Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 4-18-2017]
§ 1-1. Adoption.
In accordance with Section 8.8 of the Charter of the Town of Marlborough,
the compilation of the ordinances of the Town of Marlborough, codified and
consolidated into chapters and sections in the form attached hereto and
made a part hereof, and consisting of Chapters 1 through 340, is hereby
approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as the "Code of the Town of
Marlborough, Connecticut," hereinafter called the "Code." All provisions
contained in the compilation provided for herein and known as the "Code
of the Town of Marlborough" shall be in force and effect on and after the
effective date of this ordinance.
§ 1-2. Continuation of existing provisions.
The provisions of the Code, insofar as they are substantively the same as
those ordinances in force immediately prior to the enactment of the Code by
this ordinance, are intended as a continuation of such ordinances and not
as new enactments, and the effectiveness of such provisions shall date from
the date of adoption of the prior ordinance. All such provisions are hereby
continued in full force and effect and hereby reaffirmed as to their adoption
by the Town.
§ 1-3. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of the Town of Marlborough of a
general and permanent nature in force on the date of the adoption of this
ordinance which are inconsistent with any provisions of the Code are hereby
repealed from and after the effective date of this ordinance; provided,
however, that such repeal shall only be to the extent of such inconsistency,
and any valid legislation of the Town of Marlborough which is not in conflict
with the provisions of the Code shall be deemed to remain in full force and
effect.
§ 1-4. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section, article or part of this ordinance
or of any ordinance appearing in the Code or included in this Code through
supplementation, or the application thereof to any person or circumstances,
shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such
judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof or
the application thereof to other persons and circumstances but shall be
confined in its operation to the clause, sentence, paragraph, section, article
or part thereof and the persons and circumstances directly involved in the
controversy in which judgment shall have been rendered.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-5
1:3
§ 1-5. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code, in loose-leaf form, has been filed in the office of the
Town Clerk of the Town of Marlborough and shall remain there for use and
examination by the public until final action is taken on this ordinance; and, if
this ordinance shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified to by the Town
Clerk of the Town of Marlborough, and such certified copy shall remain on
file in the office of said Town Clerk to be made available to persons desiring
to examine the same during all times while said Code is in effect. The
enactment and publication of this ordinance, coupled with the availability of
a copy of the Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held, and
considered to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for
all purpose.
§ 1-6. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to any of the
ordinances in the Code of the Town of Marlborough, or any new ordinances,
when enacted or adopted in such form as to indicate the intention that
they be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into such
Code so that reference to the Code shall be understood and intended to
include such additions, deletions, amendments or supplements. Whenever
such additions, deletions, amendments, or supplements to the Code shall be
enacted or adopted, they shall thereafter be published as amendments and
supplements thereto.
§ 1-7. Code to be kept up-to date.
It shall be the duty of the Town Clerk to keep up-to-date the Code of the
Town of Marlborough. All changes in said Code and all ordinances adopted
by the Town subsequent to the enactment of this ordinance in such form as
to indicate the intention that they be a part of said Code shall, when finally
enacted or adopted, be included therein by temporary attachment of copies
of such changes until such changes are published as supplements to said
Code, at which time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-8. Sale of Code; supplementation.
Copies of the Code, or any chapter or portion of it, may be purchased from
the Town Clerk of the Town of Marlborough or an authorized agent of the
Town Clerk upon the payment of a fee to be set by the Town. The Town Clerk
may also arrange for procedures for the periodic supplementation thereof.
§ 1-9. Penalties for tampering with Code.
Any person who, without authorization from the Town Clerk, changes or
amends, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of the Code of
the Town of Marlborough, or who alters or tampers with such Code in
any manner whatsoever which will cause the legislation of the Town of
Marlborough to be misrepresented thereby, or who violates any other
§ 1-5 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 1-9
1:4
provisions of this ordinance, shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a
fine of not more than $250.
§ 1-10. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances for publication as the Code of
the Town of Marlborough, no changes in the meaning or intent of such
ordinances have been made, except as provided in Subsection B of this
section. Certain grammatical changes and other minor nonsubstantive
changes were made in one or more of said ordinances. It is the intention
of the Town Meeting that all such changes be adopted as part of the Code
as if the ordinances had been previously formally amended to read as
such.
B. Ordinances in the previous codification have been renumbered and
reorganized. The following nomenclature updates have been made:
(1) References to "DEP" have been changed to "DEEP."
(2) References to the "Commissioner of Environmental Protection" have
been changed to "Commissioner of Energy and Environmental
Protection."
§ 1-11. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect upon passage and publication as required
by law.
§ 1-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-11
1:5

ARTICLE II
Signpost
[Adopted as § A.2 of the Town Code]
§ 1-12. Official notices.
The official Town signpost for purposes of legal notices of Town business
shall be that notice board or exterior place nearest to the office of the Town
Clerk at the Marlborough Town Hall.
§ 1-13. Placement and maintenance.
The Selectmen shall erect and maintain said signpost and may from time to
time designate other locations for said signpost in accordance with C.G.S.
§ 7-102.
§ 1-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-13
1:7
Chapter 7
ADMINISTRATION AND FINANCE
§ 1-13 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 1-13
1:8
ARTICLE I
Old Age and Survivors Insurance
[Adopted as § A.1 of the Town Code]
§ 7-1. Participation; scope.
The Town shall participate in the Old Age and Survivors Insurance System
as provided for in Sections 7-452 through 7-459, inclusive, of the C.G.S.,
in accordance with the existing agreement between the State Retirement
Commission and the Town of Marlborough, dated February 20, 1956,
excluding therefrom the services performed by individuals to whom Section
218(c)(3) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. § 418) is applicable.
§ 7-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-1
1:9

ARTICLE II
Disposal of Town Property
[Adopted as § I of the Town Code]
§ 7-2. Authority to dispose of surplus items.
The Board of Selectmen shall be authorized, without further municipal
approval, to dispose of any obsolete, damaged or unused items of property
of the Town, except land, buildings or water rights, provided that the item
of property has, in the opinion of the Board of Selectmen, a value of less
that $10,000 at the time of disposition. Disposition shall include applying
any item of property, regardless of value, as a trade-in on the purchase price
of a budgeted expenditure of a like or improved item.
§ 7-3. Bidding procedures.
Items disposed of under this article are exempt from mandatory bidding
procedures; however. the Selectmen are hereby authorized to use such bid
procedures as it deems appropriate when, in the Board's opinion, such
procedures would best serve the interests of the Town.
§ 7-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-3
1:11

ARTICLE III
Land Acquisition Fund
[Adopted effective 5-1999 (§ A.17 of the Town Code)]
§ 7-4. Establishment; term.
Pursuant to the authority of C.G.S. § 7-131r, there is hereby established the
Marlborough Land Acquisition Fund to be used for the acquisition of land
(or any interest in land, including but not limited to leasehold interests,
easements and development rights) to be used for open space, recreation
or housing. The Marlborough Land Acquisition Fund shall not lapse at the
close of the municipal fiscal year.
§ 7-5. Deposits.
There shall be deposited into the Marlborough Land Acquisition Fund such
sums as the Town may from time to time appropriate for that purpose, not
to exceed in any fiscal year that amount that would be generated by the
imposition of a tax of not more than two mills against the property subject
to municipal property tax in the Town. There shall also be deposited into
the Marlborough Land Acquisition Fund all payments in lieu of open space
dedication pursuant to the Marlborough Subdivision Regulations under the
authority of C.G.S. §§ 8-25 and 8-25b, and any other funds acquired by the
Town, whether by gift, bequest, grant or otherwise, for the purpose to be
served by the Marlborough Land Acquisition Fund.
§ 7-6. Advisory committee.
A. The Board of Selectmen shall appoint an Open Space Land Acquisition
Advisory Committee to consist of at least two citizens at large and one
member of each of the following: Board of Selectmen, Board of Finance,
Planning Commission, Zoning Commission, Conservation Commission
and Parks and Recreation Commission. The persons appointed shall
serve at the discretion of the Board of Selectmen.
B. The Open Space Land Acquisition Advisory Committee shall elect a
Chairperson and Secretary and shall meet periodically but not less
frequently than quarterly.
C. The Open Space Land Acquisition Committee shall advise the Board of
Selectmen concerning potential acquisitions of land or interests in land
for open space, recreation or housing purposes and perform such other
advisory tasks relating to the use and administration of the Marlborough
Land Acquisition Fund as the Board of Selectmen may direct.
§ 7-7. Appropriations.
Appropriations from the Marlborough Land Acquisition Fund for the
purpose for which it was created may be made upon recommendation of the
Board of Selectmen and the approval of the Board of Finance. Any purchase
of land or interest in land pursuant to this article shall be in accordance with
the provisions of the Town Charter and shall be approved by any Annual or
Special Town Meeting.
§ 7-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-7
1:13
Chapter 25
HEALTH SERVICES
§ 25-1. Public health nurse.
The Director of Health shall prepare a public health nursing program which,
after advice of the Municipal Health Service Committee and approval of the
Board of Selectmen, shall be submitted to the State Commissioner of Health
for approval as provided in C.G.S. § 19-71a.1
§ 25-2. Municipal Health Service Committee.
The Municipal Health Service Committee shall be advisory to the Director
of Health and Board of Selectmen in all matters concerning health services
in the Town of Marlborough.
§ 25-3. Joint health services.
The Board of Selectmen shall be authorized, pursuant to C.G.S. § 19-96, to
enter into a contractual agreement with another municipality or to procure
health services if the State Department of Health approves such action.
§ 25-4. Representative to health services group.
The Board of Selectmen, with the advice of the Director of Health, shall
designate persons from said Committee for appointment as representatives
of the Town of Marlborough on the board of directors of any group providing
approved health services to the Town of Marlborough. Their terms and
duties shall be as prescribed in the bylaws of said health service group,
provided that the Board of Selectmen may replace any such representative
whenever it appears to be in the best interest of the Town of Marlborough,
as determined by the Board of Selectmen.
Chapter 45
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
1. Editor's Note: C.G.S. § 19-71a was transferred to C.G.S. § 19a-135, which in turn was
repealed in 1992.
§ 7-7 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 25-4
1:14
ARTICLE I
Resident State Policeman
[Adopted as § A.9 of the Town Code]
§ 45-1. Authority to employ.
The Board of Selectmen is authorized to enter into an agreement with the
Commissioner of the Connecticut State Police for providing a Resident State
Policeman for the Town of Marlborough under the provisions of § 29-5 of the
C.G.S.
§ 45-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 45-1
1:15

ARTICLE II
Justices of the Peace
[Adopted 5-7-1996 (§ E.1 of the Town Code)]
§ 45-2. Number; term.
There shall be selected 15 Justices of the Peace in a manner and to serve
terms as prescribed in §§ 9-183b, 9-183c, 9-184 and 9-184c of the C.G.S.
§ 45-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 45-2
1:17

ARTICLE III
Town Clerk
[Adopted as § E.2 of the Town Code]
§ 45-3. Salary; collection and deposit of fees.
Effective January 7, 1980, as provided in § 7-34b of the C.G.S., the Town
Clerk will receive a salary which will be fixed by the legislative body at the
Annual Budget Meeting. All fees or compensations provided by the General
Statutes to be paid to the Town Clerk shall be collected by such Town
Clerk, and all such moneys shall be deposited weekly into a Town account
designated by the Town Treasurer.
§ 45-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 45-3
1:19

ARTICLE IV
Zoning Enforcement Official
[Adopted as § E.3 of the Town Code]
§ 45-4. Enforcement of wetlands regulations.
The Zoning Enforcement Official will be the enforcing officer for the
Conservation Commission for the Inland Wetlands Regulations.
§ 45-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 45-4
1:21
Chapter 60
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
§ 60-1. Powers and duties.
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall be formed and shall serve as provided by
the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut and shall have the following
powers and duties:
A. Adopt such rules and procedures as may be necessary to carry out these
regulations.
B. Upon application, hear and decide appeals where it has been alleged
that there is an error in any order, decision or requirement made by the
ZEO in the enforcement of these regulations.
C. Upon application, decide requests for special permits in the cases
specified in this regulation or the General Statutes and Special Acts of
the State of Connecticut.
D. Upon application, determine and vary the application of these
regulations in harmony with their general purpose and intent and with
due consideration for conserving the public health, safety, convenience,
welfare and property values solely with the respect to a parcel of land
where, owing to conditions especially affecting such parcel but not
affecting generally the district in which it is situated, a literal
enforcement of such regulations would result in exceptional difficulty or
unusual hardship so that substantial justice will be done and the public
welfare and safety secured.
§ 60-2. Procedure.
A. All applications, appeals and requests submitted to the ZBA shall be
accompanied by the following:
(1) A fee to defray the cost of the legal notice and the processing of the
application. Fee rates to be set annually by the Board of Selectmen.
(See Appendix C for the present Fee Schedule2)
(2) A site development plan and/or other pertinent documents necessary
to explain the nature of the application.
(3) A report from the ZEO, which shall include, but not be limited to, a
statement regarding the nature of the application and the particular
regulations affected.
B. Submission of the application to the administrative official must be made
at least 15 days prior to a regularly scheduled meeting.
C. The Board shall hold a public hearing on all appeals, requests for special
permits, request for interpretation of these regulations and application
for variances as per the requirements of Article Five and shall publish
a notice of said hearing in a newspaper of general circulation with
the Town in accordance with the General Statutes of the State of
Connecticut, as amended.
2. Editor's Note: Said Fee Schedule is on file in the Town offices.
§ 45-4 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 60-2
1:22
D. The Board shall notify the Town Clerk of the adjoining municipality by
certified mail of the pendency of any application within seven days of
receipt of an application concerning any project on any site, when in the
sole opinion of the Board:
(1) Any portion of the property affected by a decision of the Board is
within 500 feet of the boundary of the adjoining municipality; or
(2) A significant portion of the traffic to the completed project on the
site will use streets within the adjoining municipality to enter or exit
the site; or
(3) A significant portion of the sewer or water drainage from the project
on the site will flow through and significantly impact the drainage or
sewerage system within the adjoining municipality; or
(4) Water runoff from the improved site will impact streets or other
municipal or private property within the adjoining municipality.
E. Within seven days of receipt of any request for a use variance, the ZBA
shall submit the application for such variance to the Zoning Commission,
and any report submitted by the Commission shall be read at the public
hearing and be made part of the record of the application.
F. If an application involves an activity regulated pursuant to the
Marlborough Inland Wetland and Watercourse Area Regulations, the
applicant shall submit an application to the Inland Wetland Agency not
later than the day the application is filed with the ZBA.
G. After submission of the application and receipt at a meeting of the ZBA,
the ZBA shall, within 65 days render a decision on the application.
H. The applicant may consent, in writing, to one sixty-five-day extension of
the decision date on the application.
I. If an application involves an activity that requires an inland wetland and
watercourse permit and the time limit for a decision by the ZBA would
elapse prior to the 35th day after a decision by the Inland Wetlands
Agency, the time period for a decision by the ZBA shall be extended to
35 days after the decision of the Inland Wetland Agency.
J. The ZBA may approve, approve with conditions or disapprove the
application. Notice of the decision of the ZBA shall be communicated to
the applicant by certified mail within 15 days after such decision has
been rendered. Notice of the decision of the ZBA shall be published in
a newspaper having a substantial circulation in the Town within 15 days
after such action has been taken. The reasons for the action of the ZBA
shall be set forth in the minutes of the ZBA.
§ 60-3. Decisions.
A. The concurring vote of four members of the ZBA shall be necessary to
reverse any order, requirement or decision of the ZEO or to decide in
favor of the application any matter upon which it is required to pass
under these regulations or to vary the application of these regulations.
B. In issuing any order, requirement, determination, interpretation,
decision or granting any variance, the ZBA may prescribe appropriate
conditions and safeguards deemed reasonable to protect the rights of
individuals, property values, the environment, the neighborhood, the
public health, safety and welfare. Violation of such conditions and
§ 60-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 60-3
1:23
safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the decision is
granted, may render the decision void.
C. In considering special permit applications, the ZBA shall insure
conformance with the criteria defined in Article Five and other
provisions of these regulations.
D. In exercising the above-mentioned powers, the ZBA may, so long as
such action is in conformity with the terms of this regulation, reverse or
affirm, wholly or in part, or may modify the order, requirement, decision
or determination appealed from and may make such order requirement,
decision or determination appealed from and may make such order,
requirement, decision or determination as out to be made, and to that
end shall have powers of the ZEO from whom the appeal was taken.
Whenever the ZBA grants any special permit or variance of the zoning
regulations applicable to any property, or reverses wholly or in part any
order, requirement, or decision appealed from the ZEO, it shall state
upon its records the reason why such variance, appeal or special permit
was granted or such reversal made.
E. A variance from these regulations shall not be granted by the ZBA
unless:
(1) Special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the
land, structure, or buildings in the same district.
(2) The special conditions and circumstances do not result from the
actions of the applicant.
F. A nonconforming use of neighboring lands, structures, or buildings in
the same zoning district shall not be considered grounds for issuance of
a variance.
Chapter 80
ALTERNATE AND REPLACEMENT MEMBERS
§ 60-3 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 60-3
1:24
ARTICLE I
Board of Finance Alternate Members
[Adopted as § B.2 of the Town Code]
§ 80-1. Number; election; authority.
Pursuant to C.G.S. § 7-340a, there shall be three alternates to the Board
of Finance, whose powers and duties, when seated, shall be the same as
provided by law for regular members of said Board. The office of alternate
to the Board of Finance shall be filled by election. Said appointments and
elections shall comply with minority representation requirements of C.G.S.
§ 9-167a and the Town Charter.
§ 80-2. Term.
The terms of office for said alternates shall be four years, except that one of
the initial appointees shall serve until the municipal election in November
1983, and the others shall serve until the municipal election in November
1985.
§ 80-3. Vacancies.
All vacancies shall be filled by the Board of Selectmen.
§ 80-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 80-3
1:25

ARTICLE II
Temporary Replacements for Zoning Commission, Zoning Board of
Appeals and Conservation Commission
[Adopted 5-1990 (§ B.3 of the Town Code)]
§ 80-4. Authority to appoint.
If either the Zoning Commission, Zoning Board of Appeals or Conservation
Commission is unable to obtain a quorum due to disqualification of one
or more members by reason of conflict of interest on a particular matter,
the Board of Selectmen shall appoint such temporary replacements as are
necessary and appropriate to enable such board or commission to operate
with at least a quorum.
§ 80-5. Selection; limited authority.
Such replacement shall be chosen from the last completed list of electors
and shall act as a member of such board or commission only in the hearing
and determination of such matter for which there was no quorum and until
the final determination of such matter, at which time the appointment shall
terminate.
§ 80-6. Limitations on selection.
Such appointment shall be made by the Board of Selectmen only after
the panel of alternates for said board or commission is depleted and with
due consideration to the minority representation requirements of C.G.S.
§ 9-167a and Charter Section 2.3.
§ 80-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 80-6
1:27

ARTICLE III
Designation of Alternate Members
[Adopted effective 6-2002 (§ D.7 of the Town Code)]
§ 80-7. Procedure for designation.
Except where otherwise provided by statute for any board, commission,
committee or other similar body of the Town of Marlborough for which the
election or appointment of alternates has been authorized, the following
procedures shall apply to the designation of such alternates to act.
§ 80-8. Designation and documentation.
If any regular member of any board, commission, committee or other similar
body of the Town of Marlborough is absent or disqualified from acting, the
chairman of such board, commission, committee or other similar body shall,
subject to the provisions of C.G.S. § 9-167a, designate an alternate from the
panel of alternates, choosing alternates in rotation so that they shall act as
nearly equal a number of times as possible. If any alternate is not available
in accordance with such rotation, such fact shall be recorded in the minutes
of the meeting and the next alternate shall be designated.
§ 80-9. Term of service for disqualified member.
An alternate designated to act in place of a regular member who has
been disqualified shall continue to act in such capacity in the hearing
and determination of the particular matter or matters in which the
disqualification arose.
§ 80-10. Term of service for absent member.
Any alternate designated to act in place of a regular member who is absent
shall act in such capacity only so long as the regular member remains
absent from the proceedings.
§ 80-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 80-10
1:29
Chapter 84
ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW BOARD
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land use — See Ch. 254.
§ 84-1. Purpose.
A. There shall be an Architectural Design Review Board in the Town of
Marlborough, the purpose of which shall be to provide guidance with
regard to the design of buildings, structures, landscaping and site layout,
with the objective of promoting development projects that are in
harmony with Marlborough's architectural heritage and which preserve
and improve the appearance, beauty and character of the community.
B. The Board of Selectmen establishes this Architectural Design Review
Board ("ARB") to serve as an advisory body to the Planning Commission,
Zoning Commission, and Zoning Board of Appeals on matters of
commercial site and building design and multifamily housing sites and
design. The ARB is charged with reviewing all projects regarding
multifamily housing and nonresidential exterior construction and
renovation submitted to the Planning Commission, the Zoning
Commission, or the Zoning Board of Appeals, and recommending ways
to preserve and enhance the design or appearance of proposed projects.
§ 84-2. Powers and duties.
A. The ARB shall function in an advisory capacity to the Planning
Commission, the Zoning Commission, and the Zoning Board of Appeals,
providing commentary on submitted floating zone, site plan and special
permit applications for commercial, industrial, institutional, and
multifamily residential developments with regard to the scale, massing,
colors and proportions of buildings, landscaping, public spaces, lighting
and signage.
B. The ARB shall not conduct its review relative to Zoning Regulations
governing use of a property, the granting of variances, or building code
compliance. The Board's recommendations shall not be binding; rather,
they are of an advisory nature; provided, however, that the Planning
Commission, the Zoning Commission, or the Zoning Board of Appeals, as
the case may be, shall state on the record the reasons such commission
or board decided to reject a recommendation from the ARB. A plan's
endorsement by the ARB will not imply or guarantee subsequent
approval of an application by the Planning Commission, the Zoning
Commission, or the Zoning Board of Appeals.
C. The ARB shall establish and promulgate bylaws to enable it to fulfill its
duties and shall meet at least twice a year and other such times as it
deems appropriate to carry out its duties and responsibilities pursuant
to this chapter. The ARB will provide a set of guiding principles setting
forth various aesthetic and functional provisions to guide nonresidential,
§ 80-10 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 84-2
1:30
commercial, office, industrial and public/quasi-public and multifamily
development in the Town. It is anticipated that the principles and
concepts herein will be incorporated into and supplemented by more
detailed development standards and/or design guidelines as the Town
matures.
(1) To encourage high-quality land/site planning, architecture and
landscape design;
(2) To encourage development in keeping with the desired character of
the Town and/or specific design attributes identified in plans adopted
by the Town;
(3) To ensure physical, visual and functional compatibility between uses;
and
(4) To ensure proper attention is paid to site and architectural design,
thereby protecting land values.
D. The designated approving authority under this chapter shall have the
authority to apply the guiding principles flexibly to account for
circumstances relating to the proposed site plan.
§ 84-3. Membership and terms of appointment.
A. Members; qualifications.
(1) The ARB shall consist of five regular members and two alternate
members, which shall be appointed by the Board of Selectmen. The
initial appointments to this Board shall be as follows: three members
for three years; two members for two years; and two alternate
members for one year. Thereafter, members of the Board shall be
appointed for a period of three years from July 1st in the year of their
appointment. Any vacancy occurring in the membership of the Board
shall be filled by an appointment of the Board of Selectmen for the
unexpired portion of the vacated term.
(2) In appointing members to the ARB, the Board of Selectmen shall
seek to appoint a mix of knowledgeable experts and laypeople. The
experts shall have knowledge of such fields as architecture, urban
planning, landscape architecture, site planning, professional
engineering, graphic design, interior design and related fields. The
laypeople shall be drawn from individuals demonstrating a high level
of interest and commitment to the work of the ARB. All members
shall be electors of Marlborough.
B. At the first meeting after July 1 of each year, the ARB shall elect a
Chairman, Vice Chairman and Secretary from among its members. Said
appointments shall be by a vote of the majority of the ARB members.
§ 84-4. Conflict of interest.
No member of the ARB shall participate in the review or deliberations upon
any matter in which he/she is directly or indirectly interested in a personal
or financial sense. Members of the ARB shall not concurrently be a member
of the Planning or Zoning Commission or the Zoning Board of Appeals.
Chapter 88
§ 84-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 84-4
1:31
ARTS AND CULTURAL COMMISSION
§ 88-1. Establishment and purpose.
There shall be established an Arts and Cultural Commission for the purpose
of facilitating the continuation and development of the arts and cultural
activities.
§ 88-2. Number of members.
Such commission shall consist of not less than seven members nor more
than 15 members.
§ 88-3. Appointment.
Members shall be appointed by the Board of Selectmen for four-year
overlapping terms. Members shall be appointed from nominees submitted
to the Board of Selectmen from various community and municipal
organizations and from at-large applicants. At-large applicants may apply
directly to the Board of Selectmen for appointment.
Chapter 94
COMMISSION ON AGING
§ 94-1. Organization.
There shall be a commission on aging in the Town of Marlborough,
consisting of five regular members and three alternate members, which
shall be called the "Marlborough Commission on Aging." Members and
alternate members shall be appointed by the Board of Selectmen and shall
be chosen as follows:
A. At least two regular members of the Commission shall be members of
the public 60 years of age or older. The three alternate members shall
be members of the public, with preference given to individuals 60 years
of age or older. All members so appointed shall be persons interested in
and committed to the consideration and solution of the problems of the
aging.
B. A chairperson shall be elected by a majority of the regular members of
the Commission. Alternate members shall attend all meetings and shall
take the place of a regular member when a regular member is absent
from a meeting. When taking the place of an absent regular member,
such alternate member shall be counted toward a quorum and shall have
all the voting rights of the absent member. The Chairperson shall rotate
alternates to serve in this capacity as needed.
C. The Town of Marlborough's municipal agent for elderly persons,
appointed pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes § 7-127b (a) shall
be an ad hoc member of the Commission. The First Selectman, the
Chatham Health District, Roy B. Pettengill Ambulance Association and
§ 84-4 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 94-1
1:32
the Marlborough clergy (or their designees) serve as nonvoting ex officio
members.
§ 94-2. Membership and terms of appointment.
A. In January of each year, the Board of Selectmen shall appoint regular
members and alternate members to replace those whose terms are then
expiring. All regular members and alternate members shall be appointed
to hold office for a period of three years. Vacancies shall be filled for the
unexpired portion of the term, and the Commission may recommend a
candidate to the Board of Selectmen to fill said vacancy. All members of
the Commission shall serve without compensation.
B. If any appointed member of the Commission fails to attend three
consecutive meetings of the Commission or fails to attend 50% of all
meetings of the Commission held during any calendar year, it shall be
cause for removal. Any vacancy occurring other than by expiration of
term shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment for
the balance of the unexpired term.
§ 94-3. Purpose.
The purpose of the Commission shall be to review and analyze the needs
and conditions of the elderly and aging in relation to housing, nutrition,
employment, economic welfare, health, recreation, social services,
transportation and other matters and problems of concern to the elderly.
The Commission shall also plan, coordinate, develop and implement
programs to meet the needs and improve the conditions of the elderly and
aging within the Town of Marlborough and shall provide coordination and
linkage of such plans and programs with existing services. The Commission
shall act as an advocate for the elderly and aging and shall make
recommendations to the Board of Selectmen during the budget process.
§ 94-4. Duties.
The Commission shall initiate, plan and coordinate services and programs
for the elderly and aging with the Town of Marlborough in accordance with
its purpose. It shall review, initiate and recommend approval or disapproval
of application for federal, state, local and private funds for programs for
the elderly and aging to the Board of Selectmen. The Commission shall
assist in interpreting and developing policies and guidelines for elderly
services and programs. The Commission shall meet at least once every
month on a date which shall be determined by the regular members and
call a special meeting from time to time as necessary. The Commission shall
be authorized to establish and promulgate bylaws to enable it to function
in fulfilling its duties. It is not intended that the Commission shall operate
programs.
§ 94-5. Budget.
The Commission shall prepare an annual budget. Said budget shall be
submitted to the Board of Selectmen for the next fiscal year budget.
§ 94-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 94-5
1:33
Chapter 99
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT ADVISORY COMMISSION
§ 99-1. Establishment of Community Development Advisory
Commission.
There is hereby established the Marlborough Community Development
Advisory Commission, which will serve as an advisory board to the Board of
Selectmen and other Town agencies.
§ 99-2. Powers and duties.
The Community Development Advisory Commission will have the following
powers and duties:
A. Community vision. Through public involvement the Commission will
identify the vision in conjunction with other Town boards and
commissions for the future of the Town of Marlborough, including
community values, goals and action plans for working with all boards
and commissions in achieving the vision. The Commission will work
with the various Town boards and commissions to promote the
implementation of Town goals and objectives as outlined within the
various strategic plans of the various Town agencies. The Commission
will help develop and maintain an overall strategic plan articulating the
community vision and values, and work annually with the community and
Town boards and commissions to create recommendations for actions to
implement the goals and objectives of the plan.
B. The Commission will work with the various Town boards and
commissions as requested and also will perform the following functions:
(1) Beautification committee. The Commission will promote and
coordinate the landscaping of Town-owned property and promote the
beautification of the community as a whole.
(2) Community marketing strategy. It will work in an advisory capacity
with the various Town boards and commissions to develop a
community marketing strategy that will promote the character and
identify the values of the community.
(3) Facility/infrastructure planning. The Commission will work with the
Public Building Commission and Board of Selectmen to identify the
facility/infrastructure needs of the Town and the timelines for
addressing those needs.
(4) Long term capitol improvement planning. The Commission will
review and recommend priorities for CNR projects, timelines and
budgets. It will make recommendations annually to the Board of
Selectmen in accordance with the timelines for the annual budget
process. It will conduct workshops with Town departments and
agencies as needed throughout the year.
(5) Open space and municipal land acquisition. The Commission will
work with the Conservation Commission and Planning Commission
to advise the Board of Selectmen and Board of Finance concerning
potential acquisition of land for municipal purposes and perform
§ 94-5 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 99-2
1:34
other such tasks relating to the use and administration of the
Marlborough Open Space Land Acquisition Fund.
(6) Plan of conservation and development. In an advisory capacity, the
Commission will work with the Planning Commission to promote the
implementation and updating of policies of the Marlborough Plan of
Conservation and Development.
§ 99-3. Membership; meetings.
The Board of Selectmen will appoint a Community Development Advisory
Commission to consist of six members and three alternates. The Community
Development Advisory Commission will elect such officers as it deems
necessary and may establish such bylaws as it deems appropriate for the
conduct of its business. The Commission will meet periodically but not less
than quarterly.
§ 99-4. Terms.
After passage of this chapter the Board of Selectmen shall appoint two
regular members and one alternate representative to serve terms until
January 2008, two regular members and one alternate representative to
serve terms until January 2007, and two regular members to serve terms
until January 2008. Thereafter, all terms shall be four-year terms.
Chapter 106
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION
§ 106-1. Establishment; members.
There shall be an economic development commission of the Town, which
shall consist of five members appointed by the Board of Selectmen.
§ 106-2. Alternate members.
There shall be three alternates to the Economic Development Commission,
whose powers and duties, when seated, shall be the same as provided by the
law for regular members of the Commission. Alternates shall be appointed
by the Board of Selectmen, which appointments shall comply with minority
representation requirements of C.G.S. § 9-167a and the Town Charter.
§ 106-3. Terms.
A. The term of all members appointed to the Commission shall be four
years; except that for the three members appointed to terms
commencing in 1997, the terms shall be as follows: one member shall be
appointed for two years, one member shall be appointed for three years,
and one member shall be appointed for four years; thereafter, the terms
for these three members or their successors shall be four years.
B. The terms of all alternates to the Commission shall be four years.
§ 99-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 106-3
1:35
Chapter 112
FIRE COMMISSIONERS
§ 112-1. Purpose; scope of authority.
The Fire Commissioners shall obtain fire protection for the Town and
supervise affairs relative to this objective. Nothing herein shall affect the
ownership by the Volunteer Fire Company of any building, fire apparatus or
other property, and the Fire Commissioners may enter into an agreement
with observance of the regulations of the Commissioners as the
Commissioners may deem desirable and reasonable.
Chapter 127
LAKE ADVISORY COMMISSION
§ 127-1. Establishment of Lake Advisory Commission.
There is hereby established the Marlborough Lake Advisory Commission,
which shall serve as an advisory board to the Board of Selectmen and other
Town agencies.
§ 127-2. Powers and duties.
A. The Lake Advisory Commission shall have the following powers and
duties: To oversee the water quality and recreational use of Lake
Terramuggus and help make recommendations to Town agencies as
to lake management issues. The Commission shall also promote the
implementation of Town goals and objectives as outlined within the
various strategic plans of the various Town agencies.
B. The Commission shall also be responsible for the following:
(1) Coordinating the water quality testing program.
(2) Coordination and update of the lake management plan.
(3) Public outreach concerning lake management issues.
§ 127-3. Membership and transition of current members/alternates.
A. The Board of Selectmen shall appoint all regular members and alternate
members. When a vacancy occurs, the Board of Selectmen shall appoint
a successor to hold office for the unexpired portion of the term. A
member shall continue in office until his successor is appointed. The
Board of Selectmen may, for good cause, remove any regular member or
alternate member from office prior to the expiration of a term.
B. The Lake Advisory Commission shall consist of seven regular members;
at least two regular members shall reside on (adjacent to) Lake
Terramuggus and at least two regular members shall reside outside of
the Lake Terramuggus watershed district.
C. There shall be three alternate members on the Lake Advisory
Commission. Alternate members, when seated, shall have the same
§ 106-3 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 127-3
1:36
powers and duties provided for by law for regular members of the Lake
Advisory Commission.
D. All regular members and alternate members of the Lake Advisory
Commission in existence immediately before the effective date of this
chapter shall be appointed to the Lake Advisory Commission created
pursuant to this chapter.
E. A transition process is necessary to effect membership representation
that at least two regular members shall reside outside of the Lake
Terramuggus watershed district. Upon the expiration of a term,
resignation or a member is no longer an elector of the Town of
Marlborough that continue to serve under the transition provision, all
regular members and alternate members of the Lake Advisory
Commission in existence immediately before the effective date of this
chapter shall be appointed, appointments made thereafter must meet
residency (reside) requirements set forth by this chapter.
F. All regular members and alternate members of the Lake Advisory
Commission shall be electors of the Town of Marlborough and shall
serve without compensation.
G. A Chairman and the Vice Chairman shall be elected by the members of
the Lake Advisory Commission from among the members of the Lake
Advisory Commission. These elections shall be made upon the effective
date of this chapter and annually thereafter in January of each year.
The Chairman and Vice Chairman shall continue in office until their
successors are elected.
H. The Lake Advisory Commission shall be authorized to establish and
promulgate bylaws to enable it to function in fulfilling its duties.
I. Upon the effective date of this chapter, the Board of Selectmen shall
appoint: Three regular members and one alternate member to serve
terms until January 1, 2009; two regular members and one alternate
member to serve terms until January 1, 2010; and two regular members
and one alternate member to serve terms until January 1, 2011.
Thereafter all terms shall be for three-year periods.
§ 127-4. Meetings.
The Commission shall meet periodically but not less frequently than
quarterly.
Chapter 131
NATURE TRAILS AND SIDEWALKS COMMISSION
§ 131-1. Establishment and purpose.
There is hereby established the Marlborough Nature Trails and Sidewalks
Commission, which shall serve as an advisory board to the Board of
Selectmen and other Town agencies.
§ 127-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 131-2
1:37
§ 131-2. Powers and duties.
The Nature Trails and Advisory Commission shall have the following powers
and duties: To oversee the recreational and other use of nature trails and
sidewalks in the Town of Marlborough and to make recommendations to
Town agencies as to the use, development and maintenance of nature trails
and sidewalks. The Commission shall also promote the implementation of
Town goals and objectives as outlined within the various strategic plans of
Town agencies.
§ 131-3. Membership of current members and alternates.
A. The Board of Selectmen shall appoint all regular members and alternate
members. When a vacancy occurs, the Board of Selectmen shall appoint
a successor to hold office for the unexpired portion of the term. A
member shall continue in office until his or her successor is appointed.
B. The Nature Trails and Sidewalks Commission shall consist of five regular
members. There shall be three alternate members on the Commission.
Alternate members, when seated, shall have the same powers and duties
as regular members.
C. All regular members and alternate members of the prior Nature Trails
and Sidewalks Commission in existence immediately before the effective
date of this chapter shall be appointed to the Nature Trails and
Sidewalks Commission created pursuant to this chapter. All members of
the Commission shall be electors of the Town of Marlborough and shall
serve without compensation.
D. If any appointed member of the Commission fails to attend three
consecutive meetings of the Commission or fails to attend 50% of all
meetings of the Commission held during any calendar year, it shall be
cause for removal. Any vacancy occurring other than by expiration of
term shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment for
the balance of the unexpired term.
E. A Chairman and a Vice Chairman shall be elected by the members from
among the members of the Commission. These elections shall be made
as soon as reasonably practicable upon the effective date of this chapter
and annually thereafter in January of each year. The Chairman and Vice
Chairman shall continue in office until their successors are elected. The
Nature Trails and Sidewalks Advisory Commission shall be authorized to
establish and promulgate bylaws to enable it to function in fulfilling its
duties.
F. Upon the effective date of this chapter, the Board of Selectmen shall
appoint three regular members and two alternate member to serve
terms until January 1, 2011, and two regular members and one alternate
member to serve terms until January 1, 2012. Thereafter, all terms shall
be for two-year periods.
§ 131-4. Meetings.
The Commission shall meet periodically but not less frequently than
quarterly.
§ 131-2 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 131-4
1:38
Chapter 140
PLANNING COMMISSION
§ 140-1. Establishment.
There shall be established a Planning Commission, whose composition,
powers and duties shall be as provided by Chapter 126 of the Connecticut
General Statutes and as further provided in the Charter for the Town of
Marlborough.
Chapter 145
PUBLIC BUILDING COMMISSION
§ 145-1. Duties.
The Commission shall act on behalf of the Town of Marlborough in matters
pertaining to the construction of public buildings by the Town and shall
perform such other duties as may be assigned from time to time by action
of the Town Meeting or the Board of Selectmen.
§ 145-2. Alternate members. [Added 6-19-2001, effective 7-19-2001]
A. There shall be three alternates to the Building Commission, whose
powers and duties, when seated, shall be the same as provided by law for
the regular members of the Commission. Alternates shall be appointed
by the Board of Selectmen, which appointments shall comply with the
minority representation requirements of C.G.S. § 9-167a and the Town
Charter.
B. The terms of all alternates to the Commission shall be four years; except
that, for the three alternate members appointed to terms commencing
in 2001, the terms shall be as follows: one member shall be appointed
for two years, one member shall be appointed for three years, and one
member shall be appointed for four years; thereafter, the terms for these
three members or their successors shall be four years.
Chapter 152
REGIONAL COUNCIL OF GOVERNMENTS
§ 152-1. Town participation.
The Town of Marlborough does hereby adopt § 4-124i through 4-124p of the
1971 Supplement to the C.G.S. (Public Act 821), providing for the formation
of a regional council of governments within a planning region, as defined or
redefined by the Director of the Office of State Planning, and does hereby
join such regional council of governments when and as such Council is duly
established in accordance with such statutes, upon the adoption of said
statutes by not less than 60% of all municipalities within such planning
§ 131-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 152-1
1:39
regions. The adoption of such sections of the C.G.S. is intended to include
the provisions of any special act of the 1975 General Assembly respecting
additional representation for the core city within the capitol region on a
regional council of governments, and a nonvoting advisory regional forum
thereunder, consistent with the proposed bylaws of such regional council of
governments on May 3, 1973.
Chapter 163
TRAFFIC SAFETY COMMISSION
§ 163-1. Duties.
The Traffic Safety Commission will be charged with the duties of making
studies and surveys of the roads under the jurisdiction of the Town. The
Commission shall determine the dangerous and hazardous sections,
establish priorities, pinpoint areas to be corrected and report to the Board
of Selectmen. It is charged with the "traveling public" in the Town and will
cooperate with the Selectmen in making our roads safer for all our people.
Chapter 174
WATER POLLUTION CONTROL AUTHORITY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewer Regulations — See Ch. 410.
§ 174-1. Establishment; duties.
There shall be established a water pollution control authority, whose
composition, powers and duties shall be as provided by Chapter 103 of the
Connecticut General Statutes and as further provided in the Charter for the
Town of Marlborough.
§ 174-2. Members.
A. The Water Pollution Control Authority shall consist of five members. At
least one regular member shall reside within the sewer service district.
B. There shall be three alternate members on the Water Pollution Control
Authority. Alternate members, when seated, shall have the same powers
and duties provided for by law for regular members of the Water
Pollution Control Authority. All regular members and alternate members
of the Water Pollution Control Authority shall be electors of the Town of
Marlborough.
C. The Board of Selectmen shall appoint all regular members and alternate
members. When a vacancy occurs, the Board of Selectmen shall appoint
a successor to hold office for the unexpired portion of the term. A
member shall continue in office until his successor is appointed. The
§ 152-1 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 174-2
1:40
Board of Selectmen may, for good cause, remove any regular member or
alternate member from office prior to the expiration of a term.
D. If any appointed member of the Authority fails to attend three
consecutive meetings of the Authority or fails to attend 50% of all
meetings of the Authority held during any calendar year, it shall be cause
for removal. Any vacancy occurring other than by expiration of term
shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment for the
balance of the unexpired term.
§ 174-3. Finances.
A. The Water Pollution Control Authority shall annually prepare a budget of
estimated revenue and expenditures for the ensuing fiscal year starting
July 1 and ending June 30 and submit a copy to the Board of Selectmen
by February 15.
B. The Water Pollution Control Authority shall maintain proper accounting
and financial records through the office of the Town Treasurer and
shall have an annual report submitted by August 15 to the Board of
Selectmen.
§ 174-4. Appointment of members; terms.
In January of each year, the Board of Selectmen shall appoint regular
members(s) and alternate member(s) to replace those whose terms are then
expiring. All regular members and alternate members shall be appointed
to hold office for a period of three years. Vacancies shall be filled for
the unexpired portion of the term, and the Authority may recommend a
candidate to the Board of Selectmen to fill said vacancy.
§ 174-5. Officers.
A Chairman and the Vice Chairman shall be elected by the members of
the Authority from among the members of the Water Pollution Control
Authority. These elections shall be made annually in January of each year.
The Chairman and Vice Chairman shall continue in office until their
successors are elected.
§ 174-6. Operating bylaws.
The Water Pollution Control Authority shall be authorized to establish and
promulgate bylaws to enable it to function in fulfilling its duties.
§ 174-7. Collection of charges.
The Tax Collector is designated to collect all benefit assessments,
connection charges, and use charges with respect to any sewerage system,
in each case in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Connecticut
General Statutes.
Chapter 200
§ 174-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 174-7
1:41
ADULT DAY CARE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 340.
§ 200-1. Findings.
It is hereby declared that adult day care is a necessary alternative to
institutional care, which affects the public health, safety and general
welfare.
§ 200-2. Adoption of standards.
The Town hereby adopts the Standards for Adult Day Care, dated May 1979,
prepared by the National Institute on Adult Day Care, a constituent unit of
the National Council on the Aging, which standards are on file in the Town
Hall and are incorporated herein by reference.
§ 200-3. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct or carry on or
permit to be engaged in, conducted or carried on, in or upon any premises
in the Town, the operation of adult day care for two or more unrelated
adults without first having obtained a permit from the Director of Health.
§ 200-4. Application for permit; fee.
Every applicant for a permit to engage in, conduct or carry on adult day
care on premises in the Town shall file an application with the Director of
Health on a form promulgated by the Director of Health and pay a filing fee
of $100 payable to the Town of Marlborough.
§ 200-5. Standards for granting permit.
The form of application shall require information from the applicant which
will enable the Director of Health to ascertain whether the proposed adult
day care operation is consistent with the Standards for Adult Day Care.
§ 200-6. Permits not transferable.
Permits granted under this chapter are not transferable.
§ 200-7. Revocation or suspension of permit.
An adult day care permit may be revoked or suspended after a public
hearing before the Board of Selectmen where it appears that the permittee
has violated the Standards for Adult Day Care.
§ 174-7 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 200-8
1:42
§ 200-8. Notice of violations.
The Director of Health, or his designee, before revoking or suspending
any permit, shall give the permittee at least 10 days' written notice of the
violations and the opportunity for a public hearing before the Board of
Selectmen, at which time the permittee may present evidence bearing upon
the question. In such cases the violations charged by the Director of Health
shall be specific and in writing.
§ 200-9. Penalties for offenses.
Any person or entity engaging in, conducting or carrying on or permitting
the engaging in conducting or carrying on of adult day care, as defined
herein, in or upon any premises in the Town without a permit shall be
subject to a fine of not more than $100 for each violation. Each day a
violation continues shall be considered a separate violation.
Chapter 205
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
§ 205-1. Purpose.
Regulation of consumption and possession of alcoholic liquor within and
upon public highways, public areas and parking areas.
§ 205-2. Definitions.
For purpose of this section:
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR — Has the same meaning as set forth in § 30-1 of the
Connecticut General Statutes.
OPEN CONTAINER — Any open bottle; any container which was sealed by a
liquor tax stamp, which seal has been broken, whether or not stopped; any
can which is set up to dispense; or any glass, cup, jar or other vessel.
PARKED VEHICLE — Has the same meaning as set forth in § 14-1 of the
Connecticut General Statutes.
PARKING AREA — Lots, areas or other accommodations for the parking of
motor vehicles off the street or highway and open to public use with or
without charge.
PUBLIC HIGHWAY — A highway, road, street, avenue, boulevard or any
other way within and under the control of the Town of Marlborough and
open to public use, including the sidewalks of any such highway.
PUBLIC AREA — Any public or privately owned park, plaza, mall, arena,
stadium or cemetery which is open to the public.
§ 200-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-3
1:43
§ 205-3. Prohibited acts.
Except as permitted in § 205-4 hereof, no person shall consume any
alcoholic liquor or possess any open container of alcoholic liquor upon or
within the limits of any public highway, public area or parking area within
the Town of Marlborough. For purposes of this section, without limiting
the generality of the foregoing, the consumption of alcoholic liquor or the
possession of an open container of alcoholic liquor in parked vehicles within
or upon the parking area of a public highway or sidewalk is a violation
hereof.
§ 205-4. Exceptions.
A. Consumption of alcoholic liquor or possession of an open container
of alcoholic liquor is permitted during any function, festival, event or
celebration conducted on or within a public highway, public area or
parking area pursuant to any law, statute, ordinance, resolution or
permit authorizing the sale or consumption of liquor in or upon such
public highway, public area or parking area.
B. This chapter shall not apply to any function specifically authorized by
the Board of Selectmen or any authorized function occurring at Blish
Memorial Park or other areas within the jurisdiction of the Park and
Recreation Commission.
§ 205-5. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be fined $50 for
each offense.
Chapter 209
ANIMALS
§ 209-1. Redemption of impounded dogs or cats.
Any cat or dog captured or impounded under the provisions of § 22-332d
or 22-333 of the Connecticut General Statutes shall be redeemed by the
owner or keeper thereof, or the agent of such owner or keeper, upon proper
identification and presentation to the Marlborough Animal Control Officer
of a license, tag or other means of identification for such cat or of a license
and tag for such dog and upon the payment by such owner or keeper or his
agent of: 1) a redemption fee of $15; and 2) the cost of advertising incurred
under the provisions of § 22-332 or 22-332d(a) of the Connecticut General
Statutes. When the owner or keeper of any such impounded cat or dog fails
to redeem such cat or dog within 24 hours after receiving notification to do
so or, where the owner is unknown, within 24 hours after notification was
effected by means of publication in a newspaper, such owner or keeper shall
pay, in addition to such redemption fee and the cost of advertising, the sum
of $15 per day for the cost of detention and care of such impounded cat or
dog. In addition, any owner or keeper of any such impounded cat or dog who
fails to redeem such cat or dog within 120 hours after receiving notification
§ 205-3 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 209-1
1:44
to do so shall have committed an infraction as set forth in C.G.S. § 22-332d
or 22-333.
§ 209-2. Dog control. [Effective 9-2005]
The owner or keeper of any dog shall be required to keep such dog on
a leash or lead while within the confines of public streets, sidewalks,
highways and other public places and grounds within the Town of
Marlborough. No dogs are allowed in Town parks and school grounds.
§ 209-3. Dogs running at large. [Effective 9-2005]
Dogs found roaming at large in violation of the provisions of this chapter
shall be subject to the provisions of C.G.S. § 22-332 relating to impounding
and disposition. In addition, any owner or keeper who allows his or her dog
to roam at large in violation of this chapter shall forfeit and pay for the use
of the Town of Marlborough a charge of $25, to be recovered by an action
on this chapter brought in the name of the Treasurer of the Town.
Chapter 215
BAZAARS AND RAFFLES
§ 215-1. Adoption of statutory provisions.
The provisions of §§ 7-170 to 7-186, as amended, of Connecticut General
Statutes, relating to the conduct of bazaars and raffles in accordance with
the operative statutes and regulations of the State of Connecticut, are
hereby adopted for the Town of Marlborough pursuant to the authority
stated in § 7-171 of the C.G.S., as amended.
Chapter 221
BUILDING CODE
§ 221-1. Adoption of state provisions.
The Town of Marlborough hereby adopts and implements the State Building
Code in accordance with the provisions of § 19-395 of the C.G.S.3
Chapter 226
BURNING, OPEN
§ 226-1. Permit required.
No person shall ignite, cause to be ignited, permit to be ignited or
maintained any open fires except as permitted by regulations promulgated
3. Editor's Note: C.G.S. § 19-395 has been transferred to C.G.S. § 29-252.
§ 209-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 226-1
1:45
by the Connecticut State Department of Energy and Environmental
Protection (DEEP). A permit must be secured from the local burning official.
Chapter 238
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 340. Sewer regulations — See Ch. 410.
§ 238-1. Statement of purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed:
A. To protect human life and health;
B. To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
C. To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
D. To minimize prolonged business interruptions;
E. To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges
located in areas of special flood hazard;
F. To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the second use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future
flood blight areas;
G. To ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of
special flood hazard; and
H. To ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard
assume responsibility for their actions.
§ 238-2. Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common
usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The area within the community
subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) — The water surface elevation of the base
flood in relation to a standard set of geographic data in special flood hazard
areas.
§ 226-1 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 238-2
1:46
BASEMENT — That portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
BUILDING — See definition for "structure."
COST — As related to substantial improvements, the cost of any
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, alteration, repair or other
improvement of a structure shall be established by a detailed written
contractor's estimate. The estimate shall include, but not be limited to,
the cost of materials (interior finishing components, structural components,
utility and service equipment); sales tax on materials, building equipment
and fixtures, including heating and air conditioning and utility meters;
labor; built-in appliances; demolition and site preparation; repairs made to
damaged parts of the building worked on at the same time; contractor's
overhead; contractor's profit; and grand total. Items to be excluded include
cost of plans and specifications; survey costs; permit fees; outside
improvements such as septic systems, water supply wells, landscaping,
sidewalks, fences, yard lights, irrigation systems, and detached structures
such as garages, sheds and gazebos.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, or
permanent storage of materials or equipment.
FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY (FEMA) — The federal
agency that administers the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP).
FINISHED LIVING SPACE — Finished living space can include, but is
not limited to, a space that is heated and/or cooled, contains finished
floors (tile, linoleum, hardwood, etc.), has sheetrock walls that may or
may not be painted or wallpapered and other amenities such as furniture,
appliances, bathrooms, fireplace and other items that are easily damaged by
floodwaters and expensive to clean, repair or replace. A fully enclosed area
below the base flood elevation (BFE) cannot have finished living space and
needs to be designed for exposure to flood forces. These spaces can only be
used for parking, building access or limited storage.
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM) — The Official Map
on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated the
floodway, one-hundred-year floodplain and five-hundred-year floodplain.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — An official map of a community
on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both
the areas of special flood hazard and the applicable risk premium zones.
A. The overflow of inland or tidal water;
The unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from
any source.
B.
§ 238-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-2
1:47
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY — The official report by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency. The report contains flood profiles as well
as the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map and the water surface elevation
of the base flood.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one
foot.
FLOOR — The top surface of an enclosed area in a building (including
basement), i.e., top of slab in concrete slab construction or top of wood
flooring in wood frame construction. The term does not include the floor of
a garage used solely for parking of vehicles.
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT FACILITY — A facility which cannot be used
for its intended purpose unless it is located in close proximity to water, such
as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading or unloading of cargo
or passengers, shipbuilding, ship repair, or seafood-processing facilities.
The term does not include long-term storage, manufacture, sales or service
facilities.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE (HAG) — The highest natural elevation of
the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a
structure.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement).
MARKET VALUE — Market value of the structure shall be determined by:
an independent appraisal by a professional appraiser; the property tax
assessment, minus land value; the replacement cost minus depreciation of
the structure; the structure's actual cash value. (Town can pick the method
it likes from above list.)
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with
or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities.
The term also includes recreational vehicles, park trailers, travel trailers,
and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive
days or longer and intended to be improved property.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home
lots for rent or sale.
MEAN SEA LEVEL (MSL) — The North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of
1988 or other datum to which base flood elevations shown on a community's
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) are referenced.
NATIONAL GEODETIC VERTICAL DATUM (NGVD) — As corrected in 1929,
a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations
within the floodplain.
§ 238-2 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 238-2
1:48
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of this chapter, May 23, 1982 (not
the revision date).
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
START OF CONSTRUCTION — For other than new construction or
substantial improvements under the Coastal Barriers Resources Act (P.L.
97-348), includes substantial improvement and means the date the building
permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date.
The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of a
structure (including a manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring
of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any
work beyond the stage of excavation or placement of a manufactured home
on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation,
such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation
of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement,
footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does
it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as
garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main
structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction
means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part
of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions
of the building.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA) — The land in the floodplain
within a community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding
in any given year. SFHAs are determined utilizing the base flood elevation
(BFE) provided on the flood profiles in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for a
community. BFEs provided on Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) are only
approximate (rounded up or down) and should be verified with the BFEs
published in the FIS for a specific location. The SFHA is also called the "area
of special flood hazard."
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any combination of repairs,
reconstruction, alterations or improvements to a structure taking place over
a ten-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50% of the
A. Built on a single chassis;
B. Measures 400 square feet or less at the largest horizontal projections;
C. Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable; and
Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal
use.
D.
§ 238-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-2
1:49
market value of the structure. The market value of the structure should be:
(1) the appraised value of the structure (using the cost approach to value)
prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement; or (2) in the case
of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. For
the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to
occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural
part of the building commences, whether or not the alteration affects the
external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include
any improvements project required to comply with existing health, sanitary
or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living
conditions.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building that is principally above
ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank, or other manmade
facilities or infrastructures.
VARIANCE — A grant of relief by a community from the terms of the
floodplain management ordinance that allows construction in a manner
otherwise prohibited and where specific enforcement would result in
unnecessary hardship.
VIOLATION — Failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A
structure or other development without the required permits, lowest floor
elevation documentation, floodproofing certificates or required floodway
encroachment calculations is presumed to be in violation until such time as
that documentation is provided.
WATER SURFACE ELEVATION — The height, in relation to the National
Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or other datum, where specified),
of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal
or riverine areas.
§ 238-3. Floodplain District.
The Floodplain District includes all special flood hazard areas designated
as Zone A, A1-30 on the Town of Marlborough Flood Insurance Rate Maps
(FIRM) on file with the Town Clerk. These maps, as well as the
accompanying Town of Marlborough Flood Insurance Study dated
September 26, 2008, and any subsequent revisions thereto, are adopted by
reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. Since mapping is legally
adopted by reference into this chapter it must take precedence when more
restrictive until such time as a map amendment is obtained.
§ 238-4. General standards.
Within Zone A, A1-30, the following standards must be met prior to issuing
permits for any proposed construction/development.
A. Anchoring. All new construction and substantial improvements shall
be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the
structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including
the effects of buoyancy.
§ 238-2 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 238-4
1:50
B. Construction materials and methods.
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials resistant to flood damage.
(2) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
(3) For new construction and substantial improvements: require that
fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely
for the parking of vehicles, building access or limited storage in an
area other that a basement, and which are subject to flooding, shall
be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on
the exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters.
Designs meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the
following criteria: a minimum of two openings having a total net area
of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed
area subject to flooding shall be provided. The bottom of all openings
shall be no higher than one foot above grade.
C. Utilities.
(1) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air-conditioning
equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within
the components during conditions of flooding.
(2) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems.
(3) New and replacement sanitary sewerage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems
and discharge from the systems into floodwaters.
(4) On-site wastewater disposal systems shall be located and
constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from
them during flooding.
D. Compensatory storage. The water holding capacity of the floodplain,
except those areas that are tidally influenced, shall not be reduced.
Any reduction caused by filling, new construction or substantial
improvements involving an increase in footprint to the structure shall
be compensated for by deepening and/or widening of the floodplain.
Storage shall be provided on site, unless easements have been gained
from adjacent property owners; it shall be provided within the same
hydraulic reach and a volume not previously used for flood storage;
it shall be hydraulically comparable and incrementally equal to the
theoretical volume of floodwater at each elevation, up to and including
the one-hundred-year flood elevation, which would be displaced by the
proposed project. Such compensatory volume shall have an unrestricted
hydraulic connection to the same waterway or water body.
Compensatory storage can be provided off site if approved by the
municipality.
E. Equal conveyance. Within the floodplain, except those areas which are
tidally influenced, as designated on the Flood Insurance Rate Map
(FIRM) for the community, encroachments resulting from filling, new
§ 238-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-4
1:51
construction or substantial improvements involving an increase in
footprint of the structure are prohibited unless the applicant provides
certification by a registered professional engineer demonstrating, with
supporting hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance
with standard engineering practice, that such encroachments shall not
result in any (0.0 feet) increase in flood levels (base flood elevation).
Work within the floodplain and land adjacent to the floodplain, including
work to provide compensatory flood storage, shall not be constructed in
such a way so as to cause an increase in flood stage or flood velocity.
F. Aboveground oil tanks. Aboveground storage tanks (oil, propane, etc.),
which are located outside or inside of the structures, must be either
elevated above the base flood elevation (BFE) on a concrete pad or
securely anchored with tie-down straps to prevent flotation or lateral
movement, have the top of the fill pipe extended above the BFE, and
have a screw fill cap that does not allow for the infiltration of floodwater.
G. Portion of structure in flood zone. If any portion of a structure lies within
the special flood hazard area (SFHA), the entire structure is considered
to be in the SFHA. The entire structure must meet the construction
requirements of the flood zone. The structure includes any attached
additions, garages, decks, sunrooms or any structure attached to the
main structure. Decks or porches that extend into a more restrictive
flood zone will require the entire structure to meet the standards of the
more restrictive zone.
H. Structures in two flood zones. If a structure lies within two or more flood
zones, the construction standards of the most restrictive zone apply
to the entire structure (i.e., V zone is more restrictive than A zone:
structure must be built to the highest BFE). The structure includes any
attached additions, garages, decks, sunrooms or any other structure
attached to the main structure. (Decks or porches that extend into a
more restrictive flood zone will require the entire structure to meet the
standards of the more restrictive zone.)
I. No structures entirely or partially over water. New construction,
substantial improvements and repair to structures that have sustained
substantial damage cannot be constructed or located entirely or
partially over water.
§ 238-5. Development regulations.
In all areas of flood hazard in A1-30, AE, AH, where base flood elevation
data has been provided, the following regulations shall apply:
A. Residential construction. New construction and substantial
improvement of any residential structures shall have the lowest floor,
including basement, elevated to or above the base flood elevation.
B. Nonresidential construction.
(1) New construction and substantial improvement of nonresidential
structures shall be constructed in accordance with Subsection A
above or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall:
(a) Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level the structure
is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the
passage of water;
§ 238-4 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 238-5
1:52
(b) Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effect of buoyancy.
(2) A registered professional engineer or architect shall review and/or
develop structural design specifications and plans for construction
and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in
accordance with acceptable standards of practice for meeting the
provisions of this subsection. Such certification shall be provided to
the Town Engineer as set forth in § 238-6.
C. New structures within the floodway are prohibited.
D. Within the floodway designated on the Flood Boundary and Floodway
Map, all encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements to existing structures, and other development, are
prohibited unless certification by a registered professional engineer is
provided by the applicant, demonstrating that such encroachment shall
not result in any (0.00) increase in flood levels during the occurrence
of the one-hundred-year flood. In A Zones where base flood elevations
have been determined, but before a floodway is designated, no new
construction, substantial improvement, or other development (including
fill) shall be permitted which will increase base flood elevations more
than one foot at any point along the watercourse when all anticipated
development is considered cumulatively with the proposed development.
Should data be requested and/or provided, the Town shall adopt a
regulatory floodway based on the principle that the floodway must be
able to convey the waters of the base flood without increasing the water
surface elevation more than one foot at any point along the watercourse.
E. Manufactured homes shall not be placed in the Floodplain District.
F. All recreational vehicles to be place on a site within an area of special
flood hazard must either: (1) be on a site fewer that 180 consecutive
days (2) be fully licensed and ready for highway use; (3) meet elevation
and anchoring requirements for residential construction described in
Subsection A of this section. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway
use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site
only by quick-disconnect-type utilities and security devices, and has no
permanently attached additions.
§ 238-6. Establishment of development permit.
A. A development permit shall be obtained from the Town Engineer before
construction or development begins within Zone A, A1-30.
B. The Town Engineer shall review permits to assure sites are reasonably
free from flooding and require that all other local, state, and federal
permits are obtained.
C. Alteration of watercourse. Prior to any initiation of such alteration, the
Town shall:
(1) Notify adjacent communities and the Department of Energy and
Environmental Protection's Water Resources Unit prior to any
alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of
such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency;
§ 238-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-6
1:53
(2) Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated
portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is not
diminished.
D. Within Zone A, the applicant shall provide to the Town Engineer any base
flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other
source, including data developed pursuant to § 238-7D of this chapter.
The Town Engineer shall review such data and may reasonably use it as
criteria for requiring that new construction, substantial improvements,
or other development in Zone A meet the standards of §§ 238-4 and
238-5.
E. Information to be supplied by the applicant, obtained by the Town
Engineer and maintained by the Building Official:
(1) Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level)
to which any floodproofing is effective; and
(2) Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level)
of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new and substantially
improved structures:
(3) Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in § 238-5B.
(4) The Building Official shall maintain for public inspection all records
pertaining to the provisions of this chapter.
§ 238-7. Subdivision standards for Floodplain District.
All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development shall be
reviewed to determine whether such proposals will be reasonably safe from
flooding. If any part of a subdivision proposal or other development is
located within the Floodplain District established under the chapter, the
Town Engineer and the Planning Commission shall review it.
A. The proposal is designed to be consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage; and
B. All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems, shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damage; and
C. Adequate drainage systems shall be provided to reduce exposure to flood
hazards; and
D. Base flood elevation (the level of the one-hundred-year flood) and
floodway data shall be provided for that portion within the Floodplain
District.
E. Land located within the floodway shall not be subdivided for building
lot purposes unless sufficient land area is available outside the floodway
area, as part of the lot, for the structure and subsurface disposal system.
§ 238-8. Appeals and variances.
The Building Appeals Board shall hear and decide appeals relating to the
enforcement and administration of this chapter and requests for variances
from the requirements of this chapter.
A. A variance shall not be issued within any designated regulatory floodway
if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would
result.
§ 238-6 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 238-8
1:54
B. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is
the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
C. Variances shall only be issued upon:
(1) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(2) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
(3) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in
increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or
victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or
ordinances.
D. If a variance is granted, the Building Appeals Board shall notify the
applicant in writing over its signature that: the issuance of such variance
to construct a structure below the base flood elevation will result in
increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as
$25 for $100 of insurance coverage, and such construction below the
base flood level increases risks to life and property.
E. The Building Appeals Board will maintain a record of all variance
actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such
variances issued in the annual report submitted to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency.
§ 238-9. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing
law, regulations, ordinances, easements, covenants or deed restrictions.
However, where this chapter and another conflict or overlap, whichever
imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
§ 238-10. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection required by the chapter is considered the
minimum reasonable for regulatory purpose and is based on scientific
and engineering consideration. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes.
This chapter does not imply that land outside the special flood hazard areas
or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood
damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Town of
Marlborough or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that
result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully
made thereunder.
§ 238-11. Penalties for offenses.
In accordance with C.G.S. § 7-148(b)(1), any person(s) or party found to be
in violation of this chapter will be subject to a fine of $250 a day for each
day such violation continues, as well as being responsible for all Town legal
fees and costs that are a result of court action.
Chapter 254
§ 238-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-11
1:55
LAND USE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building code — See Ch. 221.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 238.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 301.
Zoning — See Ch. 340.
§ 238-11 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 238-11
1:56
ARTICLE I
Excavation and Grading Permits
[Adopted effective 8-1996 (§ A.4, Sec. 1, of the Town Code)]
§ 254-1. Permit required.
A permit shall be required before the filling of or removal of earth products,
including but not limited to materials such as sand, gravel, stone, loam, dirt,
peat, coal and minerals. The permit shall be issued or denied in accordance
with regulations promulgated by the Zoning Commission of the Town of
Marlborough and all such filling of, or removal of such earth products and
the reestablishment of ground level and protection of the area by suitable
cover shall conform and comply with regulations promulgated by the Zoning
Commission of the Town of Marlborough.
§ 254-2. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, firm or corporation shall be subject to a fine of not more than
$100 for each violation of this article (C.G.S. § 7-148). Each day that a
violation continues unabated after notice by the Town shall be considered a
separate violation for purposes of fines.
§ 254-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 254-2
1:57

ARTICLE II
Frontage Requirements
[Adopted effective 8-1996 (§ A.4, Sec. 2, of the Town Code)]
§ 254-3. Completion of improvements.
No building permit shall be issued for any building unless the lot upon
which the building is to be located shall have frontage on either: (1) a
"street" (as defined below); or (2) a proposed street in an approved
subdivision with respect to which all required improvements with the
exception of paving, loaming and seeding have been completed and
approved by the Town Engineer in conformance with the Town of
Marlborough's Highway Standards. A certificate of occupancy shall not
be granted for a building located on a proposed street in an approved
subdivision until all required improvements have been completed and
approved by the Town Engineer in conformance with the Town of
Marlborough's Highway Standards, with the exception of the final course of
paving, loaming and seeding. This article shall not prevent the issuance of
building permits for the construction of farm or accessory buildings.
§ 254-4. Penalties for offenses.
Any building erected in violation of this article shall be deemed an unlawful
structure, and the First Selectman may bring action to enjoin the erection of
such structure or to cause the same to be vacated or removed. Any person,
firm or corporation violating this article shall be subject to a fine of not
more than $200 for each building or structure so erected in violation of this
article.
§ 254-5. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
in this section:
STREET — An approved right-of-way that has been accepted by the
Marlborough Board of Selectmen, a state road or a private right-of-way that
has been approved by the Marlborough Planning Commission or Zoning
Commission.
§ 254-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 254-5
1:59

ARTICLE III
Fees
[Adopted as § A.5, Para. 1, of the Town Code]
§ 254-6. Establishment by Selectmen.
In accordance with § 8-1c of the Connecticut General Statutes regarding
reasonable fees for processing municipal land use applications, the Town
of Marlborough shall henceforth assess fees in accordance with a schedule
of fees to apply to the Zoning Commission, Planning Commission, Zoning
Board of Appeals and Conservation and Inland Wetlands Commission. The
Board of Selectmen shall set such fee schedule annually for all land use
applications to defray the costs of processing said applications. Such
schedule shall supersede any specific fees set forth in the General Statutes
or any special act.
§ 254-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 254-6
1:61

ARTICLE IV
Penalties for Violations
[Adopted 2-13-2007 (§ A.5, Sec. 1, of the Town Code)]
§ 254-7. Citations for violations of Inland Wetlands Regulations.
A. The Town Planner and Town employees working at the direction of the
Town Planner are authorized to issue citations for violations of the Inland
Wetlands Regulations of the Town of Marlborough to the extent and in
the manner provided by this article. Any such citation may be served
either by hand delivery or by certified mail, return receipt requested, to
the person named in the citation. If the person named in the citation sent
by certified mail refuses to accept such mail, a citation may be sent by
regular United States Mail. The issuance of such citations and any fines
payable in connection therewith shall be in addition to and not in lieu of
any penalties or remedies set forth in the Inland Wetlands Regulations of
the Town of Marlborough and the Connecticut General Statutes.
B. The Conservation Commission is hereby empowered and authorized, as
the designee of the Board of Selectmen, to adopt regulations governing
the issuance and enforcement of all citations issued for violations of the
Inland Wetlands Regulations of the Town of Marlborough, provided that
said regulations shall be in conformance in all respects to this article
and applicable law. In no event shall any citation be issued pursuant
to this § 254-7: (1) prior to the effective date of such regulations; (2)
against the state or any employee of the state acting within the scope
of his employment; or (3) without the approval of the Conservation
Commission. The schedule of fines for such citations shall be set by the
Board of Selectmen from time to time, and the initial schedule of fines
for such citations is set forth in Schedule A attached hereto and made a
part hereof.
C. The Town Planner shall retain an original or certified copy of any citation
issued pursuant to this § 254-7, which original or certified copy shall
be deemed a business record within the scope of § 52-180 of the
Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
§ 254-8. Citations for violations of zoning regulations.
A. The Zoning Enforcement Officer and Town employees working at the
direction of the Zoning Enforcement Officer are authorized to issue
citations for violations of Chapter 340, Zoning, of the Code of the Town
of Marlborough to the extent and in the manner provided by this article.
Any such citation may be served either by hand delivery or by certified
mail, return receipt requested, to the person named in the citation. If the
person named in the citation sent by certified mail refuses to accept such
mail, a citation may be sent by regular United States Mail. The issuance
of such citations and any fines payable in connection therewith shall be
in addition to and not in lieu of any penalties or remedies set forth in
Chapter 340, Zoning, of the Code of the Town of Marlborough and the
Connecticut General Statutes.
B. The Zoning Commission is hereby empowered and authorized, as a
designee of the Board of Selectmen, to adopt regulations governing the
§ 254-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 254-8
1:63
issuance and enforcement of all citations issued for violations of Chapter
340, Zoning, of the Code of the Town of Marlborough, provided that said
regulations shall be in conformance in all respects to this article and
applicable law. In no event shall any citation be issued pursuant to this
section: (1) prior to the effective date of such regulations or (2) without
the approval of the Zoning Commission. The schedule of fines for such
citations shall be set by the Board of Selectmen from time to time, and
the initial schedule of fines for such citations is set forth in Schedule A
attached hereto and made a part hereof.4
C. The Town Planner shall retain an original or certified copy of any citation
issued pursuant to this § 254-8, which original or certified copy shall
be deemed a business record within the scope of § 52-180 of the
Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
§ 254-9. Time period by which fine must be paid if not contested.
A person or entity receiving a citation authorized by this article shall be
allowed to make an uncontested payment of the fine specified therein for
a period of 30 days, commencing upon the date of receipt of the citation,
provided that if the citation has been sent by regular mail pursuant to
the provisions of § 254-7 or 254-8, the day of receipt of the citation shall
be deemed to be three days after the day of mailing of the citation. Any
payment made pursuant to this § 254-9 shall be made to the Treasurer for
deposit in the General Fund. Such payment shall be inadmissible in any
proceeding, civil or criminal, to establish the conduct of such person or
other person making the payment.
§ 254-10. Notice.
Any person or entity issued a citation and failing to make an uncontested
payment thereof pursuant to § 254-9 hereof shall be entitled to a notice
informing such person or entity:
A. Of the allegations against such person or entity and the amount of fines
due;
B. That such person or entity is entitled to contest his or its liability before
a citation hearing board by delivering, in hand or by United States Mail
to the Town Planner, written demand thereof within 10 days following
receipt of the notice described by this section;
C. That failure to demand a hearing within such ten-day period may result
in judgment being entered against such person or entity; and
D. That such judgment may issue without further notice.
§ 254-11. Admission of liability.
Any person or entity receiving a notice described in § 254-10 hereof shall
be entitled to admit liability and pay the full amount of the fines described
in such notice without requesting a hearing. Such payment shall be made
within the ten-day period described in § 254-10B. Any payment made
4. Editor's Note Schedule A is attached to this chapter.
§ 254-8 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 254-11
1:64
pursuant to this § 254-11 shall be sent to the Town Planner and made
payable to the Treasurer for deposit in the General Fund. Such payment
shall be inadmissible in any proceeding, civil or criminal, to establish the
conduct of such person or other person making the payment.
§ 254-12. Appointment of hearing officers and formation of hearing
board.
A. The Board of Selectmen shall appoint at least three Town residents to
act as citation hearing officers to conduct hearings as described in this
article.
(1) In no event shall any of the following individuals be appointed as a
hearing officer pursuant to this § 254-12:
(a) The Town Planner.
(b) The Zoning Enforcement Officer.
(c) The Town Building Inspector.
(d) Any Commissioner of the Conservation Commission.
(e) Any Commissioner of the Zoning Commission.
(f) Any Town employee exercising any authority under the Inland
Wetlands Regulations of the Town of Marlborough or Chapter
340, Zoning, of the Code of the Town of Marlborough.
(2) No citation hearing officer shall be entitled to compensation in
connection with the exercise of such citation hearing officer's duties
hereunder. Each citation hearing officer shall be removable at will
by the First Selectman, subject to the approval of the Board of
Selectmen, acting as chief executive officer of the Town of
Marlborough pursuant to § 7-12a of the Connecticut General
Statutes, as amended.
B. A Chief Citation Hearing Officer shall be elected by the members of
the Citation Hearing Board from among the members of the Citation
Hearing Board. This election shall be made upon the effective date of
this article and annually thereafter in January of each year. The Chief
Citation Hearing Officer shall continue in office until his successor is
elected. The Chief Citation Hearing Officer shall be responsible for:
(1) Establishing a Citation Hearing Board from time to time pursuant to
Subsection C hereof;
(2) Making final determinations regarding conflicts of interest and other
ethical matters as they pertain to any Citation Hearing Officer;
(3) Administrating each hearing pursuant to the provisions hereof; and
(4) Ensuring the adherence of each hearing conducted hereunder to
the applicable provisions of the Connecticut General Statutes, as
amended, and the provisions hereof.
C. Three Citation Hearing Officers shall comprise a Citation Hearing Board.
In the event that more than three Citation Hearing Officers shall have
been appointed pursuant to the provisions hereof, the Chief Citation
Hearing Officer shall appoint a Citation Hearing Board from all available
Citation Hearing Officers, provided that the Chief Citation Hearing
Officer shall use reasonable efforts to ensure the equal participation of
all Citation Hearing Officers.
§ 254-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 254-13
1:65
§ 254-13. Hearing procedure for citations.
A. Any person or entity receiving the notice described in § 254-10 shall be
permitted to demand a hearing by delivering written demand thereof, by
hand or via United States Mail, to the Town Planner within the 10 days
following receipt of the notice described in § 254-10. Such person or
entity shall be entitled to require the presence of the individual issuing
such citation at such hearing, provided such person or entity includes
such request in such demand. The Town Planner, upon receipt of such
demand, shall assign such hearing and certify such demand to the Chief
Citation Hearing Officer.
B. The Chief Citation Hearing Officer shall set a date, time and place for
a hearing and send written notice thereof to such person or entity.
Such hearing shall be held not less than 15 days nor more than 30
days following the Town Planner's receipt of such demand, provided
that the Chief Citation Hearing Officer shall grant a postponement or
continuance of such hearing upon good cause shown as requested by any
interested party.
C. Any person or entity wishing to contest liability under the citation shall
appear at the hearing. The Town Planner or his designee shall be
permitted to appear on behalf of the Town.
D. All hearings shall be conducted by a Citation Hearing Board. Each
Citation Hearing Board shall conduct hearings in the order and form
and with such methods of proof as the Chief Citation Hearing Officer
deems fair and reasonable. The rules regarding the admissibility of
evidence shall not be strictly applied, but all testimony shall be given
under oath or affirmation. Testimony and evidence presented shall be
recorded by a competent stenographer or, in the alternative, the Citation
Hearing Board shall cause such testimony and evidence to be recorded
by a sound-recording device. All testimony and evidence comprising
the hearing record shall be retained as a business record within the
scope of § 52-180 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended. Any
person or entity contesting liability at the hearing and any individual
appearing on behalf of the Town may present evidence. At the conclusion
of the hearing, the Citation Hearing Board shall announce a decision,
and a written record thereof shall be produced to be included in the
hearing record. Any decision by a Citation Hearing Board shall require
the affirmative consent of at least two of the Citation Hearing Officers
comprising such Citation Hearing Board.
E. No Citation Hearing Officer which has a conflict of interest or the
appearance of a conflict of interest in any hearings shall be assigned
to preside over such hearings as part of a Citation Hearing Board. Any
Citation Hearing Officer who determines that there exists the possibility
of the appearance of a conflict of interest in any hearing shall recuse
himself from such hearing, and the Chief Citation Hearing Officer shall
assign an alternate Citation Hearing Officer to such hearing.
§ 254-14. Entry of judgment.
A. If any person or entity receiving the notice described in § 254-10 hereof
fails to make a payment pursuant to § 254-11 or demand a hearing within
§ 254-13 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 254-14
1:66
the 10 days of receipt thereof, such person or entity shall be deemed
to have admitted liability for the violation(s) stated in the citation. The
Town Planner shall certify said failure to respond to the Chief Citation
Hearing Officer, and the Chief Citation Hearing Officer shall thereafter
enter and assess the fines stated in the citation.
B. If such contesting person or entity fails to appear at the hearing, the
Citation Hearing Board assigned to such hearing shall determine
whether such person or entity was duly noticed pursuant to the
provisions of this article. If the Citation Hearing Board determines that
such person or entity was duly noticed pursuant to the provisions of
this article, the Citation Hearing Board shall determine whether such
person's or entity's presence was necessary. The Citation Hearing Board
shall be permitted to review copies of police reports, investigatory and
citation reports and other official documents mailed to the Chief Citation
Hearing Officer or the Citation Hearing Board by such person or entity.
If the Citation Hearing Board determines that such person or entity was
duly noticed and that such person's or entity's presence at the hearing
was necessary, the Citation Hearing Board shall enter an assessment
by default. Each determination made hereunder by a Citation Hearing
Board shall require the affirmative consent of at least two of the Citation
Hearing Officers comprising such Citation Hearing Board.
C. If at the conclusion of the hearing the Citation Hearing Board announces
a decision stating that the person or entity cited is not liable, the
Chief Citation Hearing Officer shall dismiss the matter and enter the
determination in writing.
D. If at the conclusion of the hearing the Citation Hearing Board announces
a decision stating that the person or entity cited is liable for the
violation(s) stated in the citation, the Chief Citation Hearing Officer shall
enter as provided for by this article such decision and assess the fines
stated in such citation.
§ 254-15. Failure to make payment when due.
If any assessment is not paid on the date of its entry, the Chief Citation
Hearing Officer shall follow the procedures established in § 7-152c(f) of the
Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
§ 254-16. Right to appeal.
Any person or entity against which an assessment has been entered
pursuant to this article is entitled to judicial review by way of appeal
in accordance with § 7-152c(g) of the Connecticut General Statutes, as
amended.
§ 254-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 254-16
1:67

ARTICLE V
Withholding of Permits for Past-Due Taxes
[Adopted 7-17-1990 (§ A.16 of the Town Code)]
§ 254-17. Conditions under which permits may be withheld.
The Building Official of the Town of Marlborough shall not issue or renew
any building permit for improvements pertaining to real property if any
taxes levied by the Town against such real property or against personal
property used in a business enterprise conducted on such real property are
delinquent and have been so delinquent for a period of not less than one
year.
§ 254-18. Exceptions. [Amended 6-1991]
Notwithstanding the foregoing, no building permit or renewal thereof shall
be denied on the basis of delinquent taxes where the applicant has
submitted an affidavit to the Building Inspector stating that such delinquent
taxes are not the responsibility of the applicant or any entity of which
applicant has more than 50% ownership.
§ 254-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 254-18
1:69

ARTICLE VI
Public Hearing Notices
[Adopted 6-6-2012 (§ A.4, Sec. 3, of the Town Code)]
§ 254-19. Posting of signs for public hearings in certain land use
matters.
Whenever a person or any entity takes an appeal from a decision of the
Zoning Enforcement Officer; seeks a variance, special exception, special
permit, zone change not initiated by the Town; wetlands approval,
subdivision or resubdivision from either the Zoning Board of Appeals,
Conservation Commission, Planning Commission or Zoning Commission,
whichever is the appropriate agency in the particular case, and a public
hearing is to be held by the appropriate agency, the appellant or applicant
shall cause a sign to be placed on the property which is the subject of said
appeal or application.
§ 254-20. Location.
If the appellant does not own or have the legal right to put the sign on the
subject property, then the sign may be placed near the subject property, if
possible. The sign is to be placed at or near a street line or traveled way
or in such other location that it will be visible to the general public. If the
subject property has street frontage of over 300 feet, a second sign will be
required. If the subject property has frontage on more than one street, then
a sign must be posted on each street frontage.
§ 254-21. Acquisition and installation.
Such sign or signs and sign post(s) are to be provided by the Town of
Marlborough to the appellant or applicant after the appellant or applicant
provides a deposit to cover the cost of the sign or signs. The sign shall,
except for the wording thereon, be installed by the appellant or applicant
not less than 10 days before the public hearing and shall be removed and
returned to the Town within seven days after the legal notice is published
of the decision. If a sign is destroyed or damaged, the Town may require
replacement of the sign within 24 hours. Failure to return the sign post(s)
within said time period will mean the deposit is forfeited to the Town.
§ 254-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 254-21
1:71
Chapter 259
LOITERING
§ 259-1. Public property restrictions.
It shall be unlawful to loiter or cause undue noise or nuisance on any street,
sidewalk or public place.
§ 259-2. Private property restrictions.
It shall be unlawful to loiter on private property where the owner has
made written request to the Board of Selectmen to regulate loitering on his
property and has given notice of said loitering prohibition by posting his
property in conspicuous manner.
§ 259-3. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating this chapter shall be subject to a fine not exceeding
$100 for each offense pursuant to C.G.S. § 7-148(d).
Chapter 270
PARKING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 324.
§ 254-21 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 259-3
1:72
ARTICLE I
Overnight Parking Restrictions
[Adopted 10-5-2011 (§ F.3 of the Town Code)]
§ 270-1. Winter parking.
No parking shall be permitted on any highway or Town road between the
hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. commencing November 1 of each
year and ending April 1 of each following year.
§ 270-2. Parking of commercial vehicles and construction
equipment.
It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand, park or leave any
commercial vehicle, item of construction equipment, or trailer on any public
highway, including any state or municipal highway or any traveled way
which is paved, plowed or otherwise maintained by the Town, regardless of
whether the same has been formally accepted by the Town of Marlborough,
or within the public right-of-way thereof, between the hours of 12:00
midnight and 6:00 a.m. of any day. The Board of Selectmen may permit for
limited durations the parking of construction equipment related to an active
Town construction project within the Town highway right-of-way.
§ 270-3. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating this article shall be subject to a fine of $25 for each
violation.
§ 270-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-3
1:73

ARTICLE II
Parking During Snow Conditions
[Adopted as § F.4 of the Town Code]
§ 270-4. Parking prohibition.
No parking shall be permitted on any highway or Town road while snow is
on the highway or Town road.
§ 270-5. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating this article shall be subject to a fine of $25 for each
violation.
§ 270-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-5
1:75

ARTICLE III
Handicapped Parking
[Adopted as § F.5 of the Town Code]
§ 270-6. Designation of areas.
The Board of Selectmen may designate areas reserved for handicapped
parking.
§ 270-7. Penalties for offenses.
Unauthorized use of said areas shall subject the violator to a fine of $25 for
each violation.
§ 270-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-7
1:77
Chapter 274
PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS
§ 270-7 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 270-7
1:78
ARTICLE I
Boats Operated on Lake Terramuggus
[Adopted as § H.2 of the Town Code]
§ 274-1. Restrictions.
No person shall operate any power boat or motorized vehicle having more
than 3.3 brake horsepower on Lake Terramuggus.
§ 274-2. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating this article shall be subject to a fine of $50 for each
violation.
§ 274-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 274-2
1:79

ARTICLE II
Mooring of Watercraft on Lake Terramuggus
[Adopted 7-23-1996 (§ A.15 of the Town Code)]
§ 274-3. Mooring prohibited.
Except as provided below, no person shall moor any raft, watercraft or other
floating object on Lake Terramuggus.
§ 274-4. Exception for property fronting on Lake.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, an owner of a building lot of record with
frontage on Lake Terramuggus may moor a raft or watercraft and may
permit others to moor a raft or watercraft within 100 feet of the shoreline
of Lake Terramuggus, so long as each raft or watercraft is moored within
the area bounded by lines commencing at either end of the "frontage
closure line" of such lot and extending from each such point into Lake
Terramuggus in a direction perpendicular to the bearing of the shoreline
of Lake Terramuggus at each such point. For the purpose of this article,
the frontage closure line of a lot is the straight line between the two
points where the boundary lines of such lot meet the shoreline of Lake
Terramuggus.
§ 274-5. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who violates this article shall be subject to a fine of $100 for
each violation. In addition, the Town shall have the right to remove from
the lake any raft, watercraft or other floating object that is moored in
violation of this article, and the person violating this article with respect to
such removed raft, watercraft or other floating object shall pay the costs of
removal and storage thereof.
§ 274-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 274-5
1:81

ARTICLE III
Park Rules and Regulations; Supervision of Town Property
[Adopted effective 3-4-2004 (§ C.1 of the Town Code)]
§ 274-6. Park and Recreation Commission.
The powers and duties of the Park and Recreation Commission (the
"Commission") shall be to administer recreation programs, activities and
facilities for the Town of Marlborough.
§ 274-7. Rules and regulations for parks, facilities and activities.
A. The Commission, subject to the approval of the Board of Selectmen as
set out hereinafter, is hereby authorized to promulgate and from time
to time amend rules and regulations applicable to all persons entering,
utilizing, visiting or otherwise within the boundaries of any Town park or
recreational facility under the oversight of the Commission or engaged
in any activity sanctioned by the Park and Recreation Commission.
B. Any person convicted or violating any provision of the regulations
promulgated hereunder, as the same be amended or supplemented, shall
be punished by a fine not exceeding the maximum penalty allowable
under Connecticut General Statutes § 7-148(c)(10), shall be required to
pay all costs or any proceedings to enforce such regulations, and shall
be liable for any damage resulting from any such violation.
C. Violation of any provision of the regulations promulgated hereunder, as
the same may be amended or supplemented, shall be sufficient cause
for immediate expulsion from the area or activity by the Commission,
its designee or any police authority. Persons expelled hereunder are
prohibited from entering any area or participating in any activity under
the oversight of the Commission for a period of 48 hours following their
expulsion and may be excluded from any such area or activity for a
longer period of time, as deemed appropriate.
§ 274-8. Parking for Blish Memorial Park.
A. Any person residing in Marlborough may obtain a resident sticker from
the Town Clerk for each vehicle owned by him, which shall be displayed
conspicuously on the vehicle. The fee for the sticker shall be determined
by the Board of Selectmen.
B. Any person who uses said facilities without a sticker shall be subject to
a fine of $5 plus processing fees for each violation.
§ 274-9. Other Town properties.
The Park and Recreation Commission shall supervise and maintain other
properties owned by the Town of Marlborough as directed by the Board of
Selectmen or Town Meeting.
§ 274-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 274-9
1:83

ARTICLE IV
Nature Trails
[Adopted 6-22-2010 (§ H.9 of the Town Code)]
§ 274-10. Definitions.
A. For the purposes of this Nature Trails Ordinance (the "article"), the
definitions of § 14-1 C.G.S. are incorporated by reference as if contained
herein. In the event a definition contained within C.G.S. § 14-1 conflicts
with any definition in this article, the definition contained in this article
applies.
B. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE — A self-propelled vehicle designed to travel
over unimproved terrain and which has been determined by the
Commissioner of Motor Vehicles to be unsuitable for operation on the
public highways.
NONMOTORIZED VEHICLE — Any vehicle propelled by human
muscular power, including a bicycle, tricycle, wheelchair (including a
low-speed motorized or powered wheelchair), or cross-country skis, inline
skates (roller blades), roller skates, or baby carriages/strollers for
children.
PEDESTRIAN — A person going on foot or a person propelling or being
propelled in a wheelchair.
PERSON — A natural person, corporation, company, association,
partnership or firm.
SNOWMOBILE — Any self-propelled vehicle designed for travel on snow
or ice.
TOWN — The Town of Marlborough.
TOWN TRAIL AREA — The area of each trail and the adjacent buffer area
of five feet or overlapping private property area on which the Town holds
an easement.
TRAIL — Any track, footpath, course, walk or path intended or
maintained primarily for use by pedestrians within the Town.
§ 274-11. Use restrictions.
A. Town trail areas are for use by pedestrians and nonmotorized vehicles
only. The Town may limit the use of bicycles in posted Town areas.
B. All Town trail areas shall be open from dawn to dusk unless the First
Selectman or his designee has granted special permission to an
individual or a group in writing to extend this time period.
C. Dogs must be leashed at all times while within the Town trail areas, and
owners must remove solid pet waste from Town trail areas.
D. Special event permits may be issued by the First Selectman of the Town
of Marlborough.
§ 274-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 274-12
1:85
§ 274-12. Prohibited uses.
A. The operation of a motor vehicle, motorcycle or other motorized vehicle
is prohibited on any Town trail area, except official vehicles engaged in
maintenance or emergency activities.
B. No person shall operate a snowmobile or all-terrain vehicle on or over
any Town trail area without the written permission of the First
Selectman of the Town of Marlborough.
C. No person shall park or store any motor vehicle or motorized vehicle,
bicycle, trailer or personal property on any Town trail area, except in
those areas set aside and designated as temporary parking.
D. No person or organization shall camp overnight in any Town trail area.
E. No person or organization shall erect tents or construct shelters or
other structures of a temporary or permanent nature in any Town trail
area.
F. No person shall light, kindle or use any fire in any Town trail area.
G. Hunting, trapping, archery, discharging firearms, paintball guns, air
guns or use of any weapon on or into any Town trail areas is prohibited.
Hunters crossing Town trail areas to gain access to private or state
property may proceed through Town trail areas only with an unloaded
firearm.
H. No person shall offer any article, item or service for sale in any Town
trail area without the express written permission of the First Selectman,
except that this does not apply to established Parks and Recreation
Department and Board of Education programs.
I. No person shall destroy, injure, herd, harvest or disturb any form of
wildlife, plant life, or its habitat on any Town trail area, excluding statepermitted
fishing where specifically allowed.
J. No bottles, broken glass, cans, wastepaper or other rubbish shall be left
in any Town trail area except in containers designated for that purpose.
If the containers are full or there are no containers available, it is the
responsibility of each person bringing disposable items into a Town trail
area to remove these or any derivative waste when he or she leaves the
Town trail area. No yard waste, leaves or other refuse may be deposited
into Town trail areas. No residential or commercial dumping of any kind
is permitted in Town trail areas.
K. No person shall deface, disfigure, mar, injure, remove, alter or otherwise
intentionally damage or tamper any Town trail area property or
improvement.
L. No person shall use any alcoholic beverage and/or illegal drugs in any
Town trail area.
M. No animals, except dogs as provided for in this article, shall be
permitted in the Town trail area unless specifically authorized by the
Town.
§ 274-13. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to
a fine not less than $50 nor more than $250 for each offense. Each violation
of this article shall constitute a separate violation.
§ 274-12 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 274-13
1:86
Chapter 278
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
§ 278-1. License required.
No person, except as hereinafter stated, shall sell, offer for sale or solicit
orders for any goods, wares or merchandise within the Town of
Marlborough without a license (hereinafter referred to as the "peddling
license") issued by the Town Clerk's office upon the filing of an application
as hereafter provided.
§ 278-2. Exceptions.
The following activity shall not require a peddling license:
A. Sales by farmers and gardeners of the produce of their farms and
gardens, the sale, distribution and delivery of milk, teas, coffees, water,
spices, groceries, meats and bakery goods, newspapers, sales on
approval, conditional sales of merchandise and any other persons or
sales which may be exempt from such regulation by the General
Statutes.
B. Sales by persons having an established place of business in the Town of
Marlborough.
C. Sales to dealers and business establishments.
D. Sales for the benefit of a charitable organization located in Marlborough;
a regional or charitable organization that, though not located within
Marlborough, provides services to residents of Marlborough (e.g., the
Andover Hebron Marlborough Youth and Family Services organization,
etc.); or a charitable organization approved by the state.
E. Sales by persons for their own account who are residents of the Town of
Marlborough and who have not attained 16 years of age.
F. An activity otherwise exempted by law.
§ 278-3. Application for peddling license.
The application for a peddling license shall be filed with the Town Clerk's
office, in writing, and shall contain the following information:
A. The full name and description of the applicant; if a partnership, the
names of all partners; if a corporation, club or association, the name of
agent, officers and directors.
B. The permanent home address and business address of the applicant.
C. The full and legal name and address of the applicant's employer.
D. If a vehicle is to be used in relation to the peddling license, a description
of the same, together with the license or other registration number or
other similar means of identification.
E. A description of the nature of the business and any goods to be sold.
F. A sample copy of all of the materials which the applicant intends to
provide to potential customers shall be provided with the application.
§ 274-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 278-3
1:87
G. A certificate of insurance for each policy applicable to the business
that is subject of the application, including, but not limited to, general
liability and workers' compensation insurance.
§ 278-4. Background check.
Prior to the issuance of such peddling license, each applicant and all
persons registered as helpers shall undergo a Connecticut State Police
Records Check (SPRC) and submit the results of the same to the Town
Clerk's office.
§ 278-5. Issuance of license.
The Town Clerk shall issue the license or provide written notice of the denial
of the same within 30 days of receipt of the completed application or the
submission of the results of the aforesaid background check, whichever
date is later.
§ 278-6. Appeal process.
In the event any such license is denied by the Town Clerk's office, the
applicant may appeal by making a written request within five days of such
denial for a hearing before the Board of Selectmen at the next regularly
scheduled meeting or a special meeting called for this purpose within 30
days of the denial.
§ 278-7. Fees.
The peddling license fee shall be $100 per year. Each person helping or
assisting in the sale, offering items for sale, or soliciting orders shall be
individually licensed and shall pay the license fee. All such peddling licenses
shall expire on the 31st day of December following the date of issuance.
§ 278-8. Issuance of card or button.
The Town Clerk shall issue to such persons as shall qualify a card or button
bearing the name and address of the licensee, the name and address of his
employer, if any, and the expiration date of the license, signed by the Town
Clerk's office.
§ 278-9. Nontransferability of license.
No peddler's license shall be used at any time by any person other than the
one to whom it was issued.
§ 278-10. Records.
It shall be the duty of the Town Clerk's office to keep a record of all peddling
licenses and a detailed account of all receipts for such licenses, which
receipts shall be turned over monthly to the Town Treasurer.
§ 278-3 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 278-11
1:88
§ 278-11. Use of public streets and property restricted.
A peddler or solicitor using a vehicle shall have no exclusive right to
any location on public streets or public property, shall not be permitted
any stationary location therein, and shall not be permitted to operate in
any congested area or any area where his operations might impede or
inconvenience the public. For the purpose of this chapter, the judgment of
a police officer or Town official, exercised in good faith, shall be deemed
conclusive as to whether the area is congested or the public impeded or
inconvenienced.
§ 278-12. Exhibit of license.
Each individual holding a peddler's license must present his peddling
license upon his arrival at the property of any potential customer and upon
the request by any individual.
§ 278-13. Night sales at dwellings prohibited.
Calls at the dwelling of any person for sale or solicitation by any licensee
between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. are prohibited, except by
appointment with the owner or tenant of the property.
§ 278-14. Revocation of license; notice of hearing.
A. Any license may be suspended by the First Selectman without hearing
and/or revoked after notice and hearing for any of the following causes:
(1) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application for a license.
(2) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of
carrying on the business.
(3) Any violation of this chapter.
(4) Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude
subsequent to the issuance of the license.
(5) Conducting the business in an unlawful manner or in such a manner
as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to
the health, safety or general welfare of the public.
B. Notice of such suspension and/or revocation shall be given, in writing,
setting forth the grounds for suspension and/or revocation. Such notice
shall be mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the
licensee at the address provided by said licensee in his most recent
submitted application or his last known address at the time the license is
suspended. The licensee, if he wishes to challenge the revocation of his
peddling license, must request a hearing before the Board of Selectmen
by forwarding such a request, in writing, to the Board of Selectmen
within five days of the date of the notice of suspension/revocation. If
the licensee fails to timely request a hearing, the suspension and/or
revocation shall be final without any further notice to the licensee. If
a hearing is timely requested, the date fixed for the hearing shall be
not less than five days nor more than 10 days after the receipt of the
licensee's request for a hearing.
§ 278-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 278-15
1:89
§ 278-15. Expiration of licenses.
All peddling licenses shall expire on the 31st day of December following the
date of issuance.
§ 278-16. Penalties for offenses; enforcement.
A. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter, including, but
not limited to, the sale, offering for sale or solicitation of orders for sale
without a valid peddling license, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed
$199.
B. This section shall be enforced by citations issued by designated
municipal officers or employees and a citation hearing procedure
authorized by § 7-152c of the Connecticut General Statutes.
Chapter 283
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
§ 278-15 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 278-16
1:90
ARTICLE I
Abandoned Refrigerators
[Adopted as § H.1 of the Town Code]
§ 283-1. Removal of door required.
It shall become unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to leave or
permit to remain outside of any dwelling, building or other structure, or
within any unoccupied or abandoned building, dwelling or other structure
under his or their control, in a place accessible to children, any abandoned,
unattended or discarded ice box, refrigerator or other container which has
an airtight door or lid, snap lock or other locking device which may not be
released from the inside without first removing said door or lid, snap lock
or other locking device from said icebox, refrigerator or container.
§ 283-2. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall
be subject to a fine in an amount not exceeding $50 or be imprisoned in the
Hartford County Jail for a period not exceeding 30 days, or be both so fined
and imprisoned. Each day such violation is committed or permitted shall
constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder.
§ 283-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 283-2
1:91
Chapter 292
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Abandoned refrigerators — See Ch. 283, Art.
I.
§ 283-2 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 283-2
1:92
ARTICLE I
Establishment and Use of Transfer Station
[Adopted effective 3-23-2001 (§§ G.1, G.2 and G.3 of the Town
Code)]
§ 292-1. Transfer station area.
There shall be a Town sanitary transfer station area (the "Transfer Station"),
for the convenience and sole use of Marlborough residents, on a parcel of
land on Quinn Road. No person shall bring garbage, rubbish or recyclable
materials (as defined in Article II of this chapter) to the Transfer Station
from any other town. As set forth in this Article I, residents may bring
certain materials to the Transfer Station, but under no circumstances shall
residents dump garbage or rubbish in any other section of the Town.
Residents and businesses may contract with private haulers for the purpose
of transporting garbage, rubbish and recyclable materials (as defined in
Article II of this chapter) to other licensed facilities. All such material shall
be secured in transit in such a manner so as to prevent it from being
scattered on roads and highways.
§ 292-2. Disposal of unauthorized materials at Transfer Station.
Only authorized materials (as defined and limited by § 292-3 and Article II
of this chapter) shall be disposed of at the Transfer Station.
§ 292-3. Regulation concerning disposal of authorized materials.
A. Only the following materials (collectively, the "authorized materials")
shall be disposed of at the Transfer Station pursuant to Articles I and II
of this chapter:
(1) Household waste: as defined in Article II, Recycling, § 292-5.
(2) Recyclable materials: as defined in and limited by Article II,
Recycling, §§ 292-5 and 292-6A.
(3) Household furniture and items, including sofas, stuffed chairs,
recliners, sofa beds, mattresses and box springs.
(4) White goods: as defined in Article II, Recycling, § 292-5.
(5) Stumps (up to 24 inches in diameter), wooden furniture pallets, and
logs.
(6) Construction and demolition waste: as defined in Article II,
Recycling, § 292-5.
(7) Brush: as defined in Article II, Recycling, § 292-5.
(8) Scrap tires: as defined in Article II, Recycling, § 292-5.
(9) Other items as approved by the Board of Selectmen.
B. Each vehicle entering the Transfer Station shall have an up-to-date
permit sticker attached to the vehicle's windshield or a temporary
permit issued by the Town Clerk or the First Selectman.
C. The Board of Selectmen shall set the hours of operation of the Transfer
Station.
D. The Board of Selectmen may prescribe and from time to time amend fees
for the acceptance of authorized materials at the Transfer Station.
§ 292-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 292-3
1:93
E. All recyclable materials (as defined and limited by Article II, Recycling,
§§ 292-5 and 292-6) delivered to the Transfer Station must conform to
Article II, concerning recycling.
F. Any item not listed in the definition of "authorized materials" contained
in Subsection A of this section shall not be disposed of at the Transfer
Station, including but not limited to the following items:
(1) Waste oil, waste antifreeze, and waste oil filters produced by or in
the possession of commercial enterprises, liquid waste, mixed trash,
stumps exceeding 24 inches in diameter, animal carcasses, or animal
by-products.
(2) Hazardous waste (as defined in Article II, Recycling, § 292-5),
including but not limited to pesticides, herbicides, asbestos, leador
oil-based paints, drain cleaners, solvents, brake fluid, wood
preservatives, rat poison, oven cleaners, swimming pool chemicals,
acids, photo chemicals, epoxy, or furniture stripper. These items
must be brought to a licensed household hazardous waste disposal
facility.
(3) Biomedical waste (as defined in Article II, Recycling, § 292-5).
(4) Grass clippings.
(5) Special waste (as defined in Article II, Recycling, § 292-5).
G. No person shall deposit at the Transfer Station any ice box, refrigerator
or other container that has an airtight door or lid, snap lock or other
locking device that may not be released from the inside without first
removing the door or lid, snap lock or other locking device from the ice
box, refrigerator or container.
H. A temporary permit shall be required for anyone who is hired by a
resident of the Town to transport demolition material or debris to the
Transfer Station. Temporary permits are issued by the Town Clerk or the
First Selectman.
§ 292-4. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating this article shall be subject to a $100 fine for each
violation.
§ 292-3 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 292-4
1:94
ARTICLE II
Recycling
[Adopted effective 3-23-2001 (§ G.4 of the Town Code)]
§ 292-5. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ASEPTIC PACKAGING — Gable top, plastic-coated containers up to one
gallon in size, empty, with straws and caps removed.
BATTERY (DRY CELL STORAGE TYPE) — A device used for generating
electric current through a chemical reaction, including but not limited
to nickel-cadmium, carbon and/or alkaline batteries. The term "battery"
does not include mercuric oxide batteries, which will not be accepted at
the Transfer Station. The term "battery" also does not refer to lead acid
batteries or motor vehicle batteries, which are encompassed within the
term "storage battery," as defined below.
BIOMEDICAL WASTE — Infectious waste, pathological waste, and
chemotherapy waste generated during the administration of medical care
or the performance of medical research involving humans or animals and
as further defined in C.G.S. § 22a-207(19), as amended. Syringes, sharps
and needles stored in a No. 2 HDPE container, with lid taped shut, are
acceptable for disposal into household waste.
BRUSH — Bushes, shrubs and/or tree limbs less than three inches in
diameter.
CARDBOARD — Corrugated boxes and similar corrugated and kraft paper
materials that have a minimum of contamination by food or other material.
No wax or plastic coatings allowed. All items must be free of debris and
flattened prior to disposal. Materials cannot be larger than three feet by
three feet.
COMMINGLED RECYCLABLE MATERIAL — The assortment or
combination of metal food containers, plastic containers, glass food
containers, aluminum foil and/or aseptic packaging. All items must be free
of debris and cleaned.
CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION WASTE — Waste building materials
and packaging resulting from construction, remodeling, repair and
demolition operations on houses, commercial buildings, and other
structures as further defined and limited by C.G.S. § 22a-208x, as amended.
DEEP — The State of Connecticut Department of Energy and Environmental
Protection.
GLASS FOOD CONTAINERS — Any unbroken glass bottle or jar of any
shape or color, up to one gallon in size, used to package food or beverage
products suitable for human or animal consumption. All glass food
containers must be clean and have caps, lids and corks removed.
§ 292-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 292-5
1:95
HAZARDOUS WASTE — Any waste material that may pose a present or
potential hazard to human health or the environment when improperly
disposed of, treated, stored, transported or otherwise managed and as
further defined by C.G.S. § 22a-115(1), as amended, and § 22a-209-1 of the
Regulations of the DEEP, as amended.
HOUSEHOLD WASTE — Ordinary household waste that does not contain
any recyclable materials, hazardous waste, construction and demolition
waste, biomedical waste, batteries, storage batteries, special waste or oil
base paints. Dry latex paint is acceptable.
LEAVES — The foliage of trees.
MAGAZINES — Catalogs, magazines or other similar printed matter.
METAL FOOD CONTAINER — Any aluminum, bimetal, steel, tin-plated
steel, or other metallic can, plate or tray of any shape, up to one gallon
in size, used to package food or beverage products suitable for human or
animal consumption. Clean aluminum foil is also acceptable. Number 10
cans are also acceptable.
NEWSPAPER — Any used or discarded newsprint that has a minimum of
contamination by food or other material. Newspaper must be no more than
two months old, clean, dry and placed in brown kraft paper grocery bags.
OFFICE PAPER — Any used or discarded high-grade white paper and manila
paper, including but not limited to paper utilized for file folders, tab cards,
writing, typing, printing, computer printing and photocopying, which is
suitable for recycling and which has a minimum of contamination, excluding
office paper generated by households.
PLASTIC CONTAINERS — No. 1 PET (polyethylene terephthalate) up to
three liters in size with the number "1" on the container and No. 2 HDPE
(high-density polyethylene) up to one gallon in size with the number "2" on
the container.
REASONABLE OPPORTUNITY TO RECYCLE — Exists when, for a given
recyclable material, there exists a separate container, handling, transport
and/or processing at the Transfer Station or other designated location in the
Town.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Any materials that have been designated as
recyclable under the Connecticut General Statutes and the Regulations of
the DEEP, as amended, and that have been identified as recyclable pursuant
to § 292-6 below.
RECYCLING — The process of sorting, cleansing, treating and
reconstituting waste or other discarded material for the purpose of using
the altered form.
RECYCLING CONTAINER — A specifically marked container used to collect
recyclable materials separately from other solid waste.
RESIDENT — Individuals who reside in the Town. The term "resident" does
not include businesses or other organizations.
§ 292-5 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 292-5
1:96
SCRAP METAL — Used or discarded items that consist predominantly of
ferrous metals, aluminum, brass, copper, lead, chromium, tin, nickel or
alloys thereof, including but not limited to white goods. All nonmetal items
must be removed. No batteries or closed containers are allowed.
SCRAP TIRES — Any discarded rubber of synthetic rubber tires used by or
manufactured for vehicles, including but not limited to automobiles, trucks,
buses and trailers. No rims larger than 17 inches will be accepted.
SPECIAL WASTE — Any waste that is not recyclable materials, household
waste, hazardous waste or biomedical waste, and that requires special
handling for disposal.
STORAGE BATTERY — Lead acid batteries or other batteries used in motor
vehicles such as automobiles, airplanes, boats, recreational vehicles, and
tractors.
WASTE ANTIFREEZE — A substance of low freezing point added to a liquid,
especially to the water in a radiator of vehicles, e.g., ethylene glycol.
WASTE OIL — Crankcase oil that has been utilized in internal combustion
engines.
WHITE GOODS — Common household appliances, such as washers, dryers,
air conditioners, televisions, refrigerators, freezers and stoves.
§ 292-6. Recyclable materials.
A. The list of recyclable materials is as follows:
(1) Cardboard;
(2) Glass food containers;
(3) Leaves;
(4) Metal food containers;
(5) Newspaper;
(6) Office paper;
(7) Scrap metal;
(8) Storage batteries;
(9) Waste oil;
(10) Waste antifreeze;
(11) Plastic containers;
(12) Magazines; and
(13) Scrap tires.
B. The Board of Selectmen may revise this list from time to time.
§ 292-7. Household recycling.
A. Prior to collection or disposal, residents shall presort the following items
from household waste and shall place the separated items into an
appropriate recycling container: glass food containers, metal food
containers, plastic containers, aluminum foil, aseptic packaging,
magazines and newspaper. Glass food containers, metal food containers,
aseptic packaging, and plastic containers shall be rinsed. Newspapers
shall be string-tied in bundles or placed in brown paper grocery bags.
§ 292-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 292-7
1:97
B. The Board of Selectmen may revise, from time to time, the materials
required to be presorted from household waste prior to collection or
disposal.
§ 292-8. Recycling by private businesses.
A. The use of the terms "private business" and "private businesses" in this
section refer to commercial, industrial and private business enterprises
located in the Town.
B. All private businesses and/or owners of private business property are
responsible for the proper disposal of garbage, rubbish and recyclable
materials that are generated or brought onto their property. They must
also adhere to all applicable local, state and federal laws relating to
recycling and waste disposal.
C. The materials that must be recycled by private businesses are as follows:
plastic containers, glass food containers, metal food containers,
newspapers, magazines, cardboard, waste oil, storage batteries, scrap
metal, and office paper. The Board of Selectmen may revise this list from
time to time.
D. All private businesses and owners of private business property are
required to provide their own means of collection, transportation and
disposal of recyclable materials and nonrecyclable waste from their
property to a proper receiving center.
E. Private businesses and owners of private business properties must make
themselves aware of the proper means by which to dispose of recyclable
materials and nonrecyclable waste generated or brought onto their
property.
F. The Transfer Station may accept or receive recyclable materials or
nonrecyclable waste that is generated by private businesses or that is
brought onto private business property only as directed by the Board of
Selectmen or as required by Subsection H below.
G. Upon request, the Town will provide assistance to private businesses
interested in learning proper recycling procedures.
H. All private haulers shall obtain a permit and/or a license while working
in the Town. All private haulers shall also provide monthly tonnage
reports to the Town.
§ 292-9. Waste oil.
A. The Town will maintain a storage container at the Transfer Station to
receive waste oil from residents only. The Town also will provide for the
removal of collected waste oil from the Transfer Station, as necessary.
B. The Town will provide a separate disposal container at the Transfer
Station to receive used waste oil filters from residents only.
C. The Town will provide a separate disposal container at the Transfer
Station to receive waste antifreeze from residents only.
D. Private businesses and other organizations, including but not limited to
garages and dealerships, shall make their own provisions for storage and
removal of waste oil, waste oil filters, and waste antifreeze.
§ 292-7 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 292-10
1:98
§ 292-10. Leaves.
The Town will accept leaves at the Transfer Station.
§ 292-11. Scrap metal.
The Town will accept scrap metal at the Transfer Station.
§ 292-12. Storage batteries.
A. The Town will maintain a dropoff point at the Transfer Station for storage
batteries from residents only.
B. Private businesses and other organizations, including but not limited
to garages and dealerships, will be responsible for properly disposing
of storage batteries. The Town will not accept storage batteries from
private businesses and other organizations at the Transfer Station.
§ 292-13. Freon recovery.
Chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) and hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HFCs) shall not
be removed from any item containing such materials prior to disposal of
such item at the Transfer Station. The Town shall arrange for such removal
by a licensed or certified company.
§ 292-14. Household furniture and mattresses.
The Town will accept household furniture and mattresses at the Transfer
Station from residents only. Private businesses and other organizations shall
make their own provisions for the disposal of furniture and mattresses.
§ 292-15. Enforcement.
A. Those generators of waste found to be in violation of requirements for
presorting recyclable materials will be notified in one or more of the
following ways:
(1) Verbally;
(2) In writing; or
(3) In person by a representative of the Town.
B. The Town will not accept any recyclable materials in the municipal solid
waste container at the Transfer Station from any waste generator for
whom there exists a reasonable opportunity to recycle.
(1) Presorting required.
(a) Contracted waste-and-materials haulers shall not collect waste
from waste generators that violate the presorting requirements
set forth in this Article II. Any person that dumps one or more
loads at the Transfer Station not complying with the presorting
requirements set forth in this Article II will be subject to the fines
prescribed herein for each violation.
[1] First offense: $15 fine.
[2] Second offense: $100 fine.
§ 292-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 292-15
1:99
[3] Third offense: Review and determination by the Board of
Selectmen of penalty, which may include fines up to the
maximum amount allowed by law.
(b) Any police officer, constable, resident state trooper or other
person authorized by the First Selectman may issue a citation to
any person who commits a violation of this section. Appeals may
be made to the Board of Selectmen.
(2) Contracted waste-and-materials haulers who have reason to believe
that a person from whom they collect solid waste has discarded
recyclable materials with such solid waste in violation of the
presorting requirements contained in this article shall not collect
such solid waste and shall promptly notify the First Selectman or
his designated agent for action by the Town against the violator. The
person whose waste was not collected will be subject to the fines
prescribed herein for each violation.
(a) First offense: $15 fine.
(b) Subsequent offense: $100 fine and subject to order that material
be removed.
(3) Residents and private businesses delivering their own waste to the
Transfer Station will place recyclable materials in containers
provided for such items at the Transfer Station before disposing
of nonrecyclable waste. Failure to do so will constitute a violation
of this article and subject the violator to the fines set forth in
Subsection B(1) for each violation.
(4) Private haulers of waste from residents and private businesses must
report any violation of this article to the Town pursuant to C.G.S.
§ 22a-220c.
§ 292-16. Prohibition of unauthorized collection of recyclable
materials.
Except as specifically authorized by the Town, no person(s) engaged in the
business of separation, recovery, collection, removal, storage or disposition
of materials and waste within the Town shall pick up presorted recyclable
materials. This restriction shall also apply to any citizen, resident, taxpayer
or person who might engage in such a practice for personal gain.
§ 292-15 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 292-16
1:100
Chapter 297
STORAGE TANKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building code — See Ch. 221.
§ 297-1. Statement of purpose.
The Town of Marlborough relies entirely on groundwater for its drinking
water supplies. To ensure a clean, dependable water supply for the present
and future residents of the community, it is the purpose of this chapter
to protect its groundwater resources, through reasonable requirements as
may be necessary to ensure the proper installation of fuel storage tanks.
§ 297-2. Aboveground location.
The Building Official and/or Fire Marshal shall require that fuel storage
tanks and components are located above ground in a basement or a
protective structure unless safety, health or site-specific conditions
necessitate the use of an underground fuel-storage system.
§ 297-3. Fuel Gas Code.
The latest revision of the Building Official's Code (BOCA) Flammable and
Combustible Liquids is hereby make a part of this chapter.5
§ 297-4. Standards for underground tanks.
Underground fuel storage systems of all sizes for new facilities, including
new residential buildings, as well as the repair, alteration or replacement of
underground fuel-storage systems of all sizes at existing facilities, including
residential buildings, shall be in accordance with the corrosion protection,
testing and monitoring provisions of the National Fire Protection
Association (NFPA) Publication Number 30, entitled "Flammable and
Combustible Liquids Code" (Section 2-3); NFPA 31, Standards for the
Installation of Oil-Burning Equipment, and the Regulations of Connecticut
State Agencies, Section 22a-449(d)-1, "Control of the Nonresidential
Underground Storage and Handling of Oil and Petroleum Liquids," as all of
the foregoing may be amended from time to time.
§ 297-5. Approvals required.
A. Commercial and industrial underground storage tanks and their
components must be inspected and approved in writing by the Fire
Marshal prior to being covered.
5. Editor's Note: See now the International Code Council Fuel Gas Code.
§ 292-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 297-5
1:101
B. Noncommercial underground storage tanks and their components must
be inspected and approved in writing by the Building Inspector prior to
be covered.
C. The Marlborough Department of Health shall be required to approve
in writing the location of underground storage systems to ensure that
the provisions of the Public Health Code of the State of Connecticut are
satisfied with specific regards to the drinking water supplies.
Chapter 301
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land use — See Ch. 254.
Zoning — See Ch. 340.
Sewer regulations — See Ch. 410.
§ 297-5 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 297-5
1:102
ARTICLE I
Illicit Discharges
[Adopted 6-15-2010 (§ A.20 of the Town Code)]
§ 301-1. Purpose and intent.
The purpose of this article is to provide for the health, safety and general
welfare of the citizens of the Town of Marlborough through the regulation
of nonstormwater discharges to the storm drainage system to the maximum
extent practicable as required by federal and state law. This article
establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the
municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) in order to comply with
requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
(NPDES) permit process. The objectives of this article are:
A. To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the municipal separate
storm sewer system (MS4) by stormwater discharges by any user.
B. To prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the municipal separate
storm sewer system.
C. To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance and
monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this article.
§ 301-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have
the following meanings:
AUTHORIZED ENFORCEMENT AGENCY — Employees or designee(s) of
the municipal agency designated to enforce this article.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs) — Schedules of activities,
prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution
prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other
management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants
directly or indirectly to stormwater, receiving waters or stormwater
conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating
procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or
water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.
CLEAN WATER ACT — The federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C.
§ 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY — Activities subject to NPDES construction
permits. Currently these include construction projects resulting in land
disturbance of one acre or more. Such activities include but are not limited
to clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating and demolition.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS — Any material, including any substance, waste
or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration or
physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may cause or significantly
contribute to a substantial present or potential hazard to human health,
safety, property or the environment when improperly treated, stored,
transported, disposed of or otherwise managed.
§ 301-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 301-2
1:103
ILLEGAL DISCHARGE — Any direct or indirect nonstormwater discharge to
the storm drain system, except as exempted in § 301-6 of this article.
ILLICIT CONNECTIONS — An illicit connection is defined as either of the
following: Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface,
which allows an illegal discharge to enter the storm drain system, including
but not limited to any conveyances which allow any nonstormwater
discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter
the storm drain system and any connections to the storm drain system from
indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection
had been previously allowed, permitted or approved by an authorized
enforcement agency, or any drain or conveyance connected from a
commercial or industrial land use to the storm drain system which has not
been documented in plans, maps or equivalent records and approved by an
authorized enforcement agency.
INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY — Activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as
defined in 40 CFR 122.26(b)(14).
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES)
STORMWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT — A permit issued by the EPA [or
by a state under authority delegated pursuant to 33 U.S.C. § 1342(b)] that
authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States,
whether the permit is applicable on an individual group or general areawide
basis.
NONSTORMWATER DISCHARGE — Any discharge to the storm drain
system that is not composed entirely of stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm,
corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner
or as the owner's agent.
POLLUTANT — Anything which causes or contributes to pollution.
Pollutants may include, but are not limited to, paints, varnishes and
solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; nonhazardous liquid and solid
waste and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter or other discarded or
abandoned objects, ordnances and accumulations, so that same may cause
or contribute to pollution; floatables, pesticides, herbicides and fertilizers;
hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens;
dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that
result from constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive
matter of any kind.
PREMISES — Any building, lot, parcel of land or portion of land, whether
improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM — Publicly owned facilities by which
stormwater is collected and/or conveyed, including but not limited to any
roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped
storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and
human-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs and other drainage
structures.
§ 301-2 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 301-2
1:104
STORMWATER — Any surface flow, runoff and drainage consisting entirely
of water from any form of natural precipitation and resulting from such
precipitation.
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN — A document which
describes the best management practices and activities to be implemented
by a person or business to identify sources of pollution or contamination
at a site and the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to
stormwater, stormwater conveyance systems, and/or receiving waters to the
maximum extent practicable.
WASTEWATER — Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated
stormwater, discharged from a facility.
§ 301-3. Applicability.
This article shall apply to all water entering the storm drain system
generated on any developed and undeveloped lands unless explicitly
exempted by an authorized enforcement agency.
§ 301-4. Responsibility for administration.
The Director of Planning and Development or designee(s) (hereinafter the
"authorized enforcement agency") shall administer, implement and enforce
the provisions of this article. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon
the authorized enforcement agency may be delegated in writing to persons
or entities acting in the beneficial interest of or in the employ of the agency.
§ 301-5. Minimum standards.
The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this article
are minimum standards, and this article does not intend nor imply that
compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination,
pollution, nor unauthorized discharge of pollutants.
§ 301-6. Discharge prohibitions.
A. Prohibition of illegal discharges. No person shall discharge or cause to
be discharged into the municipal storm drain system or watercourses
any materials, including but not limited to pollutants or waters
containing any pollutants that cause or contribute to a violation of
applicable water quality standards, other than stormwater. The
commencement, conduct or continuance of any illegal discharge to the
storm drain system is prohibited except as described as follows:
(1) The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions
established by this article: waterline flushing or other potable water
sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream
flows, rising groundwater, groundwater infiltration to storm drains,
uncontaminated pumped groundwater, foundation or footing drains
(not including active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space
pumps, air-conditioning condensation, springs, noncommercial
washing of vehicles, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows,
§ 301-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 301-6
1:105
swimming pools (if dechlorinated - typically less than one part per
million chlorine), firefighting activities, and any other water source
not containing pollutants.
(2) Discharges specified in writing by the authorized enforcement
agency as being necessary to protect public health and safety.
(3) Dye testing is an allowable discharge, but requires a verbal
notification to the authorized enforcement agency prior to the time
of the test.
(4) The prohibition shall not apply to any nonstormwater discharge
permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver or waste discharge order
issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of
the Federal Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the
discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit,
waiver or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and
provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge
to the storm drain system.
B. Prohibition of illicit connections.
(1) The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit
connections to the storm drain system is prohibited.
(2) This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit
connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection
was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at
the time of connection.
(3) A person is considered to be in violation of this article if the person
connects a line conveying sewage to the MS4 or allows such a
connection to continue.
§ 301-7. Suspension of MS4 access.
A. Suspension of illicit discharges in emergency situations. The authorized
enforcement agency may, without prior notice, suspend MS4 discharge
access to a person when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual
or threatened discharge which presents or may present imminent and
substantial danger to the environment or to the health or welfare of
persons or to the MS4 or waters of the United States. If the violator
fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency, the
authorized enforcement agency may take such steps as deemed
necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the MS4 or waters of the
United States or to minimize danger to persons.
B. Suspension due to the detection of illicit discharge.
(1) Any person discharging to the MS4 in violation of this article may
have his MS4 access terminated if such termination would abate
or reduce an illicit discharge. The authorized enforcement agency
will notify a violator of the proposed termination of its MS4 access.
The violator may petition the authorized enforcement agency for a
reconsideration and hearing.
(2) A person commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4 access
to premises terminated pursuant to this section without the prior
approval of the Authorized enforcement agency.
§ 301-6 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 301-8
1:106
§ 301-8. Industrial or construction activity discharges.
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES
stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such
permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form
acceptable to the authorized enforcement agency prior to the allowing of
discharges to the MS4.
§ 301-9. Monitoring of discharges.
A. Applicability. This section applies to all facilities that have stormwater
discharges associated with industrial activity, including construction
activity.
B. Access to facilities.
(1) The authorized enforcement agency shall be permitted to enter and
inspect facilities subject to regulation under this article as often
as may be necessary to determine compliance with this article. If
a discharger has security measures in force which require proper
identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the
discharger shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access
to representatives of the authorized enforcement agency.
(2) Facility operators shall allow the authorized enforcement agency
ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of
inspection, sampling, examination and copying of records that must
be kept under the conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge
stormwater and the performance of any additional duties as defined
by state and federal law.
(3) The authorized enforcement agency shall have the right to set up on
any permitted facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion
of the authorized enforcement agency to conduct monitoring and/or
sampling of the facility's stormwater discharge.
(4) The authorized enforcement agency has the right to require the
discharger to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The
facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at
all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the discharger
at its own expense. All devices used to measure stormwater flow and
quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy.
(5) Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access
to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly
removed by the operator at the written or oral request of the
authorized enforcement agency and shall not be replaced. The costs
of clearing such access shall be borne by the operator.
(6) Unreasonable delays in allowing the authorized enforcement agency
access to a permitted facility is a violation of a stormwater discharge
permit and of this article. A person who is the operator of a facility
with an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater associated with
industrial activity commits an offense if the person denies the
authorized enforcement agency reasonable access to the permitted
facility for the purpose of conducting any activity authorized or
required by this article.
§ 301-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 301-9
1:107
(7) If the authorized enforcement agency has been refused access to
any part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged,
and he/she is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that
there may be a violation of this article, or that there is a need to
inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling
program designed to verify compliance with this article or any order
issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and
welfare of the community, then the authorized enforcement agency
may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent
jurisdiction.
§ 301-10. Requirement to prevent, control and reduce stormwater
pollutants by use of best management practices.
The authorized enforcement agency will adopt requirements identifying
best management practices for any activity, operation or facility which may
cause or contribute to pollution or contamination of stormwater, the storm
drain system, or waters of the United States. The owner or operator of a
commercial or industrial establishment shall provide, at its own expense,
reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials
or other wastes into the municipal storm drain system or watercourses
through the use of these structural and nonstructural BMPs. Further, any
person responsible for a property or premises, which is or may be the
source of an illicit discharge, may be required to implement, at said person's
expense, additional structural and nonstructural BMPs to prevent the
further discharge of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer
system. Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid NPDES permit
authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with industrial activity,
to the extent practicable, shall be deemed compliance with the provisions of
this section. These BMPs shall be part of a stormwater pollution prevention
plan (SWPP) as necessary for compliance with requirements of the NPDES
permit.
§ 301-11. Watercourse protection.
Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such
person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within
the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles
that would pollute, contaminate or significantly retard the flow of water
through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain
existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse
so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function or
physical integrity of the watercourse.
§ 301-12. Notification of spills.
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person
responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency
response for a facility or operation, has information of any known or
suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in illegal
§ 301-9 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 301-12
1:108
discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the storm drain
system or waters of the United States, said person shall take all necessary
steps to ensure the discovery, containment and cleanup of such release.
In the event of such a release of hazardous materials, said person shall
immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence via
emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of nonhazardous
materials, said person shall notify the authorized enforcement agency in
person or by phone or facsimile no later than the next business day.
Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice
addressed and mailed to the authorized enforcement agency within three
business days of the phone notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials
emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or
operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of
the discharge and the actions taken to prevent is recurrence. Such records
shall be retained for at least three years.
§ 301-13. Enforcement.
A. Notice of violation. Whenever the authorized enforcement agency finds
that a person has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement
of this article, the authorized enforcement agency may order compliance
by written notice of violation to the responsible person. Such notice may
require, without limitation:
(1) The performance of monitoring analyses and reporting;
(2) The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;
(3) That violating discharges, practices or operations shall cease and
desist;
(4) The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property;
(5) Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs; and
(6) The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.
B. If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is
required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such
remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall further
advise that, should the violator fail to remediate or restore within the
established deadline, the work will be done by a designated
governmental agency or a contractor and the expense thereof shall be
charged to the violator.
§ 301-14. Appeal of notice of violation.
Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of
the authorized enforcement agency. The notice of appeal must be received
within 15 days from the date of the notice of violation. Hearing on the
appeal before the Inland Wetlands Commission shall take place within 45
days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of the
Inland Wetlands Commission shall be final.
§ 301-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 301-15
1:109
§ 301-15. Enforcement measures after appeal.
If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set
forth in the notice of violation or, in the event of an appeal, within 15 days of
the decision of the Inland Wetlands Commission, then representatives of the
Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission shall enter upon the subject
private property and are authorized to take any and all measures necessary
to abate the violation and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for
any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse
to allow the government agency or designated contractor to enter upon the
premises for the purposes set forth above.
§ 301-16. Cost of abatement of violation.
Within 15 days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property
will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. The
property owner may file a written protest objecting to the amount of the
assessment within 15 days. If the amount due is not paid in a timely manner,
as determined by the decision of the Inland Wetlands Commission or by the
expiration of the time in which to file an appeal, the charges shall become
a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the
property for the amount of the assessment. Any person violating any of the
provisions of this article shall become liable to the Town by reason of such
violation. The liability shall be paid in not more than 12 equal payments.
Interest at the rate of 18% per annum shall be assessed on the balance
beginning on the 15th day following discovery of the violation.
§ 301-17. Injunctive relief.
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provisions or fail to
comply with any of the requirements of this article. If a person has violated
or continues to violate the provisions of this article, the authorized
enforcement agency may petition for a preliminary or permanent injunction
restraining the person from activities which would create further violations
or compelling the person to perform abatement or remediation of the
violation.
§ 301-18. Compensatory actions.
In lieu of enforcement proceedings, penalties and remedies authorized
by this article, the authorized enforcement agency may impose upon a
violator alternative compensatory actions, such as storm drain stenciling,
attendance at compliance workshops, creek cleanup, etc.
§ 301-19. Violations deemed public nuisance.
In addition to the enforcement process and penalties provided, any
condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions
of this article is a threat to public health, safety and welfare and is declared
and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at the
§ 301-15 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 301-19
1:110
violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin or otherwise compel
the cessation of such nuisance may be taken.
§ 301-20. Criminal prosecution.
Any person that has violated or continues to violate this article may be
prosecuted criminally to the fullest extent of the law, in addition to the
remedy provided by this article.
§ 301-21. Remedies not exclusive.
The remedies listed in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies
available under any applicable federal, state or local law, and it is within
the discretion of the authorized enforcement agency to seek cumulative
remedies.
§ 301-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 301-21
1:111
Chapter 306
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
§ 301-21 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 301-21
1:112
ARTICLE I
Acceptance of New Roads
[Adopted as § F.1 of the Town Code]
§ 306-1. Restrictions on accepting new roads.
In addition to the provisions of the Town Charter Section 3.4.3, the
following restriction on the acceptance of new roads shall be followed. Due
to icing conditions, snow, and the general inclemency of the weather during
the winter months, the Town of Marlborough is hereby prohibited from
accepting any new roads between the dates of November 15 and April 15 of
any year.
§ 306-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 306-1
1:113

ARTICLE II
Construction Work in Rights-of-Way
[Adopted as § F.2 of the Town Code]
§ 306-2. Permit required.
Within the Town of Marlborough no person, firm, corporation or their
servant, agent or employee shall excavate within the right-of-way on any
street or highway under the control of or maintained by the Town, or
dig below the surface of any street or highway, or place any obstruction
thereon, or install a driveway or do grading thereon, without first obtaining
a permit therefor from the First Selectman or his authorized representative.
As used herein, "highway" or "street" shall include any portion, the
shoulders, of any unimproved or underdeveloped portion of the highway or
street.
§ 306-3. Conditions for permit issuance.
The issuance of such permits shall be in accordance with the following rules
and regulations:
A. Permit shall be issued only after receipt of application in writing, signed
by the applicant or his authorized representative, stating the nature of
the work to be performed, location, and person, corporation or agency
performing the work.
B. The fee for issuing each permit under the provision of this order shall be
set by the Board of Selectmen.
C. A cash or surety bond in an amount equal to the value of the
improvements proposed within the public right-of-way must be
deposited on issuance of the permit to insure completion of the
improvements and restoration of the highway to conditions satisfactory
to the First Selectman. Notification of completion of the work shall be
given to the First Selectman, and upon inspection and approval, he will
arrange for release of the bond.
D. Excavation and construction and restoration of road must be done by a
bona fide contractor, and suitable barricades and warning lights must
be provided to safeguard the public during the progress of work. Onehalf
of the traveled part of road shall be kept open at all times during
construction.
E. The Superintendent of Highways or his authorized representative is
empowered to inspect at any time any or all work being performed under
a permit issued under the provisions of this article. If in his opinion the
public safety and welfare so warrant, he may direct the permittee to
restore any excavation or install or remove any obstruction within 12
hours of such notice, and if such direction is not complied with, he may
cause such work to be done at the responsibility and expense of the
permittee.
F. Permits will expire six months after date of issue, unless canceled by
completion and approval of work done by the First Selectman at a
previous date.
§ 306-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 306-3
1:115
G. None of the foregoing provisions of this article shall apply to any work
being done by or on behalf of the Town of Marlborough, or performed
in connection with the maintenance, repair, replacement or relocation
of existing utility poles owned by a public service company, nor to the
erection of any temporary protective warning signs or devices, nor to
installation of additional utility poles in connection with the extension of
service by such a company.
H. It shall be the responsibility of the general contractor or developer
in an area where there is construction or excavation in progress to
prevent littering on or damage to a Town highway. Littering shall include
droppings from vehicles, sediment resulting from erosion, and any other
debris cited by the Superintendent of Highways or his authorized
representative. If littered, the roadway shall be cleaned at the end
of each working day, and if damaged, the roadway shall be repaired
according to the Town of Marlborough's Highway Construction
Standards and Specifications, within a reasonable time period as agreed
upon by the Superintendent of Highways or his authorized
representatives. Any contractor or developer found to be in violation of
this section shall be subject to a stop-work order and all other penalties
dictated by this article.
§ 306-4. Construction standards.
All work performed under this article shall be in accordance with the
latest approved "Town of Marlborough Highway Construction Standards
and Specifications," available at the office of the Town Clerk. Under this
article, the First Selectman will cause necessary repairs to be made and
costs will be billed for excess, and amount will be due within 30 days from
the date of billing.
§ 306-5. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this article shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, may be subject to a fine
of not more than $25 for each provision thus violated, and each day such
violations shall continue after notice to the offender may be deemed a
separate offense.
§ 306-3 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 306-5
1:116
ARTICLE III
Sidewalks
[Adopted 10-5-2011 (§ F.6 of the Town Code)]
§ 306-6. Inspection and repair.
The First Selectman shall provide for an inspection of Town-accepted
sidewalks and shall order the owner or occupants of property adjoining any
defective sidewalk to repair the same. If such defect is not repaired within
30 days from the date of order thereof, the First Selectman may order the
repair of such defect, and cost of such repair shall be collected by the Town
of Marlborough from the defaulting property owner. (12/88)
§ 306-7. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
OCCUPANT — The tenant, lessee or any other person or entity in possession
and control of any privately owned premises.
OWNER — The person, estate, corporation or any other legal entity that
owns or holds any interest in the premises. This includes all owners,
regardless of number or interest.
PERSON — A natural person or any legal entity or organization recognized
as a person under Connecticut law, including communities, companies,
corporations, public or private, limited-liability companies, societies and
associations.[Added 4-18-2017]
PREMISES — Any tract, parcel, lot or other subdivision of land within
the Town, with or without buildings thereon, that adjoins or fronts on any
sidewalk within the Town or borders or adjoins any street, square or public
place within the Town where there is a sidewalk.
SIDEWALK — Any paved, graded, planked or raised, or in any other way
improved, municipally owned off-road walkway intended for public use.
§ 306-8. Owner's or occupant's duty to remove obstruction.
Pursuant to C.G.S. § 7-148(c)(6)(C)(v), each owner or occupant of land
adjacent to any sidewalk shall remove snow, ice, sleet, debris or any other
obstruction therefrom.
§ 306-9. Specific duty to remove snow and ice; throwing snow and
ice into street; drainage onto streets and sidewalks.
A. In addition to the duty on an owner or occupant pursuant to
§ 7-148(c)(6)(C)(v), an owner or occupant of any premises abutting a
public sidewalk shall remove or cause to be removed from the entire
width of such sidewalk any and all snow and ice within 24 hours after
the snow event has ceased.
§ 306-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 306-9
1:117
B. In any case or situation where the removal of ice is impossible or
extremely difficult, the owner or occupant shall cause such sidewalk to
be made safe for public travel by covering the same with sand or some
other suitable substance.
C. All snow and ice accumulating in the street higher than a point four
inches below the bottom of the lowest outlet on any fire hydrant, and
within a radius of three feet from the center of such hydrant, shall be
removed by the occupant or owner of the premises fronting on that
portion of the street within 24 hours after the snow event has ceased.
D. No person shall throw or put, or cause to be thrown or put, any snow
or ice into or onto the traveled portion of any public street or highway
under the jurisdiction of the Town.
E. No person shall discharge, cause a discharge, or maintain a property
from which there exists a discharge from any drain, pipe, channel or
definable concentrated stream upon any public highway, street, road,
sidewalk or public land so as to create a nuisance or hazard to
pedestrian or vehicular traffic. If an underground stormwater drainage
system abuts or passes in front of said property, the property owner shall
seek a permit from the Town to request connection of such discharge to
the existing system. If there is no stormwater drainage system abutting
the property, or if connection by the Town is denied for any reason,
the property owner must redirect and contain the water elsewhere on
the property or to another private property authorized pursuant to a
valid recorded drainage easement. No person shall make or maintain
a property containing any connection into the Town drainage system
without a permit. Any person receiving written notice from the Town of
a violation of this subsection shall immediately cease to discharge said
water unless the notice expressly authorizes a longer time to correct the
violation. [Added 4-18-2017]
§ 306-10. Municipal liability for ice and snow on public sidewalks.
A. This section is adopted pursuant to C.G.S. § 7-163a.
B. The Town of Marlborough shall not be liable to any person injured in
person or property caused by the presence of ice or snow on a public
sidewalk unless the Town is the owner or in possession and control of
land abutting such sidewalk.
C. The owner, occupant or person in possession of land abutting a public
sidewalk shall have the same duty of care with respect to the presence of
ice or snow on such sidewalk toward the portion of the sidewalk abutting
his property as the Town of Marlborough had prior to the effective date
of this article, and such owner, occupant or person in possession shall
be liable to persons injured in person or property where a breach of said
duty is a proximate cause of said injury.
§ 306-11. Penalties for offenses; citation hearing procedure.
A. Whenever any owner or occupant, as herein defined, whose duty it is to
remove snow, ice, sleet, debris or any other obstruction or to otherwise
make sidewalks safe for public travel, as herein provided, shall fail,
refuse or neglect to comply with the same or shall otherwise violate any
§ 306-9 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 306-11
1:118
provision of this article, he shall be issued a citation and fined $75 for
each offense. The citation must be paid upon receipt.
B. Each and every day of refusal or neglect to comply with such provisions
shall be deemed a separate offense.
C. Any owner or occupant issued a citation pursuant to this article shall
be entitled to a hearing pursuant to the provisions of C.G.S. § 7-152c, as
revised.
D. The Board of Selectmen shall appoint a hearing officer(s) pursuant
to C.G.S. § 7-152c, as revised. The hearing officer(s) will conduct the
hearing as provided for in C.G.S. § 7-152c, as revised.
§ 306-12. Removal by Town upon violations; lien. [Amended
4-18-2017]
A. Pursuant to C.G.S. § 7-148(c)(6)(C)(v), in the event any owner or
occupant of premises, as defined herein, shall fail, neglect or refuse
to remove snow, ice, sleet, debris or any other obstruction from any
sidewalk or to make any sidewalk safe for public travel or otherwise fails,
neglects or refuses to comply with the provisions of this article, the First
Selectman or his designee, upon such failure, neglect or refusal, may
remove or cause to be removed any obstruction from such sidewalk or
otherwise make it safe for public travel.
B. Pursuant to C.G.S. § 7-148(c)(6)(C)(v), if the illegal discharge of water
onto any public highway, street, road or sidewalk creates, or may create,
a nuisance or hazard to pedestrian or vehicular traffic, thereby
obstructing safe access to that public work, the Town may take
immediate remedial action. Any and all expense of such remedial action
shall be payable by the property owner, or if caused by a person who is
not the owner shall be payable jointly and severally by that person and
by the owner of the property containing the discharge. If such illegal
discharge does not make an immediate nuisance or hazard, and the
corrective action outlined in a notice by the Town is not made within
the time frame specified in said notification, the change may be made by
the Town and the expense thereof shall be and remain, until paid in full
with interest at a rate allowed by the Connecticut General Statutes per
annum.
C. If a correction is not made to permanently remedy a violation of § 306-9E
within one construction season (as determined by the Department of
Public Works), the Town, at its sole option, may undertake said
correction after providing 30 days' notice to the owner of the property
of the specific correction to be performed by the Department of Public
Works. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Department of Public
Works to perform such work may appeal the decision to the Board
of Selectmen within 30 days of the receipt of said notice. Nothing in
this section shall be construed to relieve a person from immediately
remedying a violation of § 306-9E as ordered pursuant to this article.
D. The costs of such removal or other necessary action performed pursuant
to this article shall be a lien upon the premises concerned, provided
the First Selectman shall cause a certificate of lien to be recorded in
§ 306-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 306-12
1:119
the office of the Town Clerk within 30 days from such removal or other
necessary action.
§ 306-12 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 306-12
1:120
Chapter 315
TAXATION
§ 306-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 306-12
1:121

ARTICLE I
Exemption for Solar Energy Systems
[Adopted as § A.3, Sec. 2, of the Town Code]
§ 315-1. Exemption authorized.
The Town of Marlborough hereby authorizes the property tax exemption of
solar energy heating or cooling systems set forth in § 12-81 (56)(a), (b) and
(c) of the C.G.S.
§ 315-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 315-1
1:123

ARTICLE II
Elderly Housing Tax Abatement
[Adopted 6-6-1988 (§ A.12 of the Town Code)]
§ 315-2. Applicability.
Real property taxes otherwise due the Town of Marlborough for premises
described in a deed recorded in Volume 73, Page 47 of the Marlborough
Land Records, situated on South Main Street, being Assessor's Lot 25, Block
28-A, on Map No. 21, presently owned by the Marlborough Association for
Senior Housing, Inc., are henceforth wholly abated until further action of
the Board of Selectmen.
§ 315-3. Purpose.
Such tax abatement shall be used for one or more of the following purposes:
A. To reduce rents below the levels which would be achieved in the absence
of such abatement and to improve the quality and design of such
housing;
B. To effect occupancy of housing by elderly persons of varying income
levels within limits determined by the Commissioner of Housing by
regulation; or
C. To provide necessary related facilities or services in such housing.
§ 315-4. Agreement required.
Such abatement shall take effect pursuant to and only when a contract is
entered into between the Town and the Marlborough Association for Senior
Housing, Inc., approved by the Board of Selectmen on behalf of the Town,
and which contract shall provide the terms of such abatement, that moneys
equal to the amount of such abatement shall be used for any one or more of
the purposes herein stated, and that such abatement shall terminate at any
time when such housing is not solely for low- or moderate-income elderly
persons.
§ 315-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 315-4
1:125

ARTICLE III
Exemption for Property Used for Scientific, Educational, Literary,
Historic or Charitable Purposes
[Adopted effective 6-1999 (§ A.18 of the Town Code)]
§ 315-5. Effective date of exemption.
Any property tax exemption authorized by C.G.S. § 12-81(7), as amended
from time to time, shall be effective as of the date of acquisition of the
property to which the exemption applies.6
§ 315-6. Procedure for reimbursement of taxes paid.
In the event § 315-5 applies to any tax-exempt organization, the
organization shall follow the following procedure to obtain reimbursement
of any tax paid by it for a period subsequent to the date of acquisition of the
property to which the exemption applies or any tax paid by the prior owner
of the property to which the exemption applies for a period subsequent to
the acquisition date and for which the organization reimbursed such owner
upon transfer of title of such property:
A. The organization shall request any such reimbursement by submitting a
written request to the Tax Collector and the Board of Selectmen within
six months of the acquisition date of the property.
B. Any such written request shall be accompanied by written evidence
that the organization paid or reimbursed the prior owner for taxes for
a period subsequent to the acquisition date of the property, including
evidence of the date(s) and amount(s) of any such payment(s).
C. The organization shall provide such further written documentation as
may be reasonable requested by the Tax Collector or the Board of
Selectmen to process the request.
6. Editor's Note: C.G.S. § 12-81(7) has been revised to also apply to open space land
preservation
§ 315-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 315-6
1:127

ARTICLE IV
Exemption for Special-Purpose Vehicles
[Adopted 9-23-2003 (§ A.14 of the Town Code)]
§ 315-7. Exemption for ambulance-type vehicles.
A. Pursuant to § 12-81c(1) of the Connecticut General Statutes, any
ambulance-type motor vehicle which is used exclusively for the purpose
of transporting any medically incapacitated individual, except any such
vehicle used to transport any such individual for profit, shall be exempt
from the local personal property tax.
B. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AMBULANCE-TYPE MOTOR VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle specially
equipped or modified in a significant way for the purpose of transporting
medically incapacitated individuals, including but not limited to the
inclusion of lifts, the equipping with stretchers, beds or other special
seating, and significant modification to accommodate medical or
emergency equipment such as oxygen.
USED EXCLUSIVELY — The vehicle is used and devoted primarily and
inherently for the purpose of transporting medically incapacitated
individuals and does not mean vehicles used partly for transporting
medically incapacitated individuals and partly for other purposes.
§ 315-8. Exemption for vehicles used to transport disabled child.
A. Pursuant to § 12-81c(3) of the Connecticut General Statutes, any motor
vehicle owned by a person with disabilities, or owned by the parent
or guardian of such person, which vehicle is equipped for purposes of
adapting its use to the disability of such person, shall be exempt from
the local personal property tax.
B. Such vehicles shall include but are not limited to:
(1) Vehicles containing wheelchair or scooter loaders that mount on the
roof, in the passenger area, in the trunk or other storage areas of a
motor vehicle; and
(2) Vehicles containing any automotive adaptive control device that is
installed in the motor vehicle to enable an individual with mobility
restrictions to control the accelerator, foot brake and/or steering
wheel, including, but not limited to, any mechanical or electrical
control device added to a standard motor vehicle.
C. Upon receipt of an application for an exemption under this subsection,
the Assessor shall inspect the subject vehicle and determine whether
a vehicle qualifies for an exemption. In determining whether a vehicle
qualifies for the exemption provided by this subsection, the Assessor
shall inspect the vehicle and may consider, among other things, the cost
of the conversion. The Assessor shall determine whether modifications
not specifically listed herein would qualify the vehicle for the exemption
under this section.
§ 315-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 315-9
1:129
§ 315-9. Filing for exemption.
Applications for an exemption under this article shall be filed annually with
the Town Assessor's office, in such manner and including such information
as required by the Town Assessor, no later than November 1 following the
assessment date with respect to which such exemption is claimed or, for
vehicles purchased on or after October 2 and on or before July 31 of the
assessment year for which such exemption is requested, not later than 30
days after such purchase. This section shall be applicable with respect to
the assessment year which commenced October 1, 1988, and each and
every year thereafter. Applications for exemptions relative to assessment
year which commenced on said October 1, 1988, shall be made not later
than 30 days following the effective date of this section or, for vehicles
purchased after said effective date, but on or before July 31, 1989, not later
than 30 days after such purchases.
§ 315-9 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 315-9
1:130
ARTICLE V
Exemption for Veterans Receiving Housing Assistance
[Adopted 12-23-2009 (§ A.21 of the Town Code)]
§ 315-10. Statutory authority.
The Town of Marlborough hereby adopts the optional tax exemption for
certain veterans authorized by and in accordance with C.G.S.
§ 12-81(21)(C).
§ 315-11. Tax exemption.
A. The dwelling house and the lot whereupon the same is erected,
belonging to or held in trust for any citizen and resident of the Town of
Marlborough, occupied as such person's domicile, shall be fully exempt
from property taxation if such person is a veteran who served the Army,
Navy, Marine Corps, Coast Guard or Air Force of the United States
and that person has received financial assistance for specially adapted
housing under the provisions of Section 801 of Title 38 of the United
States Code and has applied such assistance toward the acquisition or
modification of such dwelling house.
B. The same exemption shall be allowed on such a housing unit as
described in Subsection A, and which is owned by the surviving spouse of
a veteran who had qualified for the tax exemption allowed by this article,
while such spouse remains a widow or widower and while such dwelling
unit remains the spouse's domicile.
§ 315-12. Application.
An individual seeking to benefit from the tax exemption provided for by
this article shall submit to the Assessor an affidavit or other proof sufficient
to demonstrate his or her qualification for this exemption. Additionally, an
individual shall submit such proof at any time it may be requested by the
Assessor thereafter, including but not limited to a submission necessary for
an individual's annual attestation.
§ 315-13. Appeal.
Any individual aggrieved by an adverse decision by the Assessor shall have
the right to appeal that decision to the Board of Selectmen. Any such appeal
shall be in writing to the Board of Selectmen and shall be made within 10
days of such decision. The Board of Selectmen shall hear such appeal de
novo at its next regular meeting and issue a final decision on the appeal
within a reasonable time thereafter.
§ 315-14. Review of the optional tax exemption.
After the adoption of this optional tax exemption for certain veterans, the
Board of Finance shall review this optional tax exemption and the economic
impact on the Town of Marlborough and shall advise the Board of Selectmen
of the same within 90 days of the passage of this article. The Board of
§ 315-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 315-14
1:131
Finance shall thereafter conduct an additional review of this optional tax
exemption and economic impact on the Town of Marlborough and shall
advise the Board of Selectmen of the same on or about February 1, 2012,
and every fourth year thereafter, to coincide with a date approximately 90
days next following the election of the Board of Selectmen.
§ 315-15. Effective date.
This tax relief program will be effective for the Grand List of October 1,
2009.
§ 315-14 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 315-15
1:132
ARTICLE VI
Tax Relief for Elderly and Disabled Homeowners
[Adopted 10-5-2011 (§ A.22 of the Town Code)]
§ 315-16. Tax relief authorized.
The Town of Marlborough hereby enacts a tax credit for elderly and
disabled homeowners pursuant to § 12-129n of the Connecticut General
Statutes for eligible residents of the Town of Marlborough on the terms
and conditions provided herein. The program is enacted for the purpose of
assisting such homeowners with a portion of the costs of property taxation.
This program shall be known as the "Marlborough Optional Elderly or
Disabled Tax Relief."
§ 315-17. Eligibility.
A. An applicant shall meet the following criteria to be eligible for this
program:
(1) Such person is 65 years of age and over at the close of the preceding
calendar year or whose spouse, living with him or her, is 65 years of
age or over or 60 years of age or over and the surviving spouse of a
taxpayer qualified in Marlborough under this program at the time of
his or her death; or
(2) Under age 65 and eligible in accordance with applicable federal
regulations to receive permanent total disability benefits under
social security, or has not been engaged in employment covered
by social security and accordingly has not qualified for benefits
thereunder, but has become qualified for permanent total disability
benefits under any federal, state or local government retirement
or disability plan, including the Railroad Retirement Act and any
government-related teachers' retirement plan, in which
requirements with respect to qualifications for such permanent total
disability benefits are comparable to such requirements under social
security; and
(3) Applicants under Subsection A(1) or (2) above must have paid real
estate taxes in the Town of Marlborough for the five years
immediately preceding their receipt of tax benefits under this section
and meet the requirements of the Town of Marlborough with respect
to maximum income allowable during the calendar year preceding
the year in which application is made for the tax relief provided
herein.
(4) No such property tax relief, together with any relief received by any
such resident under the provisions of C.G.S. §§ 12-129b to 12-129d,
inclusive, and 12-170aa shall exceed, in the aggregate, the total
amount of the tax which would, except for said C.G.S. §§ 12-129b
to 12-129d, inclusive, 12-170aa and this section, be laid against the
taxpayer.
(5) Any tax relief granted in accordance with this program shall not
disqualify such resident with respect to any benefits for which such
resident shall be eligible under the provisions of C.G.S. §§ 12-129b to
§ 315-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 315-17
1:133
12-129d, inclusive, and 12-170aa, and any such tax relief provided
under this section shall be in addition to any such benefits for
which such resident shall be eligible under said sections; provided,
however, that the total tax relief available under all such programs,
together with this program, shall not exceed 75% of the tax that
would otherwise be payable absent all such programs.
(6) No person delinquent in payment of his/her real or personal property
taxes to the Town of Marlborough shall be eligible for real property
tax relief pursuant to this program.
(7) An applicant may not be simultaneously registered for or receiving a
similar tax relief benefit in any other municipality.
(8) Any benefits accruing pursuant to this Optional Elderly or Disabled
Tax Relief Program shall cease immediately upon the death of the
eligible taxpayer, provided the eligible taxpayer's spouse does not
qualify for relief under this program, and shall be prorated for the
year in which the taxpayer dies.
B. Applicants shall be eligible for real property tax relief as set forth herein,
provided all of the following conditions are met:
(1) Such person has been a resident of the Town of Marlborough for a
period of five years prior to the October 1 assessment date and shall
occupy such property as his or her principal residence. "Principal
residence" shall be defined as that real property occupied as his or
her residence for more than 183 days of each calendar year.
(2) If during a tax year a qualifying taxpayer dies leaving a spouse who
would also qualify under this program, the surviving spouse shall be
entitled to receive the remaining benefits for that tax year.
(3) If any person entitled to the tax credit pursuant to this program sells
the property upon which the tax credit is granted, no additional tax
credit shall be allowed for his or her interest in the property for any
fiscal years commencing after the date of such sale of the property;
and provided, further, that the purchaser of the property shall pay
the Town of Marlborough a pro-rated share of the tax credit the
same as provided to the State of Connecticut by § 12-170aa(i) of the
Connecticut General Statutes.
§ 315-18. Application.
Application for benefits under this program shall:
A. Be made on forms provided by the Town Assessor of the Town of
Marlborough and shall be accompanied by a copy of the applicant's most
recent federal tax returns or other documentation of all income and
residency status satisfactory to the Assessor.
B. Be filed the first year with the Assessor of the Town of Marlborough at
any time between January 1 and April 15 of each year to obtain a tax
credit for the next fiscal year. All approved applicants will be required
to refile biennially with the Town Assessor to maintain their eligibility.
There is no exception to this filing period.
C. Applications and other documentation presented in support of the
application for tax relief shall not be open for public inspection except as
may otherwise be required by law.
§ 315-17 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 315-18
1:134
D. The penalty for filing an application containing a false statement of any
kind shall include the refund by the taxpayer of all tax relief granted
hereunder together with interest at the rate of 18% per annum.
§ 315-19. Computation of benefits.
A. The Assessor of the Town of Marlborough shall determine whether each
applying taxpayer is entitled to a tax credit under this program and
shall compute the amount of tax credit to which each qualified taxpayer
is entitled and advise the Tax Collector in what amount to reduce the
amount of the tax levied against the taxpayer.
B. The Assessor is hereby authorized to implement this program and to
adopt such rules and regulations, consistent with C.G.S. § 12-129n, as
may be necessary for the proper administration of this program.
§ 315-20. Qualifying income.
A. The applicant's qualifying income is the income of the applicant and the
applicant's spouse, as applicable, or as defined in the State Guidelines
for Elderly and Totally Disabled Tax Relief Programs. Income shall
include adjusted gross income as defined in the Internal Revenue Code
of 1954, as amended; social security benefits; railroad retirement
benefits; income from other tax-exempt retirement and annuity sources;
as well as any other taxable and nontaxable income, including without
limitation rental income and gifts or contributions to living expenses
made by any individual other than the applicant's spouse if that
individual is 22 years of age or older and his or her principal residence
is the applicant's property.
B. Specifically excluded from qualifying income are social security
payments made on behalf of a dependent person, casualty loss
reimbursement by insurance companies, grants for disaster relief and
life insurance proceeds.
§ 315-21. Amount of tax relief.
A. An otherwise qualified individual who has an income equal to or less
than the maximum allowable qualifying income level for unmarried
homeowners, as indicated on the schedule of qualifying income
contained within C.G.S. § 12-170aa(c), shall be eligible for tax relief in
the amount of $500, subject to the other limitations of this Optional
Elderly or Disabled Tax Relief Program.
B. An otherwise qualified individual who has an income greater than the
maximum allowable qualifying income level for unmarried homeowners,
but less than or equal to the maximum qualifying income level for
married homeowners, as both are indicated on the schedule of qualifying
income contained within C.G.S. § 12-170aa(c), shall be eligible for tax
relief in the amount of $300, subject to the other limitations of this
Optional Elderly or Disabled Tax Relief Program.
§ 315-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 315-22
1:135
§ 315-22. Maximum abatement.
The total abatement of property tax revenue which may be granted by the
Town of Marlborough pursuant to the provisions of this program shall not
exceed an amount equal to 10% of the total real property tax assessed in the
Town of Marlborough in the preceding tax year. If the number of qualified
applications in any year exceeds this amount, the tax relief will be prorated
equally among all qualifying applicants.
§ 315-23. Determination of tax relief.
The Assessor shall review applications and information provided by
applicants seeking tax credits under this program. The Assessor shall
determine eligibility of applicants no later than May 15 of each year and
notify the Tax Collector of the amount of tax credit.
§ 315-24. Appeals.
Any applicant aggrieved by any act or determination of the Assessor may
appeal to the Board of Selectmen in accordance with the following
procedure:
A. The applicant shall, in writing on a form prescribed by the Assessor and
within five business days of the act or final determination of the Assessor
of which the applicant claims to be aggrieved, submit his or her appeal
to the Board of Selectmen.
B. The Board of Selectmen shall date stamp the appeal and, within seven
calendar days thereof, not including the date of receipt, schedule a
hearing thereon, such hearing to be not later than 14 calendar days
thereafter and shall then notify the applicant, in writing by first-class
mail, postage prepaid, of the date, time and place of the Board of
Selectmen's hearing of the applicant's appeal.
C. At the hearing, at which the applicant may be represented by legal
counsel or otherwise, the applicant shall present evidence in support
of the claimed basis of appeal. The hearing shall be informal, and the
Board of Selectmen may request such additional information from the
aggrieved applicant and/or the Assessor as the Board of Selectmen
deems necessary and appropriate to render a full and fair decision upon
the applicant's appeal.
D. The hearing pursuant to this section may be adjourned for the purpose of
obtaining evidence not immediately available, but in any case, the Board
of Selectmen shall render a written decision, which decision shall be
final and not subject to further appeal, by no later than the 14th calendar
day following the Board of Selectmen's receipt of the applicant's appeal.
§ 315-25. Periodic program review.
This tax relief program shall be reviewed by the Board of Selectmen and
by the Board of Finance in the second year after implementation and then
every two years thereafter, or as deemed necessary. The Board of Finance
§ 315-22 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 315-25
1:136
will make recommendations for continuation, modification or termination of
this program to the Board of Selectmen.
§ 315-26. Effective date.
This tax relief program will be effective with the Grand List of October 1,
2011, and thereafter.
§ 315-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 315-26
1:137
Chapter 324
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
§ 315-26 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 315-26
1:138
ARTICLE I
Operation of Recreational Vehicles on Town Property
[Adopted as § H.4 of the Town Code]
§ 324-1. Permit required.
No person shall operate any motorcycle, minibike, moped, snowmobile or
other such motorized vehicle on Town property without first obtaining a
permit for said use or operation from the First Selectman or the Resident
State Trooper.
§ 324-2. Form and display of permit.
Such permit shall be in writing, on a form prescribed by the First
Selectman. The permittee shall carry such permit on his person at all times
while operating on Town property.
§ 324-3. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating any of the provision of this article shall be subject
to a fine of not less that $2 nor more than $25 for each offense and
by impoundment of such unauthorized vehicle until the payment of the
aforesaid fine, together with an impoundment fee of $5, has been made.
§ 324-4. Sale of impounded vehicles.
If any such impounded vehicle is not redeemed within 30 days as aforesaid,
the Town reserves the right to sell such vehicle and apply proceeds to the
fine, impoundment fee and costs of sale.
§ 324-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 324-4
1:139

ARTICLE II
Fire Lanes
[Adopted effective 1-7-1984 (§ H.5 of the Town Code)]
§ 324-5. Fire lanes required.
In order to ensure the reasonable safety of persons occupying or using any
premises in the Town of Marlborough, all premises which the volunteer fire
company may be called upon to protect in case of fire or other emergency,
and which in the opinion of the Town Fire Marshal, after recommendation
by the Fire Commission and/or Traffic Safety Commission, are not readily
accessible from public roads, shall be provided with suitable fire lanes so
that all buildings on the premises are accessible to fire apparatus.
§ 324-6. Exceptions.
Fire lanes shall not be required for access to any one- or two-family
residential structures used principally for agricultural purposes.
§ 324-7. Designation and maintenance.
The designation and maintenance of fire lanes or other access provisions
on private property shall be accomplished as specified by the Town Fire
Marshal, after recommendation by the Fire Commission and/or the Traffic
Safety Commission, who may make reasonable requirements as to the
establishment of fire lanes within the Town for the orderly access of fire and
other emergency equipment on premises of new and existing buildings and
facilities to ensure the reasonable safety of persons occupying or using said
premises.
§ 324-8. Standards for requiring fire lanes.
Fire lanes may be required for all buildings any portion of which is set back
more than 150 feet from a Town road, or which exceed 30 feet in height and
any portion of which is set back over 50 feet from a Town road.
§ 324-9. Design standards.
Fire lanes may be the driving portions of the vehicle parking area and/or
walkways and shall be at least 20 feet in width and extend to a point at least
within 10 feet from a building. Any dead-end fire lane more than 300 feet
long shall be provided with a turnaround at the closed end at least 90 feet
in diameter.
§ 324-10. Notice and posting.
Notice of the establishment of fire lanes in accordance with this article,
after recommendation by the Fire Commission and/or the Traffic Safety
Commission, shall be given by the Town Fire Marshal in writing to the
property owner, the First Selectman and the Resident State Trooper for
the Town of Marlborough. Such fire lanes, as established by the Town Fire
§ 324-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 324-10
1:141
Marshal, shall be posted by the owner of the property involved within 60
days of said notice and in accordance with the instructions of the Fire
Marshal.
§ 324-11. Penalties for offenses.
Any property owner who fails to comply with the requirements and
instructions of the Fire Marshal as to fire lanes within the time allotted shall
be fined $100 and shall suffer a penalty of $10 for each day thereafter until
compliance is made.
§ 324-12. Parking prohibited.
No vehicle shall be parked or standing within an established fire lane.
A. Whenever any vehicle is found parked or standing in an established
fire lane, a constable or state trooper shall attach to such a vehicle a
parking violation notice to the owner or operator thereof setting forth
that such vehicle has been parked unlawfully; provided, however, that in
an emergency such unlawful parking constitutes a hazard or impedes the
orderly access of emergency equipment, the Constable, State Trooper or
the Chief Fire Officer in charge may have the vehicle towed to another
portion of the lot or area which is not within a fire lane, all at the expense
of the owner of said vehicle.
B. In any prosecution or proceeding for unlawful parking in a fire lane, the
registered owner of the vehicle so parked shall be presumed to be the
operator thereof.
C. The penalty for unlawful parking in a fire lane shall be a fine of $10.
D. Each person who violates this section shall, within five days of the time
when such notice was attached to such vehicle, pay to the Town of
Marlborough the penalty for and in full satisfaction of such violation. The
failure of such persons to make such payment within such time limit shall
render such person subject to double the penalty provided by Subsection
C.
§ 324-10 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 324-12
1:142
Chapter 330
WATER AND SEWAGE FACILITIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewer regulations — See Ch. 410.
§ 324-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 324-12
1:143

ARTICLE I
General Conditions
§ 330-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Sanitary Code of
Marlborough."
§ 330-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to safeguard the public health of the Town
of Marlborough through reasonable requirements as may be necessary
to ensure the proper construction of water supply and sewage disposal
facilities.
§ 330-3. State Health Code.
The latest revision of the Public Health Code of the State of Connecticut,
in its entirety, is hereby made a part of the Sanitary Code of the Town of
Marlborough and shall apply and govern in all cases except where such
provisions of this chapter shall prescribe more stringent requirements.
§ 330-4. Approval required.
No dwelling, apartment, boardinghouse, hotel, commercial or industrial
building, hospital or other structure or improvement shall be constructed or
approved for occupancy in the Town of Marlborough unless the sanitation
facilities are approved by the Marlborough Director of Health or his
authorized representative and are in accord with the provisions of this
chapter.
§ 330-5. Definitions.
The "Department of Health" shall mean the Marlborough Department of
Health.
§ 330-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-5
1:145

ARTICLE II
Special Regulations
[Amended 12-7-1983]
§ 330-6. Applicability.
The following special regulations shall govern the construction, repair and
abandonment of water wells and the installation and repair of pumps and
pumping equipment in the Town of Marlborough.
§ 330-7. Well specifications.
A. "Storage depth" shall pertain to drilled wells only and will be defined as that
quantity of water, measured in feet of well, taken from the static water level
down to the level of the pump. Should the pump not be the submersible type,
the storage depth will be taken from the static water level down to the pump's
point of suction intake.
B. A drilled well shall have a storage depth of no less than 100 feet or a yield, as
determined from a four-hour yield test, of no less than 1 1/2 gallons per minute
(gpm).
C. Drilled wells at single-family dwellings.
(1) For a drilled well at a single-family dwelling, the following minimum storage
depths, as defined in Subsection A, must be met for the yields indicated below:
Yield
(gpm)
Storage Depth
(feet)
1 1/2 180
2 160
2 1/2 140
3 120
3 1/2 100 minimum
(2) The diameter of a drilled well shall be six inches.
D. For individual wells at multifamily dwellings, the storage and yield must be
approved by the Director of Health.
E. No pump shall be set within 10 feet of the bottom of the well.
F. Pressure tanks for individual home installations shall have a minimum capacity
of 42 gallons, though a greater capacity is desirable.
G. Any owner or lessee of land upon which there is located on abandoned dug well
must fill the same with suitable fill as required by the Director of Health or his
authorized representative. Abandoned wells may not be used for the disposal of
sewage or wastes.
H. No water well of any type located within the area bordered easterly by Quinn
Road, northwesterly by Cattle Lot Brook, westerly by the Marlborough-East
Hampton Town Line and southerly by property owned by the Town of
Marlborough shall be used for human consumption without first obtaining a
well use permit from the Department of Health. Said well use permit shall
be signed by the Town Sanitarian or Director of Health, which permit shall
only be issued after certification by the State of Connecticut or other authority
§ 330-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-7
1:147
acceptable to the Department of Health that the raw water quality from said
well conforms to the standards of the State of Connecticut, Department of
Health Services, as set forth in the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies,
Section 19-13-B102, as amended.
§ 330-8. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating this article shall be subject to the fines and other
administrative requirements of this chapter as well as civil injunctive relief
to abate the violation.
§ 330-9. Applicability.
This article shall apply to all wells located or first used after the effective
date of this article (December 7, 1983).
§ 330-7 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 330-9
1:148
ARTICLE III
Administration
§ 330-10. Rules and regulations.
The Department of Health shall adopt and from time to time amend rules
and regulations governing the location, construction, repair and
abandonment of water supply and sewage disposal facilities and the
installation and repair of pumps and pumping equipment and shall be
responsible for the administration of this chapter.
§ 330-11. Responsibility for compliance.
The responsibility for complying with these rules and regulations as herein
stated shall rest with the owner or lessee of the land involved.
§ 330-12. Enforcement.
The Department of Health shall enforce the provisions of this chapter and
any rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto.
§ 330-13. License and permit required for construction.
Any person constructing a well or constructing or repairing a subsurface
sewage disposal system shall be licensed as required by the State of
Connecticut and shall obtain a written permit to do such work from the
Department of Health.
§ 330-14. Inspection.
The Department of Health is authorized to inspect any water supply and
sewage disposal facility, abandoned well or pump installation for any wells.
Duly authorized representatives of the Department of Health may at
reasonable times enter upon and shall be given access to any premises
for the purposes of such inspection. Upon the basis of such inspections, if
the Department of Health finds applicable laws, rules or regulations have
not been complied with or that a health hazard exists, it shall disapprove
the well, sewage disposal facility and/or pump installation with denial or
suspension of applicable permits or with an order to correct the violation
within a reasonable period of time. If disapproved, no well sewage disposal
facility or pump shall thereafter be used until brought into compliance and
any health hazard eliminated.
§ 330-15. Exemptions.
Where the Department of Health finds that compliance with all
requirements of this chapter would result in undue hardship, an exemption
from any one or more such requirements may be granted by the Department
of Health to the extent such exemption can be granted without impairing
the intent and purpose of this chapter.
§ 330-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-16
1:149
§ 330-16. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by denial of a permit or by suspension of a permit
may appeal the decision of the Director of Health to a court of competent
jurisdiction.
§ 330-17. Fees.
The Department of Health shall collect a fee for permits issued in the
amounts set by the Board of Selectmen.
§ 330-18. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter, regulations issued
hereunder, or order pursuant hereto shall be subject to a penalty of $25
every day or any part thereof in which such violation occurs.
§ 330-19. Effect on other requirements.
It is not intended that the requirements of any other law or ordinance,
except where stated herein, be repealed or otherwise made ineffective by
this chapter, and in case of conflict the strictest of the relevant provisions of
this and other laws and ordinances shall apply.
§ 330-16 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 330-19
1:150
Chapter 340
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Adult day care — See Ch. 200.
Building code — See Ch. 221.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 238.
Land use — See Ch. 254.
Stormwater management; illicit
discharges — See Ch. 301, Art. I.
Water and sewage facilities — See Ch. 330.
Sewer regulations — See Ch. 410.
§ 330-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-19
1:151

ARTICLE I
Authority and Purpose
§ 340-1.1. Authority.
In accordance with the power and authority provided by the Connecticut
General Statutes Chapter 124, Title 8, the Zoning Commission of the Town
of Marlborough hereby adopts the following as the zoning regulations of the
Town of Marlborough.
§ 340-1.2. Purpose.
The interpretation of the regulations in this chapter shall be permissive in
nature. Uses, structures and buildings not permitted by this chapter are
prohibited. This chapter is adopted under the General Statutes of the State
of Connecticut for the following purposes:
A. To promote and to protect the public health, safety and welfare of the
inhabitants of Marlborough, Connecticut, and of the public generally;
B. To encourage and facilitate the orderly growth and expansion of the
municipality with consideration of the Town Plan of Development so that
development is managed to a degree that is commensurate with the
ability of the Town to provide necessary public facilities and services;
C. To prevent the overcrowding of the land;
D. To avoid undue concentration of population and to facilitate the
adequate provision for transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks
and other public requirements;
E. To protect the character and maintain the stability of residential,
commercial, industrial and recreational areas within the Town;
F. To provide adequate light, air, privacy and convenience of access to
property;
G. To divide the Town into zoning districts, restricting and regulating
therein the location, construction, reconstruction, alteration and use
of buildings, structures and land for residential, commercial, industrial
and other uses;
H. To control the height, size and location of signs;
I. To establish building lines and the location of buildings designed for
uses within such lines;
J. To provide uses, buildings or structures which are compatible with the
character of development of the permitted uses within specified zoning
districts;
K. To regulate additions to and alterations or remodeling of existing
buildings or structures which do not comply with the restrictions and
limitations imposed hereinafter and to provide for the gradual
elimination of the uses of land, buildings and structures which do not
conform to the standards of the zoning districts in which they are
located;
L. To encourage efficient circulation in, and lessen congestion on, the
public streets by providing for off-street parking of motor vehicles and
for the loading and unloading of commercial vehicles;
§ 340-1.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-1.2
1:153
M. To provide protection against fire, panic, flood, explosion, noxious
fumes, and other dangers;
N. To define and limit the powers and duties of the administrative officers
and bodies as provided herein;
O. To assure that proper provisions are made for sedimentation control and
the control of erosion caused by wind or water;
P. To conserve and protect the natural resources of the Town, to include:
the soil, water, air, wetlands, watercourses, trees, forests, aquifers,
groundwater, wildlife and areas of scenic, cultural or ecological
significance;
Q. To encourage the development of housing opportunities for all citizens
of the municipality consistent with soil types, terrain and infrastructure
capacity; and
R. To protect existing and potential public surface water and groundwater
drinking supplies.
§ 340-1.2 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 340-1.2
1:154
ARTICLE II
Establishment of Zoning Districts and Provision for Official Zoning
Map
[Amended 5-5-2011, effective 6-4-2011]
§ 340-2.1. Establishment of Zoning Districts.
The Town of Marlborough is hereby divided into the following zoning
districts:
R Residential Zone
DMR Designed Multiple Residence
GC General Commercial Zone
VCD Village Center District
DBIZ Designed Business/Industrial Zone
GI General Industrial Zone
DI Designed Industrial Zone
DR Designed Recreation Zone
DC Designed Commercial Zone
§ 340-2.2. Official Zoning Map.
The boundaries of zones are established as shown on the Zoning Map,
entitled "Marlborough, Connecticut, Town Zoning Commission Zoning Map,
January 1, 1982," as now or hereafter duly amended, filed in the office of
the Town Clerk. This Map, together with all explanatory matter therein, is
hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter.
A. Zoning boundaries. Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of
zoning districts as shown on the Zoning Map, the following rules shall
apply:
(1) Boundaries indicated as abutting street lines, highways or alleys
shall be construed as extending to the center line of such streets,
highways or alleys;
(2) Boundaries indicated as approximately following plotted lot lines
shall be construed as following such lot lines;
(3) Boundaries indicated as following shorelines shall be construed to
follow such shorelines and, in the event of change in the shoreline,
shall be construed as moving with the actual shoreline; boundaries
indicated as approximately following center lines of streams, rivers
or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such center
lines (moving of streams is not permitted other than through natural
meandering);
(4) Boundaries indicated as parallel to, or extensions of, features
indicated in Subsection A(1) through (3) above should be so
construed. Distances not specifically indicated on the Zoning Map
shall be determined by the scale of the Map;
§ 340-2.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-2.2
1:155
(5) In case of uncertainty, the Zoning Commission shall determine the
location of the boundary;
(6) Where a lot, at the time of passage of this chapter or any
amendments thereto, falls into two or more zoning districts, the
zoning district and the regulation thereof that is most restrictive or
that imposes the higher standard shall govern.
§ 340-2.2 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 340-2.2
1:156
ARTICLE III
General Regulations
[Amended 5-7-2015, effective 6-1-2015]
§ 340-3.1. Minimum requirements.
The requirements set by this chapter within each zoning district shall be
minimum requirements and shall apply uniformly and particularly to each
class or kind of building, structure or land, unless otherwise specifically
permitted elsewhere in this chapter.
§ 340-3.2. Regulations affect every building and use.
No building, structure or land shall hereafter be used or occupied, and no
building or structure or part thereof shall hereafter be erected, constructed,
reconstructed, moved or structurally altered unless in conformity with all
of the requirements herein specified for the zoning district in which it is
located. No building permit or certificate of compliance or occupancy shall
be issued without certification in writing from the Zoning Enforcement
Officer that the structure and use comply with this chapter.
§ 340-3.3. Conformity of buildings and land.
No building or other structure shall hereafter be erected or altered in any
other manner contrary to the provisions of this chapter, including but not
limited to:
A. Greater height;
B. Accommodate or house a greater number of families;
C. Occupy a greater percentage of lot area;
D. Have narrower or smaller rear yards, front yards, side yards, or other
open spaces; or
E. Have less frontage and area than herein required.
§ 340-3.4. Lot areas not counted toward requirements.
No part of a yard or other open space, off-street parking, loading space
or structure required in connection with any building, structure or use
shall be included towards meeting the requirements for any other building,
structure or use, except where specific provisions are made in this chapter.
§ 340-3.5. Reduction of lot areas or minimum required yards.
No yard or lot existing at the time of passage of this chapter shall be
reduced in dimension or area below the minimum requirements set forth
herein except by reason of a portion being acquired for public use in any
manner. Yards or lots created after the effective date of this chapter shall
meet at least the minimum requirements established by this chapter.
§ 340-3.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-3.6
1:157
§ 340-3.6. Principal buildings.
Except in the case of the DBIZ, GC, GI, VCD and municipal property, or
where this chapter authorizes such use, there shall not be more than one
principal building on a lot until after issuance of a special permit by the
Commission.
§ 340-3.7. Building permits, certification of occupancy.
No building permit shall be issued for any building unless the lot upon
which the building is to be located shall have frontage on either: (1) a
"street" as defined in Article IV of this chapter; or (2) a proposed street in
an approved subdivision with respect to which all required improvements
with the exception of paving, loaming and seeding have been completed
and approved by the Town Engineer in conformance with the Town of
Marlborough's Highway Standards. A certificate of occupancy shall not
be granted for a building located on a proposed street in an approved
subdivision until all required improvements have been completed and
approved by the Town Engineer in conformance with the Town of
Marlborough's Highway Standards, with the exception of the final course
of paving, loaming and seeding. (See also, Town of Marlborough Code,
Chapter 254, Land Use, Article II, Frontage Requirements.)
§ 340-3.8. Corner lots.
Lots with frontage on two streets shall meet minimum front yard and
frontage requirements on both streets. The street facing the front door shall
be the front yard and the other a side yard. (See Appendix B.7)
§ 340-3.9. Minimum required yards.
No building, portion of building, structure, construction, vehicle parking,
equipment or material storage is permitted in any required yard, except
where otherwise permitted by this chapter. Architectural features such
as pilasters, chimneys, sills, cornices, eaves, windows, steps, stoops or
thresholds may extend or project into the minimum required yards not more
than two feet. Bus shelters and public utility installations, as permitted
under Articles VI, VII, VIII and IX of this chapter, need not conform to
the minimum required yard and accessory building requirements of this
chapter. For the placement of buildings and structures, the Commission
may, at its discretion, in situations where the public right-of-way is
excessively wide, permit the front yard in General Commercial (GC),
General Industrial (GI), Designed Commercial (DC) and Design Industrial
(DI) Zones to be measured as 60 feet from the curbline.
§ 340-3.10. Walls and fences.
Notwithstanding other provisions of this chapter, fences, walls and hedges
may be permitted in any required yard or along the edge of any yard.
7. Editor's Note: Appendix B is on file in the Town's office.
§ 340-3.6 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 340-3.10
1:158
Fences, walls and hedges shall not exceed eight feet in height within 15 feet
of a curbline or property line, except for use with athletic facilities or when
required by the Commission, and shall not obstruct vision as to create a
traffic hazard.
§ 340-3.11. Driveways.
A. The apron and drive shall have a maximum grade of 15%, a minimum
width of 10 feet, a transition curve, a paved apron and shall not alter the
flow of stormwater in the road gutter or side swale. (See Appendix B.8)
B. No driveway runoff shall run directly onto the roadway. It shall be
retained on the lot, carried in the roadway gutter, carried in the roadway
side swale, or piped directly to a catch basin or culvert.
C. No driveway shall be constructed in any required side yard unless
necessary to permit the construction of a common driveway or access to
Town or state open space or to a public utility facility. The Commission
may approve a site development plan application for a common driveway
if it is deemed by the Commission to be the only prudent and feasible
access to the sites or if the Conservation Commission submits a written
recommendation that the common driveway would diminish the adverse
impact on an inland wetland or watercourse conservation area. An
appropriate easement and maintenance agreement shall be filed on the
Marlborough Land Records to indicate that a right-of-way has been
conveyed for the shared portion of the driveway.
D. Driveways shall not exceed a maximum length of 1,000 feet unless
otherwise approved by the ZEO, based upon a recommendation from
the Fire Marshal, with consideration to the relative location of a water
source for fire suppression, the slope of the driveway and the ability
for the adequate maneuverability of emergency vehicles. Driveways that
exceed 500 feet in length may be subject to additional standards
required by the Fire Marshal as a means to ensure the reasonable
safety of persons occupying or using any premises in the Town. These
standards may include, but are not limited to, extra driveway width,
pavement treatment, and driveway length and turnaround areas. The
Commission may prescribe certain conditions or may deny approval
for sites that cannot be adequately serviced by emergency vehicle
equipment.
§ 340-3.12. Visibility at intersections.
At the intersection of two streets, no planting, structure, fence, wall or
obstruction to vision shall be placed or maintained exceeding 2 1/2 feet in
height, measured from the road surface, within a triangular area formed by
the intersecting property lines and a straight line connecting points on said
property lines, each of which points are 25 feet distant from the point of
intersection. (See Appendix B.9)
8. Editor's Note: Appendix B is on file in the Town's office.
9. Editor's Note: Appendix B is on file in the Town's office.
§ 340-3.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-3.13
1:159
§ 340-3.13. Speakers/amplifiers and sound equipment.
The use of speakers, amplifiers and sound equipment for advertising
purposes is permitted only within the confines of buildings and shall not be
audible at a distance of 20 feet from the main entrance of the establishment.
§ 340-3.14. Refuse and debris.
The storage or collection of unsightly material or debris, such as trash, junk
metal, nonoperational recreational vehicles and yard equipment and the
like, shall not be permitted on any lot.
§ 340-3.15. Display of commercial goods.
Goods and/or merchandise shall not be stored or displayed outside a
building except by special permit, issued by the Zoning Commission, based
on conformance with the criteria defined in Article V and other provisions
of this chapter.
§ 340-3.16. Outdoor lighting.
A. Purpose; intent. The purpose of this section is to further promote the
public health, safety and welfare by providing adequate standards to
control lighting in outdoor places. The specific requirements and
standards of this section have been formulated to:
(1) Permit reasonable uses of exterior lighting for nighttime safety,
utility, security and enjoyment while preserving the ambiance of the
night;
(2) Curtail and reverse any degradation of the nighttime visual
environment and the night sky;
(3) Minimize glare by limiting outdoor lighting that is misdirected,
excessive or unnecessary; and
(4) Conserve energy and resources to the greatest extent possible.
B. Compliance with this chapter. Any person or entity installing,
constructing, affixing, operating, maintaining, repairing or replacing
any exterior lighting fixture from which any form of exterior lighting
emanates shall comply with the terms and provisions contained in this
section.
C. Lighting design.
(1) Type and design. All exterior lighting fixtures shall be of a type and
design appropriate to the lighting application and consistent with
Marlborough's rural and small-town New England character.
(2) Full-cutoff fixtures. Each exterior lighting fixture shall be a full-cutoff
fixture.
(3) Aim of fixture. Any exterior lighting fixture used primarily for the
illumination of horizontal surfaces shall be aimed directly at the
ground immediately below such exterior lighting fixture. Any
exterior lighting fixture used primarily for the illumination of
nonhorizontal surfaces shall be aimed directly at the subject matter
to be illuminated.
§ 340-3.13 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 340-3.16
1:160
(4) Height of fixture. The lowest point of any exterior lighting fixture
used primarily for the illumination of horizontal surfaces shall not
exceed 16 feet above the grade of the ground immediately below
such exterior lighting fixture. The highest point of any exterior
lighting fixture used primarily for the illumination of nonhorizontal
surfaces shall not exceed 25 feet above the surface level of the
nearest public right-of-way, measured from the location of such
exterior lighting fixture.
(5) Shielding.
(a) No lamp or lamp image from any exterior lighting fixture shall be
visible outside the lot line on which such exterior lighting fixture
is located.
(b) No exterior lighting fixture shall produce glare which is visible
outside the lot line for such lot on which such exterior lighting
fixture is located.
(6) Brightness. No exterior lighting fixture located in a commercial zone
or an industrial zone shall employ lamps in excess of 250 watts or
50 watts, for incandescent lighting and compact fluorescent lighting,
respectively.
(7) Lighting hours.
(a) In commercial zones and industrial zones, exterior lighting on
a lot shall be reduced to the minimum intensity necessary for
public safety or security purposes at the later of: (i) one-half hour
following the close of business on such lot; and (ii) 10:00 p.m.,
Marlborough, Connecticut time. Such exterior lighting for public
safety or security purposes:
[1] Shall not exceed 25% of the total illumination created by all
exterior lighting fixtures on the applicable lot during regular
business hours;
[2] Shall utilize exterior lighting fixtures which are fully shielded
to prevent any glare from being visible from any other lot;
and
[3] Shall only illuminate points of entry for structures on such lot
and parking areas to the extent each is appropriate pursuant
to the IESNA's recommended practices.
(b) For commercial and industrial uses in a recreational zone or
residential zone, no exterior lighting shall be permitted, except
for:
[1] Exterior lighting specifically and solely used for public safety
and security purposes in the manner set forth in Subsection
C(7)(a) above; and
[2] Exterior lighting consistent with residential uses conforming
to the standards of this § 340-3.16.
(c) For residential uses in any zone, exterior lighting on a lot shall
be extinguished as early as practicable.
(d) On any lot being used for recreational purposes, exterior lighting
shall be extinguished on such lot at the later of: (i) one-half hour
following the conclusion of any event being located on such lot;
and (ii) 9:00 p.m., Marlborough, Connecticut time.
§ 340-3.16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-3.16
1:161
D. Prohibited lighting.
(1) No external lighting shall flash, pulse, sparkle, twinkle, rotate, move
or simulate motion.
(2) No external lighting fixture shall use neon, light-emitting diode,
high-intensity sodium, laser, fossil fuel, or mercury vapor technology,
and no external lighting fixture shall be used which is not
appropriate pursuant to the IESNA's recommended practices.
(3) No searchlights shall be used in any zone, except by police or state
or local public officials in the ordinary course of their duties.
(4) No external lighting creating a public hazard, nuisance or trespass
by projecting or reflecting objectionable light shall be permitted in
any zone.
(5) No external lighting fixture failing to comply with the standards of
this § 340-3.16 shall be permitted in any zone.
E. Commission discretion; special permit. Upon application by an owner of
a lot, the Commission may issue a special permit to allow the installation,
construction, affixing, operation, maintenance, repair or replacement of
any exterior lighting fixture in a manner inconsistent with any portion of
Subsection C, provided that such applicant shall demonstrate:
(1) The impracticability of such provisions in said Subsection C;
(2) The compliance of such application with the intentions, purposes and
goals of this § 340-3.16; and
(3) The commercial reasonableness, using the recommended practices
of the IESNA as a standard, of the application presented.
F. Exemptions.
(1) Low-watt lighting. Exterior lighting fixtures employing lamps not
in excess of 100 watts or 25 watts, for incandescent lighting and
compact fluorescent lighting, respectively, and containing not more
than two lamps, and meeting the standards of Subsection C(5)(b),
shall be exempt from the other provisions of this § 340-3.16.
(2) Landscape lighting. Landscape lighting utilizing lamps not
exceeding 25 watts or seven watts, for incandescent lighting and
compact fluorescent lighting, respectively, and used solely for such
purposes and meeting the standards of Subsection C(5)(b), shall be
exempt from the other provisions of this § 340-3.16.
(3) Temporary seasonal lighting. Decorative holiday lighting used solely
for such purposes and meeting the standard of Subsection C(5)(b)
shall be exempt from the other provisions of this § 340-3.16 from
November 15 through January 15, inclusive, of each year.
(4) Temporary event lighting. Exterior lighting utilized in connection
with a temporary use approved by the Commission under §§ 340-3.15
and 340-5.2 of this chapter shall be exempt from the provisions of
this § 340-3.16.
(5) Flags. Exterior lighting fixtures solely used to illuminate national,
state, municipal or other political flags shall be exempt from the
provisions of Subsection C(2), (4) and (7), provided that such exterior
lighting fixtures shall use the lowest-power lamps necessary for
proper illumination of such flags.
§ 340-3.16 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 340-3.16
1:162
(6) Swimming pools. Exterior lighting fixtures solely used to illuminate
swimming pools and other water features governed by Article 680 of
the National Electrical Code shall be exempt from the provisions of
this § 340-3.16.
(7) Building code. Exterior lighting fixtures solely used for exit signs,
stairs, ramps and other illumination required by building codes shall
be exempt from the provisions of this § 340-3.16, provided that,
if any provisions of Subsection C shall not contravene applicable
building codes, then such provisions shall remain applicable to such
exterior lighting fixtures.
G. Application procedures.
(1) Residential uses. External lighting meeting the standards of this
§ 340-3.16 and used for customary residential purposes in
connection with residential uses in any zone shall be permitted as
of right. By way of clarification, the phrase "customary residential
purposes" shall not be construed to include outdoor recreational
uses, including, but not limited to, riding rings, basketball courts and
tennis courts.
(2) Other uses. Except as set forth in Subsection E above, any person
desiring to install, construct, affix or replace any lighting fixture in
any zone shall submit a site plan application in conformance with
§ 340-5.3 of this chapter.
§ 340-3.17. Planning Commission requirements.
The Planning Commission may require larger lot sizes and minimum
required yards where on-site conditions, on-site tests or the Health Director
and/or the Town Engineer indicate the need.
§ 340-3.18. Soil testing required.
Each proposed lot shall be approved by the Chatham Health District
Sanitarian as having sufficient details and data to support a subsurface
sewage disposal system prior to its approval. All percolation tests and
deep hole tests shall, where possible, be witnessed by the Chatham Health
District Sanitarian, and all locations shall be specified on the plans. Each
proposed lot shall have a percolation test and a deep hole test conducted
within both the primary and reserve sewage disposal areas as per the
State Department of Health Service Design Standards, as amended. A
report detailing the results of the percolation tests, deep hole tests and
groundwater monitoring shall be presented to the Planning Commission
at the time of application as prescribed in the Marlborough Subdivision
Regulations or to the Zoning Commission at the time of a special permit
application and/or site development plan application.
§ 340-3.19. Buffer yards required.
A. When a side and/or rear yard in a General Commercial (GC), General
Industrial (GI), Designed Business Industrial Zone (DBIZ), Designed
Industrial (DI), and Designed Recreation (DR) Zone is adjacent to a
residential zone, the side and/or rear yard abutting the residential zone
§ 340-3.16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-3.19
1:163
shall be a minimum of 50 feet with a twenty-five-foot buffering strip, as
defined in this chapter.
B. When a side and/or rear yard in a Village Center 1 (VCD 1), Village
Center 3 (VCD 3), Village Center 4 (VCD 4) or Village Center 5 (VCD 5)
Zone is adjacent to a residential zone, the side and/or rear yard abutting
the residential zone shall be no less than 35 feet and no more than
60 feet, depending on visibility and proximity to existing buildings, as
determined by the Planning Commission or Zoning Commission.
§ 340-3.20. Minimum buildable lot area.
All proposed lots in a subdivision or resubdivision shall not be approved
unless the lots can meet or exceed the minimum buildable lot area
requirements of this chapter, except in an open space conservation area
residential, large lot conservation, or village cluster residential subdivision
application.
§ 340-3.21. Soil erosion and sediment control plan required.
A soil erosion and sediment control plan shall be required for all
development applications in which the disturbed area of such development
is cumulatively more than 1/4 acre.
§ 340-3.22. Use of land for access.
Access to any use in a commercial or industrial zone shall be prohibited on
or across land in a residential zone.
§ 340-3.23. Use variance.
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall be prohibited to grant a variance related
to the permitted uses of land, buildings or structures not authorized by
this chapter for a specific district or the density of development beyond
that permitted by this chapter for any zoning district. No variance shall be
granted for any application in connection with the future division of land as
it relates to any requirements of this chapter.
§ 340-3.24. Voting place.
The provisions of this chapter shall permit the temporary use of any
premises as a voting place for municipal, state or federal election or
primary.
§ 340-3.25. Permitted and prohibited uses.
Any use not expressly permitted by right or special permit in a particular
zoning district by this chapter shall be prohibited within such district. Any
use expressly not permitted by this chapter is not permitted in any zoning
district.
§ 340-3.19 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 340-3.26
1:164
§ 340-3.26. Motor vehicle junkyards.
No person shall operate a motor vehicle junkyard on any parcel of land
unless it is a legally authorized "motor vehicle junkyard," as defined in
C.G.S. § 14-6(H),10 and it is a permitted use in the zone in which the parcels
are located.
§ 340-3.27. Discontinued/closed streets.
Upon abandonment or declaration of non-use of any street, road or highway
or any portion thereof, in accordance with C.G.S. § 13a-49, the zone
designation immediately abutting the street right-of-way shall be
automatically extended to the center line of the street, road or highway
unless otherwise designated by the Commission.
§ 340-3.28. Dwellings in other than principal structure.
No residential dwelling shall be permitted in any accessory structure except
as permitted in Article VI.
§ 340-3.29. Undivided tract.
An undivided tract of land occupied by two or more principal buildings prior
to September 23, 1953 may, upon the issuance of a special permit by the
Commission, pursuant to § 340-5.1 of this chapter, be divided into as many
lots as are such principal buildings, even though the resultant lots will not
conform to the applicable area, square yard or frontage requirements of this
chapter, provided the owner of the tract of land shall not own contiguous
land to make conforming lots or more conforming lots, and each such lot
shall be as nearly conforming as feasible.
§ 340-3.30. Visiting trailer.
One visiting trailer used for living purposes may be permitted after the
issuance of approval by the Health Department. Any visiting trailer shall be
parked in the rear of the house or to the side of the house, if it is located
within 20 feet of the house and not in a required yard area, for not more
than six weeks in any calendar year.
§ 340-3.31. Temporary uses.
A. The Commission may issue, with or without a public hearing, temporary
use permits with conditions for the following purposes in any zone:
any indoor or outdoor event or commercial venture, such as auctions,
carnivals, fairs, parades or vendor sales, expected to be attended by
50 or more people, as determined by the ZEO. Any application shall be
submitted at least 14 days in advance of the event, and the following
information shall be included: a site plan, parking plan, and cleanup
plan. The Commission may condition any approval as follows:
10.Editor's Note: See C.G.S. § 13a-123c for definition of “junkyard.”
§ 340-3.26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-3.31
1:165
(1) The number of days of the event: In no case shall said event last
longer than four consecutive days.
(2) The Commission may authorize the use of speakers and sound
equipment with specific time frames and permitted decibel levels.
(3) The Commission may require that adequate police and emergency
services are provided. If required, the applicant shall submit to the
ZEO proof of arrangement for said services as required prior to the
commencement of the event.
(4) Limit the time and amount of lighting.
(5) Require a bond for the site cleanup and restoration.
B. The ZEO may issue the following temporary use permits, with or without
conditions, for a trailer for temporary living quarters during the
construction of a principal residential structure for a property for which
a building permit has been issued. Health Department approval for the
septic system and water supply well is required. Said trailer may be used
for one year and must be removed within two weeks of issuance of a
certificate of occupancy.
§ 340-3.32. Building permits and certificate of occupancy.
No building permit shall be issued for any building unless the lot upon
which the building is to be located shall have frontage on either: (1) a
"street" as defined in Article IV of this chapter; or (2) a proposed street in
an approved subdivision with respect to which all required improvements
with the exception of paving, loaming and seeding have been completed
and approved by the Town Engineer in conformance with the Town of
Marlborough's Highway Standards. A certificate of occupancy shall not
be granted for a building located on a proposed street in an approved
subdivision until all required improvements have been completed and
approved by the Town Engineer in conformance with the Town of
Marlborough's Highway Standards, with the exception of the final course of
paving, loaming and seeding. (See also Town of Marlborough Code, Chapter
254, Land Use, Article II, Frontage Requirements.)
§ 340-3.33. Nonilluminated outdoor recreation facility.
Outdoor recreation facility, such as tennis court, paddle tennis court,
batting cage, basketball court, or similar facility, with no aboveground
artificial lighting, provided that:
A. The facility is not located in the front yard unless it is located more than
150 feet from the front property line.
B. The facility is no closer than 25 feet from the side and rear property
lines.
C. No more than one such court per residential property unless the parcel
is five acres or more.
§ 340-3.34. Storage containers.
A. Long-term storage – more than 30 days:
(1) Permitted after issuance of a building permit.
§ 340-3.31 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 340-3.34
1:166
(2) In residential zones only one container is permitted, which shall
not exceed 200 square feet and shall be located to the rear of the
principal dwelling and 50 feet from the side and rear property lines.
(3) In nonresidential zones not more than two storage containers that do
not exceed 450 square feet each are permitted. Said containers shall
be stored to the rear of the principal building and 25 feet from the
side and rear property lines.
(4) Storage containers shall not be permitted within existing driveway
and parking areas.
(5) When a valid building permit is active, a container to store materials
and tools is permitted.
(6) Storage containers shall not be permitted on a vacant lot.
(7) No hazardous materials shall be stored in a container.
B. Temporary storage – 30 days or less:
(1) Shall only be allowed for temporary storage in conjunction with a
bona fide moving operation, remodeling job on the same premises for
which a building permit has been issued, or for a principal building
damaged by fire, explosion or natural disaster awaiting repair.
(2) Temporary permits issued by the Zoning Enforcement Officer are
valid for a thirty-day period and may be renewed once for a
maximum period of 60 days; except a container utilized on a property
in which the principal building was damaged by fire, explosion or
natural disaster, which shall have a maximum time frame of 120
days.
(3) The Commission may extend the maximum one-hundred-twenty-day
time frame when conditions warrant such an extension.
(4) Must be located on the property and in a location that does not
interfere with sight lines along driveways and streets.
(5) Containers are to be removed from site upon expiration of the
temporary permit.
C. Temporary truck trailer storage.
(1) In all nonresidential zones temporary truck trailer storage shall be
restricted to a designated loading area. No such trailer shall be
stored for more than 10 consecutive days unless a temporary storage
trailer permit is issued.
(2) Retail sales are not permitted from a trailer unless specifically
permitted elsewhere in this chapter.
(3) A trailer used for these purposes shall be registered and mounted on
wheels and roadworthy.
(4) No hazardous material may be stored unless approved by the Fire
Marshal.
(5) Any trailers authorized shall be removed upon expiration of the time
frame in Subsection C(1) above and/or any temporary permit time
frame.
§ 340-3.35. Construction trailers.
After issuance of a zoning permit, a trailer may be used on an active
construction site as an office, after the permits for the principal building
§ 340-3.34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-3.35
1:167
have been issued or, in the case of a subdivision, after construction of the
improvements has been authorized.
§ 340-3.36. Small-scale solar installations.
A. Small solar energy systems shall be permitted as an accessory use
by right in residential zoning districts and by site development plan
approval for all nonresidential zoning districts, subject to requirements
set forth below. Solar energy systems include ground-, pole- and roofmounted
systems.
B. A small-scale solar installation shall only produce energy for direct
consumption on the subject property and be interconnected to the
electric utility power grid to offset energy use on the subject property in
accordance with current state net-metering regulations.
C. The construction of the small-scale solar energy system shall be in
accordance with an approved building permit application. If the smallscale
solar energy system is to be interconnected to the local utility
power grid, a copy of the notification from the local electric distribution
company accepting such connection shall be submitted.
D. In all zoning districts, ground- or pole-mounted facilities shall be set
back 25 feet from the side and rear property lines and shall not be
located in the front yard.
E. Ground-mounted facilities shall not exceed 20 feet in height. All wiring
shall be underground and all installation shall meet the manufacturer's
recommendations for installation and operation.
F. Roof-mounted facilities shall not project vertically more than four inches
above the peak of the roofline of a sloped roof or more than five feet
above a flat roof. Rooftop panels shall be configured in a square or
rectangular pattern.
G. Any glare generated by a system must be mitigated or directed away
from adjoining properties and/or the street.
§ 340-3.37. Reasonable accommodations for persons with
handicaps. [Amended 5-4-2017]
A. All setback, coverage, location, and use requirements of these
regulations may be modified by the Zoning Enforcement Officer for
the alteration, construction, and/or modifications necessary to provide
access for persons with handicaps or such other modifications of these
regulations as may be necessary to meet the requirements of the
Americans with Disabilities Act and Fair Housing Act. Once the
reasonable modification is no longer required, all improvements to land,
buildings, and structures not in compliance with these regulations shall
be removed within 90 days.
B. Responsibilities of applicant.
(1) The applicant for such modification shall publish a legal notice in
a newspaper having substantial circulation within the Town of
Marlborough containing:
(a) A description of the building, use or structure that has received
a modification and the nature of such modification;
(b) The location of the building, use or structure; and
§ 340-3.35 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 340-3.37
1:168
(c) A statement that any aggrieved person may appeal such
modification to the Zoning Board of Appeals within 30 days of
such publication.
(2) Additionally, the applicant shall record the Zoning Enforcement
Officer letter granting the modification on the Land Records in the
Office of the Town Clerk within 14 days after the thirty-day
publication period referred to in Subsection B(1)(c) above has
expired.
§ 340-3.37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-3.37
1:169

ARTICLE IV
Definitions
[Amended 5-7-2015, effective 6-1-2015]
§ 340-4.1. Word usage.
For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms or words used herein shall be
interpreted or defined as follows:
A. Words in the present tense include the future tense.
B. The singular includes the plural.
C. The word "person" includes a corporation, association, partnership or
individual.
D. The word "lot" includes the word "plot" or "parcels."
E. The term "shall" is mandatory.
F. The word "used" or "occupied," as applied to any land or building, shall
be construed to include the words "intended, arranged or designed to be
used or occupied."
G. Words not specifically defined herein shall be used as defined in the
latest edition of Webster's New Collegiate Dictionary.
§ 340-4.2. Terms defined.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated in this section:
ACCESSORY USE or ACCESSORY STRUCTURE —
ACRE — For the purposes of this chapter, an acre shall be defined as 40,000
square feet.
ADULT DAY-CARE CENTER — A program of supplementary care for adults,
related or unrelated, outside of their own homes, on a regular basis for
a part of the 24 hours in one or more days of the week, satisfying the
requirements of Article Ten.J.11 of this chapter.
Any use or structure on the same lot with, and of a nature incidental
and subordinate to, the principal use of structure. "On the same lot,"
with respect to accessory uses and structures, shall be construed as
meaning on the same lot or on a contiguous lot in the same zone and
in the same ownership. Where a building is attached to the principal
building, it shall be considered a part thereof and not an accessory
building.
A.
The following are not permitted as accessory uses unless otherwise
provided in this chapter.
In residential zones: any building or use for commercial or
industrial purposes.
(1)
In commercial or industrial zones: any building or use for dwelling
purposes.
(2)
B.
§ 340-4.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-4.2
1:171
ALL-WEATHER SURFACE — An all-weather surface is defined as asphalt
pavement, processed stones, pea stone, etc.
ALTERATION — The change or rearrangement in size, shape, occupancy,
character or use of a building or structure.
BEDROOM — A room which is designated and primarily used for sleeping.
BOARD — The Zoning Board of Appeals.
BUFFER — A strip of land adjoining a property line or zone boundary
composed of natural vegetative growth, landscaping, fencing or screening
to provide visual and noise separation and protection.
BUILDING — Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls
and intended for shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, animals or
chattel.
BUILDING COVERAGE — The combined area of a site covered by the roof
area or outside dimensions of all structures on the lot, which includes eaves
and other similar projections. Coverage shall include dwellings, garages,
accessory buildings, commercial structures, porches, decks, covered
walkways, pools, tennis and other recreational courts, and all other
structures.
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance measured from the finished
ground-level grade at least 20 feet from any point of the exterior building
walls of the building to the peak (ridge) on a minimum of three sides of a
building. (See Appendix B.12)
BUILDING LINE, MINIMUM — A line running parallel to the property line
at a distance from the property line equal to the minimum required yard.
(See Appendix B.13)
CEASE AND DESIST ORDER — A written directive issued by an
enforcement officer requiring a violation party to immediately correct such
violation. Each cease and desist order shall, as an accommodation to such
violation party, notify such violation party that the failure to remediate such
violation may result in the issuance of a municipal citation, provided that
the failure to include such notice shall not render such cease and desist
order ineffective or limit any other remedies permitted hereunder.
CHANGE OF USE — A discontinuance of an existing use and the
substitution of a use of a different kind or class. Change of use is not
intended to include a change of tenants or proprietors unless accompanied
by a change in the use category.
CHILD DAY-CARE CENTER — A program of supplementary care for more
than 12 related or unrelated children outside their own homes on a regular
basis for a part of the 24 hours in one or more days in the week.
11.Editor's Note: So in original.
12.Editor's Note: Appendix B is on file in the Town's office.
13.Editor's Note: Appendix B is on file in the Town's office.
§ 340-4.2 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 340-4.2
1:172
CITATION ORDINANCE — That certain ordinance establishing penalties
for violations of certain land use regulations adopted by the Board of
Selectmen at its meeting held on February 13, 2007, as such ordinance may
be amended and in effect from time to time.14
COMMERCIAL USE OR BUILDING — A use or building where a product or
service is sold to the public.
COMMERCIAL ZONE — Any zoning district classified on the Zoning Map of
the Town of Marlborough as a GC, DBIZ, DC or VCD.
COMMISSION — Depending upon the authority given by this chapter,
"commission" may refer to the Zoning Commission, the Zoning Board of
Appeals or the Planning Commission of the Town of Marlborough.
COMMON OPEN SPACE — Any parcel or parcels of land or an area of water,
or a combination of land and water, designed and intended for the use of
residents and/or the general public.
COMMUNITY WATER SYSTEM — Any subdivision application which
proposes the use of a water company, as that term is defined in § 25-32a of
the C.G.S., as amended.
CONGREGATE LIVING FACILITY — An institution, building or buildings,
residence or other place, whether operated for profit or not, including
places operated by units of government, having some or all of the
characteristics of housing or homes for the aged or nursing homes and
which undertakes through its ownership or management to provide for
a period exceeding 24 hours maintenance or personal service for seven
or more adults, not related to the owner or administrator by blood or
marriage, who by reason of advanced age or physical infirmity are unable
or potentially unable to care for themselves and who require such service.
CONVALESCENT/NURSING HOME — A public or private organization
engaged in providing professional nursing services as required by the State
of Connecticut Public Health Code Section 19A-490, as amended.
CURBLINE — A line running parallel to the street and defined at the edge
of the pavement. (See Appendix B.15)
DESIGNED DEVELOPMENT ZONE — A zoning district established by the
Zoning Commission after detailed site development plan review, public
hearing, and special permit approval to permit the development of groups
of principal buildings on a single lot. A special permit is required to define
the use(s) allowed in the zoning district.
DWELLING — A building or portion thereof designed exclusively for singlefamily
residential occupancy but not including hotels, motels or tourist
homes.
14.Editor's Note: See Ch. 254, Land Use, Art. IV, Penalties for Violations.
15.Editor's Note: Appendix B is on file in the Town's office.
§ 340-4.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-4.2
1:173
DWELLING UNIT — A single housekeeping unit providing complete
independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent
provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.
DWELLING UNIT, ACCESSORY — A separate dwelling unit created either
within an existing single-family dwelling or within an accessory structure
within a residential zone which has an independent kitchen, bathroom and
living area facilities.
DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY (MULTIPLE RESIDENCE) — A building
arranged, intended or designed to be occupied by two or more families
living independently of each other.
EARTH VIOLATION — A violation involving the grading of land, removal of
earth or soil erosion and sediment control.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS — The Zoning Enforcement Officer and any
individual empowered by the Commission to assist the ZEO in the
administration and execution of the ZEO's duties hereunder.
EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN — A document which explains
and illustrates the measures which will be taken to control erosion and
sedimentation on construction sites. The plan has a written portion known
as a narrative and an illustrative portion known as a map or site plan.
EXCAVATION — The extraction, regrading or removal of sand, gravel, stone,
loam, dirt, peat or other earth product so as to alter its contour.
EXTERIOR LIGHTING — Any light emanating from an exterior lighting
fixture.
EXTERIOR LIGHTING FIXTURE — Any lighting fixture located exterior of
any structure on a lot or used for the purpose of illuminating the portion of
a lot exterior to any structure.
FAMILY — One person, or a group of two or more persons related by blood,
marriage, legal adoption or legal guardianship, or a group of not more
than five persons who need not be so related living and cooking together
in the same dwelling unit as a single housekeeping unit. The persons
constituting a family may also include up to six foster children, when a
married couple permanently resides in the same dwelling unit as foster
parent, and gratuitous guests and domestic servants. A roomer, boarder,
lodger or occupant of supervised group quarters, regardless of relationship
or ownership, shall not be considered a member of the family.
FAMILY DAY-CARE HOME — A facility which provides family day-care
services and which consists of a private family home caring for not more
than six children, including the provider's own children not in school full
time, where the children are cared for not less than three nor more than
12 hours during a twenty-four-hour period and where care is given on a
regularly recurring basis.
FARM — A parcel of land with a minimum of five acres in area, used for
the cultivation of the soil, dairying, raising or harvesting any agricultural
or horticultural commodity, including the raising, shearing and feeding
§ 340-4.2 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 340-4.2
1:174
of livestock; the operation, management, conservation, improvement or
maintenance of a farm and its buildings; and the production or harvesting
of any agricultural commodity. Farms include farm buildings and accessory
buildings thereto, such as nurseries, greenhouses or other structures, used
exclusively for the raising of agricultural or horticultural commodities.
FARM WINERY — Any place or premises located on a farm of at least 10
acres that includes at least five acres of vineyards, or the growing of other
fruits used on site in which wine or brandy is manufactured and sold. Said
facility shall meet the requirements of CGS § 30-16(5), as amended. It is a
facility comprising the building(s) used to convert fruit juices to wine, and
to age, bottle, store, distribute and sell said wine. A winery, for the purposes
of this chapter, includes crushing, fermenting and refermenting, bottling,
blending, bulk and bottle storage, aging, shipping, receiving, laboratory
equipment and maintenance facilities, sales, and administrative office
functions, and may include tasting and promotional events as accessory
uses. The farm winery permittee shall produce on the premises of the farm
winery an average crop of fruit equal to not less than what is required by
the State of Connecticut Liquor Control Regulations, as amended.[Added
3-3-2016]
FARM WINERY CAFE — An accessory use to the farm winery which allows
the sale and service of food prepared on or off site, and consumed at a
farm winery for the general public, as well as, the accommodation of special
group events. The maximum seating permitted is 200 persons at any one
time.[Added 3-3-2016]
FARM WINERY RETAIL STORE — A building or a portion of a building
located on the farm winery/vineyard established as a place for the sale
of wine, winery by-products and merchandise may also include souvenirs
and clothing bearing the logo of the winery, as well as wine-related items
and other products that reflect or enhance the character or theme of the
winery.[Added 3-3-2016]
FLOOR AREA — The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors
of a building, measured from the exterior faces of exterior walls, excluding
public corridors, restrooms, attic areas with a headroom of less than seven
feet, unenclosed stairs or fire escapes, elevator structures, areas devoted
to air-conditioning, ventilating or heating, or other building machinery and
equipment.
FRONTAGE — The distance measured along the minimum required frontyard
building line of a lot abutting a street, as defined in this chapter. In
the case of a rear lot, the frontage shall be measured at the street line. (See
Appendix B.16)
FULL-CUTOFF FIXTURE — A lighting fixture from which no light is emitted
at or above a horizontal plane drawn at the top of such lighting fixture.
16.Editor's Note: Appendix B is on file in the Town's office.
§ 340-4.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-4.2
1:175
GARAGE, PRIVATE — A detached or accessory building or a portion of a
main building for the parking and storage only of automobiles or registered
commercial vehicles belonging to the occupants of the premises.
GLARE — Excessive brightness in the field of vision that is sufficiently
greater than the brightness to which the eyes are adapted to cause
annoyance or loss in visual performance and visibility.
GROUP DAY-CARE HOME — A program of supplementary care for not less
than or more than 12 related or unrelated children on a regular basis for a
part of the 24 hours in one or more days in the week.
HOME OCCUPATION — A business or commercial activity customarily
conducted within a dwelling by the residents thereof for compensation,
which is clearly secondary to the use of the dwelling for living purposes.
HOSPITAL — A building used for the medical or surgical care of sick or
injured members of the public, excluding buildings used for medical or
surgical care, primarily on a by-appointment basis.
HOTEL, INN OR MOTEL — A building or buildings designed and used
primarily for temporary occupancy by transients, which provides or offers
accommodations for a consideration for seven or more persons, exclusive of
proprietors and employees, living on the premises.
IESNA — The Illuminating Engineering Society of North America.
INDUSTRIAL USE OR BUILDING — A use or building where a product is
manufactured, assembled or produced.
INDUSTRIAL ZONE — Any zoning district classified on the Zoning Map of
the Town of Marlborough as a DBIZ, GI or DI Zone.
KENNEL — Any operation in which a total of three or more dogs or cats are
kept overnight for breeding, boarding or grooming.
LANDSCAPE LIGHTING — Exterior lighting fixtures mounted in or at grade
(but not more than three feet above grade) and used solely for landscape
rather than any area lighting.
LIBRARY — A building in which literary, musical, artistic or reference
materials (such as books, manuscripts, recordings or films) are primarily
kept for use by members of the public but not for sale.
LIGHTING FIXTURE — A complete lighting unit consisting of one or more
electric lamps, the lamp holder, any reflector or lens, ballast (if any), and
any other components and accessories.
LIGHTING TRESPASS — Any light emanating from any lighting fixture
which is cast beyond the boundaries of the lot on which such lighting fixture
is located.
LIVESTOCK — Animals such as equines, cows, goats, sheep, swine, furbearing
animals, and wildlife, etc.
LOT — For zoning purposes, a "lot" is a single lot of record.
§ 340-4.2 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 340-4.2
1:176
LOT AREA, MINIMUM BUILDABLE — An area of at least 35,000 contiguous
square feet, having a series of corner angles ranging between 80° and
100°, with each side of the area being not less than 100 linear feet. The
minimum buildable lot area shall not include the following: land classified
as wetlands or watercourses plus a fifty-foot buffer area as defined in the
Inland Wetlands and Watercourse Regulations of the Town of Marlborough;
land with a slope in excess of 20% as measured over fifty-foot intervals;
and land within a federally mapped floodplain. The primary and reserve
subsurface sewage disposal system areas shall be located in the minimum
buildable lot area as delineated on plans approved by the Town Sanitarian
and Planning Commission.
LOT COVERAGE — The combined area of a site covered by the area of
buildings, structures and physical site improvements. Coverage shall
include building coverage and all impermeable surfaces such as walkways,
patios, porches, driveways, parking area, recreational surfaces, sign
supports, stairways, etc.
LOT LINE — A line representing a portion of the actual boundary of a lot.
LOT, REAR — A lot which has access to the street through a fifty-foot access
strip and where the lot area is located to the rear of other lots having access
on the same street. (See Appendix B.17)
LOT SIZE — The area of a lot as measured on a horizontal plane bound
by the front, side and rear lot lines. Lot size as defined herein shall be
contiguous.
MUNICIPAL CITATION — A written citation ordering the payment of a
municipal fine on account of the existence of a violation, as more
particularly described in the Citation Ordinance.18
NONCONFORMING BUILDING STRUCTURE OR USE — Any building,
structure or use of land, building or premises which does not comply with
all of the requirements of this chapter governing the zoning district in which
it is located.
NONFRONTAGE LOT LINE — Any lot line which does not border a public
right-of-way.
NURSERY — Any lot, structure or premises used as a commercial enterprise
for the purpose of growing or keeping plants for sale or resale in their living
form.
OWNER — Either:
A. The record title owner of a lot; or
A lessee enjoying exclusive use and possession of an entire lot during
the term of the leasing instrument creating such rights.
B.
17.Editor's Note: Appendix B is on file in the Town's office.
18.Editor's Note: See Ch. 254, Land Use, Art. IV.
§ 340-4.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-4.2
1:177
PARK — All or a portion of any lot owned and maintained by the Town of
Marlborough primarily for ornamental and/or recreational uses by members
of the public.
PERSON — Any individual, business entity, unincorporated organization,
trust or governmental authority.
PLACE OF WORSHIP — A building used primarily for religious practice and
prayer.
POULTRY — Domesticated gallinaceous birds such as chickens, turkeys,
pheasants, etc., and any of the various waterfowl such as ducks, geese, etc.
PROFESSIONAL USE OR BUILDING — A use or building where a service is
performed for the public for remuneration.
PUBLIC INTEREST ORGANIZATION — The United States of America, the
State of Connecticut, the Town of Marlborough, or any of their respective
public or quasi-public agencies, a house of worship or a public service
fraternal lodge.
PUBLIC TASTING ROOM — A room or rooms, open to the general public,
primarily used for wine tasting and the retail marketing of winery products.
Merchandise offered for sale within the tasting room may also include
souvenirs and clothing bearing the logo of the winery, as well as winerelated
items and other products that reflect or enhance the character or
theme of the winery.[Added 3-3-2016]
PUBLIC UTILITY INSTALLATION — Any building, structure or other
improvement installed or to be installed and/or utilized by the State of
Connecticut, the Town or any public service company (as defined in § 16-1
of the Connecticut General Statutes) in connection with any public electric,
electric distribution, gas, telephone, pipeline, sewage or water systems. The
design of any such public utility installation shall be, in the Commission's
discretion, compatible as to size, exterior design, setback, public safety and
aesthetics with the buildings, structures and other improvements in the
area surrounding the location of any public utility installation.
RECORD DRAWING — A survey prepared by and stamped with the seal of
a land surveyor registered in the State of Connecticut at a class A-2 level
of accuracy, delineating the as-built field location of all structures, utilities,
plantings, well, septic, driveway, parking stalls, parking areas, contours of
the land, sidewalks, signs, treelines, curtain and footing drains, outfalls,
drainage easements, seeded areas, lighting; and the typical construction
details for the parking area, sidewalks, septic systems, lighting, curtain
drains, footing drains; and shall include a typical approval block, a note
that reads "Perpetual care and maintenance shall be performed by owner
on plantings, seedings and site improvements," and a key map.
RECREATION SPACE — That space appropriately improved for common
recreational uses, including, but not limited to, tennis courts, swimming
pools, ball fields, or clubhouses, etc.
RECREATIONAL EQUIPMENT — Includes boats, boat trailers, travel
trailers, pickup campers, trailers, motorized dwellings, tent trailers, pop-
§ 340-4.2 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 340-4.2
1:178
out campers and the like. No such recreational equipment shall be used for
living, sleeping or housekeeping purposes unless previously approved by
the Commission for such use.
RECREATIONAL ZONE — Any zoning district classified on the Zoning Map
of the Town of Marlborough as a "design recreational zone."
RESIDENTIAL ZONE — Any zoning district classified on the Zoning Map
of the Town of Marlborough as a "residential zone" or "design multiple
residence zone."
RESTAURANT — A place of business where a menu selection of meals is
prepared on the premises and served to patrons seated at tables for onpremises
consumption in a completely enclosed room. The term does not
include a place where food or meals are offered for off-premises, automobile
or curb service consumption. A drive-in or drive-through restaurant is not
considered a "restaurant," as defined in this chapter.
RESTAURANT, DRIVE-IN — Any place or premises where provisions are
made on the premises for the selling, dispensing or serving of food,
refreshments or beverages in motor vehicles and/or in other than a
completely enclosed building on the premises, including those
establishments where customers may serve themselves and may eat or
drink the food, refreshments or beverages in motor vehicles and/or in
other than a completely enclosed building on the premises. A restaurant
which provides drive-in or drive-through facilities of any kind in connection
with regular restaurant activities shall be deemed a drive-in restaurant for
purposes of this chapter.
RESTAURANT, FAST FOOD — An establishment where food is prepared
and served to the customer in a ready-to-consume state for consumption
either within the restaurant building, outside the building and on the same
premises, or off the premises, and having any combination of two or more
of the following characteristics:
SCHOOL — A building primarily used to provide for the full course of
elementary and/or advanced academic teachings of children.
SETBACK — Measured as the closest point of any portion of a building or
structure to any property line. (See Appendix B.19)
SIGN — Any material, structure or device composed of lettered or graphic
material, which is located out of doors or on the exterior of any building or
indoors as a window sign, that displays an advertisement, announcement,
A limited menu, usually posted on a sign rather than printed on
individual sheets or booklets;
A.
B. Self-service rather than table service by restaurant employees;
C. Disposable containers and utensils; or
D. A kitchen area in excess of 50% of the total floor area.
19.Editor's Note: Appendix B is on file in the Town's office.
§ 340-4.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-4.2
1:179
notice or name used for the purpose of bringing the subject thereof to the
attention of the public, but including any flag, badge or insignia of any
government or governmental agency.
SIGN, ADDRESS — A freestanding sign depicting the street address of the
lot on which such sign is placed.
SIGN, AWNING — A sign attached, printed or adhered flat against the
surface of an awning and not extending beyond the borders thereof. No
portion of an awning sign shall be located below a height of eight feet above
the surface level beneath the awning to which such sign is affixed.
SIGN, BILLBOARD — A sign which directs attention to a use not exclusively
related to the lot where such sign is located.
SIGN, CONTRACTOR'S — A sign posted by a contractor at a property
during the course of such contractor's work at a lot and removed
immediately at the conclusion thereof, provided that no contractor's sign
shall be placed on any lot for a duration of time exceeding 90 days.
SIGN, DETACHED — A freestanding sign which is permanently affixed to its
supporting structure, the top of which shall not exceed eight feet in height
above the surface level beneath such sign, and the bottom of which shall not
be less than 30 inches above the surface level beneath such sign.
SIGN, DEVELOPMENT — A freestanding sign which depicts the name of a
residential development or subdivision, which sign shall be maintained by a
condominium association, homeowners' association or similar organization
and for which a maintenance bond shall be issued in favor of the Town in an
amount reasonably determined by the Zoning Commission.
SIGN, DIRECTORY — A freestanding sign setting forth the street address
of a lot and two or more directory identification signs, together with, at
the owner's discretion, the advertised name of a lot (which name shall not
exceed 30% of the size of such directory sign), which shall not exceed 12
feet in height above the surface level beneath such sign and the bottom of
which shall not be less than 36 inches above the surface level beneath such
sign. Each directory sign shall be of an integrated and uniform design, with
identical colors and construction materials throughout.
SIGN, DIRECTORY IDENTIFICATION — A sign affixed to a directory sign,
identifying the owner or a tenant at the lot on which such directory sign is
placed, using lettering no greater than five inches in height. Each directory
identification sign shall be of an integrated and uniform design with such
directory sign, and each directory identification sign on any directory sign
shall utilize identical colors and construction materials as all other directory
identification signs on such directory sign. The proportion of any directory
identification sign to the directory sign to which it is affixed shall be
substantially similar, as determined by the Zoning Commission, to the
proportion of the gross floor square footage exclusively occupied by the
tenant or owner identified on such directory identification sign to the gross
floor square footage occupied by the owner and all tenants at the lot on
which such directory sign is placed.
§ 340-4.2 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 340-4.2
1:180
SIGN, HOME OCCUPATION — A freestanding sign which, together with its
supporting structure, the top of which shall not exceed 3.5 feet in height
above the surface level beneath such sign and the bottom of which shall
not be less than 24 inches above the surface level beneath such sign,
specifically identifies the home occupation legally maintained on the lot on
which such sign is placed.
SIGN, NAMEPLATE — A sign depicting an occupant of a lot or a business
maintained thereon, which sign shall be permanently affixed to a building
on such lot.
SIGN, POLITICAL — A sign, flag or banner depicting a message or symbol of
a body politic, a federal, state or local election, or other language relevant
to federal, state or local political issues, which signs, if related to an
election, shall be placed not more than 30 days prior to the applicable
election date and removed no more than seven days thereafter.
SIGN, PROTECTION — A sign warning the general public against dangers
located on a lot or prohibiting the general public from trespassing, hunting
or other violations of an owner's property rights, provided no such
protection sign shall be located within 20 feet of any other protection sign
located on the same lot.
SIGN, PUBLIC INTEREST — A sign identifying an owner of a lot which is
a public interest organization, such public interest sign being placed on
such lot only if the operations conducted at such lot requires the regular
visitation of the public or other parties not owning or occupying such lot.
SIGN, PUBLIC SAFETY — A sign used for the sole and exclusive purpose of
maintaining reason and order to ensure the safety of public visitors or other
third parties not owning or occupying a lot, such as directional signs, stop
signs, etc.
SIGN, ROOF — A sign affixed to the roof of a building, the top of which shall
not be located more above the ridge of a pitched roof or above the surface of
a flat roof and the bottom of which shall not be more than 24 inches above
the drip edge immediately beneath such sign.
SIGN, TEMPORARY EVENT — A nonpermanent freestanding sign
identifying a special temporary event that will be conducted at the lot
on which such sign is placed, including, without limitation, so-called "Aframe,"
"sandwich board" and similar signs. No temporary event sign shall
be placed on a lot more than five days prior to the special temporary event
which is the subject of such temporary event sign, and each temporary
event sign shall be removed not more than two days following the
conclusion of such special temporary event, provided that no owner or
tenant shall be permitted to maintain any temporary event sign for a period
in excess of 10 days; and provided, further, that no owner or tenant shall be
permitted to maintain temporary event signs for more than 15 days during
any twelve-month period.
SIGN, TEMPORARY REAL ESTATE — A sign advertising the actual
availability of a lot or any portion thereof for sale or for lease, provided that
§ 340-4.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-4.2
1:181
no temporary real estate sign shall be placed on a lot more than five days
following consummation of the sale or lease of the lot being advertised.
SIGN, TEMPORARY TAG SALE — A sign advertising a tag sale at a lot
and placed on the lot at which such tag sale shall be conducted, which
sign shall not be placed more than three days in advance of such tag sale.
Each temporary tag sale sign shall be removed immediately following the
conclusion of such tag sale.
SIGN, WALL — A sign affixed to a wall of a building and identifying the
owner or tenant enjoying exclusive use and possession of such building or
the portion thereof in the location such sign is affixed. No wall sign shall
extend above the lowest point of the roof, nor shall any wall sign extend
higher than the eaves line or top of the parapet wall of the building to which
such wall sign is affixed. No wall sign shall extend beyond the ends of the
wall to which such wall sign is affixed or project more than three inches
from the surface of the wall to which such wall sign is affixed. No portion of
any wall sign, including any illumination fixtures or supporting frames, shall
be located more than 25 feet above the surface level of the nearest public
right-of-way, measured from the location of such wall sign.
SIGN, WINDOW — A sign affixed to an external window or located within
four feet of a window of the building or portion thereof occupied by the
owner or tenant affixing such sign and visible to the general public,
excluding the actual physical display of products sold by such owner or
tenant at such location.
SIGNIFICANT VIOLATION — A violation which involves any of:
SPECIAL EVENTS — A farm winery may conduct wine tastings and hold
special events in a building or a portion of a building located on the farm
vineyard. Such room may only exist as an accessory to a farm winery/
vineyard.[Added 3-3-2016]
SPECIAL PERMIT — A permit granted after a public hearing and approval
subject to the requirements of this chapter permitting a use(s) and/or
building(s).
STREET — An approved public right-of-way that has been accepted by the
Marlborough Board of Selectmen, a state road or private right-of-way that
has been approved by the Marlborough Planning Commission or Zoning
Commission.
STREET LINE — The boundary line separating a parcel of land from the
street. (See Appendix B.20)
A. An imminent threat to public safety, public health or property values;
An adverse and irreversible effect on public safety, public health or
property values; or
B.
A violation of substantially similar nature as a violation for which a
cease and desist order was given in the prior 12 months to the same
violation party.
C.
§ 340-4.2 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 340-4.2
1:182
STRUCTURE —
SUBSURFACE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM — A system consisting of a
house sewer, a septic tank followed by a leaching system, any necessary
pumps and siphons, and any groundwater control system on which the
operation of the leaching system is dependent.
SUPERVISED GROUP QUARTERS — A dwelling housing a group of persons
during a period in which such persons are undertaking a program of
vocational training, counseling, social rehabilitation or other similar
program, such as children's homes and group homes. Supervised group
quarters shall not be considered a rooming house, boardinghouse or lodging
house.
TEMPORARY USE PERMIT — A permit issued by the Zoning Commission or
the ZEO subject to the requirements of this chapter permitting a temporary
use, sign or structure.
TENANT — A person or entity with a leasehold interest in real property
obtained from an owner to exclusively occupy and use a portion of a lot.
TOURIST HOME; BOARDINGHOUSE — A building, part of which is
occupied by the owner of the building as his permanent residence, in which
lodging and meals are offered or provided for compensation to two or more
persons, up to a maximum of six persons, by prearrangement for definite
periods of time.
TOWN — The Town of Marlborough, Connecticut.
TRAILER — A structure mounted on wheels, capable of being towed or
hauled by another vehicle, and used for short-term human occupancy,
carrying or storing materials, goods or objects, or as a temporary office.
TRAILER MOBILE HOME — Any vehicle or similar portable structure which
is or can be used for sleeping, living or working quarters and which is,
Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires location on
the ground or attachment to something having location on the ground.
As used in this chapter, structures shall include but are not limited
to buildings, swimming pools, tennis courts, towers, docks, balconies,
open entrances, porches, decks, chimneys, handicapped ramps, bay
windows, storage tanks, antennas, satellite dishes, ground-mounted
solar panels and fences or walls greater than six feet in height.
Retaining walls and platforms that are necessary for the installation of
public utilities shall not be viewed as structures.
A.
Floating structures, such as piers, docks, wharves, ramps, mooring
devices, launching devices, the decking of which is no higher than
three feet above mean high water, are permitted structures exempt
from the minimum required yard requirements and are subject to the
securing of the necessary permits from the Marlborough Conservation
Commission.
B.
20.Editor's Note: Appendix B is on file in the Town's office.
§ 340-4.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-4.2
1:183
has been, or can be mounted on wheels, whether or not resting upon a
temporary or permanent foundation.
VARIANCE — A relaxation of the terms of the zoning regulations by the
ZBA when such relaxation will not be contrary to the public interest and
where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property and not as a result of
the actions of the applicant, a literal enforcement of this chapter would
result in unnecessary and undue hardship.
VEHICLE, COMMERCIAL — Any motor vehicle with commercial license
plates or with lettering, markings or other accessories indicating it is
intended for use other than personal and/or recreational transportation. For
the purposes of this definition, dump trucks, backhoes, bulldozers and other
types of construction-related machinery shall be viewed as commercial
vehicles.
VEHICLE, MOTOR — Any motor vehicle as defined by C.G.S. § 14-212, as
amended.
VIOLATION — A violation of any regulation, rule, order, directive or other
provision of this chapter, the Commission, or Title 8 of the Connecticut
General Statutes.
VIOLATION PARTY — The owner and/or tenant of any lot (or portion
thereof) causing or permitting a violation to exist thereon.
WATERCOURSE — Any river, creek, brook, stream, waterway, lake, pond,
marsh, swamp, bog or any other body of water, natural or artificial, public or
private, vernal or intermittent, which are contained within, flow through or
border upon the Town of Marlborough or any portion thereof, not regulated
pursuant to §§ 22-7h to 22-7o, inclusive, or the 1969 supplement to the
C.G.S., as amended.21
WETLANDS — Any land area or submerged land area which consists of
any of the soil types designated as poorly drained, very poorly drained,
alluvial and floodplain by the National Cooperative Soils Survey of the
Natural Resources Conservation Service of the United States Department
of Agriculture, as amended. Such areas may include filled, graded or
excavated sites which possess an aquic (saturated) soil moisture regime as
defined by USDA NRCS.
WINE — Any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of the natural
sugar content of fruits, such as grapes or apples or other agricultural
products, containing sugar, including brandy.[Added 3-3-2016]
YARD — A required open space unoccupied and unobstructed by any
building, portion of a building, structure or construction.
YARD, FRONT — An open space extending between side lot lines across the
front of a lot. (See Appendix B.22)
21.Editor's Note: See current wetlands and watercourse provisions in C.G.S. §§ 22a-28
through 22a-45d.
22.Editor's Note: Appendix B is on file in the Town's office.
§ 340-4.2 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 340-4.2
1:184
YARD, REAR — An open space extending across the rear of the lot between
the inner side yard lines. In the case of through lots, there will be no rear
yard. On a corner lot or an interior lot on a curve where there is no rear lot
line, there shall be no rear yard requirement. (See Appendix B.23)
YARD, SIDE — An open space extending from the street line to the rear lot
line. (See Appendix B.24)
ZBA — The Zoning Board of Appeals of the Town of Marlborough.
ZEO — The Zoning Enforcement Officer of the Town of Marlborough, as
appointed and empowered by the Commission.
ZONING PERMIT — A permit granted by the ZEO, subject to the
requirements of this chapter, permitting a use(s), structure(s) and/or
building(s).
23.Editor's Note: Appendix B is on file in the Town's office.
24.Editor's Note: Appendix B is on file in the Town's office.
§ 340-4.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-4.2
1:185

ARTICLE V
Special Permit, Temporary Use Permit and Site Development Plan
Regulations
§ 340-5.1. Special permits.
The Commission may, upon application, issue special permits for specific
uses within this chapter. The Commission has identified uses that possess
characteristics of a unique and special nature that require conformance to
additional standards as well as to all other requirements of this chapter.
Upon application, each specific proposal shall be considered on an
individual basis.
A. Application requirements. The application shall be accompanied by the
following:
(1) A fee to defray the cost of legal notices and the processing of the
application. Fee rates to be set annually by the Board of Selectmen.
(See Appendix C for the present fee schedule.25)
(2) A site development plan, where required, and other pertinent
documents necessary to satisfy this chapter.
B. Applications procedure.
(1) The application must be submitted to the administrative official at
least seven days prior to a regularly scheduled meeting.
(2) If an application involves an activity regulated pursuant to the
Marlborough Inland Wetlands and Watercourse Area Regulations,
the applicant shall submit an application to the inland wetlands
agency not later than the day the application is filed with the
Commission.26
(3) After submission of the application and receipt at a meeting of the
Commission, the Commission shall, within 65 days, hold a public
hearing on the application.
(4) The Commission shall notify the town clerk of the adjoining
municipalities by certified mail of the pendency of an application
within seven days of receipt of an application concerning any
project on any site when, in the sole opinion of the Commission:
(a) A significant portion of the traffic to the completed project on
the site will use streets within the adjoining municipality to
enter or exit the site; or
(b) A significant portion of the sewer or water drainage from the
project on the site will flow through and significantly impact the
municipality; or
(c) Water runoff from the improved site will impact streets or other
municipal or private property within the adjoining municipality.
(5) The applicant shall permit the ZEO to erect temporary sign(s)
advertising the public hearing on the property at least 10 days prior
to the public hearing.
(6) If a special permit involves an activity that requires an inland
wetlands and watercourse permit and the time limit for a decision
by the Commission would elapse prior to the 35th day after a
25.Editor's Note: Appendix C is on file in the Town's office.
§ 340-5.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-5.1
1:187
decision by the inland wetlands agency, the time period for a
decision shall be extended to 35 days after the decision of the
inland wetlands agency.
(7) If an application involves an activity regulated pursuant to the
Marlborough Inland Wetlands and Watercourse Area Regulations,
the Commission shall not render a decision on the application until
the inland wetlands agency has submitted a report with its final
decision to the Commission.27
(8) The public hearing must be completed within 30 days after such
hearing commences.
(9) The Commission shall decide upon all applications, except where
previously noted, within 65 days of the close of the public hearing.
(10) The applicant may request in writing or consent to one or more
extensions of the time periods provided herein for commencement
or completion of hearings or for decisions after completion of
hearings, provided the total period of any such extension of
extensions shall not exceed 30 days for the completion of a hearing
and 65 days for commencement and decisions after hearings have
been completed.
(11) The Commission may approve, approve with conditions, or
disapprove the application. Notice of the decision of the
Commission shall be communicated to the applicant by certified
mail within 15 days after such decision has been rendered. Notice
of the decision of the Commission shall be published in a
newspaper having a substantial circulation in the Town within
15 days after such action has been taken. The reasons for the
action of the Commission shall be set forth in the minutes of the
Commission.
C. Decision criteria.
(1) The Commission shall, when reviewing all applications for special
permits, take into consideration the general objectives of the public
health, safety, welfare, convenience and the protection of property
values as well as the particular protection of the immediate
neighborhood in which the application is proposed.
(2) The Commission shall ensure conformance to all requirements of
the district in which the site is located and the standards contained
below:
(a) The site plan submitted as part of the application shall satisfy
the requirements for site development plan approval as detailed
in § 340-5.3 of this chapter.
(b) The proposed use will be in harmony with the characteristics of
the neighborhood and surrounding area and will not adversely
affect property values in the neighborhood.
26.Editor's Note: In the Town of Marlborough, the Conservation Commission acts as the
Town's inland wetlands and watercourses agency.
27.Editor's Note: In the Town of Marlborough, the Conservation Commission acts as the
Town's inland wetlands and watercourses agency.
§ 340-5.1 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 340-5.1
1:188
(c) The design, location, height, mass, scale, roof shape and
architectural style of the main and accessory buildings will be
compatible with the buildings in the surrounding area.
(d) Parking, loading facilities, traffic circulation within the site, and
entrance and exit driveways shall be adequately and properly
located for maximum pedestrian and vehicular safety and
convenience.
(e) Streets providing access to the proposed use shall be adequate
to handle any additional traffic generated by the proposed use
and shall not create unsafe traffic conditions.
(f) Adequate water supply, sewage disposal, and stormwater
drainage shall be provided to the site.
(g) Sufficient safeguards shall be provided to protect adjacent
property and the neighborhood in general from detriment.
(h) The proposed use shall not have a significant impact on any
natural, historical or archaeological resource.
(i) Due consideration to the plan of development, as amended.
D. Performance bond. The Commission shall require, as a condition of
approval, that the applicant posts a bond with surety and amount
satisfactory to the Commission to insure conformance with all proposed
site improvements shown on the approved site development plan. The
Commission may modify this requirement for projects with site
improvements of less than $25,000. The bond shall be submitted to the
Town Engineer, Town Attorney and the ZEO for approval, sufficient to
cover 115% of the cost of construction of street improvements, drainage,
sewer and water supply, landscaping and any other site improvements
required by the Commission prior to approval. The bond shall be in
the form of a certified check payable to the Town of Marlborough, a
savings passbook with a signed withdrawal slip for a joint account in the
name of the Town and applicant, or an irrevocable letter of credit from
a bank. The bond shall be posted with the Town in accordance with the
approved site plan for an initial period of two years, unless an extension
of time is requested in writing by the applicant and is approved by the
Commission. Copies of these bond forms can be obtained from the office
of the Planning Coordinator.
E. Conditional approvals. If the application is approved with stipulations
and/or conditions, one Mylar and four paper copies of the revised plans
and other pertinent documents necessary to satisfy the conditions of
approval shall be submitted to, approved by and signed by the Chairman
or Secretary of the Commission within 90 days from the date of the
conditional approval. The Commission may grant, upon written request
of the applicant, a maximum of two ninety-day extensions. Any plan or
permit not approved and signed by the Commission within the required
time frames shall become null and void. Final approval shall be obtained
at such time as the plans are signed by the Commission.
F. Filing with the Town Clerk. Upon final approval, the special permit, with
the signed Mylar site development plan, shall be recorded by the record
landowner at his expense in the office of the Marlborough Town Clerk.
§ 340-5.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-5.1
1:189
Any special permit not so recorded within 90 days following the date of
final approval shall become null and void.
G. Special permit becomes void.
(1) Commencement of work. Construction or operation shall commence
and a building permit shall be issued when required within nine
months from the date of final approval of the special permit, or
the special permit becomes void. The Commission may grant, upon
written request of the applicant, a maximum of two one-year
extension periods.
(2) Completion of work. All work associated with the approved special
permit shall be completed within three years from the date that
the special permit has been filed with the Marlborough Town Clerk.
The Commission may grant, upon written request by the applicant,
a maximum of two one-year extensions. In all cases, all work in
Connecticut with such special permit shall be completed within five
years after the plan has been filed with the Town Clerk. Failure
to complete all work within such five-year period shall result in
automatic expiration of the approval of the special permit. For the
purposes of this section of this chapter, "work" shall mean all
physical improvements required by the approved plan.
(3) Termination of prior special permits. Special permit approval
requires the Commission to consider a particular use for a particular
location in light of all of the circumstances at the time of application
and approval. Those circumstances are subject to change over time.
Accordingly, upon the establishment of any use for which a special
permit is required by this chapter and the issuance of a certificate of
zoning compliance, all previous special permit or site development
plan approvals shall be deemed to have been superseded by the new
special permit approval, and no such use shall thereafter change
to a new special permit or site development plan use without the
approval of the Commission under the applicable procedure.
H. Partial bond release. The Commission shall not release a portion of
a performance bond to a remaining balance of less than 25% of the
original bond amount in instances where work remains to be performed.
I. Record drawings and bond release.
(1) Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy and prior to the
release of the performance bond, the Commission shall require that
one Mylar and four paper copies of a record drawing are submitted
to and approved by the Commission when a site development plan
was included with the special permit.
(2) Upon written request by the applicant, the Commission shall have
the ZEO, the Town Engineer and, when deemed necessary by the
Commission, the Building Inspector and the Fire Marshal perform
an inspection to determine whether the conditions of approval have
been met and whether all of the required site improvements have
been completed in accordance with the approved plans and permits.
Based upon these findings, the Commission may authorize release of
the bond and approval of the record drawing.
§ 340-5.1 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 340-5.1
1:190
(3) Upon approval, the signed Mylar record drawing shall be recorded
by the record landowner at his expense in the office of the
Marlborough Town Clerk. Any record drawing not so recorded
within 90 days following the date of approval shall become null and
void.
J. Conditional record drawing approval.
(1) During the period beginning December 1 and ending April 1 or due
to seasonal or weather-related conditions, the Commission, and the
ZEO where authorized, may at its discretion issue conditional record
drawing approval where plantings, earth grading and seeding have
not been completed.
(2) The conditional record drawing approval may be issued for a period
not to exceed 180 days. Upon written request by the applicant,
completion of the remaining site work and submission of the record
drawing, the Commission may release the remainder of the bond,
and the Chairman shall sign the record drawing.
K. Amendments.
(1) Construction and site improvements shall be completed in strict
compliance with the permit approved by the Commission. However,
amendments to an approved special permit may be made, provided
that an application is submitted to and approved by the ZEO or by
the Commission.
(2) If the ZEO determines that the construction or plan modifications
are of a minor nature and do not materially affect the construction
drawings, the Commission may waive the requirements for a public
hearing only by unanimous vote of the Commission members voting
on the request.
L. Conditions for revocation. A special permit may be subject to revocation
by the ZEO if any condition or safeguard imposed by the Commission
upon land, buildings, structures and/or uses for said special permit are
not strictly adhered to by the applicant and/or landowner. The ZEO shall
adhere to the procedures detailed in Article XV of this chapter whenever
a special permit must be revoked.
§ 340-5.2. Temporary use permits.
The Commission has identified uses and activities that are temporary in
nature and that have the potential for incompatibility with other land uses.
These uses shall be regulated as follows:
A. Authority.
(1) The Zoning Commission may issue, with or without conditions,
temporary use permits for the following purposes in any zone:
(a) Any outdoor event or commercial venture, such as parades,
carnivals, fairs, auctions, vendors, sales, etc., expected to be
attended by more than 50 members of the general public, as
determined by the ZEO, subject to the following conditions:
[1] Said event or commercial venture may not run for more than
20 days.
§ 340-5.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-5.2
1:191
[2] Speakers, amplifiers or other sound equipment may be used
in conjunction with said event or commercial venture only if
their use is specified in the application.
[3] A cleanup and restoration bond may be required.
[4] The Commission may require that adequate police and
emergency services are provided.
(2) The ZEO may issue, with or without conditions, temporary use
permits for the following purposes:
(a) A construction trailer or temporary structure, subject to the
following conditions:
[1] Said trailer or temporary structure to be used for an office,
equipment or material storage necessary for pending
construction at a conforming building or use.
[2] A building permit issued for said construction.
(b) A single trailer, subject to the following conditions:
[1] Said trailer be used as living quarters for the property owner
during construction of a principal residence.
[2] A building permit issued for that construction.
[3] An approved sanitary and water supply system be provided.
[4] Said trailer be removed from the lot on which the
construction takes place within one year from the date of
issuance of the temporary use permit or two weeks after a
certificate of occupancy is issued, whichever comes first.
B. Application requirements. The application for a temporary use permit
shall include the following:
(1) A fee to defray the cost of the legal notices and the associated costs
of the processing of the application. Fee rates to be set annually by
the Board of Selectmen. (See Appendix C.28)
(2) A plan for the proposed activity indicating the proposed location on
the site and any other information that the Commission or ZEO may
require to fully describe the proposed activity.
(3) The time period during which the activity will occur.
C. Application procedure.
(1) Submission of the application to the administrative official at least
seven days prior to a regularly scheduled meeting.
(2) After submission of the application and receipt at a meeting of the
Commission, the Commission shall, within 65 days, hold a public
hearing on the application.
(3) The public hearing must be completed within 30 days of its
commencement.
(4) The Commission shall decide upon all applications within 65 days of
the close of the public hearing.
(5) The Commission may approve, approve with conditions, or
disapprove the application. Notice of the decision of the Commission
shall be communicated to the applicant by certified mail within 15
days after such decision has been rendered. Notice of the decision
of the Commission shall be published in a newspaper having a
28.Editor's Note: Appendix C is on file in the Town's office.
§ 340-5.2 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 340-5.2
1:192
substantial circulation in the Town within 15 days after such action
has been taken. The reasons for the action of the Commission shall
be set forth in the minutes of the Commission.
(6) The requirement for a public hearing to obtain a temporary use
permit may be waived only by unanimous vote of the Commission
members voting on the request.
(7) Temporary use permits issued by the ZEO do not have to conform to
the procedural requirements of this section of the regulations.
D. Decision guidelines. The Commission and the ZEO in evaluating all
applications for temporary use permits shall take into consideration the
general objectives of the public health, safety, welfare, convenience and
the protection of property values. The Commission and the ZEO shall
also ensure that any nuisance or hazardous feature involved is suitably
separated from adjacent uses and a vehicle traffic problem will not be
created. The Commission or the ZEO may approve a temporary use
permit subject to suitable conditions, safeguards and stipulations.
§ 340-5.3. Site development plan.
Pursuant to C.G.S. § 8-3(g), a site plan is required for certain uses permitted
within this chapter to determine the conformity of a proposed building, use
or structure with the provisions of this chapter. This section establishes
procedural and informational requirements for site plans. These
requirements are in addition to other applicable standards and
requirements of this chapter. Site plan applications, except those
accompanying a special permit, will be acted upon by the Commission
under the provisions of C.G.S. § 8-7d(b). The Commission may hold a public
hearing on any site plan. In the case of site plans accompanying a special
permit application, the plans will be considered as part of the special
permit application, and action on the plan will be taken in accordance with
§ 340-5.1 of this chapter.
A. Applicability. Site development plan approval issued by the Commission shall be
required for:
(1) All buildings, construction or change of any use of land or structure in GC, GI,
VCD, DBIZ, DC, DI, DR and DMR Zones.
(2) In accordance with Article VI, for special permits in residential zones.
B. Application procedure.
(1) Informal discussion of site plans.
(a) Any applicant for a use requiring site plan approval may request the
placement of the proposal on the agenda of a regular or special meeting of
the Commission for the purpose of presenting preliminary plans or concepts
and receiving preliminary comments, observations and questions, and
identifying areas of concern. At this time the purpose of the informal
discussion(s) is to minimize delay, expense and inconvenience to all
interested parties and to assist a potential applicant in understanding
appropriate design parameters desired by the Town. The informal discussion
shall not be deemed to constitute any portion of the official and formal
procedure of applying for a site plan. Neither the proponent nor the
Commission shall be in any way bound by statements made in such informal
discussions.
§ 340-5.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-5.3
1:193
(b) At the informal discussion of the Commission, the applicant may request
a full or partial waiver of site plan requirements under this article of the
chapter above. Following informal discussion, the Commission may suggest
that the proposal, or certain aspects thereof, be referred to other municipal,
state or federal agencies for review and comments or may advise the
potential applicant that additional information will be required prior to
action on a formal application for site plan approval.
(2) Submission of the application to the administrative official must be made at
least six days prior to a regularly scheduled meeting. The official date of receipt
of a site plan application will be the next regularly scheduled meeting of the
Commission immediately following the day of submission of the complete
application to the Commission's designated agent or 35 days, whichever is
sooner.
(3) If any proposed activity is under the jurisdiction of the Marlborough
Conservation Commission29 under provisions of C.G.S. Chapter 440, the report
of said Commission, together with any permit issued for regulated activities,
will be submitted with the site plan. In accordance with Connecticut General
Statutes, the Commission will not act on a site plan application until the report
of the Conservation Commission has been received and considered.
(4) After submission of the application and its receipt, the Commission shall within
65 days render a decision on the application. The applicant may consent in
writing to up to an additional 65 days to process the application.
(5) The Commission shall notify the town clerk of the adjoining municipality by
certified mail of the pendency of any application within seven days of receipt of
an application concerning any project on any site when in the sole opinion of the
Commission:
(a) Any portion of the property affected by a decision of the Commission is
within 500 feet of the boundary of the adjoining municipality; or
(b) A significant portion of the traffic to the completed project on the site will
use streets within the adjoining municipality to enter or exit the site; or
(c) A significant portion of the sewer or water drainage from the project on
the site will flow through and significantly impact the drainage or sewerage
system within the adjoining municipality; or
(d) Water runoff from the improved site will impact streets or other municipal
or private property within the adjoining municipality.
(6) The Commission may approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove the
application. Notice of the decision of the Commission shall be communicated
to the applicant by certified mail within 15 days after such decision has been
rendered. Notice of the decision of the Commission shall be published in a
newspaper having a substantial circulation in the Town within 15 days after such
action has been taken. The Commission shall state on the record its reason for
its decision.
C. Application requirements. The site development plan application shall include the
following:
(1) An application fee and technical review fee.
(2) Statement of use. A written statement, signed by the applicant and by the owner if
different from the applicant, describing the nature and extent of the proposed use or
29.Editor's Note: In the Town of Marlborough, the Conservation Commission acts as the
Town's inland wetlands and watercourses agency.
§ 340-5.3 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 340-5.3
1:194
occupancy in sufficient detail to determine compliance with the use provisions of chapter. The written statement will include a declaration as to the nature and extent
of the proposed use or occupancy; a description of provisions for water supply, sewage
disposal, solid and liquid waste, drainage and other utilities; the number of persons
estimated to occupy or visit the premises on a daily basis; the basis for determining
parking and loading requirements and an estimate of the type of vehicular traffic number of vehicles generated on a daily basis and at peak hour; and disclosure of toxic or hazardous substances used, stored or processed in connection with the proposed
use or occupancy.
(3) Additional site plan submission requirements. The Commission may require that written
reports be prepared and submitted as part of any site plan submission. Reports which
may be required include reports on sewage disposal, water supply, fire protection
measures, management of stormwater runoff, traffic generation, storage of hazardous
materials, protection of significant archeological sites, or any other aspect of existing
and proposed development as the Commission may deem necessary to determine
conformance with the intent of this chapter.
(4) In the case of uses requiring approval of any department of the State of Connecticut, plans shall be submitted to said department. The tentative staff approval shall be issued
in writing by the department before final approval shall be issued by the Commission.
(5) An itemized cost estimate for site plan improvements, along with corresponding prices.
(6) Seven copies of the site plan drawn at a scale of one inch equals 40 feet or smaller (no case shall the map exceed 24 inches by 36 inches), which shall include the following:
(a) Title of development, date, North point, scale (one inch equals 800 feet), key map, and address of record owner, and name of the professional preparing the site plan.
(b) A class A-2 survey of the property indicating all distances, bearings and the area site and any abutting streets prepared by a land surveyor registered in the Connecticut. All plans shall be prepared, signed and sealed by a Connecticut-professional engineer, architect or landscape architect, whichever shall be appropriate.
(c) Location and dimensions of all existing and proposed easements and rights-of-(d) A table summarizing the proposed and required zoning information, as follows: size, setbacks, required yards, floor area devoted to use, building height, lot building coverage, parking calculations, landscaping and any other specific site required by this chapter.
(e) The boundaries of the subject parcel and adjacent property lines within 100 feet lot lines of the subject parcel.
(f) Location and use of all existing and proposed structures.
[1] Location of all uses not requiring structures.
[2] Location and dimensions of all proposed outdoor signs.
[3] Location of roads, internal circulation, driveways, parking and loading areas the number of stalls provided therewith, and pedestrian walkways or other separation.
[4] Location and dimensions of all man-made features in adjoining streets or sites 100 feet of the subject parcel.
[5] Notations to reference all previous approvals issued by all authorities dates, conditions, site plan references, and permit numbers.
[6] Location and construction design details of all existing and proposed sidewalks,
driveways, parking areas, and stormwater drainage structures. Location § 340-5.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-5.3
1:195
strips and screening, showing the type, size and species of shrubs, trees or plantings.
[7] The height, bulk, use and location of all buildings; typical floor plans or other for the use of interior spaces of proposed buildings; the exterior appearance proposed buildings, including exterior elevations, roof plan, designation of materials,
colors and textures of exterior finishes, doors, windows, roofing, trim and the location of heating, air-conditioning, ventilation and similar equipment; and special
exterior features, such as building-mounted signs, drive-in windows, building or lighting, roof drainage/gutters, and features on the interior of the building designed
to be capable of being seen from the exterior.
[8] The location, dimensions, square footage (both ground floor and total), height type of construction of all buildings or structures, including fences, walls, signs,
lighting fixtures, flagpoles and the like. All signs of any type whatsoever shall indicated on the site and building plans, as applicable, indicating location, number,
size, color, method of illumination and type.
[9] Any change whatsoever to any of the existing features depicted on any previous
approved site plan, but not limited to: proposed uses of land, including uses requiring a structure or building; the amount of land and/or buildings dedicated
to each use; proposed grades at two-foot contours or less; any signs, accessory
structures, fences, walls or other similar structures; location and details for collecting and handling of refuse; the location of gas, electric and other utilities be provided, and whether utility lines shall be placed above or beneath the ground.
(g) The existing and proposed topographic contours of the land and abutting streets intervals of two feet or spot elevations where necessary.
(h) A plan and design details of the proposed method of sanitary waste disposal and source
of potable water supply.
(i) Exterior lighting.
[1] The type, location and size of any exterior lighting and all exterior lighting fixtures,
including:
[a] Description and photographic illustration of each exterior lighting fixture,
including component specifications such as luminaires, reflectors, optics, of cutoff, supports and poles;
[b] Locations and descriptions of each exterior lighting fixture and hours operation, aiming angles and mounting heights;
[c] Computer-generated photometric grid showing footcandle readings every feet and the average footcandles for either or both of horizontal and vertical
illumination levels (depending on the application);
[d] Foundation and details of all poles, trusses and other freestanding structures
supporting exterior lighting fixtures;
[e] A compliance certificate executed by the applicant and any lighting consultant
engaged by such applicant, detailing the conformance of each exterior lighting
fixture to the standards described in § 340-3.16 of this chapter (or in the event a nonconforming exterior lighting fixture pursuant to § 340-3.16F of this chapter,
the information required by such subsection).
[2] If a special permit applicable pursuant to § 340-3.16E of this chapter is submitted,
such compliance certificate shall also describe, in detail, the compliance of exterior lighting with the recommended practices of the IESNA with respect to exterior lighting applications described in such site plan application.
§ 340-5.3 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 340-5.3
1:196
(j) Location of existing watercourses, wetlands, wooded areas, flood hazard areas, outcrops, single trees with a diameter of 20 inches or more measured three feet the base of the trunk, with an indication of whether they are to be retained.
(k) Sedimentation and erosion control plans.
(l) Designated handicapped parking and ramps.
(m) A note stating. "Perpetual care and maintenance shall be performed by plantings, seedlings and site improvements."
(n) Fire lanes, where required per Chapter 324, Article II, of the Town Code, as amended.
(o) Zone district boundaries within 100 feet of the site.
(p) The following approval block.
MARLBOROUGH ZONING COMMISSION, MARLBOROUGH, CT
DATE APPROVED DATE OF EXPIRATION
CHAIRMAN
SECRETARY
(q) All test pit and percolation test data and the dates that the tests were performed.
D. Performance standards and criteria. The following criteria shall be satisfied to
protect the public health, safety and welfare of the public at large. The applicant
shall furnish in writing together with any application for use sufficient evidence
that the proposed use will not produce any nuisance in excess of the measurable
performance standards listed below.
(1) No smoke or other air contaminant shall be discharged into the atmosphere for
a period or periods aggregating more than three minutes in any one hour which
is darker in shade than is designated at No. 2 on the Ringlemann Chart, as
published by the United States Bureau of Mines, or which is of such capacity as
to obscure an observer's view to a degree equal to or greater than does smoke
designated at No. 2 on the Ringlemann Chart.
(2) Offensive odors, as defined by Section 22a-174-23 of the regulations
promulgated by the Connecticut Department of Energy and Environmental
Protection, shall not discharge beyond the property line of an operation that
stores, uses or produces a substance which will cause said odor. Any
determination of a violation of Section 22a-174-23, as may be amended from
time to time, constitutes a violation of this provision. Where lot lines bounding
an industrial use adjoin a residential district, there shall be no offensive odors
noticeable at said lot's property lines.
(3) No noise or vibration which is objectionable due to volume, frequency or
shrillness shall be transmitted outside the property where it originates.
(4) No offensive or harmful wastes shall be discharged into any stream,
watercourse, adjoining property, sanitary sewer, septic system, or storm drain.
(5) No activity shall be conducted which is hazardous or dangerous to persons or
property.
E. Building design standards. Architectural renderings of the building elevations
(front/side/rear) shall be submitted to the Commission for its review and approval
along with a floor plan. The facade of all buildings that are visible from any street
or other public areas shall be of some architectural treatment approved by the
Commission.
(1) Exterior siding materials shall be of decorative masonry, wood, metal, stone
or approved alternate material. Exterior design features, including materials,
§ 340-5.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-5.3
1:197
texture, color and trim detailing, shall be included on all building elevations to
the extent which maintains overall design continuity.
(2) Monotonous building forms are to be avoided by using various methods to help
create interest and reduce scale. Examples include the staggering of vertical
walls, recessing openings, providing upper-level roof overhangs, using deep
score lines at construction joints, contrasting compatible building materials, and
using horizontal bands of compatible colors. A variety in roof shapes and form
is encouraged to add diversity of the buildings as well to enhance scale and
complement the features of nearby buildings. Where parapet walls are used,
they should be treated as an integral part of the building design.
(3) The size of windows and doors should relate to the size of the wall in which
they appear. Monotonous repetition should be avoided where possible in the
location, size and shape of windows and small doors. Mirrors or highly reflective
glass shall not cover more than 20% of a building surface visible from a street.
Additionally, utility doors, fire doors, loading docks and other potentially
unsightly service features should be designed to blend with the building's
architecture.
(4) Primary buildings in close proximity on the same property should have
harmonious proportions and similar architectural styles. Nearby accessory
buildings should be of compatible design and treatment.
(5) Mixed-use buildings containing nonindustrial uses should highlight the public
entry to the structure to create a sense of human scale and to emphasize a
primary entry feature.
(6) The mixing of unrelated architectural styles, materials and details is to be
avoided.
(7) All HVAC and other building utility systems shall be screened from view from
the public street and abutting property.
F. Site preservation and landscaping. The application shall include a landscape plan
and a site constraint plan prepared by a State of Connecticut-licensed landscape
architect. The characteristics of the site are to be incorporated into the design to
take advantage of topographic features, provide buffering of adjoining land uses,
and retain the prominent natural landscape and environmental features of the
property through:
(1) Minimizing soil and tree removal.
(2) Design grading to blend with the natural terrain and avoid creating steep slopes.
(3) Treating disturbed surfaces to encourage plant growth and soil stabilization by
providing the necessary topsoil and planting of the appropriate native species of
trees, shrubs and grasses.
(4) Preserving the significant natural features of the site, such as stonewalls, rock
outcrops, wetlands, prominent tree stands, and vistas.
(5) The area between the buildings and the street shall be landscaped in a way
to provide visual interest, with a mixture of grass, different species of shrubs,
trees, ground cover, annuals and perennial plants, except for walks, drives,
flagpoles, and other landscaping and ornamentation.
(6) Buffer strips of 50 feet shall be necessary when the site is abutting a residential
zone. If existing vegetation does not provide an adequate buffer, the area shall
be supplemented with hardy indigenous plant material, shrubs and trees.
(7) Low-impact stormwater design best management practices shall be an integral
part of all drainage and landscaping plans.
§ 340-5.3 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 340-5.3
1:198
G. Pedestrian access. On-site pedestrian walkways shall be provided between parking
areas and the building, as well as a walkway across the frontage of the lot along
the public street that terminates at the abutting property line. Sidewalks shall be
six feet wide and set back 10 feet from the curbline of a public street; however, the
Commission may vary these standards based on site conditions and the ability to
make linkages to other sidewalks. The applicant is to provide site interior walkways
that link street/drive walks with existing or future multimodal sidewalk/trail system.
H. Utilities. All developments shall provide underground utilities in both public and
private extensions of said utilities. All developments shall provide proper design
and construction of cable, electrical and phone lines, natural gas, community septic
systems, sanitary sewers, public water supply, and stormwater management system.
Switching-gear cabinets, transformers and similar aboveground utility equipment
shall be installed as shown on the site development plan, and a proper landscaping
plan shall be submitted to screen these structures from view from abutting property
and the public street.
I. Sewage disposal.
(1) The Commission shall not approve any special permit or site plan application
unless and until the Commission has been provided with a positive tentative
staff determination from the applicable governing authority with respect to the
compliance of the proposed sewage disposal system with applicable statutory
and regulatory requirements and/or from the Marlborough Water Pollution
Control Authority if the site is to be serviced by sanitary sewers or a community
septic system.
(2) Additionally, if the application proposes a community sewage disposal system,
as a condition to any approval granted by the Commission, the applicant shall
present to the Commission acknowledgement from the Marlborough Water
Pollution Control Authority that it has approved an operation and maintenance
agreement, including an escrow account for the maintenance and repair of said
community sewage disposal system.
J. Water supply.
(1) The Commission shall not approve any special permit or site plan application
unless and until the Commission has been provided with:
(a) If the proposed water system is not a community water system as defined by
the State Department of Health and State Department of Utility Control, a
letter of approval for the well location from the Chatham Health District; or
(b) If the proposed water system is a community water system as defined by the
State Department of Health and State Department of Utility Control, a letter
from the exclusive service area provider acknowledging the submission
of the application and its interest in ownership of said system, together
with a Phase I-A approval from the State Department of Public Health and
State Department of Public Utilities Control for all water supply wells in
accordance C.G.S. § 16-262m(a) prior to the close of the public hearing.
(2) Any approval granted by the Commission shall be conditioned upon receipt by
the Commission of a Phase I-B approval from the State Department of Public
Health and State Department of Public Utilities Control prior to issuance of any
building or zoning permits for the construction of any buildings.
K. Stormwater management.
(1) Purpose is to establish stormwater management requirements and controls
to protect and safeguard the quality of the groundwater and surface water
§ 340-5.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-5.3
1:199
resources of Marlborough and to reduce adverse impacts associated with
increases in peak rates of stormwater runoff.
(2) Objective.
(a) Incorporate decentralized stormwater management systems in any new
development designs;
(b) Minimize the increases in peak rates of stormwater runoff from any
development in order to reduce flooding, siltation and stream bank erosion,
and to maintain the integrity of stream channels and downstream drainage
structures;
(c) Minimize the increase in non-point-source pollution caused by stormwater
runoff from development which would otherwise degrade local
groundwater and surface water quality;
(d) Minimize the total volume of surface water runoff which flows from any
specific site during and following development to not exceed the
predevelopment hydrologic regime to the maximum extent practicable;
(e) Reduce stormwater runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion and non-pointsource
pollution wherever possible through stormwater management
controls and to ensure that these management controls are properly
maintained and designed to minimize potential threats to public safety.
(3) Design and performance criteria. In order to prevent the adverse impacts
of stormwater runoff, the Commission has developed a set of performance
standards that must be addressed in the design of any new site development
plan or modification to an existing site development plan that disturbs 5,000
square feet or more of area.
(a) All stormwater runoff generated from new development shall not discharge
stormwater runoff directly into a natural wetlands system, water body,
municipal drainage system or abutting property without adequate
pretreatment;
(b) A vegetative separation shall be maintained to provide a disconnection
between impervious surfaces and the natural wetland systems of the site
and abutting sites;
(c) All stormwater best management practices shall be designed to minimize
the need for maintenance while maintaining water quality discharge
treatment standards;
(d) All site development plans shall be designed to minimize the need for
stream bank/channel protection for the receiving natural system, but when
required shall include provisions to prevent erosion and scouring of the
stream bank/channel;
(e) The design of all stormwater best management practices shall convey
stormwater runoff in a manner to allow for the maximum removal of
pollutants and reduction in flow velocities;
(f) Stormwater discharges from land uses or activities with a higher potential
pollutant loading may require the use of specific pretreatment structural
methods and pollution prevention practices;
(g) All site development plans shall include the design of stormwater detention
or retention facilities to attenuate the increase in peak rates of stormwater
runoff for the two-, five-, ten-, twenty-five- and one-hundred-year twentyfour-
hour-duration storm events to provide for a zero post-development
increase whenever practical.
§ 340-5.3 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 340-5.3
1:200
(4) Sensitive waters and wetlands: enhanced criteria.
(a) Stormwater discharges to critical areas with sensitive resources, such as
the Blackledge River, Dickinson Creek, Lyman Brook, Fawn Brook, Flat
Brook, Lake Terramuggus and their contiguous wetlands, may be subject
to additional performance criteria or may need to utilize or restrict certain
stormwater management practices. Land development that discharges to
sensitive waters and wetlands as noted above shall meet enhanced criteria.
These may include but are not limited to:
[1] Nutrient sensitive waters. Enhanced control of nutrients and sediment
removal for stormwater discharges shall be required.
[2] Cold-water fisheries. Techniques to control temperature increases from
stormwater discharges into these streams and water bodies shall be
required.
[3] Groundwater. Enhanced recharge and pretreatment of stormwater
discharges shall be required to protect groundwater supplies.
[4] Wetlands. Controls to minimize impacts to the natural or
predevelopment wetland hydrology, including limiting adverse
fluctuations in surface water and groundwater elevations.
(b) In these cases, the Commission may require additional storage capacity,
treatment, filtering, infiltration or other mitigation techniques. The use of
nonstructural practices shall be used to the maximum extent practical to
meet enhanced criteria. In making its determination to apply enhanced
criteria, the Commission shall consider the cumulative impacts of the site
development plan.
(5) Stormwater management plan requirements.
(a) All stormwater management plans shall include measures to capture and
treat stormwater runoff in accordance with the guidelines outlined in the
most recent version of the Connecticut DEEP Stormwater Quality Manual
and to incorporate low-impact development design elements to the extent
that is practical.
(b) No application for a development involving any site development plan
will be approved by the Commission unless it includes a stormwater
management plan detailing how the stormwater runoff and associated
water quality impacts resulting from the development will be controlled
and managed during and after construction. The plan must be prepared by
an appropriate design professional.
(c) The Commission may impose additional requirements deemed reasonable
and necessary to control the volume, timing, rate and/or quality of runoff
if the hydrologic, geologic, topographic or land use conditions warrant
greater control than provided by the applicant. Further, the Commission
may restrict the use of certain BMPs and may require pretreatment to
exceed the minimum standards established in the most recent version of
the Connecticut DEEP Stormwater Quality Manual.
(6) Compliance with federal and state regulations. All stormwater facilities and
conveyance systems shall be designed in compliance with all applicable Town,
state and federal laws and regulations. It shall be the applicant's sole
responsibility to identify and obtain all required permits prior to the start of
any construction.
§ 340-5.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-5.3
1:201
(7) Protection of public health, safety and general welfare. The design of
stormwater BMPs shall consider public health, safety and general welfare.
These considerations shall include, but not be limited to: preventing flooding
of buildings, structures and travelways; preventing long-term standing water
in and near drainage facilities; minimize the creation of mosquitoes' breeding
pools; preventing attractive nuisance conditions and dangerous conditions due
to stormwater depth or velocity and/or access to drainage structures, including
inlet and outlet openings. In addition, designs shall not result in the creation
of aesthetic nuisances due to excessive slopes, cuts and fills, lack of suitable
native landscaping and other similar conditions that would detract from the
appearance of the surrounding environment.
(8) Natural resource inventory.
(a) Stormwater management designs shall include an inventory of important
natural resources features on the site, and these features shall be shown
on the stormwater management plan. Protection and/or conservation of the
site's natural features shall be a part of the stormwater management plan.
(b) The plan shall identify important natural features identified through a
natural resources inventory that includes but shall not be limited to the
following: natural drainage features, riparian buffers, wetlands, steep
slopes, soils with high infiltration capacity, significant forest cover,
significant trees and natural communities, including the presence of any
threatened and/or endangered species.
(9) Site design feasibility report.
(a) Stormwater management practices for a site shall be selected on the basis
of the physical characteristics of the site. The design professional shall
submit a report outlining the stormwater practices options, including lowimpact
alternatives, that were considered and those that were chosen for
the design based on the evaluation and analysis of site opportunities and
constraints. Among the factors that should be considered:
[1] Depth to groundwater/ledge.
[2] Hydrologic functions.
[3] Contributing drainage area.
[4] Site vegetation.
[5] Soil characteristics.
[6] Topography.
[7] Location in relation to environmentally sensitive features.
(b) A soils report based on on-site boring logs or soil test pit data shall be
submitted with all designs. The number and location of soil borings/test pits
and associated soil testing shall be that which is necessary to determine
the suitability and distribution of soil types present at the location of the
proposed stormwater measures as shown on the site development plan.
(10) Infiltration. All stormwater designs shall include infiltration for any new site
development unless the site design feasibility report and associated soils report
demonstrate that the physical characteristics of the site are not suitable. Lowimpact
design elements utilized for infiltration of discharge into a natural
system shall utilize native plant species.
(11) Overland flood routes.
(a) Overland flood-routing paths shall be provided to safely convey stormwater
runoff from the one-hundred-year, twenty-four-hour-duration storm event
§ 340-5.3 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 340-5.3
1:202
to receiving water resource or stormwater BMP with adequate hydraulic
capacity, such that the runoff is contained within a drainage easement
for the flood-routing path that does not cause flooding of buildings and
abutting properties.
(b) There shall be an allowance in all designs for a minimum of one foot of
freeboard for all flood-conveyance systems and flood-control structures.
(12) Stormwater conveyance. Stormwater conveyance systems shall be designed to:
(a) Maximize the flow path from inflow to outflow points;
(b) Include protection of inlet and outlet structures;
(c) Provide for the elimination of or protection from erosive velocities; and
(d) Utilize infiltration systems where applicable.
(13) Velocity dissipation. Devices and techniques to reduce stormwater velocities
and prevent erosion shall be placed at discharge outlet locations and along
or within the full length of any outlet channels to convey and discharge peak
design flows in a manner that will not result in scouring or surface erosion,
including receiving streams or channels or wetlands, so that the natural
physical and biological characteristics and functions of the receiving waters
are maintained and protected.
(14) Landscaping/planting plan.
(a) All stormwater management designs shall include a detailed landscaping
plan that identifies the types (both common and botanical names),
locations, sizes and total number of all proposed plantings. Planting notes
and details shall also be provided as well as a maintenance and
management plan to ensure the long-term viability of all plantings. In
addition, the landscaping plan shall include a stabilization schedule for the
revegetation of all disturbed areas of the site. Any area of land from which
the natural vegetative cover has been either partially or wholly cleared
or removed by development activities shall be seeded with temporary
vegetation within seven days after the suspension of grading work which is
expected to last a period of 30 days or more. Permanent vegetation shall be
fully established by the date of substantial completion of construction.
(b) Following the first year after the establishment of permanent vegetation
and the completion of all landscaping plantings, an inspection shall be
conducted by the Town to confirm their health and survival. Should any
permanent vegetation or plantings be determined to be dead or dying
following the one-year period, then they shall be revegetated or replaced. A
second inspection shall then be conducted by the Town one year from any
subsequent revegetation or replanting.
(15) Nonstructural stormwater practices. To the extent that they are feasible, the
use of nonstructural stormwater treatment practices are required and shall
be selected and designed using the appropriate criteria from the most recent
version of the Connecticut DEEP Stormwater Quality Manual or other
appropriate low-impact design manuals acceptable to the Commission.
(16) Structural stormwater practices. All structural stormwater management
facilities shall be selected and designed using the appropriate criteria from
the most recent version of the Connecticut DEEP Stormwater Quality Manual.
For other structural stormwater controls not included in the Connecticut DEEP
Stormwater Quality Manual or for which pollutant removal rates have not
been provided, the effectiveness and pollutant removal of the structural control
§ 340-5.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-5.3
1:203
must be documented through prior studies, literature reviews, or other means
acceptable to the Commission before approval of any design utilizing such
structural stormwater controls.
(17) Discharge to municipal stormwater system. If any stormwater runoff from a
new or modified site development plan is discharged to a municipal separate
storm sewer system (MS4) or other publicly, municipally or privately owned
storm sewer system, the applicant must demonstrate that the existing storm
sewer system has adequate excess hydraulic capacity to convey both increases
in peak discharge flow rates and in runoff volumes. In addition, all such
discharges shall conform to all the requirements contained in the applicable
general permit for the discharge of stormwater and dewatering wastewaters
from construction activities, the general permit for the discharge of
stormwater associated with industrial activity, or the general permit for the
discharge of stormwater associated with commercial activity, as originally
issued and reissued. All new or modified site development shall also conform
in all respects to the Town of Marlborough Illicit Discharge Detection and
Elimination Ordinance, as amended (Chapter 301, Article I, of the Town Code).
(18) Operation, inspection and maintenance plan agreement and schedule.
(a) An enforceable operation, inspection and maintenance plan agreement and
schedule shall be executed to ensure that the stormwater management
plan facilities function as designed and approved. The agreement shall
designate the responsible party for the long-term maintenance of the
approved stormwater management facilities and include a provision
passing the responsibility for such maintenance to successors in title. This
agreement shall include easements to the Town allowing access to all
stormwater management plan facilities at reasonable times for periodic
inspection by the Town and/or its agents to ensure that the facilities are
being properly maintained and in good working order. Said easements shall
be executed and recorded in the Marlborough Land Records with filing of
the final endorsed plan.
(b) The design and planning of all stormwater management plan facilities shall
include detailed inspection procedures and frequencies, maintenance plans
and schedules, as well as repair procedures to ensure their continued longterm
function. These items shall identify the components of the stormwater
management system that need to be inspected and maintained, provide
a maintenance schedule for each facility and the equipment necessary
to perform that maintenance. Provisions for the periodic review and
evaluation of the effectiveness of the maintenance program and the need
for revisions or additional maintenance procedures shall be included in the
plan.
(c) All stormwater management facilities must undergo, at a minimum, an
annual inspection to document maintenance and repair needs and to
ensure compliance with the requirements of the Connecticut DEEP
Stormwater Quality Manual and any additional conditions assigned by
the Commission. Any maintenance and/or repair needs found must be
addressed in a timely manner by the owner and a reinspection made
confirming the completion of the identified items. The owner shall submit
to the Commission annually a copy of the inspection report and, if
necessary, any reinspection reports. If the responsible party fails or refuses
§ 340-5.3 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 340-5.3
1:204
to fully address all items identified in an inspection report after 30 days'
notice from the Commission of such failure to comply, the Commission shall
commence enforcement action to achieve compliance.
(19) Substantive changes to plan. No changes shall be made to an approved
stormwater management plan without review and written approval by Town
staff or if any such changes are determined to be substantive by the
Commission. Additional data may be requested to allow for a complete review
and evaluation of proposed changes to ensure compliance with the required
discharge standards.
L. Decision criteria.
(1) The Commission shall, when reviewing all site development plan applications,
take into consideration the general objectives of the public health, safety,
welfare, convenience and the protection of property values as well as the
particular protection of the immediate neighborhood in which the application is
proposed.
(2) The Commission shall ensure conformance to all requirements of the district in
which the site is located and to the standards contained below:
(a) The site and all buildings, structures and uses shall be accessible for fire,
police and other emergency vehicle service, which shall be accomplished
through the review and report submitted by the Town Fire Marshal.
(b) The site and all buildings, structures and uses shall comply with the State
Building Code, specifically in regard to the requirements for handicapped
access.
(c) Parking, loading facilities, traffic circulation within the site, and entrance
and exit driveways shall be adequately and properly located for maximum
pedestrian and vehicular safety.
(d) Landscaping on the site shall comply with the intent and the standards of
Article XIII, and all refuse collection areas, parking, service and loading
areas shall be suitably screened and/or enclosed by plantings, wall and
fencing from the adjacent areas and public rights-of-way.
(e) The stormwater drainage systems shall be designed to minimize soil erosion
and to prevent off-site impacts and in compliance with the requirements of
Subsection K above. The Commission may require that the overall drainage
systems shall be designed such that the runoff rate outside of the
development does not exceed the rate which existed before development
and the use of low-impact development stormwater management best
practices.
(f) Due consideration to the Plan of Conservation and Development, as
amended.
(g) The design of the site, building, landscaping and other features are in
accordance with the criteria of Subsections D through J of this section.
M. Performance/maintenance bond.
(1) A performance bond shall be posted in an amount to be determined by the
Commission based on a review of Town staff recommendations for the current
construction costs of all proposed site improvements shown on the approved
site development plan and all sediment and erosion control measures, site
restoration, and landscape/planting plan improvements, plus a contingency
allowance of 20%. Posting of the performance bond and a bond agreement shall
be executed prior to the endorsement of the record plan and the commencement
§ 340-5.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-5.3
1:205
of any construction activity. No bond will be released in whole or in part
for any portion of the stormwater management system until an as-built plan
demonstrating substantial conformance with the approved stormwater
management plan has been submitted and approved by the Commission.
(2) The bond shall be posted with the Town in accordance with the approved site
plan for an initial period of three years and include two one-year automatic
renewals. Copies of these bond forms can be obtained from the office of the
Planning and Development Director. The bond shall be in the form of a certified
check payable to the Town of Marlborough, a savings passbook with a signed
withdrawal slip for a joint account in the name of the Town and applicant,
or an irrevocable letter of credit from a bank maintaining offices in Hartford,
Middlesex, New London and/or Tolland Counties.
(3) A maintenance bond, equal to at least 20% of the amount of the original
performance bond amount, shall be held by the Commission for a period of
one year following the approval of the as-built plan. At the discretion of the
Commission, the maintenance bond period may be extended for an additional
one-year period due to poor vegetative growth, structural failures, or other
similar matters that impact the proper function and performance of stormwater
management facilities, survival of the landscaping, or other compliance with the
original approval.
N. Record drawings and bond release.
(1) Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy and compliance and prior to
the release of the performance bond to a maintenance bond, the Commission
requires that one Mylar and two paper copies of the as-built record drawing are
submitted to the Commission for the finding of compliance with the approval
granted.
(2) On the finding of compliance of the original approval, the Commission will
sign the Mylar as-built record drawing, and the applicant shall record it at his
expense in the office of the Marlborough Town Clerk prior to issuance of the
certificate of occupancy.
O. Conditional approvals. If the application is approved with stipulations and/or
conditions, one Mylar and three paper copies of the revised plans and other
pertinent documents necessary to satisfy the conditions of approval shall be
submitted to, approved by and signed by the Commission within 90 days from the
date of the conditional approval. The Commission may grant, upon written request
of the applicant, a maximum of two ninety-day extensions. Any plan or permit not
approved and signed by the Commission within the required time frames shall
become null and void. Final approval shall be obtained at such time as the plans are
signed by the Commission.
P. Filing with the Town Clerk. Upon final approval, the approved site development plan
application, with the signed Mylar site development plan, shall be recorded by the
record landowner at his expense in the office of the Marlborough Town Clerk. Any
site development plan not so recorded within 90 days following the date of final
approval and signature by the Commission shall become null and void.
Q. Site plan becomes void.
(1) All work associated with the approved site development plan shall be completed
within three years from the date that the site development plan has been filed
with the Marlborough Town Clerk. The Commission may grant, upon written
request of the applicant, a maximum of two one-year extensions. In all cases, all
§ 340-5.3 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 340-5.3
1:206
work in connection with such site development plan shall be completed within
five years after the plan has been filed with the Marlborough Town Clerk.
(2) Failure to complete all work within such five-year period shall result in
automatic expiration of the approval of the site development plan. For the
purposes of this section of the chapter, "work" shall mean all physical
improvements required by the approved plan.
R. Conditional record drawing approval. During the period beginning December 1 and
ending April 1 or due to seasonal or weather-related conditions, the Commission
and the ZEO, where authorized, may at their discretion issue conditional as-built
record drawing approval where plantings, earth grading and seeding have not been
completed. The conditional as-built record drawing approval may be issued for a
period not to exceed 180 days. Upon written request by the applicant, completion of
the remaining site work and submission of the record drawing, the Commission may
release the remainder of the bond and the Chairman shall sign the record drawing.
S. Amendments. Construction and site improvements shall be completed in strict
compliance with the permit approved by the Commission. However, amendments to
an approved site plan may be made, provided that an application is submitted to and
approved by the ZEO or by the Commission as provided in this subsection. If the
ZEO determines that the construction or plan modifications are of a minor nature
and do not materially affect the permit, the ZEO may approve a set of modified site
plans and construction drawings. If the ZEO determines that the construction or
plan modifications are a significant amendment, the Commission may approve a set
of modified site plans and construction drawings.
T. Conditions for revocation. A site development plan may be subject to revocation
by the Commission, upon initiation of the process by the ZEO, if any condition or
safeguard imposed by the Commission upon land, buildings, structures and/or uses
for said site development plan are not strictly adhered to by the applicant and/or
landowner. The ZEO shall adhere to the procedures detailed in Article XV of this
chapter whenever a site development plan must be revoked.
U. Waiver of site plan requirements.
(1) In addition to uses and activities specifically exempted from site plan
requirements by this chapter, the Commission may waive requirements for a
site plan if it determines that a proposed activity will not affect existing traffic
circulation or result in an increase in the need for parking, nor will it entail any
significant exterior change to a building or site, nor will the new activity have
an impact substantially different from the existing use from which the change
is requested. A request for a waiver of site plan requirements will be submitted
in writing by the property owner or owner's agent at the time of application.
A Commission decision to waive site plan requirements may be made based on
informal discussion of the activity at a regular or special Commission meeting.
(2) Also, a partial waiver of site plan information requirements may be granted to
avoid unnecessary delay and expense for an applicant whose proposed activity
is minor in nature and limited in its impact on the surrounding area. The
Commission may, at its sole discretion, exempt any application from specific
information requirements as set forth in this section. The exemption may be
approved if the Commission finds that the information would not aid the
Commission in its determination of the application's compliance with this
chapter. A request for a partial waiver of site plan requirements will be
§ 340-5.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-5.3
1:207
submitted in writing by the property owner or owner's agent at the time of
application.
§ 340-5.3 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 340-5.3
1:208
ARTICLE VI
Residential Zone Regulations
[Amended 5-7-2015, effective 6-1-2015]
§ 340-6.1. Uses permitted as of right.
The following uses are permitted as of right, subject to the requirements
and standards set forth herein:
A. Residential parking and garaging.
(1) The total combined garaging facilities in connection with a singlefamily
dwelling shall not exceed the number of bedrooms and shall
not exceed 1,200 square feet in area. The Commission may issue a
special permit to permit the construction of more garage space than
the maximum herein allowed.
(2) Not more than one unregistered motor vehicle or piece of
unregistered recreational equipment may be parked outside a
garage, and such parking shall only be permitted to the rear of the
principal residence and not within any side or rear yard setback
area.
(3) Not more than one commercial vehicle with two axles for each
single-family dwelling may be habitually parked or garaged on a lot,
and it shall be stored in an enclosed structure or to the rear of the
principal building and shall not be stored in any side or rear yard
setback area. No vehicle containing construction debris, hazardous
waste, septic waste, or garbage may be parked on a residential
lot. Vehicles stored with a gross vehicle weight in excess of 11,000
pounds are only permitted after the issuance of a special permit by
the Commission.
(4) All recreation vehicles shall be stored to the rear of the principal
residence or garaged and shall not be located within the side- or
rear-yard setback areas. Not more than two recreational vehicles
shall be stored outside on any lot. No recreation vehicle shall be used
for living or business purposes while parked on the lot. Said vehicles
are to be owned or leased by the owner of the property or a tenant
of the premises. No recreation vehicle parked or stored shall exceed
40 feet in length and occupy an area greater than 400 square feet.
B. Personal business office. Offices for nonresidential purposes are
permitted by occupants of a home where:
(1) No business is conducted from the premises except by mail,
telephone or other electronic devices.
(2) No persons other than members of the household are employed.
(3) No pedestrian or automobile traffic other than that associated with a
typical residential property.
(4) No external evidence of the business is permitted, including the
displaying of a sign.
(5) No hazardous materials other than those common to a single-family
residential use, such as fuel associated with on-site heating, are
stored, used or disposed of on the property.
§ 340-6.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-6.1
1:209
C. Rear lots (see Appendix B30). Rear lots are permitted, provided the
following conditions are met:
(1) The fee-simple access strip shall not be less than 50 feet in width
from an accepted Town road, approved private road, or a proposed
Town or private road in an approved subdivision.
(2) Ten-foot side yards shall be maintained along the access strip.
(3) Frontage for a rear lot is 50 feet, and each rear lot must be separated
by at least one full building lot with the required frontage except
on the arc of a cul-de-sac or dead-end, where a double rear lot
configuration is permitted.
(4) The lot line from which the access strip of the lot originates shall be
considered the frontage of the rear lot.
(5) The access strip shall not be used in computing minimum lot size
requirements.
(6) The lot shall consist of a minimum of three acres (120,000 square
feet).
D. Garage sales and tag sales:
(1) Sales last for not more than three days.
(2) Sales are held not more than three times yearly and shall not be held
more frequently than 60 days apart.
(3) Sales are conducted on the owner's property.
(4) No goods purchased for resale may be offered for sale.
(5) No goods shall be located within a street right-of-way.
(6) All goods not sold must be removed from outside within 24 hours of
the end of the event.
E. The following specific types of group residences, pursuant to § 8-3e of
C.G.S. Chapter 124, as amended:
(1) Community residences for six or fewer children with mental or
physical disabilities.
(2) Community residences for six or fewer developmentally disabled
persons.
(3) Community residences for six or fewer persons receiving mental
health or addiction services.
F. The keeping of animals, bees, bird, poultry, fowl, dogs, cats, fish, rabbits
and other small domesticated animals for personal use of a
noncommercial nature, provided the following standards are met:
(1) Poultry and fowl shall only be kept to the rear of the principal
residence and not within the required side- or rear-yard setback
areas. All structures housing poultry and fowl shall be located 50 feet
from all property lines. No more than 24 rabbits, fowl or poultry may
be kept. Poultry and fowl shall be kept in a manner so as to minimize
noise and its effect on abutting properties.
(2) Fencing must be installed and maintained to contain the poultry and
fowl within the property outside of the required yard setback areas.
(3) No more than six beehives shall be kept on a property. No beehive
shall exceed 12 square feet.
30.Editor's Note: Appendix B is on file in the Town's office.
§ 340-6.1 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 340-6.1
1:210
(4) No more than six dogs or cats shall be kept on a property except for a
property with an approved kennel permit issued by the Commission.
§ 340-6.2. Zoning permit uses.
The following uses are permitted, after the issuance of a zoning permit by
the ZEO, subject to the requirements and standards set forth herein:
A. Single-family detached dwellings.
B. Farms, provided that:
(1) The storage of fertilizer and manure shall be located at least 75 feet
from any lot line.
(2) Fencing must be installed and maintained to contain livestock and
poultry within the property.
(3) Farms are exempt from all of the accessory building requirements
of this chapter relating to the size of structures used for farming
purposes, and the height of these structures is permitted to be 40
feet (excludes residential buildings), except that any building that is
accessory to a farm shall not be located closer than 50 feet to any
property line. All accessory buildings must be directly related to the
farming operation.
(4) Farms are exempt from the garaging requirements of this chapter.
(5) There must be a minimum of five contiguous acres dedicated to the
farm operation.
C. Accessory buildings, structures and uses, provided that:
(1) No permanent accessory building or structure shall be constructed
on any lot prior to the time of construction of the principal building
to which it is an accessory.
(2) No portion of any accessory building or structure shall be located
closer to the front property line than any portion of the principal
building on any lot; except when a principal building is set back
more than 100 feet from the front property line, an accessory
building may be located 25 feet in front of the principal building.
(3) No accessory building or structure shall exceed 24 feet in height. A
cupola or ornamental structure may extend an additional three feet
in height.
(4) The accessory buildings shall not exceed 50% of the floor area of the
existing principal building without a special permit approval from
the Commission.
(5) The building and structures shall conform to all other requirements
of the district in which they are located.
(6) Any accessory building connected by a heated room no more than 15
feet or that shares at least at least 25% of a common wall with the
principal building shall not be considered an accessory building.
D. The keeping of livestock on residential lots, excluding farms, may be
permitted for personal use, provided the following standards are met:
(1) The owner of the land on which the animals are to be kept shall
submit the following information:
(a) A plan or drawings showing the boundary of the property on
which the animals are to be kept.
§ 340-6.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-6.2
1:211
(b) The location of the existing on-site structures and on-site wells
and septic systems.
(c) The location and dimensions of the proposed animal shelter,
exercise area and the techniques to be used to contain the
animals on the property.
(d) The location of manure stockpile areas.
(e) The number and type of animals to be kept.
(f) The location of all wetlands and watercourses.
(2) The ZEO shall determine that all of the following standards are
satisfied prior to the issuance of a zoning permit for the keeping of
livestock on residential properties:
(a) There shall be 1 1/4 acres as the minimum lot size for the first
equine, cow or llama or other similar animal, as determined by
the ZEO, being kept and 1/2 acre for each additional horse, cow
or llama or other similar animal.
(b) There shall be one acre as the minimum lot size for the first two
goats, sheep or swine being kept and 1/4 acre for each additional
goat, sheep or swine.
(c) For any combination of livestock being kept, the minimum
requirements for equines, cows or llamas shall be considered as
primary. For example, an owner of two equines and three sheep
would require a minimum lot size of three acres.
(d) Each animal shall be provided with a minimum three-sided
enclosed shelter that shall provide protection from the elements
in the minimum amount of 75 square feet per equine, cow, llama
or other similar animal and 25 square feet per goat or sheep or
other similar animal.
(e) Each large animal, such as equine and cows, shall be provided
with a fenced exterior exercise area in the minimum amount of
1,000 square feet for each animal.
(f) Animals shall not be kept directly over any subsurface sewage
disposal systems.
(g) Animals shall be kept on relatively level well-drained land. To
this end, animals shall not be kept in areas that contain wetlands
or that have poor drainage characteristics, as defined by the
NRCS.
(h) Fencing must be installed and maintained to contain the
livestock within the property outside all required setback areas.
(i) All structures, including riding rings, must conform to area and
yard requirements of the particular residential zone. In addition,
storage areas for manure may not be located within 75 feet of
any property line, dwelling unit, well, wetland or watercourse.
(j) The use of temporary buildings or trailers for the stabling of
livestock in excess of 30 days is prohibited. There shall be no
storage of supplies outside of permanent buildings.
(k) No animals are to be kept for commercial purposes.
(l) No animals shall be sheltered in the minimum required front
yard.
§ 340-6.2 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 340-6.2
1:212
E. School/public bus shelters shall not be located closer than 10 feet from
the curbline of any street and shall not be larger than 100 square feet in
size.
F. Swimming pools. No portion of any swimming (aboveground/inground)
pool or its deck or platform shall be located closer than 25 feet to any
side yard, and no swimming pool shall be located in front of any portion
of the principal building.
G. Accessory dwelling units.
(1) Accessory dwelling units, subject to the following requirements:
(a) The owner of the property must reside on the premises.
(b) Only one accessory dwelling unit may be permitted on a building
lot.
(c) The applicant shall provide certification from a registered
professional engineer licensed in the State of Connecticut that
indicates that the principal and accessory dwelling units meet or
exceed all code requirements for the use of private water and
septic systems.
(d) The accessory dwelling unit shall contain not more than two
bedrooms.
(e) Off-street parking shall be provided at a rate as provided for in
Article XIII, § 340-13.5.
(2) The accessory dwelling unit shall be a minimum of 500 square feet of
floor area and shall not exceed 35% of the living area of the dwelling
or 1,200 square feet of floor area, whichever is less.
(a) Any alterations or additions, including exterior entrances, shall
maintain the single-family character of a building; to this end, all
additional doorways shall not be visible from the street.
(b) Separate means of access shall be provided if the accessory
dwelling unit is located within a basement.
(c) Any exterior stairway required to provide access to the
accessory dwelling unit located on a second floor shall be
constructed to the rear of the structure and shall be enclosed
with a permanent roof and walls.
(d) The construction of an additional driveway to service the
accessory dwelling unit shall not be permitted.
(3) The accessory dwelling unit shall not be permitted in an accessory
building except as a special permit in accordance with Article VI,
§ 340-6.3R.
H. Roadside stand: roadside stands of temporary construction, which are
readily removable, used for the sale of agricultural or horticultural
products such as fruits, vegetables, flowers, etc. Such stands erected
shall be set back a minimum of 15 feet from the street line and not
exceed 300 square feet and must be removed at the end of the normal
growing season of the product(s) raised.
I. Home occupations. Any home occupation which is customarily carried
on for compensation by a professional person, such as a physician,
dentist, engineer, attorney, architect, accountant, artist, musician, tutor
or similar use, subject to the following conditions:
§ 340-6.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-6.2
1:213
(1) The home occupation is clearly secondary to the use of the dwelling
for dwelling purposes.
(2) No more than 25% of the gross floor area of the dwelling can be
dedicated to the home occupation.
(3) The home occupation does not create objectionable noise, odor,
lighting, vibrations and unsightly conditions noticeable off the
premises or objectionable, excessive pedestrian or vehicular traffic
in the neighborhood.
(4) No more than two persons other than members of the household
are employed.
(5) The home occupation shall permit occasional visits by clients or
patrons (generally not more than a total of six per day) to render or
receive services.
(6) If there are outside employees or client visits, two additional
parking spaces must be provided.
(7) Not more than one commercial vehicle associated with the home
occupation may be stored on the lot.
(8) There shall be no external evidence of the home occupation so as
to change the residential character of the dwelling, such as the
outdoor storage and display of materials and product, except for
the sign as permitted in Article XIII.
(9) The home occupation shall be operated by the landowner of the
property, who must reside on the property.
(10) The following are prohibited as home occupation uses: beauty
shops, bakeries, animal hospitals, dance studios, real estate offices,
restaurants, and automobile repair shops.
(11) No more than one home occupation shall be permitted within any
single dwelling unit. The home occupation shall be carried on
entirely within the dwelling unit or within a completely enclosed
accessory building on the same lot as the dwelling unit.
§ 340-6.3. Special permit uses.
A. Major home occupation. A home occupation where such business use
does not comply with the requirements of § 340-6.1B (home office) or
§ 340-6.2I (minor home occupation), provided that:
(1) The area devoted to such accessory use (including storage of any
supplies or materials) shall not exceed 50% of the total square
footage of the dwelling (exclusive of garage, attic and basement);
and
(2) The accessory use shall:
(a) Clearly be incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling
for living purposes;
(b) Not change the exterior residential appearance or character of
the building or be noticeable from the exterior of the building;
(c) Not materially change the traffic characteristics of the
neighborhood;
(d) Not have any outside storage or display of merchandise,
equipment or machinery relative to the use;
§ 340-6.2 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 340-6.3
1:214
(e) Not include the keeping of stock-in-trade nor the sale or rental
of any goods not produced within the premises;
(f) Not involve the display of signs or products in, on or about the
premises, except for a sign as permitted by this chapter;
(g) Not involve retail sales at the premises; and
(h) Provide adequate parking areas for residents, employees or the
general public.
B. Private art galleries and museums, schools and libraries.
C. Boarding schools or boarding camps, subject to the following
conditions:
(1) The area of property shall be equal to 1/5 acre for each person,
including employees, residing therein.
(2) Each structure shall be located not less than 50 feet from any other
structure and not less than 75 feet from any street line.
(3) No parking area shall be nearer than 50 feet from any side or rear
property line.
(4) Vehicular access shall not be within 100 feet of any adjoining
property line.
(5) The minimum lot size shall be 20 acres.
D. Tourist homes, bed-and-breakfast operations and inns with
accommodations for not more than eight people:
(1) The owner of the principal dwelling and lot shall reside on the
property housing the bed-and-breakfast.
(2) No more than four guest rooms rated for double occupancy are
permitted in the structure for business use.
(3) The Town Sanitarian/Director of Health shall approve the
subsurface sewage disposal system.
(4) Complete bathrooms shall be provided at the rate of one bathroom
for every two guest bedrooms.
(5) The maximum length of stay shall be 14 consecutive days per guest
and a maximum stay of 60 days in one calendar year.
(6) Food service shall be limited to breakfast.
(7) A floor plan showing the layout of the facility shall be submitted
and approved by the Building Official and Fire Marshal.
(8) Modifications or additions proposed to accommodate the use of the
structure shall not exceed 50% of the total the structure.31
(9) All parking areas shall be landscaped and buffer the neighboring
properties and street.
(10) Minimum lot size of four acres.
E. The following specific types of group residences, pursuant to § 8-3e of
C.G.S. Chapter 124, as amended:
(1) Community residences for six or more children with mental or
physical disabilities.
(2) Community residences for six or more developmentally disabled
persons.
(3) Community residences for six or more persons receiving mental
health or addiction services.
31.Editor's Note: So in original.
§ 340-6.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-6.3
1:215
(4) Off-street parking shall be provided at the rate of one parking space
for every licensed driver plus three parking spaces for visitors.
F. Public utility installation needed for public convenience and necessity.
G. State and federal government buildings.
H. Municipal facilities and uses.
I. Churches, synagogues and other places of worship.
J. Cemeteries.
K. Nurseries and greenhouses.
(1) The sale of plants, farm produce, and related supplies primarily
grown on the premises.
(2) Structures shall not be located closer than 25 feet from the side
yard.
(3) All equipment shall be stored within an enclosed building.
(4) Minimum lot size shall be three acres.
L. State-licensed child day-care center or group day-care homes.
M. Riding academies, livery and boarding stables, rental stables and
private club riding stables, subject to the following requirements and
standards:
(1) The lot shall consist of a minimum of five acres of suitably drained
land.
(2) Fencing shall be installed and maintained to contain the equines
within the property.
(3) The use of temporary buildings or trailers for the stabling of equines
for more than 30 days is prohibited. There shall be no storage of
supplies outside of permanent buildings.
(4) No building, riding ring or corral used in conjunction with the
operation shall be located in such a manner that any part thereof
shall be less than 100 feet from any property line. In addition,
storage areas for manure shall be visually screened and may not
be located within 75 feet of any property line, dwelling unit, well,
wetland or watercourse.
(5) All public events such as competitions, performances and shows
shall require a separate special permit for each such event.
(6) There shall be no external lighting of any outdoor riding area.
N. Commercial kennels.
(1) The lot shall consist of a minimum of three acres (120,000 square
feet).
(2) All animals shall be confined within an enclosed structure, including
the runs, and such structures shall be located at least 100 feet from
a street line and 100 feet from a property line. The Commission may
increase these setback requirements by 100 feet when the adjoining
properties are residentially zoned.
(3) All exercise areas shall be screened from view with vegetation and/
or fencing and shall not exceed 1,000 square feet per animal.
(4) Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Article XIII,
§ 340-13.5.
O. Outdoor recreational uses. Public, semipublic and private country clubs,
golf courses, nature centers, parks, playgrounds, swim clubs, tennis
§ 340-6.3 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 340-6.3
1:216
centers, fishing/hunting clubs, including customary accessory buildings
and uses.
P. Veterinarian clinic.
Q. Aircraft landing fields, heliports, private landing fields and hangers,
subject to prerequisites of state and federal aviation regulations and
standards.
R. Use of an accessory building for dwelling.
(1) The owner of the property must reside on the premises.
(2) Only one accessory dwelling unit may be permitted on a building lot.
(3) The applicant shall provide certification from a professional
engineer licensed in the State of Connecticut that indicates that
the principal and accessory dwelling units meet or exceed all code
requirements for the use of private water and septic systems.
(4) The accessory dwelling unit shall contain not more than two
bedrooms.
(5) Off-street parking shall be provided at a rate as provided for in
Article XIII, § 340-13.5.
(6) The accessory dwelling unit shall be a minimum of 500 square feet
of floor area and shall not exceed 35% of the living area or 1,200
square feet of the floor area, whichever is less. In no case shall
the accessory apartment occupy more than 40% of the accessory
building.
(7) The construction of an additional driveway to service the accessory
dwelling unit shall not be permitted.
(8) Any exterior stairway required to provide access to the accessory
dwelling unit located on a second floor shall be constructed to the
rear of the structure and shall be enclosed with a permanent roof
and walls.
S. Shop and storage by contractor and building tradesmen, such as
contractors, electricians, plumbers, painters and similar occupations;
provided, however:
(1) No such use may occupy an area within the principal dwelling,
accessory building, or both, greater than 50% of the living area of
the principal dwelling.
(2) Any such use must be conducted by a resident of the premises and
shall be incidental to the work of such tradesman off the premises.
(3) No more than two employees shall park on site.
(4) Any accessory building utilized for storage shall be set back 25 feet
from the side-yard line and comply with the rear-yard setback.
(5) Two hundred square feet of screened outside storage area is
permitted.
T. Yard maintenance services.
(1) All storage and maintenance of tools and equipment must be inside
a building.
(2) All storage and maintenance of any products, including, but not
limited to, fertilizer, lime, mulch and the like, must be stored within
an enclosed building or a watertight container.
§ 340-6.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-6.3
1:217
(3) Only one commercial vehicle may be stored outside and may not
occupy an area greater than 300 square feet; and no more than two
commercial vehicles may be stored within an enclosed building.
(4) Only one trailer may be stored outside of an enclosed building to the
rear of the principal dwelling and shall not be located in a side-yard
setback area or within 35 feet of the rear property line. There shall
be no advertising display on the trailer.
(5) No material from job sites shall be brought onto the property.
U. Congregate living, convalescent/nursing homes.
V. Farm winery and vineyard. [Added 3-3-2016]
(1) Purpose. In order to allow for diversity and sustainability of
agricultural uses and to preserve farm activity in Marlborough,
this subsection is intended to allow for the use of farm land as
a normal part of a farm winery and vineyard use and, therefore,
allowed by special permit. Such farm wineries are permitted to
have certain complementary uses that will help create a viable
agricultural endeavor. All winery activities associated with the
manufacture, storage, bottling, production, distribution or sale of
wine and spirits shall be in accordance with all state and federal
laws or regulations governing such activities.
(2) Minimum bulk requirements. A farm winery and vineyard shall be
located on a lot or lots having a minimum aggregate area of 10 acres
under single ownership and management. The primary lot must
maintain a minimum of five acres of planted vineyard area prior to
the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the farm winery in
accordance with Article 12 of these regulations.
(3) Operations standards.
(a) The farm winery permittee shall comply with the percentage of
the products produced on the premises, and the percentage of
wine and winery by-products made from grapes or other fruit
grown on and off the premises shall be in accordance with
the laws of the State of Connecticut and the regulations for a
farm winery liquor permit from the Connecticut Liquor Control
Commission. Additionally, at least 25% of the fruit used in the
manufacturing of the farm winery permittee's wine or brandy
shall be grown in the State of Connecticut.
(b) An average crop shall be defined each year as the average yield
of the farm winery permittee's two largest annual crops out of
the preceding five years, except that during the first seven years
from the date of issuance of a farm winery permit hereunder, an
average crop shall be defined as three tons of grapes for each
acre of vineyard farmed by the farm winery permittee.
(c) The owner of the farm winery shall keep records detailing the
amount of fruit grown on the premises and the amount of fruit
and/or juice imported from off premises to determine
compliance.
(4) Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted as accessory to a
farm winery and vineyard, if authorized by special permit:
§ 340-6.3 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 340-6.3
1:218
(a) Farm winery. This use includes the commercial making of wine
and winery by-products in a designated farm winery and
vineyard premises.
(b) Retail sale of wine and tasting room; public events.
[1] A building or a portion of a building located on the farm
vineyard may be established for the sale of wine and winery
by-products by the glass, bottle or barrel and related winery
distilled products, and offering of samples of such wine or
brandy to visitors and prospective retail customers of such
wine and brandy for consumption on the premises of the
farm winery permittee. The percentage of the products
produced on the premises and the percentage of wine and
winery by-products made from grapes or other fruit grown
on the premises shall be in accordance with the laws of
the State of Connecticut and the regulations for a farm
winery liquor permit from the Connecticut Liquor Control
Commission and the Department of Consumer Protection.
Said area may include the retail sale of wine and spirits
featured as products produced at the farm winery and the
tasting of wine products produced on the premises.
[2] Activities allowed in a wine retail and tasting room include
artist receptions and artist exhibitions, music entertainment,
wine-related seminars, wine-related meetings and wine
tastings held within the tasting room, provided that all such
activities shall be located within the tasting room building.
In addition, the winery operator may have no more than
10 public events per year for the promotion of the winery
and its products. The winery/vineyard operator shall submit
written notification of a public event to the Zoning
Enforcement Officer; such notification shall be made at least
14 days prior to such a public event. No such public event
shall begin earlier than 10:00 a.m. nor end later than the
hours specified below in Subsection V(4)(e).
[3] Indoor retail sales and food service areas shall occupy no
more than 25% of the floor area devoted to wine, mead or
cider processing and storage, or no more than 4,000 square
feet, whichever is less/more.
[4] The sales volume of wine or brandy not manufactured in
such winery shall not exceed 25% of sales of other winery
establishments' alcoholic products.
(c) Winery retail store. The farm winery and vineyard may include
the accessory sale of vineyard and wine-related goods to the
general public, including wine-related food products, locally
produced products, dry goods, decorations, household goods
and furnishings. The area of retail sales must be located within
or contiguous to the wine tasting area, and shall be no greater
than the total floor area dedicated to the wine retail and tasting
room described in the preceding subsection. The normal hours
of a winery retail store and tasting room shall be Monday
§ 340-6.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-6.3
1:219
through Thursday, 10:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m., Friday and Saturday
10:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m., and Sunday 11:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m.
(except for the extended hours for aforementioned public
events).
(d) Outdoor patio or porch areas.
[1] Appurtenant to retail sale of wine and tasting room. Outdoor
patios or porches may be allowed as an appurtenance to the
retail sale of wine and tasting room but shall not exceed 50%
of the floor area of the wine retail and tasting rooms. Any
such patio or porch area shall be part of, and attached to,
said wine retail and tasting room and must be enclosed by a
gate, fence or structure, so as to maintain their separation.
There shall be no amplified music or other amplification of
sound on the patio or porch. The hours of the patio or porch
shall be no greater than the hours of the retail sale of wine
and tasting room as set forth in Subsection V(4)(c) above.
[2] Appurtenant to indoor private function room. Outdoor patios
or porches may be allowed as appurtenant to the indoor
private function room described in Subsection V(4)(e) below
but shall not exceed 50% of the floor area of such indoor
private function room. Any such patio or porch area shall be
part of, and attached to, said indoor private function room
and must be enclosed by a gate, fence or structure, so as to
maintain their separation. There shall be no amplified music
or other amplification of sound on the patio or porch. The
hours of the patio or porch shall be no greater than the
hours of the indoor private function room as set forth in
Subsection V(4)(e) below.
(e) Indoor or outdoor private functions. A designated indoor or
outdoor private function room or area may be approved,
provided that:
[1] Such functions shall not be open to the public, but shall
be invitation only events, such as weddings, corporate
functions, bar/bat mitzvahs, and similar celebrations. No
more than two such events shall be held per week and a
maximum of 52 private functions can be held per calendar
year. The Commission can lower the maximum private
functions allowed per year during the special exception
application if the Commission determines such private
functions are likely to have potential impact on adjacent
residential areas. The winery/vineyard operator shall
submit written notification of the private function to the
Zoning Enforcement Officer at least 14 days prior to such a
private function.
[2] Shall not occupy more than 5,000 square feet of gross floor
area, including tents or other temporary shelters.
[3] The Commission may approve a maximum occupancy of
up to 200 persons at both the indoor and outdoor event
areas. This number shall be in addition to the maximum
§ 340-6.3 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 340-6.3
1:220
occupancy of the retail sale of wine and tasting room of 75
persons, as set forth above.
[4] The outdoor function area shall be readily accessible from
the principal farm winery and vineyard building, and
outside tables must be located in such a manner as to
maintain access to the building for emergency purposes.
Areas in which required parking is required by the
approved special permit cannot be used for outdoor
function activities. The designated indoor and outdoor
function areas must be clearly identified on any application
plans.
[5] Any outdoor event shall take place no closer than 300 feet
from any abutting residential dwelling on another parcel
and 100 feet from the property lines.
[6] Hours of operation for private functions shall be Sunday
through Thursday 10:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m., Friday through
Saturday 10:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m., and Sunday 11:00 a.m.
to 8:00 p.m.
[7] The outdoor function area shall be largely open to the
elements, however may be enclosed with a seasonal canopy
or tent that is temporary in nature and is to be taken
down after the season for outdoor functions has ended. The
season for the seasonal canopy or tent shall be April 1 to
December 1 of each calendar year.
[8] The operator is responsible for cleanup of all trash
generated from the outdoor dining area.
[9] All entertainment and audio amplification shall occur
within the principal farm winery and vineyard building,
or in a seasonal canopy or tent area as approved by the
Commission. Outdoor entertainment and audio
amplification shall not last longer than four total hours
in a given day. Such events may include music, live or
otherwise, including a DJ. All music must adhere to the
following hours: Sunday through Thursday, no earlier than
10:00 a.m. until no later than 7:00 p.m., Friday and
Saturday, no earlier than 10:00 a.m. until no later than 9:00
p.m., Sunday no earlier than 11:00 a.m. and no later than
5:00 p.m.
[10] All exterior lighting shall comply with Article Three A. 16 of
these regulations, including full cut-off fixtures, positioned
horizontally, and light must not project off site. Floodlights
are prohibited.
[11] The indoor or outdoor private function room or area may
include a food service and service bar operating under a
caterer's liquor permit and health district approval, which
food service and service bar shall only be open when
private functions are occurring on the premises. This food
service and service bar must be entirely separate from the
§ 340-6.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-6.3
1:221
tasting room and is only available to people invited to the
private function.
[12] Special events which are served on the premises not
exceeding two days may be approved by the Zoning Officer
with 14 days' notice to the Zoning Officer. Any event over
two days must be approved by the Planning Commission as
a special event.
[13] Temporary tents may be erected for a maximum of three
days for any such event.
(f) Farm winery cafes.
[1] The parcel must be:
[a] A minimum of 15 acres.
[b] Located on the same parcel that the farm winery is
located and within the same structure as the wine
tasting facility, or the winery facility where no tasting is
proposed.
[2] The maximum hours of operation open to the public are
Monday through Thursday 10:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m., Friday
and Saturday 10:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m., and Sundays 11:00
a.m. to 8:00 p.m.
[3] During any special event the farm winery cafe shall be
closed to the general public.
[4] No other alcoholic beverage may be served or consumed
on the permit premises other than a cafe license liquor
permit issued by the State of Connecticut Liquor Control
Commission in connection with the farm winery use permits.
Events referred to as BYOB are strictly prohibited.
[5] The site shall contain no more than 2,000 square feet of
kitchen and dining area, excluding any outdoor dining area.
[6] A farm winery cafe shall accommodate a maximum of 75
persons seated or standing indoors and up to an additional
50 persons seated or standing outdoors on a patio area at
any one time (for a total of 125 persons seated or standing),
with the exception of staff.
(g) Residential unit. One unit may be allowed with each winery by
special permit.
(h) Outdoor storage. Outdoor storage of any kind, except wine
storage, is prohibited unless such storage is completely
screened from public view by an opaque screening device.
Screening visible from public rights-of-way and less intense
zoning districts shall be constructed of brick, decorative
concrete, natural stone, decorative masonry or cedar fencing
material. Screening shall be constructed and maintained at a
sufficient height to visually screen all stored materials
(5) Farm vineyard and winery parking.
(a) The site development plan shall depict a minimum of 30
permanent parking spaces are required for a winery/vineyard. If
granted a special permit by the Commission, the accessory use
in Subsection V(4)(e) to hold indoor or outdoor private functions,
§ 340-6.3 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 340-6.3
1:222
the site development plan shall depict additional temporary
parking spaces at a rate of one space for every 1.75 occupants
for indoor and outdoor events. In keeping with the agricultural
purpose and to help maintain the aesthetic nature, the
Commission may allow portions of the temporary parking spaces
to be maintained as lawn parking. The Commission may require
reinforced pavers in grass areas for portions of the proposed
temporary parking. Permanent parking spaces shall be paved or
approved gravel parking. All handicap parking regulations shall
be complied with.
(b) Parking for special events, group events, or winemaker dinners
may be provided in open field areas with a slope of 8% or less,
free of combustible materials. Each parking space shall require
400 square feet of area that includes parking space and traffic
aisles.
(c) Parking regulations. The number of required off-street parking
spaces shall be determined by a development plan prepared for
all uses associated with the winery. At a minimum the plan shall
include the following:
[1] Employee parking: one space for each employee.
[2] Tourist parking: calculated at 2.5 persons per vehicle with
enough parking to meet the maximum capacity.
(6) Farm winery and vineyard signage: shall be the same permitted in
§ 340-13.1, Signs, for commercial property.
(7) Landscape buffering. The Commission may require additional
landscaping and screening as part of special permit approval to
minimize impact on adjacent property owners.
(8) Application information. All the requirements of §§ 340-5.1 and
340-5.2 shall be submitted with an application as well as the
following:
(a) Production/storage limits. The application for a use approval
shall include an estimate of the winery production and storage
capacity, given in terms of number of gallons produced or made
annually.
(b) Tasting and on-site sales. The application for a use approval
shall include information describing on-site sales and/or tasting
being proposed. Sale of wine shall be limited to wine made and
bottled on the premises.
(c) Liquid waste disposal. All requirements of the Health
Department shall be met.
(d) Outdoor operations. The application for a use approval shall
include information to describe the nature of outdoor
operations. All outdoor operations shall be screened from view
of adjacent residences and roads to the satisfaction of the
Commission.
(e) Operating hours. The application for a use approval shall include
information regarding the proposed operating hours of the
winery. The operating hours of the winery shall be established
and approved as a condition of the use approval, recognizing
§ 340-6.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-6.3
1:223
the unique requirements of winery operations during harvest
season.
(f) The range of activities occurring on site directly related to wine
production (e.g., crushing, fermentation, barrel aging, bottling,
bottle storage) accompanied by a site plan that provides a
description of where the different winery processes will occur
on the site.
(g) Information regarding proposed public tours and wine tasting,
retail wine sales, other retail sales, including food service, and
picnic areas available to the public.
(h) Production capacity: existing and proposed.
(i) The type of cooperage used in fermentation.
(j) Production origins: origin of grapes used in the wine production
(e.g., percent of grapes produced on-site, percent of grapes
imported from off site).
(k) Site development plan: the area (existing and proposed) of
patios, structures, parking, roads, and driveways, temporary
event areas, uncovered processing areas, vineyard, and other
planted areas, etc.
(l) Nuisance control: a description of measures proposed to
minimize the off-site effects of dust, odor, or noise generated by
the proposed winery operation.
W. (Reserved)
X. Farm tourism uses. [Added 3-2-2017]
(1) Purpose. These regulations are intended to ensure that farm tourism
and the expansion of existing farm tourism uses are compatible
with the permitted uses in the surrounding area and contribute
to the unique community character and economic viability. These
regulations permit farm tourism as compatible accessory uses. It
is recognized that the magnitude of these accessory uses is often
greater than the uses that surround farms. The use or the
accumulation of farm tourism uses should be incidental and
subordinate to the use of the property for farming; they require the
greater level of regulatory scrutiny that is afforded under the special
permit. The purpose of farm tourism is to attract people to farms,
promote the sale of agricultural products using agriculture-related
tours, events and activities, as well as nonagricultural-related
activities. These tours, events, and other activities are to
supplement farm income. Activities include, but are not limited to,
petting farms, farm animal attraction, school tours, outdoor trails,
crop mazes, hayrides, pony rides, livestock and/or equine events,
group picnics, on-and-off-site food catering services, craft shows,
outdoor recreation, and educational activities. If a fee is charged, in
order to be a permitted use, the farm must be actively producing
agricultural products for sale. Farms where the seller is not actively
producing agricultural products for sale will require a special
permit.
(2) Qualifications. A special permit for a farm tourism use may be
granted, provided that:
§ 340-6.3 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 340-6.3
1:224
(a) The minimum lot area for farm tourism use shall not be less than
10 acres in a single parcel or combination of abutting parcels
under single ownership.
(b) As of the date of application for a special permit, no zoning
violation shall exist on the property. The applicant shall submit a
current certificate of zoning compliance.
(c) Regulation of farm stands and commercial greenhouses is
distinct from farm tourism and are permitted under the separate
permits in accordance with Article VI.
(3) Standards. To the extent that the Commission finds that each
standard does apply, a special permit for the farm tourism shall
not be granted unless the Commission also finds that the following
applicable standards have been met:
(a) Farm tourism use(s) shall have a direct supportive relationship
to the farming taking place on the farm; as a minimum, the farm
tourism use must provide an opportunity for sales of produce
from the on-site farming.
(b) The farm tourism use must utilize at least one produce item
produced on, or process from the product produced on the farm.
(c) Food preparation for events shall be limited to that which is
essential to the event (such as: pumpkin pie with a pumpkin
festival, vendor food with a fair) for which the application is
being made.
(d) Parking in accordance with Article XIII of these regulations.
(e) On the farm parcel(s), a vegetative buffer shall separate farm
tourism uses (e.g., pick-your-own fields, hiking trails and hay
wagon ride routes) from abutting nonfarming uses. A minimum
width of 15 feet on and/or off the farm property shall be
required. Where the buffer is to be off the farm property, a
permanent open space easement/dedication on or obtained from
abutting properties may be substituted for the on-site buffer,
the documentation for which shall be subject to approval by the
Commission.
(f) On the farm parcel(s), a vegetative and/or structural sound
buffer (e.g., sound deadening barriers or buildings) shall be
capable of eliminating noise outside farm tourism uses create
in any direction from any abutting property boundary. The
Commission may accept in lieu of a vegetative and/or structural
sound buffer, a report from a qualified sound engineer certifying
that the activity(s) being applied for is able to be conducted in
such a manner that the activity(s) shall comply with the State
of Connecticut DEEP noise standards with regard to maximum
decibel output (55 db daytime/45 db nighttime at least one foot
beyond the property line of the property on which the emitter is
located). The report shall describe the requirements necessary
for conducting the activity in order for it to comply.
(g) The minimum distance of any uses that generate smoke, heat or
ash shall be 75 feet from any property line.
§ 340-6.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-6.3
1:225
(h) The hours of operation shall not be extended before 7:30 a.m.
and after 8:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday and before 7:30
a.m. and after 9:00 p.m. Friday and after 11:00 p.m., Saturday
except for specific events as allowed in Subsection X(4).
(i) The number of events which require permitting under
Subsection X(4)(b), Category B, within a given calendar year
shall be limited to 10 promotional events.
(j) Public health requirements for potable water and waste disposal
shall be met with permanent facilities and/or temporary
facilities.
[1] If not regulated by the Public Health Code, temporary
sanitary facilities, such as chemical toilets, shall be required
for any event or use where patrons will be on site on average
of more than two hours, and where there are no facilities
available to the public within 500 feet.
[2] If the use is temporary, the facilities shall only be required
on-site for the periods in which the use is taking place.
[3] The Public Health Code shall prevail in cases where such
facilities are regulated under the Code.
(k) Proposed structures shall reflect or accent existing farm
structures with historical and/or architectural character which
the Commission determines should be maintained.
(4) Use requirements. The following uses shall be considered accessory
to the existing farming uses as long as they take place as required
below:
(a) Category A: continuous activity; requires special permit
approval prior to the commencement of activities:
[1] Retail and wholesale of agricultural products. New or
temporary structure(s) or the floor area within an existing
or temporary structure housing this use shall not exceed
1,500 square feet of area. Greenhouses used to sell nursery
stock or bedding plants are not counted in this maximum
regulation.
[2] Retail of handcrafts and artisan items. New or temporary
structure(s) or the area within an existing or temporary
structure or outside area housing this use shall not exceed
2,500 square feet of area.
[3] Agricultural education instruction. New or temporary
structure(s) or the floor area within an existing or temporary
structure or outside areas housing this use shall not exceed
1,800 square feet of area.
[4] Demonstration of production of furniture, blacksmith items,
quilts, fabrics or similar products made utilizing traditional
processes. New or temporary structure(s) or the area within
an existing or temporary structure housing this use shall not
exceed 2,500 square feet of area.
[5] Restaurant (Level 1). New or temporary structure(s) or the
floor area within an existing or temporary structure, housing
this use shall not exceed 1,800 square feet of floor area
§ 340-6.3 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 340-6.3
1:226
where customers are served at counters with no more than
a total of 35 seats (whether indoor or outdoor). Under no
circumstances shall the hours be extended earlier than 7:30
a.m. or later than 9:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday, and
7:30 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. on Friday and Saturday.
[6] Farm stores. One farm store per active farming parcel may
be permitted by special permit, provided that the farm store
meets all standards of this section and has access from an
arterial or collector road and is sited more than 50 feet
from any property boundary. A preexisting nonconforming
structure may be converted to farm store use, with the
Commission's approval, provided that all public parking for
the existing or proposed farm stores is located to the side or
rear of the building.
[a] Every application that includes a farm store use shall
include a statement of use in accordance with
Subsection X(6)(c)[1] below.
[b] At least 50% of gross sales of the farm store shall be
from agricultural goods produced on the owner's farm or
processed products made from raw materials that were
produced on the owner's farm.
[c] To ensure public safety, farm stores are required to have
off-street parking in accordance with Article XIII of these
regulations.
(b) Category B: events; require a separate special permit for each
event. Only one Category B event may take place at any given
time.
[1] Agricultural fairs, festivals, markets, carnivals and similar
functions. There shall not be more than 10 events a year.
[2] Outdoor and indoor musical concerts, plays, operas and
other performance arts events, art exhibits and shows.
There shall not be more than 10 events a year.
[3] Private gathering events, such as parties, receptions,
weddings, reunions and services, whether catered or not
require yearly special permit approval:
[a] New or temporary structure(s) or the floor area within
an existing or temporary structure housing this use shall
not exceed 1,800 square feet. When used in this
category, tents (otherwise a temporary structure) may
exceed the area limitations, above.
[b] Temporary structures and tents can be put up no more
than two days in advance of the event and removed from
the property, unless it is to be stored in a permanent
structure located on the site, no more than two days
after the event for which they are first set up.
[c] Outdoor areas for this use shall not exceed 20,000
square feet of the minimum lot size for the zone in
which it is located and be located entirely within the
area depicted on the approved site development plan.
§ 340-6.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-6.3
1:227
The Commission may require fencing or other methods
to contain outdoor activities to the designated areas.
[d] The hours of operation may be extended based on the
nature and timing of each event if the applicant can
demonstrate, using the same steps in Subsection X(3)
above, that there will be no adverse impact on the
neighborhood. Under no circumstance shall the hours be
extended earlier than 7:30 a.m. or later than 11:00 p.m.
[e] The maximum attendees at a private event is limited to
200 attendees.
[4] Open public promotional events. These are events open to
the general public and subject to the following provisions:
[a] There shall be no private events held on the same day as
promotional events.
[b] A promotional event shall not exceed three days in
duration.
[c] May require the use of professional traffic control.
[d] There shall not be more than 10 events a year.
(5) Regulation of use.
(a) As part of an approval for a farm tourism site plan, the
Commission shall approve the location on the property that will
be devoted to farm tourism as depicted on the approved site
development plan. The location and size shall be dependent
upon the potential impact to the surrounding land uses and
public infrastructure. The standards set forth in Subsection X(3)
above, shall be the criteria by which potential impacts shall be
determined acceptable or unacceptable, in addition to/in lieu of
the standards of § 340-5.1G of these regulations.
(b) The distance of farm tourism uses that contain or have site
lighting in accordance with § 340-3.16 of these regulations.
(c) For a site where there will be less than 10,000 square feet of
disturbance that would not have to provide a soil and erosion
control plan in accordance with § 340-3.21, the utilization of
appropriate mitigation methods as outlined in the 2004
Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control,
as the same may be amended from time to time, shall be
employed to reduce potential impacts of soil erosion and
sediment.
(d) The utilization of appropriate mitigation methods as outlined in
the 2004 Connecticut Stormwater Quality Manual, as the same
may be amended from time to time, shall be employed to reduce
potential impacts of stormwater.
(e) Sound systems used at outdoor or indoor events shall comply
with the State of Connecticut DEEP noise standards with regard
to maximum decibel output (55 db daytime/45 db nighttime
at least one foot beyond the property line of the property on
which the emitter is located). No outdoor music shall be played
before 10:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday,
§ 340-6.3 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 340-6.3
1:228
or before 11:00 a.m. and after 11:00 p.m. on Friday and
Saturday.
(6) Procedure.
(a) In granting a special permit for farm tourism, the Commission
shall specify the type of accessory uses and the conditions upon
them that will be allowed within the farm tourism area which
they have approved on the site plan.
(b) If a violation of the special permit is found, a warning shall be
issued. Two violations within a year shall be grounds for review
by the Commission of the special permit for farm tourism. If the
Commission finds the violations create an impact that relates
to the criteria in Subsection X(3) that did not exist at the time
of approval, then it may initiate legal procedures to revoke the
special permit approval.
(c) Application requirements:
[1] The required statement of use shall include the following
information:
[a] The proposed uses for the property;
[b] The proposed hours of operation, and days of the week
for each use proposed;
[c] The anticipated periods or seasons (approximate dates)
the uses will occur for each proposed use; and
[d] The statement of use shall become a part of any special
permit approval for a farm accessory use, and any
permitted uses shall be operated in accordance with the
provisions of the statement of use as approved by the
Commission.
[2] The required site plan shall show the following information
in addition to that required by § 340-5.3 of these regulations:
[a] The areas devoted to farming versus farm tourism shall
be depicted;
[b] The areas to be used for specific farm tourism uses
within the farm tourism area shall be noted;
[c] Uses that are periodic or seasonal should be noted so
that the Commission can determine if areas are capable
of having multiple uses throughout the year;
[d] Lighting meeting the requirements in § 340-3.16 of
these regulations.
[3] When new buildings and/or structures are to be constructed
or modification to the exterior of any existing building or
structure, architect prepared floor plans and building
elevations shall be required.
[a] The application shall include drawings which will
demonstrate that the proposed design will have
desirable and compatible characteristics of the
development existing in the surrounding area of such
building/structure.
[b] Such similar and compatible characteristics shall
include, but not be limited to, consideration of building
§ 340-6.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-6.3
1:229
bulk size, architectural features, including windows/
doors and facade lengths and heights as well as building
finishes, lighting fixtures design and signage; and
overall site design including landscaping.
Y. Campgrounds. [Added 3-2-2017]
(1) General requirements.
(a) Campgrounds may be granted only on a parcel or abutting
parcels under the same ownership containing a minimum of 20
acres or more dedicated to the use.
(b) A suitable buffer strip for purposes of visual and auditory
screening shall be provided. Said buffers area shall be 75 feet
with no less than a fifty-foot vegetated buffer in width abutting
residential zoned property. The buffer area abutting Town
property shall not be less than 50 feet in width with a twentyfive-
foot vegetated buffer. It shall be the responsibility of the
owner to maintain said vegetated buffer in perpetuity.
(c) Camping units and related facilities and structures are
prohibited in the area designated on the site plan as "buffer
strip," but the buffer may contain passive recreational uses if
said areas are landscaped in such a way as to prevent adverse
effects on adjacent properties. Use of the buffer area for passive
recreation is limited to between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00
p.m. Quiet hours for the campground shall be 10:00 p.m. to 7:00
a.m.
(d) The campground may be used during the period from March 1
to December 31 of each year. No persons who rent, use or enjoy
a campsite may claim residency during their stay. Permanent
occupancy of any campsite unit is prohibited. Campers must at
all times retain a permanent, principal physical residence and
domicile outside of the campground. The use of a recreational
camp or campground for conference or special event purposes
may be permitted through a special exception review.
(e) The campground shall be supported by internal access roads.
The minimum one-way road width shall be 11 feet within the
grounds of a campground. One-way streets in excess of 1,000
feet shall have an eight-foot-by-forty-foot pull-off area every 500
feet. Any dead end shall terminate in a cul-de-sac with a
diameter of 40 feet, or with a hammerhead of 40 feet. All twoway
streets shall have a minimum width of 18 feet.
(2) Accessory uses.
(a) The use of a campground for conference or special event
purposes may be approved for anytime of the year permitted
through a yearly special exception review as outlined below.
[1] Conferences. Conferences shall consist of events bringing
individuals to the facility for individual programs. Programs
include but are not limited to indoor and outdoor meetings
or gatherings for instructional or educational programming,
retreats, workshops, and team-building purposes for
§ 340-6.3 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 340-6.3
1:230
individuals, families, community-oriented organizations,
businesses, schools, colleges and universities.
[2] Special events. Special events, such as car shows, tag sales,
fireworks shows, concerts, and other events may be
approved for anytime of the year as part of a special
exception review.
(b) The operator of a campground may establish, as part of the
campground, a store to be known as the camp store, providing
merchandise for sale to registered campers only. The store may
also provide rental of recreational equipment and supplies. Sale
of alcoholic beverages will not be permitted. The camp store
must be located in the interior of the campground and not less
than 50 feet from any property line.
(3) Accessory buildings.
(a) Management headquarters, recreational facilities, showers,
laundry facilities, and other structures customarily incidental to
operation of a campground.
(b) Single-family dwelling with or without an accessory apartment
for the owner and/or appropriate staff.
§ 340-6.4. Height, area and yard requirements.

District Minimum Lot Size Frontage
Residential on-site sewage/well
80,000 square
feet
200 feet
Residential community water
50,000 square
feet
175 feet
Residential rear sewage/well
120,000 square
feet
50 feet
B. Minimum required yards.
(1) Front yard: 50 feet.
(2) Side yard: 15 feet.
(3) Rear yard: 50 feet.
C. Maximum height: 40 feet.
D. Maximum building coverage: 10%.
E. Maximum lot coverage: 20%.
§ 340-6.5. Open space conservation area regulation.
A. Authority. Pursuant to C.G.S. §§ 8-2, 8-18 and 8-25, the Marlborough Planning
Commission may approve cluster development in the form of an open space
conservation area residential development subdivision (O.S.C.A.R.), as provided
herein. The Marlborough Planning Commission may enact subdivision
regulations in furtherance of and not inconsistent with this chapter.
B. Purpose.
§ 340-6.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-6.5
1:231
(1) The purpose of this section is to provide for a flexible approach for design
and division of land for residential development while assuring that
significant natural and man-made resource areas within the Town will be
conserved and protected without increasing the overall residential density.
Specifically, this section is designed to further the following objectives:
(a) To promote design flexibility in residential development;
(b) To promote development that is sensitive to site characteristics;
(c) To preserve and provide land for open space, parkland and recreational
purposes which contribute to the health, safety and general welfare
of the residents of the Town of Marlborough. Such open space shall
preserve land that will serve one or more of the following purposes:
farmland, forestland, recreation areas, sensitive wetland and
watercourse systems, scenic vistas, geologic formations, unusual
topography, historic or prehistoric sites, wildlife areas and land that
contains rare or unusual flora or fauna;
(d) To encourage more creative and efficient site planning that will result
in reduced expenditures for utilities, infrastructure and maintenance
costs; and
(e) To achieve the objectives of the Open Space and Recreation Plan of the
Plan of Development.
(2) The granting of an approval for an O.S.C.A.R. subdivision shall be in the sole
discretion of the Marlborough Planning Commission to allow for reduced
requirements as to lot size, frontage, yardage, etc., in conformance with this
section.
C. Requirements.
(1) As a condition to approving an O.S.C.A.R. subdivision, the Planning
Commission shall find one or more of the following specific purposes to be
accomplished:
(a) To preserve land as unsubdivided common open space which will
preserve or enhance the appearance, character or natural beauty of the
area.
(b) To preserve land to serve as "common open space" needs.
(c) To preserve land for purposes of conserving natural resources.
(d) To inhibit building on poor soils.
(e) To preserve and protect particular areas and terrain having qualities of
natural beauty or historical interest.
(2) General eligibility requirements for an O.S.C.A.R. subdivision:
(a) O.S.C.A.R. subdivisions are limited to residential zones.
(b) O.S.C.A.R. subdivisions shall not result in the creation of more lots than
would occur in a conventional subdivision.
(c) O.S.C.A.R. subdivisions are limited to proposals resulting in five or more
lots.
(d) O.S.C.A.R. subdivisions shall provide for common or public open space
and/or conservation areas.
(3) Open space and development densities.
(a) "Open space," for the purposes of this chapter, is an area covered by
a development restriction. A development restriction prohibits further
development in order to preserve agricultural lands or any other land
that is predominately in its natural state. The Planning Commission, in
§ 340-6.5 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 340-6.5
1:232
its discretion, may permit noncommercial recreational uses permitted
by this chapter, provided that such uses are not inconsistent or harmful
to the preservation of the restricted area. The Planning Commission
may also permit activities and accessory structures necessary to
support open space agricultural uses.
(b) The maximum number of building lots shall not exceed the number that
would have been permitted in a conventional subdivision layout. As a
means to provide the applicant with some guidance in determining the
number of building lots permitted, the applicant is advised to utilize the
following formula:32
[1] By 80,000 square feet if the site will be serviced by individual on-site
wells and individual on-site subsurface sewage disposal systems.
[2] By 50,000 square feet if the site will be serviced by a community
water system and individual subsurface sewage disposal systems.
D. Design guidelines. In addition to such guidelines as may be contained in the
Marlborough Subdivision Regulations, the Planning Commission shall, in its
consideration of an O.S.C.A.R. subdivision, require that lots be laid out to the
greatest extent feasible to achieve the following objectives (listed below in
order of priority, as it is recognized that some may conflict with others on any
given site):
(1) Preserve and maintain existing forests, fields, pastures and other land in
agricultural use and to preserve land mapped as Class I or II farmland soils
together with sufficient buffer areas of not less than 50 feet to minimize
conflict between residential and agricultural use.
(2) Diversity and originality in lot layout and individual building design shall be
encouraged to achieve the best possible relationship between development
and the land. Consideration shall be given to the preservation, creation and
connection of wildlife corridors and trails within subdivision open space.
(3) Provide for pedestrian access between properties and for a perimeter
design concept intended to facilitate the networking of trails for pedestrian
or equine use to ensure recreational access to resource land as provided for
in the Subdivision Regulations.
(4) The permanent open space area shall be primarily located in areas
contiguous to existing open space areas or in an area of the site with the
highest probability of connecting with future open space areas.
(5) Leave unblocked or uninterrupted scenic views and vistas, particularly as
seen from public roads.
(6) Preserve historic and prehistoric sites and their environments insofar as
needed to protect the character of the site.
(7) Maintain the visual integrity of hilltops and ridgelines by siting development
so that building silhouettes will be below the ridgeline or hilltops or, if the
area is heavily wooded, the building silhouette will be at least 10 feet lower
than the average canopy height of trees on the ridge or hilltop.
E. O.S.C.A.R. height, area and yard requirements.
(1) Minimum lot size and frontage requirements.
32.Editor's Note: So in original.
§ 340-6.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-6.5
1:233
Lot Size Frontage
a. Standard – on-site subsurface
sewage disposal system and on-site
well
40,000 square
feet
100 feet
b. Community water system and/or onsite
subsurface sewage disposal
system
30,000 square
feet
100 feet
c. Rear lot – on-site subsurface sewage
disposal system and on-site well
40,000 square
feet
20 feet
(2) Minimum required yard areas.
(a) Front yard: 20 feet.
(b) Side yard: 15 feet. (Possible five-foot reduction but must provide access to
rear.)
(c) Rear yard: 25 feet.
(3) Maximum building height: 40 feet.
(4) Overall site coverage: 25%.
§ 340-6.6. Floating zones.
A. Intent. The purpose of this section is to allow flexibility in development
to permit multiple principal residential buildings on a single parcel in
order to provide for housing:
(1) That promotes design flexibility in residential development.
(2) That promotes housing for persons who, due to age or health,
require more compact residential patterns than possible through
single-lot subdivisions.
(3) Encourages more creative and efficient site planning that will
reduce site disturbance and the amount of infrastructure necessary.
(4) That allows recreation uses while preserving open space.
B. Floating zones.
(1) Any owner of property may apply to the Commission for a change of
zone to one of the following floating zones, provided said application
conforms in all respects with the requirements set forth in this
article for such zone change: Design Multiple Residence - DMR,
Planned Residential Recreational Development - PRRD, and Adult
Living Development - ALD. For each such zone change approved
by the Commission, the provisions of Article VI of this chapter
shall not apply to said floating zone, and in their place the plans,
specifications, conditions, representations and other components
of the zone change application, as approved and/or modified and
approved by the Commission, shall control in said floating zone.
(2) For the purposes of this article, the term "underlying zone" shall
be defined as the zone or district existing on the subject parcel(s)
prior to the filing of an application for a floating zone and the
zone to which said floating zone shall revert after approval if said
floating zone is not developed within the time limit established by
this article.
C. Preapplication procedure.
§ 340-6.5 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 340-6.6
1:234
(1) All applicants shall submit a preliminary site development plan to
the Commission for the purpose of presenting a preliminary design
of the proposed development to the community at an early stage
in the design process and to incorporate applicable comments and
suggestions into the overall design.
(2) At a minimum, the preliminary site development plan shall include
enough detail to measure for the requirements of this chapter and
to clearly present the proposal. This preliminary plan shall be
submitted with five copies of the plans, a description of the proposed
uses and plans that include:
(a) Application fee. In accordance with the Town Land Use Fee
Ordinance.
(b) General statement. A general statement shall be submitted,
describing the following:
[1] The specific types of proposed uses on the site;
[2] The methods by which site utilities will be provided;
[3] The proposed timetable for development, including a
description of phasing;
[4] The open space resources of the site and the amount of open
space to be retained, and the method for preservation, if
any;
[5] The pattern/method of ownership and maintenance of any
interior roadways, public/private facilities, the sewerage
disposal system(s), the water supply(ies), and other common
elements;
[6] A schedule of bedrooms per dwelling unit, total number of
units, square footage of each unit, and other such data as
may be required to evaluate compliance with the standards
and criteria of this chapter;
[7] Tabulations of the gross acreage of the development and the
percentage of lot coverage of buildings, open space, roads
and parking; and
[8] A statement outlining how the application is in compliance
with the Marlborough Plan of Conservation and
Development.
(c) Site plan. Any application for a floating zone shall provide the
Commission with all the information required under Article V,
§ 340-5.2 of this chapter.
(d) Additional information. A change of zone application calls upon
the Commission to exercise a legislative function and to
determine that the floating zone applied will be superior to the
underlying zoning in achieving the purposes of this chapter as
set forth in Article I.
D. Referral to Planning Commission. The Commission shall refer all
applications to the Planning Commission in the manner provided by
C.G.S. § 8-3(a), as amended from time to time, for its study of the
proposed use and construction and its conformance to the plans and
policies of the Marlborough Plan of Conservation and Development. The
Planning Commission shall issue a report in the manner provided by
§ 340-6.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-6.6
1:235
C.G.S. § 8-3(a), as amended from time to time. An application receiving a
negative report from the Planning Commission may be approved by the
Zoning Commission by a vote of not less than 2/3 of the full Commission.
E. General standards and requirements for all floating zones.
(1) Access/circulation.
(a) Access shall be to at least one Town through road or state
highway which has adequate capacity for the traffic generated
and does not create safety hazards. Such road(s) shall be
classified as an arterial or collector road in the most recent Plan
of Conservation and Development. Vehicular access (streets and
driveways) shall be a minimum of 50 feet from an adjoining
property line under separate ownership. The Commission may
increase this distance up to an additional 50 feet.
(b) Proper accessways and circulation shall be designed for
emergency vehicles, fuel trucks, refuse collection, and snow
removal equipment to operate in a safe and efficient manner.
Such accessways are not to serve as car storage areas.
(c) The Commission may require the proposed street system to have
multiple connections to an existing through road or two or more
through roads or state highways in order to provide safe and
efficient circulation system.
(d) The development shall provide for internal pedestrian
circulation, utilizing walkways and paths to serve pedestrian
movements to community facilities and dwelling units.
Sidewalks shall be provided between buildings and parking
areas. The Commission may require sidewalks along streets and
driveways.
(e) All interior streets, private or public, shall be constructed in
compliance with the Town of Marlborough Highway Standards
and Specifications. The right-of-way requirements and road
width requirements may be waived if the streets are considered
by the Commission to be of local use only for the site. In no case
shall the paved portion be less than 20 feet.
(f) All private driveways shall have the following minimum width
requirements:
[1] Two-way traffic: 22 feet.
[2] One-way traffic: 16 feet.
(2) Site utilities.
(a) Underground utilities. All developments shall provide
underground utilities in both public and private extensions of
said utilities. All developments shall provide proper design and
construction of cable, electrical and phone lines, natural gas,
community septic systems, sanitary sewers, public water
supply, and stormwater management system.
(b) Sewage disposal.
[1] If the proposed sewage disposal system meets the capacity
requirements of a system regulated by the Connecticut
Department of Health, then said system shall meet the
current requirements of Section 19-13-B103 of the
§ 340-6.6 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 340-6.6
1:236
Connecticut Department of Health, referred to as the
"Technical Standards." The applicant shall submit the
positive tentative staff determination to issue a permit prior
to the close of the public hearing for any application.
[2] If the proposed sewage disposal system meets the capacity
requirements of a system regulated by the Connecticut
Department of Energy and Environmental Protection, then
said system shall meet the current requirements of C.G.S.
§ 7-245, and applicant shall submit to the Commission a
copy of the tentative staff determination to issue a permit
from the Connecticut Department of Energy and
Environmental Protection (DEEP). If the Commission does
not receive the DEEP tentative staff determination notice
prior to the end of the statutory time frame for making
a decision, the application shall be denied. The applicant
shall submit a report from the Marlborough Water Pollution
Control Authority prior to the close of the public hearing
for any application. The applicant shall submit information
concerning the ownership, operation and maintenance and
design as a part of the application submittal.
[3] Prior to endorsement and filing of the final Mylar, the
applicant shall have executed or received tentative approval
of the Marlborough Water Pollution Control Authority for an
operation and maintenance agreement, including an escrow
account for the maintenance and repair of the sewage
disposal system.
(c) Water supply. The applicant shall submit to the Commission a
letter from the exclusive service area provider acknowledging
the submission of the application and its interest in ownership
of said system. Also, applicants shall summit a Phase I approval
form and an approval from the Connecticut Department of
Public Utilities Control for all water supply wells in accordance
C.G.S. § 16-262m(a) prior to the close of the public hearing.
If the DPUC Phase I-B application is approved prior to the
endorsement and filing of the final Mylars, the applicant shall
submit a DPUC Phase I-B approval to the Commission. Failure
of the applicant to secure the Phase 1-B approval will result in
the voiding of the approval.
(d) Site design. The design of any floating zone shall utilize best
management practices for all the elements of the development,
including but not limited to sewage disposal, water supply,
stormwater management, building design and efficiencies, road
design and landscaping.
(e) Site preservation and landscaping. The application shall include
a landscape plan and a site constraint plan prepared by a
State of Connecticut-licensed landscape architect. The
characteristics of the site are to be incorporated into the design
to take advantage of topographic features, provide buffering of
§ 340-6.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-6.6
1:237
adjoining land uses, and retain the prominent natural landscape
and environmental features of the property through:
[1] Minimizing soil and tree removal.
[2] Designing grading to blend with the natural terrain and
avoid creating steep slopes.
[3] Treating disturbed surfaces to encourage plant growth and
soil stabilization by providing the necessary topsoil and
planting of the appropriate native species of trees, shrubs
and grasses.
[4] Preserving the significant natural features of the site, such
as stonewalls, rock outcrops, wetlands, prominent tree
stands and vistas.
(f) Minimum road frontage. No property proposed for a floating
zone shall have less than 300 feet of frontage on an accepted
improved Town road or state highway.
(g) Setback requirements.
[1] No building or structure shall be closer than 100 feet from
existing Town roads and 50 feet from any proposed private
or public road.
[2] No building or structure shall be closer than 50 feet from
existing residentially zoned property and no closer than 100
feet from existing commercial or industrial zoned property.
The Commission may require additional setback and/or
natural screening, not to exceed an additional 100 feet,
from existing developed properties.
[3] No land used for active recreation shall be located within 50
feet of adjoining property lines.
(h) Minimum lot size. The minimum lot size is 12 acres. In
calculating the lot area the following land shall be excluded:
all land area within the one-hundred-year floodplain and
watercourses.
(i) Building height.
[1] The building height shall not exceed 40 feet as measured
from the sill plate to the highest point of the roof or the
average height between the eaves and the ridge for a gable,
hip or gambrel roof. For buildings that have more than
one roofline, height requirements shall be measured to the
highest roof. Chimneys and decorative features may extend
an additional three feet.
[2] Accessory buildings shall not exceed 24 feet in height, with
the exception of a clubhouse or restaurant which may have
a roof height of 35 feet. Chimneys and decorative features
may extend an additional three feet.
(j) Building separation. There shall be at least 20 feet between
buildings containing one to three units and 30 feet between
buildings containing more than three units. The Commission
may increase these separating distances up to 30 feet when
buildings have no fewer than four units, depending upon the
§ 340-6.6 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 340-6.6
1:238
site topography, site land cover, and proximity to land
development.
(k) Refuse collection. Waste collection areas shall not be located
within 75 feet of any adjoining properties and not within 25
feet of any dwelling unit within the development. Adequate
screening, utilizing fencing and plantings, shall be incorporated
into the design of each waste collection area.
(l) Architectural design.
[1] The architectural design, scale and mass of the buildings
and other structures, including among other elements the
exterior building material, color, roofline and building
elevations, shall be residential in character so as to
harmonize and be compatible with the neighborhood to
preserve property values and to preserve the appearance
and character of the community. Preferred building
materials should be or building materials must be brick,
stone or narrow-width siding or the like. Roofing materials
should, where visible, be cedar shake, slate, copper,
architectural three-tab or reasonable equivalents. Tarpaper,
metal or plastic roofing surfaces are strongly discouraged.
Building-mounted lighting shall utilize shielding to prevent
glare off site and shall be of a style and character which is
in harmony with the character of the Town.
[2] Rooftop mechanical systems shall be discouraged; however,
if utilized, the full perimeter and height shall be fully
screened from all sides. Any ground-mounted mechanical
systems shall be screened from view from private or public
streets.
[3] No housing unit or accessory structure shall have more than
two habitable stories, except the Commission may approve
a building with 2 1/2 stories if the natural grade is suitable
and the lowest level has access directly to grade without
stairs or ramps. Further, the uppermost floor shall have
access either from ground level or from an interior stair
arrangement which will not require occupants of the
uppermost story to traverse more than one story to gain
access at grade level.
(m) Open space and recreation area.
[1] Open space is land not used for the construction of
dwellings, buildings for supporting facilities, parking,
vehicular circulation, or areas within 25 feet from the
exterior of dwelling units. An open space area shall be
so arranged and defined that its area, permanent use and
control can be established with restrictions and covenants
prohibiting or restricting construction of buildings or
structures upon it. There shall be a minimum of 50% open
space.
[2] The total land area required to meet the minimum land
requirements that are 12 acres and the additional land
§ 340-6.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-6.6
1:239
required for the number and type of housing units shall
determine the open space requirement for each application.
No more than 50% of the required open space area shall be
utilized for active recreational areas unless said application
is for a planned residential recreational development.
[3] Additionally, the Commission at its sole discretion may
permit active recreational use on open space land beyond
the above-noted limits when an application depicts an open
space land area designation greater than that required for
the particular development. The additional amount of active
recreational use shall not be greater than an area
equivalent to the additional open space land designation.
[4] Open space land may be utilized for water supply and
sewage disposal, including any buildings or structures
required for their operation.
(n) Method of ownership of open space/recreation land. The
Commission shall approve the ownership of the open space area
and the provisions for the preservation. The Commission shall
consider the following types of ownership acceptable:
[1] Homeowners' association. Held in common by a
homeowners' association incorporated as a nonprofit
organization dedicated to the conservation of open space;
said homeowners' association shall be organized by the
applicant prior to filing of the final plan in a form
satisfactory to the Commission and Town Counsel.
Membership in the association must be mandatory for each
property owner within the overall development of the
property and for any successive owners. Only property
owners within the overall development of the property shall
be members of the homeowners' association and restrict
the use to members and their social guests only. These
provisions shall not apply to open space area used for
commercial recreation. The applicant's deed of said open
space land to said association shall provide that, if said
homeowners' association is dissolved, the open space land
reverts in ownership to the Town. Additionally, the
applicant's deed shall include all the proper development
restrictions to assure the protection of the open space area.
Also, the homeowners' association bylaws shall provide for
assessments against members for all expenses, including
but not limited to maintenance of said open space land,
including any improvements thereon, taxes and insurance,
and provide that each lot shall have one vote regardless of
the numbers of owners of a lot.
[2] Nonprofit land trusts/corporation. Deeded to a nonprofit
land conservation trust or corporation which is established
for the purpose of conserving land in open space, with such
conveyance to be approved by the Commission and Town
Counsel, and provided that said conveyance shall restrict
§ 340-6.6 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 340-6.6
1:240
subsequent sale or other disposition to a similar trust or
corporation to be approved by the Commission and Town
Counsel prior to any such transfer.
[3] Applicant ownership. Held in ownership by the applicant,
subject to a legally binding arrangement that will permit
use of the open space land for agricultural or recreational
uses with the appropriate restrictions approved by the
Commission, or subject to a conservation and preservation
restrictions as provided for by C.G.S. § 47-42a, as amended
from time to time, in terms and conditions which are
acceptable to the Commission and Town Counsel.
[4] Town of Marlborough. Deeded fee simple to the Town by
warrantee deed acceptable to the Board of Selectmen, the
Commission and Town Counsel, to be prepared prior to the
filing of the final subdivision plan.
[5] Other. Any other method of open space ownership which
accomplishes permanent preservation in accordance with
the requirements of this chapter and satisfactory to the
Commission and Town Counsel.
(o) Other standards of this chapter. In addition to the foregoing
standards, the Commission shall apply the standards set forth in
Articles III, V (§§ 350-5.1 and 350-5.2) and XIII. Additionally, the
Commission shall determine the application's compliance with
the Marlborough Plan of Conservation and Development.
F. Design Multiple Residence. The development includes housing with
common open space that may include recreational and supporting
facilities for residents of the development.
(1) The minimum land area per unit.
(a) One bedroom: 20,000 square feet.
(b) Two bedrooms: 30,000 square feet.
(c) Three bedrooms: 40,000 square feet.
(2) The maximum building coverage shall not exceed 25%.
(3) The maximum lot coverage shall not exceed 50%.
(4) The number of bedrooms per unit shall not exceed three.
(5) There shall not be more than six units per building.
(6) The minimum floor area.
(a) One bedroom unit: 650 square feet.
(b) Two-bedroom unit: 800 square feet.
(c) Three-bedroom unit: 950 square feet.
G. Adult Living Development. The development shall be restricted to a
population where at least one tenant within each residential unit is 55
years or older and no tenant is under the age of 18 years old. Persons
who have been certified by the Social Security Administration as totally
disabled under the age of 55 are eligible for residency.
(1) Units shall be designed to include or with room to install in the
future handicap features to accommodate the elderly, such as door
jam size, grab bars, etc.
(2) No less than 10% of the units shall be wheelchair accessible.
(3) No more than three bedrooms per unit.
§ 340-6.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-6.6
1:241
(4) Minimum land area per unit.
(a) One bedroom: 20,000 square feet.
(b) Two bedrooms: 30,000 square feet.
(c) Three-bedroom unit: 40,000 square feet.
(5) The maximum building coverage shall not exceed 25%.
(6) The maximum lot coverage shall not exceed 50%.
(7) There shall not be more than six units per building.
(8) Minimum floor area.
(a) One-bedroom unit: 650 square feet.
(b) Two-bedroom unit: 800 square feet.
(c) Three-bedroom unit: 950 square feet.
H. Planned Residential Recreational Development. The development
includes residential units with commercial or noncommercial
recreational facilities that may be private, semiprivate or public and
may include equestrian center, golf course, nature center, tennis center
or swimming club.
(1) Minimum land area per unit.
(a) One bedroom: 20,000 square feet.
(b) Two bedrooms: 30,000 square feet.
(c) Three bedrooms: 40,000 square feet.
(2) The maximum building coverage shall not exceed 25%.
(3) The maximum lot coverage shall not exceed 50%.
(4) The number of bedrooms per unit shall not exceed three.
(5) There shall not be more than six units per building.
(6) Minimum floor area.
(a) One-bedroom unit: 650 square feet.
(b) Two-bedroom unit: 800 square feet.
(c) Three-bedroom unit: 950 square feet.
(7) In a PRRD, the Commission may permit up to 70% of the required
open space to be utilized for active recreation use.
(8) Additionally, the Commission at its sole discretion may permit active
recreational use on open space land beyond the above-noted limits
when an application depicts an open space land area designation
greater than that required for the particular development. The
additional amount of active recreational use shall not be greater
than an area equivalent to the additional open space land
designation.
I. Open space/recreation areas. Open space areas with approval of the
Commission may be used for or as part of the following commercial
or noncommercial recreational uses: tennis center, swim club, golf
courses, equestrian complex, or nature centers.
(1) Golf course. Areas of land laid out for golf with a series of nine or 18
holes, each including tee, fairway, practice greens, driving ranges
and putting greens, and natural and artificial playing hazards.
(2) Equestrian complex. Areas of land laid out to feature horseback
riding as a private and/or public facility. Areas can be designated
as paddock areas, pasture land, training grounds, competition
grounds, and bridle trails.
§ 340-6.6 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 340-6.6
1:242
(3) Nature centers. Areas of land laid out with a commitment to
preserve or protect natural resources. Includes areas used for
environmental education activities, trails open to the public, exhibits
of local flora and fauna, and wildlife attraction areas.
(4) Swimming club. Areas of land laid out for the use of outdoor or
indoor swimming pools. There shall be no lighting of outdoor
swimming areas.
(5) Tennis center. Areas of land laid out for use for outdoor and/or
indoor tennis courts. There shall be no lighting of outdoor tennis
courts.
J. Supporting facilities. Supporting facilities may contain nonresidential
buildings for uses that include commercial entities. Final determination
of the nature, size, location and intensity of such supporting facilities
shall be at the discretion of the Commission after consideration of
whether such facilities are, in fact, accessory to the development.
(1) Golf course: include storage and equipment buildings, pro shops,
gift shops, clubhouse, and restaurants.
(2) Equestrian complex: include riding rings, stables, storage and
equipment buildings, tack shop, gift shops, clubhouse and
restaurant.
(3) Nature centers: include educational buildings, museums, libraries,
gift shop, bookstore, storage and equipment buildings, and
restaurants.
(4) Tennis center: include storage and equipment buildings, pro shops,
gift shops and clubhouse.
(5) Swimming club: include storage and equipment buildings,
clubhouse.
K. Public hearings and action. The Commission shall act in such a manner
and in accordance with such time frames as are designated § 340-5.1
and Article XV of this chapter and in accordance with the applicable
provisions of the C.G.S. § 8-7. In the event of conflict between the
procedures set forth in this chapter and the Connecticut General
Statutes, the latter shall prevail.
L. Approval.
(1) Upon approval of a floating zone, the Commission shall provide
notice to the applicant and the public, as provided by the
Connecticut General Statutes, and shall cause the approved floating
zone to be noted on the Official Zoning Map of the Town of
Marlborough by outlining the boundaries of the land affected
thereby and indicating the approval date.
(2) The applicant shall, within 90 days of approval of any floating zone,
record notice thereof in the Marlborough Land Records under the
name of the record owner of land affected thereby, giving legal
description of the land and giving specific reference to approved
plan(s) and map(s) and, further, the applicant shall record in the
Marlborough Land Records a copy of the approved plan(s) and
map(s) endorsed by the signature of the Commission's Chairperson
or Secretary. The applicant may request from the Commission up to
two ninety-day extensions of the filing period noted above.
§ 340-6.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-6.6
1:243
M. Conformance to recorded documents. The land described shall be used
and developed only in accordance with the recorded documents.
N. Amendment of approved floating zone. An application to alter or extend
an approved floating zone or previously approved DMR (Designed
Multiple Residence) application shall specify the nature of the planned
alterations and/or extensions and shall be accompanied by a scale plan
of the alterations and extensions in the same detail as is required for
an initial application. Such application shall be processed in the same
manner as a new application under this article.
O. Commencement and completion of construction. For any floating zone
approved, the construction of any buildings or structures or the
establishment of any use shall be completed within three years of the
effective date of such approval. The applicant may request up to two
one-year extensions from the Commission; in no case shall completion
extend past five years from the original effective approval date. Any
such approval not commenced or completed within the above time
frame shall become void, and the Commission shall call the bond to
complete the incomplete work. The Commission shall file a notice on the
Land Records stating the approval has been voided for all incomplete
work.
P. Performance bond.
(1) The Commission shall require, prior to the commencement of any
construction in connection with an approved floating zone, that
the applicant post a bond with surety and amount satisfactory to
the Commission and Town Counsel to insure conformance with all
proposed site improvements as depicted on the final site
development plan. Site improvements include construction of
streets and parking areas, landscaping, lighting, drainage, water
supply, septic disposal, sidewalks and the like. The applicant shall
submit an itemized cost breakdown for all site improvements to
Town staff for review and approval to determine the final bond
amount. The final bond amount as determined by Town staff shall
include a fifteen-percent contingency. If the project is proposed
in phases, the Commission may permit each phase to be bonded
separately. No phase may commence construction until a bond has
been posted for such phase.
(2) The bond form shall either be cash, certified bank check, an
irrevocable letter of credit from a Town-approved banking
institution, or an assigned joint account passbook from a Townapproved
banking institution with a signed withdrawal slip from the
applicant. The Commission shall not release more than 75% of the
original bond amount until all work is complete.
(3) All bonds shall be for a three-year period and any irrevocable letter
of credit shall contain a ninety-day notice of nonrenewal. The
applicant may request an extension of the bonding period from the
Commission not to exceed a period past five years from the original
date of approval.
Q. Maintenance bond. The Commission shall require the applicant to post
a bond for a period not to exceed one year from the date of completion
§ 340-6.6 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 340-6.6
1:244
of certain site improvements, depending on the time of year such
improvements have been installed.
R. Certificate of occupancy. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued
until the application of the binder coat of asphalt and complete utility
installation for that phase of construction. Additionally, the applicant is
to submit three sets of the as-built plan. In those cases where seasonal
conditions prevent compliance with the provisions of the approval
before the building is complete, the Zoning Enforcement Officer may
authorize issuance of the certificate of occupancy after the submission
of an as-built plan showing all site improvements completed to date. All
bonded incomplete work shall be completed within a time frame that
does not exceed one year from the date of issuance of the certificate of
occupancy for that particular phase of construction and a final as-built
plan submitted to the Commission for approval prior to release of the
performance bond. Failure to complete the incomplete work within the
specified time frame will result in the calling of the bond and may be
cause for revocation of the floating zone.
§ 340-6.7. Large lot conservation subdivision.
A. Purpose. To allow the development of parcels 30 acres and larger in
a way that will allow a flexible approach to the subdivision of large
residentially zoned parcels while assuring that significant natural and
man-made resource areas within these large parcels will be conserved
and protected. Specifically, this section is designed to further the
following objectives:
(1) To promote design flexibility in residential land development;
(2) To promote development that is sensitive to site characteristics;
(3) To preserve and provide land for open space, parkland and
recreational purposes which contribute to the health, safety and
general welfare of the residents of the Town of Marlborough. Such
open space shall preserve land that will serve one or more of the
following purposes: farmland, forestland, recreation areas, sensitive
wetland and watercourse systems, scenic vistas, geologic
formations, unusual topography, historic or prehistoric sites, wildlife
areas and land that contains rare or unusual flora or fauna;
(4) To encourage more creative and efficient site planning that will
result in reduced expenditures for utilities, infrastructure and
maintenance costs;
(5) To achieve the objectives of the Open Space and Recreation Plan and
the Plan of Conservation and Development.
B. Large lot conservation subdivision plan standards.
(1) Minimum parcel size: 30 acres.
(2) Minimum lot size: four acres/160,000 square feet.
(3) Open space area: 50%.
(4) The minimum buildable lot area requirement is waived.
(5) Up to three interior lots may abut one another only if there is use of
a common driveway to service the lots.
(6) Common driveways can be constructed in the minimum required
side yard after approval by the Planning Commission.
§ 340-6.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-6.7
1:245
(7) Along street frontage, a common driveway that services no more
than two street front lots and four interior lots is permitted.
(8) No cul-de-sac in a large lot conservation subdivision plan shall be
greater than 1,200 feet.
(9) An applicant is not entitled to the maximum development density
permitted by this section. The maximum density will be determined
by the Planning Commission in evaluating the application for
compliance with the purpose and objectives of this section and
compliance with the Subdivision Regulations.
(10) A large lot conservation subdivision may be utilized in combination
with an O.S.C.A.R. subdivision, but not in combination with a
conventional subdivision. The open space area requirement will be
increased to 60% when the combination of an O.S.C.A.R. and large
lot conservation are utilized.
(11) All large lot conservation subdivision plan developments shall be
considered a subdivision, by definition, subject to all of the
procedural and plan requirements of the Highway Construction and
Design Standards.
(12) Except where otherwise provided in this section, all of the
standards of the Subdivision and Zoning Regulations shall be
satisfied.
C. Large lot conservation subdivision plan requirements.
(1) As a result of the exemption from the minimum buildable lot area
requirements and the large lot sizes permitted, building location and
site design become critical elements in ensuring compliance with
the conservation and preservation intent of this chapter. Therefore,
the location of all individual driveways, dwelling units, subsurface
sewage systems and wells shall be shown on the subdivision plan
and become a part of the application approval. Construction will be
limited to those designated areas.
(2) In addition to such guidelines as may be contained in the
Marlborough Subdivision Regulations, the Planning Commission
shall, in its consideration of a large lot subdivision, require that lots
be laid out to the greatest extent feasible to achieve the following
objectives (listed below in order of priority, as it is recognized that
some may conflict with others on any given site):
(a) Preserve and maintain existing forests, fields, pastures and other
land in agricultural use and to preserve land mapped as Class I
or II farmland soils together with sufficient buffer areas of not
less than 50 feet to minimize conflict between residential and
agricultural use.
(b) Diversity and originality in lot layout and individual building
design to achieve the best possible relationship between
development and the land.
(c) There shall be the creation of contiguous open space corridors
through the use of conservation easements and dedicated open
space land.
§ 340-6.7 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 340-6.7
1:246
(d) The permanent open space areas shall be in accordance with
Article VI of this chapter and the Open Space and Recreation
Plan and the Plan of Conservation and Development.
(e) Provide for pedestrian access between properties and for a
perimeter design concept intended to facilitate the networking of
trails for pedestrian or equine use with other existing or future
open space land to ensure recreational access to the public for
resource land as provided for in the Subdivision Regulations.
(f) Leave unblocked or uninterrupted scenic views and vistas,
particularly as seen from public roads.
(g) Community wells and community septic systems may be
permitted to encompass no more than 30% of the open space
area.
(h) The visual integrity of hilltops and ridgelines shall be maintained
by siting development so that building silhouettes will be below
the ridgeline or, if the area is heavily wooded, the building
silhouettes will be at least 10 feet lower than the average canopy
height of the trees on the ridgeline or hilltop.
(i) Road cut/fills exceeding 45 feet, as measured from the center
line of the proposed road, shall submit a landscape plan for the
restoration of disturbance beyond the snow shell area.
(j) Submission of a justification for the use of common driveways
versus roads shall be submitted in developing large lot
conservation subdivision plans.
(k) Low-impact development practices shall be utilized in design.
§ 340-6.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-6.7
1:247

ARTICLE VII
Village Center District Residential Regulations
[Added 5-5-2011, effective 6-4-2011; amended 5-7-2015, effective
6-1-2015]
§ 340-7.1. Intent.
The purpose of this article is to allow flexibility in the design of clustered
residential development at the periphery of the Village Center, in Village
Center District Zone 5 (VCDZ 5), as established in Article IX of this chapter.
This article is specifically designed to promote neighborhood-style
development that is sensitive to site characteristics and preserves open
space in a manner that is consistent with the purposes and principles of the
Village Center District. Such development may occur through subdivision
in accordance with the Village Cluster Residential Subdivision provisions
of this section or as a common-interest-ownership planned development
in accordance with the Village Cluster Residential Planned Development
provisions of this section.
§ 340-7.2. Village cluster residential subdivision.
A. A village cluster residential subdivision shall be a special permit in
accordance with § 340-5.1 of this chapter and the requirements of this
Article VII and Article IX of this chapter, the review and approval of
which special permit is delegated to the Planning Commission. The
Planning Commission strongly encourages preapplication review of
proposed village cluster residential subdivisions, in accordance with
the procedure specified in § 340-6.6 of this chapter. As a condition
to approving a village cluster residential subdivision, the Planning
Commission must find one or more of the following specific purposes to
be accomplished:
(1) To preserve land as unsubdivided common open space that will
preserve or enhance the appearance, character or natural beauty of
the Village Center.
(2) To conserve valuable natural resources.
(3) To inhibit building on poor soils.
(4) To preserve and protect particular areas and terrain having qualities
of natural beauty or historical interest.
(5) To construct single-family detached or duplex dwelling units in a
pedestrian-friendly neighborhood style.
B. Eligibility. Any proposal for a village cluster residential subdivision must
meet the following standards:
(1) Located in a VCD 5 Zone.
(2) Lots served by public sanitary sewer service.
(3) Lots served by public water supply or state-approved private water
supply.
(4) Development resulting in 10 or more building lots.
(5) Development provides for common or public open space or
conservation areas.
§ 340-7.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-7.2
1:249
C. Open space. A minimum of 20% of the land proposed for village cluster
residential subdivision must be protected open space, the location of
which is in conformance with the "Village Center Land Use
Enhancement Plan" section of the Plan of Conservation and Development
and approved by the Planning Commission. "Open space," for the
purposes of this chapter, is an area covered by a deed restriction,
covenant or other legal restriction to prohibit further development.
Noncommercial, passive recreational uses may be permitted by the
Planning Commission, provided such uses are not inconsistent or
harmful to the restricted area. The Commission shall approve the
ownership of the open space area and the provisions for its preservation.
The Commission shall consider the following types of ownership
acceptable.
(1) Homeowners' association.
(a) Held in common by a homeowners' association incorporated as
a nonprofit organization dedicated to the conservation of open
space. Said homeowners' association shall be organized by the
applicant prior to filing of the final plan in a form satisfactory
to the Commission and Town Counsel. Membership in the
association must be mandatory for each property owner within
the overall development of the property and for any successive
owners. Only property owners within the overall development of
the property shall be members of the homeowners' association.
(b) The applicant's deed of said open space land to said association
shall provide that, if said homeowners' association is dissolved,
the land shall automatically revert to the Town of Marlborough.
The applicant's deed shall include all the proper development
restrictions to assure the protection of the open space area and
that the property shall remain open to the public. Also, the
homeowners' association bylaws shall provide for assessments
against members for all expenses, including, but not limited
to, maintenance of said open space land, including any
improvements thereon, taxes and insurance, provided each lot
shall have one vote regardless of the numbers of owners of a lot.
(2) Nonprofit land trusts/corporation. Deeded to a nonprofit land
conservation trust or corporation established for the purpose of
conserving land in open space, with such conveyance to be approved
by the Commission and Town Counsel, and provided that said
conveyance shall restrict subsequent sale or other disposition to a
similar trust or corporation to be approved by the Commission and
Town Counsel prior to any such transfer.
(3) Applicant ownership. Held in ownership by the applicant subject to
a legally binding arrangement that will permit use of the open space
land for public uses, with the appropriate restrictions approved by
the Commission, or subject to a conservation and preservation
restrictions as provided for by C.G.S. § 47-42a, as amended from
time to time, in terms and conditions which are acceptable to the
Commission and Town Counsel.
§ 340-7.2 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 340-7.2
1:250
(4) Town of Marlborough. Deeded in fee simple to the Town by
warrantee deed acceptable to the Board of Selectmen, the
Commission and Town Counsel to be prepared, executed and filed
prior to the filing of the final subdivision plan.
(5) Other. Any other method of open space ownership which
accomplishes permanent preservation and openness to public use in
accordance with the requirements of this chapter and satisfactory to
the Commission and Town Counsel.
D. Density. The minimum number of building lots shall be six per acre, and
the maximum number of building lots shall not exceed eight per acre.
E. Design. The Planning Commission shall, in its consideration of a village
cluster residential subdivision, require that lots be laid out to the
greatest extent feasible to achieve the following objectives:
(1) Diversity and originality in lot configuration and individual building
design shall be encouraged to achieve the best relationship between
development and land.
(2) Provide for pedestrian access between properties and facilitate the
networking of trails and greenways within the larger Village Center
District.
(3) Create an efficient site design that reduces the need for site
disturbance and impervious surface coverage.
(4) Locate permanent open space in areas contiguous to existing open
space or in areas with the highest probability of connecting with
future open spaces. A fifty-foot open space buffer against existing
residential development is desired.
F. Lot, yard and height requirements. For the purposes of this section,
the minimum buildable square required under Section 5.2.1 of the
Subdivision Regulations shall not apply; instead, the following lot
standards are required:
(1) Minimum lot frontage: 50 feet.
(2) Minimum lot size: 5,000 square feet.
(3) Minimum yard areas.
(a) Front: 20 feet.
(b) Rear: 20 feet.
(c) Side: 10 feet.
(4) Maximum building height: 35 feet. Cupolas, chimneys, stair towers,
and other vertical architectural elements may exceed the maximum
height, provided such elements are integral to the building design
and are in proportional scale with the buildings to which such
features are affixed.
(5) Maximum lot coverage: 60%.
(6) Accessory structures' maximum area: 200 square feet per lot.
§ 340-7.3. Village cluster residential planned development.
A. Approval of a village cluster residential planned development shall be a
special permit in accordance with § 340-5.1 of this chapter, in addition to
the provisions of this § 340-7.3 and Article IX of this chapter. The Zoning
Commission strongly encourages preapplication review of a proposed
village cluster residential planned development, in accordance with the
§ 340-7.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-7.3
1:251
procedure specified in § 340-6.6 of this chapter. As a condition to
approving a village cluster residential planned development, the Zoning
Commission must find one or more of the following specific purposes to
be accomplished:
(1) To preserve land as common open space that will preserve or
enhance the appearance, character or natural beauty of the Village
Center.
(2) To conserve valuable natural resources.
(3) To inhibit building on poor soils.
(4) To preserve and protect particular areas and terrain having qualities
of natural beauty or historical interest.
(5) To construct duplex, townhouse or garden apartment dwelling units
in a pedestrian-friendly neighborhood style.
B. Eligibility. Any proposal for a village cluster residential planned
development must meet the following standards:
(1) Located in VCD 5 zoning subdistricts.
(2) Lots served by public sanitary sewer service.
(3) Lots served by public water supply or state-approved private water
supply.
(4) Development resulting in 10 or more dwelling units.
(5) Development provides for common or public open space or
conservation areas.
C. Open space. A minimum of 20% of the land proposed for village cluster
residential planned development must be protected open space, the
location of which is in conformance with the "Village Center Land Use
Enhancement Plan" section of the Plan of Conservation and Development
and approved by the Zoning Commission. "Open space," for the purposes
of this chapter, is an area covered by a deed restriction, covenant
or other legal restriction to prohibit further development in order to
preserve land that is open and/or predominantly in its natural state.
Noncommercial, passive recreational uses may be permitted by the
Planning Commission, provided such uses are not inconsistent or
harmful to the restricted area. The Commission shall approve the
ownership of the open space area and the provisions for the
preservation. The Commission shall consider the following types of
ownership acceptable.
(1) Homeowners' association.
(a) Held in common by a homeowners' association incorporated as
a nonprofit organization dedicated to the conservation of open
space; said homeowners' association shall be organized by the
applicant prior to filing of the final plan in a form satisfactory
to the Commission and Town Counsel. Membership in the
association must be mandatory for each property owner within
the overall development of the property and for any successive
owners. Only property owners within the overall development of
the property shall be members of the homeowners' association.
(b) The applicant's deed of said open space land to said association
shall provide that, if said homeowners' association is dissolved,
the land shall automatically revert to the Town. The applicant's
§ 340-7.3 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 340-7.3
1:252
deed shall include all the proper development restrictions to
assure the protection of the open space area and that the
property shall remain open to the public.
(c) Also, the homeowners' association bylaws shall provide for
assessments against members for all expenses, including but not
limited to maintenance of said open space land, including any
improvements thereon, taxes and insurance, provided each lot
shall have one vote regardless of the number of owners of a lot.
(2) Nonprofit land trusts/corporation. Deeded to a nonprofit land
conservation trust or corporation established for the purpose of
conserving land in open space, with such conveyance to be approved
by the Commission and Town Counsel, and provided that said
conveyance shall restrict subsequent sale or other disposition to a
similar trust or corporation to be approved by the Commission and
Town Counsel prior to any such transfer.
(3) Applicant ownership. Held in ownership by the applicant subject to
a legally binding arrangement that will permit use of the open space
land for public uses, with the appropriate restrictions approved by
the Commission, or subject to a conservation and preservation
restrictions as provided for by C.G.S. § 47-42a, as amended from
time to time, in terms and conditions which are acceptable to the
Commission and Town Counsel.
(4) Town of Marlborough. Deeded fee simple to the Town by warrantee
deed acceptable to the Board of Selectmen, the Commission and
Town Counsel, to be prepared prior to the filing of the site
development plan.
(5) Other. Any other method of open space ownership which
accomplishes permanent preservation and openness to public use in
accordance with the requirements of this chapter and satisfactory to
the Commission and Town Counsel.
D. Density. The minimum number of dwelling units shall not be less than six
per acre, and the maximum number of dwelling units shall not exceed
eight per acre.
E. Design. This chapter is intended to encourage diversity and originality in
building and dwelling unit design that is in keeping with a New England
village center style. The following design principles shall be satisfied:
(1) Diversity and originality in building design shall be encouraged to
achieve the best relationship between development and land.
(2) Provide for pedestrian access between properties and facilitate the
networking of trails and greenways within the larger Village Center
District.
(3) Create an efficient site design that reduces the need for site
disturbance and impervious surface coverage.
(4) Locate permanent open space in areas contiguous to existing open
space or in areas with the highest probability of connecting with
future open spaces. A fifty-foot open space buffer against existing
residential development is desired.
F. Lot yard and height requirements.
(1) Minimum lot frontage: 75 feet.
§ 340-7.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-7.3
1:253
(2) Minimum buffer area from adjacent uses: 15 feet.
(3) Maximum building height: 35 feet. Cupolas, chimneys, stair towers,
and other vertical architectural elements may exceed the maximum
height, provided such elements are integral to the building design
and are in proportional scale with the buildings to which such
features are affixed.
(4) Minimum building separation: 20 feet.
(5) Maximum building ground-floor area: 15,000 square feet per
building.
(6) Maximum lot coverage: 40%.* (*Excluding area of internal sidewalks
- those not in the public right-of-way.)
(7) Accessory structure maximum area: 200 square feet per unit
§ 340-7.3 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 340-7.3
1:254
ARTICLE VIII
General Commercial Zone 1 Regulations
§ 340-8.1. Special permit uses.
In a General Commercial Zone a special permit issued by the Zoning
Commission, based on conformance with the criteria defined in this chapter,
is required in order to construct a building or buildings for the uses listed
below. After a certificate of occupancy is issued for the building in
conformance with the approved site plan, any change in use allowed in the
Commercial Zone may be allowed in that structure, except as defined below
by asterisks, as long as the parking requirements, sanitation requirements,
and building and fire code(s) requirements, etc., can be met, and the
exterior site plan is not changed. Such changes in use need approval from
the Zoning Enforcement Official (ZEO). In the event the ZEO determines
that the applicable requirements, regulations or other issues within the
jurisdiction of the Zoning Commission are not satisfied by the change in use,
the only appeal of the determination shall be via application for a special
permit to the Zoning Commission for such change in use.
(1) Business and professional offices.
(2) Retail sales and service establishments.
(3) Beauty salons and barbershops.
(4) Financial institutions.
(5) Grocery stores.
(6) Convenience stores.*
(7) Medical and dental clinics.*
(8) Restaurant, fast food restaurant, nightclubs and cafes.*
(9) Bakeries.
(10) Laundry, clothes cleaning and drying establishments limited to pickup
and delivery stations.
(11) Funeral homes.*
(12) Bowling alleys, athletic clubs, and similar indoor recreation places.
(13) Commercial parking lots for passenger motor vehicles, but not
including parking or storage of trucks, business or other commercialtype
vehicles.*
(14) Veterinary hospitals and kennels.*
(15) Transient lodgings (motel, hotel, inn and bed-and-breakfast
operations).*
(16) Wholesale businesses, sales offices and sample rooms.
(17) Public utility installations needed for public convenience and
necessity.*
(18) State and federal government buildings.*
(19) Municipal facilities and uses.*
(20) Rest homes, convalescent homes and hospitals.*
(21) Churches, synagogues and other places of worship.*
(22) Theaters and museum.*
(23) Clubs and lodges.*
(24) Bus terminals.*
(25) Accessory buildings and uses subject to the requirements of Article VI.
(26) State-licensed child day-care center or group day-care homes.*
§ 340-8.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-8.1
1:255
(27) School/public bus shelters.
(28) Public telephone booths.
(29) Alcohol liquor sales (also see § 340-13.9).*
§ 340-8.2. Special permit uses requiring approval by ZBA.
There are certain activities that may be proposed for a site that will require
approvals from both the Commission and the ZBA prior to the
commencement of said proposal. The following uses may be permitted only
after first receiving an approval of the proposed location by the ZBA, and
then receiving the appropriate site development plan and special permit
approval from the Zoning Commission: (*see Note a).
A. Motor vehicle repair per C.G.S. § 14-54, as amended.*
B. Motor vehicle gasoline station per C.G.S. § 14-321, as amended.*
NOTES:
a. These land uses have the potential for contaminating the groundwaters
of the Town. The Commission may require certain design restrictions,
such as but not limited to setbacks, material storage areas, floor drains,
stormwater management facilities and fire-protection measures.
§ 340-8.3. Height, area, yard and floor area requirements.
A. Minimum lot size and frontage requirements.
(1) Lot size, on-site well and on-site subsurface sewage disposal: 60,000
square feet.
(2) Frontage: 175 feet.
B. Minimum required yards.
(1) Front yard: 50 feet.
(2) Side yard: 15 feet.
(3) Rear yard: 25 feet.
(4) Buffer yard: 50 feet.
C. Maximum height: 40 feet.
D. Minimum floor area: 1,200 square feet.
E. Maximum building coverage: 25%.
F. Maximum lot coverage: 60%.
G. Maximum building size, single floor: 15,000 square feet. The
Commission may increase this maximum up to 25,000 square feet, based
on:
(1) Landscaping design features beyond those required by Article XIII.
(2) Building architectural design.
(3) Building location in relationship to the street line.
§ 340-8.4. Standards and criteria.
A. Landscaping, screening and buffer areas shall be provided in
accordance with Article XIII of this chapter.
B. All uses shall be subject to site development plan approval and the plan
requirements of Article V.
C. Off-street parking and loading shall be provided in accordance with
Article XIII.
§ 340-8.1 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 340-8.4
1:256
D. Signs shall be permitted, provided that the provisions of Article XIII are
achieved.
E. The general requirements of Article III shall be satisfied.
F. All HVAC, elevator, utility, venting and other similar structures shall be
screened from view and shall not exceed 15% of the roof area of any
building.
G. Alcoholic liquor sales locations shall satisfy the requirements of
§ 340-13.9.
H. Motor vehicle repair and motor vehicle gasoline stations shall satisfy the
requirements of § 340-13.8.
§ 340-8.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-8.4
1:257

ARTICLE IX
Village Center District Regulations
[Amended 5-5-2011, effective 6-4-2011]
§ 340-9.1. Purpose.
The purposes of the Village Center District (VCD) are to:
A. Promote the Village Center as the economic and civic hub of
Marlborough.
B. Encourage mixed-use, compact and unified land development.
C. Create a pedestrian-friendly environment, while providing convenient
access to businesses.
D. Provide for a variety of housing types at higher densities than allowed in
other districts.
E. Establish developments that evoke the feeling of a traditional New
England village in design and architecture.
§ 340-9.2. Principles.
All development in the VCD shall be designed to comply with the following
principles:
A. Properties will be developed in such a way as to reduce the dominance
of motor vehicles. A new street network within the Village Center will
reduce highway orientation and promote traditional neighborhood-style
development.
B. Properties within the VCD will be linked to encourage physical activity
and social interaction. A sidewalk system will extend throughout the
Village Center District, and greenways along natural resource corridors
will be created.
C. Development will protect important natural resources, especially surface
water and groundwater. All stormwater will be managed in accordance
with best management practices and the Connecticut DEEP Water
Quality Manual to minimize contamination risks.
D. Buildings will be placed at or close to the edge of sidewalks and will
provide pedestrian-scaled facades at street level to encourage walking.
A mixture of uses will be provided within and among buildings to further
promote pedestrian activity.
E. Development will be coordinated to the greatest extent feasible to
promote a unified form. Collaboration on development proposals will be
encouraged, and infrastructure and streetscape improvements will be
coordinated.
F. Architecture will emphasize doorways, windows at street level, facade
details and articulation at a scale that enhances the pedestrian
environment.
§ 340-9.3. Subdistricts.
In order to organize land uses into neighborhood-type development, the
VCD is further divided into the following subdistricts, each of which shall
§ 340-9.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-9.3
1:259
be deemed to be a zoning district but governed by those provisions of this
chapter that are applicable to all Village Center Districts:
A. VCDZ 1 - Commercial Core. This subdistrict serves as the commercial
center of the village, and therefore allows the greatest mix of uses while
enhancing those sites and uses to the greatest extent feasible.
B. VCDZ 2 - Commercial Center. This subdistrict is intended to allow for the
expansion of commercial uses in a scale and form that is compatible with
existing uses.
C. VCDZ 3 - Limited Institutional. This subdistrict encompasses the current
Town Hall and a medical facility and is intended to continue to support
institutional uses appropriately scaled to existing conditions.
D. VCDZ 4 - Institutional. This subdistrict is intended for public institutional
uses of a scale and nature that are compatible with existing institutions,
including the elementary school, library, senior center and
Congregational Church.
E. VCDZ 5 - Residential. This subdistrict is intended to encourage
residential development at a density that will help to support the
adjacent commercial center and core and not typically allowed
elsewhere in Marlborough.
§ 340-9.4. Permitted uses.
A. Permitted uses in VCDZs are shown in Table 1, Permitted Uses. Any
permitted use in the VCDZ shall require special permit approval, as
specified in § 340-5.1 of this chapter. In VCDZ 1 and VCDZ 2, mixed uses
are permitted.
B. When the Commission approves a special permit use in any VCDZ, there
shall be no change of any such use to a different use without further review
in accordance with Article V of this chapter.
C. Accessory uses are permitted in conjunction with the issuance of a special
permit for the principal use, but only to the extent of the type, size and
character of such accessory uses as may be specified in the special permit
application and any amendment thereto.
Table 1
Permitted Uses
Key:
Y = Allowed by special permit unless otherwise indicated
N = Not permitted
VCDZ 1 VCDZ 2 VCDZ 3 VCDZ 4 VCDZ 5
Residential
Multifamily garden
apartments or
quadruplex
N N N N Y
§ 340-9.3 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 340-9.4
1:260
Table 1
Permitted Uses
Key:
Y = Allowed by special permit unless otherwise indicated
N = Not permitted
VCDZ 1 VCDZ 2 VCDZ 3 VCDZ 4 VCDZ 5
Village Center
Residential Cluster
Planned Development
N N N N Y
Village Center
Residential Cluster
Subdivision
N N N N Y
Mixed-use residential
housing - upper stories
only
Y Y N N Y
Minor home
occupation - in
accordance with
§ 340-6.2I
N N N Y Y
Commercial
Business and
professional offices
Y Y N N N
Retail sales and
service establishments
Y Y N N N
Beauty salons and
barbershops
Y Y N N N
Financial institutions Y Y Y N N
Grocery stores Y Y N N N
Convenience stores Y Y N N N
Medical and dental
clinics
Y Y Y N N
Restaurants and cafes Y Y N N N
Fast-food restaurants N N N N N
Bakeries Y Y N N N
Laundry, dry cleaners -
limited to pickup and
delivery
Y Y N N N
Funeral homes N Y Y N N
Athletic clubs Y Y N N N
§ 340-9.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-9.4
1:261
Table 1
Permitted Uses
Key:
Y = Allowed by special permit unless otherwise indicated
N = Not permitted
VCDZ 1 VCDZ 2 VCDZ 3 VCDZ 4 VCDZ 5
Inns and bed-andbreakfast
operations
Y Y Y N N
Wholesale businesses,
sales offices and
sample rooms
N Y N N N
State-licensed child
day-care center or
group day-care homes
N N N Y N
Adult day care N N N Y N
Alcohol liquor sales Y Y N N N
Drive-through facilities
- for bank or pharmacy
use only; direct access
to and from principal
arterials prohibited
Y Y Y N N
Institutional
Public utility
installations needed
for public convenience
Y Y Y Y Y
State and federal
government buildings
Y Y Y Y N
Municipal facilities
and uses
Y Y Y Y Y
Rest homes,
convalescent homes
and hospitals
N Y Y Y N
School/public bus
shelters
Y Y Y Y Y
§ 340-9.5. Prohibited uses.
Any use not listed or designated as a permitted use in the VCD is expressly
prohibited.
§ 340-9.6. Height, area and yard requirements.
§ 340-9.4 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 340-9.6
1:262
A. VCD 1, VCD 2, VCD 3 and VCD 4 Subdistricts.
(1) Lot size: minimum 20,000 square feet.
(2) Lot frontage: minimum 100 feet.
(3) Required yard.
(a) All buildings fronting principal arterials or collector streets
(Route 66 and North and South Main Streets):
[1] Front yard. Maximum of two feet from the edge of sidewalk
or property line. The Commission may waive this
requirement for restaurants designed with outdoor seating
areas along the sidewalk or for office and residential
buildings which may be separated from the sidewalk by a
small landscaped or fenced area.
[2] Side yards: minimum 15 feet.
[3] Rear yard: minimum 25 feet.
[4] Building separation: minimum 20 feet.
(b) All buildings fronting local streets:
[1] Front yard. Maximum 20 feet from the edge of sidewalk.
The Commission may waive this requirement if architectural
renderings or models of the existing and proposed
streetscape for the project and surrounding properties are
presented which clearly show a public benefit to the
alternative building placement being proposed.
[2] Side yards: minimum 15 feet.
[3] Rear yard: minimum 25 feet.
[4] Building separation: minimum 20 feet.
(4) Maximum building ground-floor area: maximum 15,000 square feet
per building. The Commission may permit up to a maximum of
25,000 square feet for any building where a shared parking
agreement between abutting property owners is filed in the Town
Land Records.
(5) Impervious surface coverage: maximum 60%.
(a) The Commission may allow up to 70% for mixed-use
developments or mixed-use buildings that share parking areas
between all uses.
(b) Pervious surfaces are encouraged and shall count at a rate of
40% of their area towards maximum lot coverage.
(6) Height: maximum 35 feet. Cupolas, chimneys, stair towers, and other
vertical architectural elements may exceed the maximum height,
provided such elements are integral to the building design and are
in proportional scale with the buildings to which such features are
affixed.
B. VCD 5 Subdistricts: See Article VII of this chapter.
§ 340-9.7. Site design standards.
A. General.
(1) All utilities shall be underground.
(2) All developments shall be served by public sanitary sewer service
and public water supply or state-approved private water supply.
B. Access management.
§ 340-9.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-9.7
1:263
(1) Entrances and exits to uses in the VCD shall be combined to the
maximum extent possible. Access management methods, including
the provision of common driveways or common accessways between
adjoining lots, shall be provided upon all lots having access or
frontage along principal arterial and collector streets.
(2) Provisions shall be made for the vehicular and pedestrian
interconnection of parking lots on adjacent parcels, where feasible
and appropriate, to encourage shared parking arrangements and
park-and-walk activity. Such interconnections shall be designed to
minimize the potential for parking areas to be used as "shortcuts"
by traffic. The property owners' rights to use and the obligation to
maintain common driveways and parking lot interconnections shall
be assured by a written dedication and/or agreement to be reviewed
and approved by the Town Counsel and recorded in the Marlborough
Land Records.
C. Streets and sidewalks.
(1) New streets in the VCD shall create short interconnected blocks.
No culs-de-sac or dead-end streets are permitted. All new streets
shall be constructed in compliance with the Town of Marlborough
Highway Specifications for subdivisions. Pedestrian and bicycle
facilities shall be considered in the design and function of all streets
abutting or within proposed developments.
(2) Sidewalks shall be provided on both sides of all streets within the
VCD and within parking areas.
(3) Sidewalks shall be constructed of concrete and be generally
consistent throughout the Village Center District and in accordance
with the Marlborough Town Center Stylebook, as may be amended.
Sidewalks shall maintain a minimum width of six feet along principal
arterial streets and a minimum width of five feet along collector and
local streets.
(4) Sidewalks along principal arterials and collector streets shall be
separated from the curb by a buffer planting strip or ornamental
paving strip a minimum of four feet wide. (See landscaping
standards in Subsection E.) This buffer strip is also intended to
accommodate site amenities, including items such as pedestrian
streetlights, furniture, bike racks, waste receptacles and other
similar items, which shall be generally consistent in design and
materials throughout the Village Center District and in accordance
with the Marlborough Town Center Stylebook, as may be amended.
Developers are encouraged to provide appropriate amenities.
D. Buildings.
(1) Design. Buildings should be designed in the scale, size and quality of
a traditional New England village. They must have a visual continuity
with adjacent buildings that reflect such traditional designs and
should be designed and use materials in accordance with the
Marlborough Town Center Stylebook, as may be amended.
(2) Facades. Buildings more than 60 feet in length shall be segmented
into a series of smaller elements to avoid long unbroken facades.
Distinct elements shall be achieved through a change in color,
§ 340-9.7 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 340-9.7
1:264
material or texture and a projection, recess, window, balcony, trellis
or similar architectural feature. Two-story buildings must include
upper-story articulation to reduce the bulky appearance of the
structure.
(3) Windows.
(a) In order to provide visual interest and pedestrian activity,
ground-floor facades that face principal arterials or collector
streets shall be primarily transparent. Not more than six
horizontal feet of wall facing principal arterials or collector
streets shall be without a transparent window or door. A
minimum of 50% of principal arterial or collector street-facing
ground-floor facades, consisting of transparent entranceways,
display windows, or windows from two to eight feet in height,
is strongly encouraged. The bottom edge of such windows or
display windows may not be more than three feet above the
adjacent sidewalk.
(b) All glass in doors and windows shall appear transparent. A
minimum amount of tinting to achieve sun control is acceptable,
provided the glass appears transparent from the outside.
(4) Entrances. Primary entrances shall be highlighted by architectural
elements, lighting and signage. The design should enhance the
relationship between the building and sidewalk and emphasize the
pedestrian scale.
(5) Building services. Mechanical equipment shall be incorporated into
the design of the structure and not visible from the public view.
Loading docks, dumpster areas, and other building service facilities
shall be incorporated into the architecture of the building and
screened from public view.
E. Landscaping.
(1) Intent. The intent of this provision is to preserve and/or improve
the natural character of the Village Center District, especially offstreet
parking areas and yard areas of commercial and mixed-use
developments. Landscaping requirements are meant to achieve the
following goals:
(a) To provide natural visual screening of parking areas and along
property boundaries between zoning districts to preserve the
existing visual quality of adjacent lands.
(b) To reduce surface runoff and minimize soil erosion through the
natural filtering capability of landscaped areas.
(c) To provide natural buffers that reduce glare and noise.
(d) To moderate any adverse impacts of parking areas by providing
shade, absorbing reflected heat from paved surfaces and
creating natural windbreaks.
(e) To enhance the overall visual quality of new development by
providing a variety of plant materials that are consistent and
compatible with the existing natural vegetation of the area.
(2) Street trees. Wherever feasible, existing street trees shall be
retained and incorporated into the street design.
§ 340-9.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-9.7
1:265
(a) Spacing. Street trees are required on all existing and new
streets. Street trees shall not be spaced less than 45 feet apart.
Consideration shall be made for driveways, streetlights, utility
poles, underground utilities, traffic-light poles and other
obstructions. Consideration shall also be made for future
placement of trees in front of adjacent properties.
(b) Soils. Street trees planted near sidewalks shall require structural
soils to help prevent root disturbance.
(c) Species. Acceptable street tree species are provided in the
Marlborough Town Center Stylebook, as may be amended.
(3) Parking lot landscaping.
(a) Low-impact development techniques, such as, but not limited to,
depressed, infiltrating, landscaped islands are encouraged.
(b) Shade tree species, with a minimum caliper of four inches, shall
be planted in and around parking lots to reduce heating of paved
surfaces.
(c) A variety of native New England species shrubs, ground covers
and perennials shall be provided in parking lot islands.
(4) Stonewalls. Stonewalls shall be used in place of, or in combination
with, fencing along boundary lines that can be viewed from the
public right-of-way.
(5) Hanging baskets, planters and window boxes. Planters shall not
obstruct sight distances at street intersections or ingresses or
egresses. Planters shall not encroach into the sidewalk so that less
than five feet of passageway is available for pedestrians. Window
boxes should be at least as wide as the window sill where they are
located. They shall not encroach into the sidewalk. Hanging baskets,
planters and window boxes shall contain live plantings.
§ 340-9.8. Floating zone.
Intent. In recognition of the desire for larger buildings for certain
commercial uses, this section is intended to allow for such buildings under
certain conditions in order to serve the community's needs while
maintaining and enhancing the Village Center character.
A. Floating zone.
(1) Any owner of property in the VCDZ 1 that does front a principal
arterial, as defined in the Plan of Conservation and Development,
may apply to the Commission for a change of zone to the Village
Center Planned Commercial Floating Zone (VCPC Floating Zone).
For each such zone change approved by the Commission, the
provisions of this Article IX applicable to the VCDZ 1 shall remain
in effect, except § 340-9.6A shall not apply to said floating zone.
In its place, the following standards, in addition to the plans,
specifications, conditions, representations and other components of
the zone change application and its accompanying master plan, as
approved and/or modified and approved by the Commission, shall
control in said VCPC Floating Zone.
(2) For the purposes of this article, the term "underlying zone" shall
be defined as the zone or district existing on the subject parcel(s)
§ 340-9.7 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 340-9.8
1:266
prior to the filing of an application for a floating zone, and the
zone to which said floating zone shall revert after approval if said
floating zone is not developed within the time limit established by
this article.
B. Preapplication procedure.
(1) All prospective applicants considering development within the VCPC
Floating Zone are encouraged to review with the Planning and
Zoning Commission, on an informal and preapplication basis, a draft
preliminary master plan and drafts of other information required
by this chapter. Although this process may enable a prospective
applicant to obtain meaningful preliminary feedback, this informal
review is not intended to include evaluation of application specifics.
(2) Neither the preapplication conference nor the formal consideration
of the preliminary plan shall be deemed to constitute any portion of
the official and formal procedure of applying for a change of zone
or a land use concept plan approval. Neither the proponent nor the
Commission shall be in any way bound by statements made in such
informal discussions, their purpose being only to minimize delay,
expense and inconvenience to the public, the proponent and the
Commission upon the future receipt, if any, of a formal application
for a VCPC Floating Zone. Similarly, silence by Commission
members during an informal review should not be construed as
assent or acceptance of what is presented. Following any informal
discussion, the Commission may suggest that the proposal, or
certain aspects thereof, be referred to other municipal, state or
federal agencies for review and comment, or may suggest that
additional information is or will be required prior to action on a
formal application for change of zone. All applicants shall submit
a preliminary site development plan to the Commission for the
purpose of presenting a preliminary design of the proposed
development to the community at an early stage in the design
process and to incorporate the applicable comments and
suggestions into the overall design.
(3) Information included.
(a) At a minimum, the preliminary site development plan shall
include enough detail to measure for the requirements of this
chapter and to clearly present the proposal.
(b) This preliminary plan shall be submitted with five copies of the
plans, a description of the proposed uses and plans that include:
general statement. A general statement shall be submitted
describing the following:
[1] The specific types of proposed uses on the site;
[2] The methods by which site utilities will be provided;
[3] The proposed timetable for development, including a
description of phasing;
[4] The open space resources of the site and the amount of open
space to be retained, and the method for preservation, if any;
[5] The pattern/method of ownership and maintenance of any
interior roadways, public/private facilities, the sewerage
§ 340-9.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-9.8
1:267
disposal system(s), the water supply(ies), and other common
elements;
[6] Tabulations of the gross acreage of the development and the
preliminary estimate of the percentage of lot coverage of
buildings, open space, roads and parking;
[7] A statement outlining how the application is in compliance
with the Marlborough Plan of Conservation and
Development.
C. Formal application. In addition to the requirements of Article XVI of this
chapter, petitions to amend the Zoning Map to VCPC Floating Zone shall
also provide the following information (except for applications initiated
by the Commission). All maps shall be of a size that complies with the
requirements for filing with the Marlborough Town Clerk.
(1) Application fee: in accordance with the Town Land Use Fee
Ordinance.
(2) General statement. A general statement shall be submitted,
describing the following:
(a) The specific types of proposed uses on the site;
(b) The methods by which site utilities will be provided;
(c) The proposed timetable for development, including a description
of phasing;
(d) The open space resources of the site and the amount of open
space to be retained, and the method for preservation, if any;
(e) The pattern/method of ownership and maintenance of any
interior roadways, public/private facilities, the sewerage
disposal system(s), the water supply(ies), and other common
elements;
(f) A schedule of bedrooms per dwelling unit, total number of units,
square footage of each unit, and other such data as may be
required to evaluate compliance with the standards and criteria
of this chapter;
(g) Tabulations of the gross acreage of the development and the
percentage of lot coverage of buildings, open space, roads and
parking;
(h) A statement outlining how the application is in compliance with
the Marlborough Plan of Conservation and Development.
(3) Master plan for the area to be rezoned, including the following
elements:
(a) Boundary survey of the land to be included in the district at
a scale no smaller than one inch equals 50 feet, and prepared
at the A-2 standard of accuracy by a Connecticut-licensed land
surveyor.
(b) Existing topography with two-foot contours to T-2 or T-3 level
of accuracy, showing the general gradient of the site, existing
structures, existing roads and rights-of-way, major topographic
features, and limits of inland wetlands, watercourses and
floodplains as mapped in the field by a qualified soils scientist
and plotted by a Connecticut-licensed land surveyor.
§ 340-9.8 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 340-9.8
1:268
(c) Existing land uses and zoning within 500 feet of the area to be
rezoned.
(d) Names of all property owners located within 500 feet of the
boundary of the property to be rezoned, as listed on the Town
Assessor's records.
(e) Location of proposed land uses within the area to be rezoned;
the number of residences and the allocation among various
types of residences; the aggregate square footage of each type
of dwelling unit; the aggregate maximum number of bedrooms
for each type of residential use; the residential density and the
method used to calculate it.
(f) Proposed contours with intervals adequate to indicate drainage
and grades.
(g) Location and size of proposed buildings and structures,
including:
[1] The square footage of each proposed building;
[2] The allocation of uses for each type of building;
[3] The height of each building or structure;
[4] The location and use of existing buildings or structures, and
the intended use thereof; and
[5] The architectural and site design guidelines, per the
Marlborough Town Center Stylebook.
(h) Public and private streets and circulation patterns and potential
traffic improvements proposed by the applicant.
(i) General locations of on- and off-street parking, loading and
delivery areas.
(j) Existing and proposed pedestrian facilities and circulation
routes.
(k) (Reserved)
(l) Potential location of public transit connections or stops.
(m) Public and private open spaces, both improved and natural, and
the square footage or acreage thereof.
(n) General locations of utilities and drainage facilities to serve the
area to be rezoned.
(o) General landscaping plans, including existing vegetation to be
preserved, and general location of landscape buffers, including
general type of landscaping proposed (e.g., evergreen tree,
shade tree, flowering tree, evergreen shrub or hedge, flowering
shrub, ground cover, existing vegetation to remain) and general
location of landscaping (buffers, street trees, parking lot
islands, foundation plantings), provided that details such as the
species, number, size and exact location of such landscaping
may be deferred to the subsequent special permit review.
(p) Proposed project phasing of residential and retail components,
including phasing of public improvements and provisions to
address construction traffic.
(q) The location of all inland wetlands and watercourses as
delineated by a certified soil scientist in Connecticut.
(r) Any exposed area of ledge in excess of 200 square feet.
§ 340-9.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-9.8
1:269
(s) Identification of any known natural and/or cultural resources
(i.e., stonewalls, foundations, archeological sites, etc.).
(4) Sanitary sewers and public water.
(a) Sanitary sewers.
[1] The applicant shall submit an impact analysis prepared by
a professional engineer that evaluates the proposed sanitary
wastewater flow of the development on the public sewer
system concerning the impact to the system's capacity and
capability of effluent from the development, with discharge
standards set by the Marlborough Water Pollution Control
Authority. The applicant shall submit a report from the
Marlborough Water Pollution Control Authority prior to the
close of the public hearing for any application.
[2] If the applicant has to construct any sanitary sewer facilities
that Marlborough Water Pollution Control Authority will not
own and/or operate, the applicant shall submit information
concerning the ownership, operation and maintenance as a
part of the application submittal.
[3] If the applicant proposes to construct a community sewerage
system, as defined in C.G.S. § 7-245, being any sanitary
sewer facilities that the Marlborough Water Pollution
Control Authority will not own and/or operate, the applicant
shall submit information concerning the ownership,
operation and maintenance as a part of the application
submittal. In addition, a report from the Marlborough Water
Pollution Control Authority, indicating that all requirements
of C.G.S. § 7-246f have been satisfied, shall be provided.
(b) Public water. Documentation shall include but not be limited
to engineering feasibility studies of the proposed water supply
(such as well data from existing wells on or near the site. Final
engineering design, final governmental approvals, or physical
construction of water supply facilities shall not be required at
the zone change and master plan approval stage, but shall be
required prior to the issuance of any special permit in
accordance with Article V of this chapter.
(5) Additional information. A change of zone application calls upon the
Commission to exercise a legislative function and to determine that
the floating zone applied will be superior to the underlying zoning
to achieve the purposes of this chapter as set forth in Article I.
Therefore, it is incumbent on the applicant to provide sufficient
information, in both detail and scope, to meet its burden of proof in
that regard. Further, it is the obligation of the applicant to provide
any additional information which the Commission may request or
require in order to make such a determination. Such information
may include, but is not limited to: information concerning
surrounding land uses, building locations, driveways, streets,
topography, watercourses and wetlands, utilities and the like; a
traffic impact study prepared by a Connecticut-registered
professional engineer qualified to prepare such studies; an
§ 340-9.8 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 340-9.8
1:270
environmental impact statement prepared by professionals qualified
to prepare such studies; detailed architectural information, such as
color samples, screening of roof- or ground-mounted heating and airconditioning
equipment and ventilation ducts, building illumination,
samples of construction materials and the like; detailed landscaping
plans, including the type, size, number and location of material to be
planted, the location and construction material of any fences, walls,
flagpoles, street furniture, walkways, trash disposal areas and the
like; reports from its own consultants and staff or from government
agencies.
(6) Referral to Planning Commission. The Commission shall refer all
applications to the Planning Commission in the manner provided
by C.G.S. § 8-3(a), as amended from time to time, for its study
of the proposed use and construction and its conformance to the
plans and policies of the Marlborough Plan of Conservation and
Development. The Planning Commission shall issue a report in the
manner provided by C.G.S. § 8-3(a), as amended from time to time.
An application receiving a negative report from the Planning
Commission may be approved by the Zoning Commission by a vote
of not less than 2/3 of the full Commission.
D. Height, area and yard requirements.
(1) Lot size: minimum 20,000 square feet.
(2) Lot frontage: minimum 100 feet.
(3) Required yard.
(a) Front yard: maximum 20 feet from the edge of sidewalk. The
Commission may waive this requirement if architectural
renderings or models of the existing and proposed streetscape
for the project and surrounding properties are presented which
clearly show a public benefit to the alternative building
placement being proposed.
(b) Side yards: minimum 15 feet.
(c) Rear yard: minimum 25 feet.
(d) Building separation: minimum 20 feet.
(4) Ground-floor area: maximum 40,000 square feet per building.
(5) Impervious surface coverage: maximum 60%. The Commission may
allow up to 70% for mixed-use developments or mixed-use buildings
that share parking areas between all uses. Pervious surfaces are
encouraged and shall count at a rate of 40% of their area towards
maximum lot coverage.
(6) Height: maximum 35 feet. Cupolas, chimneys, stair towers and other
vertical architectural elements may exceed the maximum height,
provided such elements are integral to the building design and are
in proportional scale with the buildings to which such features are
affixed.
E. Public hearings and actions.
(1) The Commission shall act in such manner and in accordance with
such time limits as are designated for changes of zone in accordance
with Article XVI of this chapter and in accordance with the
applicable provisions of the General Statutes. In the event of conflict
§ 340-9.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-9.8
1:271
between the procedure set forth in this chapter and the Connecticut
General Statutes, the latter shall prevail.
(2) As an exercise of its legislative authority, the Commission may
approve, approve with modifications, or deny any application to
amend the Zoning Map to VCPC Floating Zone. The Commission
may also require that certain amenities, such as improved or natural
open space areas or community facilities, be allocated to particular
phases of the development so as to ensure that such amenities
proceed apace with the other components of the development. The
Commission may also require that each phase contain a minimum
number or type of uses to assure that the initial phases, standing
alone, will further the purposes of the VCPC Floating Zone as set
forth in this Article IX, and may require that certain buildings or
certain uses within a phase receive building permits and be under
construction before future phases may commence construction. In
considering any petition to amend the Zoning Map to VCPC Floating
Zone, the Commission shall determine the master plan and all other
application materials are consistent with the standards and
purposes of a VCPC Floating Zone set forth in this section and, in
addition, with those criteria set forth in § 340-5.3 of this chapter that
are applicable to the master plan level of detail. This reference to
Article V shall not be construed to require plans or other materials
at that level of detail required for a special permit application at the
zone change and master plan approval stage.
F. Approval.
(1) Upon approval of a VCPC Floating Zone, the Commission shall
provide notice to the applicant and the public as provided by the
C.G.S. and shall cause the approved floating zone to be noted on the
Official Zoning Map of the Town of Marlborough by outlining the
boundaries of the land affected thereby and indicating the approval
date.
(2) The applicant shall, within 90 days of approval of any VCPC Floating
Zone, record notice thereof in the Marlborough Land Records under
the name of the record owner of land affected thereby, giving legal
description of the land and giving specific reference to approved
plan(s) and map(s); and, further, the applicant shall record in the
Marlborough Land Records a copy of the approved plan(s) and
map(s) endorsed by the signature of the Commission's Chairperson
or Secretary. The applicant may request from the Commission up to
two ninety-day extensions of the filing period noted above.
G. Conformance to recorded documents. The land described shall be used
and developed only in accordance with the recorded documents.
H. Amendment of approved VCPC Floating Zone. An application to alter or
extend an approved VCPC Floating Zone or previously approved DMR
(Designed Multiple Residence) application shall specify the nature of
the planned alterations and/or extensions and shall be accompanied by
a scale plan of the alterations and extensions in the same detail as is
required for an initial application. Such application shall be processed
in the same manner as a new application under this article. The
§ 340-9.8 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 340-9.8
1:272
Commission may waive any of the application requirements contained
in this section in the event of minor modifications for which such
requirements are not necessary in the opinion of the Zoning Commission
to adequately review and decide the application for modification.
I. Commencement and completion of construction. For any VCPC Floating
Zone approved, the construction of any buildings or structures or the
establishment of any use shall be completed within three years of the
effective date of such approval. The applicant may request up to two
one-year extensions from the Commission; in no case shall completion
extend past five years from the original effective approval date. Any
such approval not commenced or completed within the above time frame
shall, following notice and an opportunity to be heard by the applicant
and owner, become void, and the Commission may call the bond to
complete the incomplete work. The Commission shall file a notice on the
Land Records, stating the approval has been voided for all incomplete
work.
J. Performance bond.
(1) The Commission shall require, prior to the commencement of any
construction in connection with an approved VCPC Floating Zone,
that the applicant post a bond with surety and amount satisfactory
to the Commission and Town Counsel to insure conformance with
all proposed site improvements as depicted on the final site
development plan. Site improvements include construction of streets
and parking areas, landscaping, lighting, drainage, water supply,
septic disposal, sidewalks and the like. The applicant shall submit
an itemized cost breakdown for all site improvements to Town staff
for review and approval to determine the final bond amount. The
final bond amount, as determined by Town staff, shall include a
fifteen-percent contingency. If the project is proposed in phases, the
Commission may permit each phase to be bonded separately. No
phase may commence construction until a bond has been posted for
such phase.
(2) The bond form shall either be cash, certified bank check, an
irrevocable letter of credit from a Town-approved banking
institution, or an assigned joint account passbook from a Townapproved
banking institution with a signed withdrawal slip from the
applicant. The Commission shall not release more than 75% of the
original bond amount until all work is complete.
(3) All bonds shall be for a three-year period, and any irrevocable letter
of credit shall contain a ninety-day notice of nonrenewal. The
applicant may request an extension of the bonding period from the
Commission, not to exceed a period past five years from the original
date of approval.
K. Maintenance bond. The Commission shall require the applicant to post
a bond for a period not to exceed one year from the date of completion
of certain site improvements, depending on the time of year such
improvements have been installed, in order to assure the repair or
replacement of damaged or defective site improvements.
L. Certificate of occupancy.
§ 340-9.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-9.8
1:273
(1) No certificate of zoning compliance shall be issued until the
application of the binder coat of asphalt and complete utility
installation for that phase of construction. Additionally, the applicant
is to submit three sets of the as-built plan. In those cases where
seasonal conditions prevent compliance with the provisions of the
approval before the building is complete, the Zoning Enforcement
Officer may authorize issuance of the certificate of zoning
compliance after the submission of an as-built plan showing all site
improvements complete to date.
(2) All bonded incomplete work shall be completed within a time frame
that does not exceed one year from the date of issuance of the
certificate of occupancy for that particular phase of construction
and a final as-built plan submitted to the Commission for approval,
prior to release of the performance bond. Failure to complete the
incomplete work within the specified time frame will result in the
calling of the bond and may be cause for revocation of the VCPC
Floating Zone.
§ 340-9.9. Relationship to zoning regulations; special permit review.
A. Master plan prevails. Unless provided otherwise in this Article IX, uses
within the VCPC Floating Zone shall be subject to all provisions and
definitions of this chapter. However, because the intent of the VCPC
Floating Zone is to provide flexibility in design standards in order to
achieve important design objectives as described herein, in cases of
conflict with other provisions of this chapter, including the zoning
definitions, the provisions of this Article IX shall prevail. Unless
expressly prescribed by this Article IX, all uses, dimensional,
architectural, bulk, location, landscaping, parking and lighting
requirements for a VCPC Floating Zone shall be established by the
Commission in its sole legislative discretion as part of an approved
master plan for that zone, and the Commission may apply as written or
may vary to meet the purposes of the VCPC Floating Zone all particular
requirements of this chapter pertaining thereto. The foregoing
notwithstanding, nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent
review under the requirements and criteria of Article V of this chapter
for any special permit application which review addresses a level of
detail for that special permit application which was not addressed in
the approval of the VCPC Floating Zone and its accompanying master
plan and studies. Similarly, nothing in this section shall be construed
to prevent such review for any elements of the special permit that
differ from the approved master plan. The intent of this section is that
any compliance issues which can be addressed at the level of detail
afforded by the master plan shall not be revisited in the individual special
permit applications filed in compliance with such master plan, while not
precluding the Commission from examining the more detailed plans of
the special permit application in conformance with the criteria of this
chapter that are appropriate to such detailed level of review.
B. Special permit review. Following approval of an VCPC Floating Zone,
all applications for special permit approval for the structures and other
§ 340-9.8 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 340-9.9
1:274
improvements within such plan shall be filed with the Commission
pursuant to the following process:
(1) Informal review. All applicants are encouraged to review all special
permit applications with the Land Use Administrator on an informal
basis prior to the filing of any application.
(2) Application process.
(a) Applications for special permit approval in an VCPC Floating
Zone must be filed with the Commission and conform to Article
V of this chapter, except as provided otherwise in this Article IX.
Each proposed use, site plan, building or structure, and other
component of the application shall include all structures and
other improvements within the entire master plan or within a
project phase as approved by the Commission as part of its
approval of the master plan and shall substantially conform to
such master plan.
(b) The Commission shall conduct a public hearing on any
application for special permit approval in accordance with the
provisions of Article V.
(c) If any of the activities proposed in the special permit application
are regulated by the Marlborough Inland Wetlands and
Watercourses Agency (IWA)33 by authority granted by the
Connecticut General Statutes, the Commission shall not render a
decision on the application until the IWA has rendered a decision
on the application to conduct such regulated activities.
(3) Application requirements. All applicants for special permit approval
shall provide the application materials required by Article V. The
following additional information shall also be submitted:
(a) Dedications to Town. Identification of all land and improvements
intended to be dedicated to the Town of Marlborough.
(b) Statement of consistency with plans, studies and guidelines. A
statement shall be provided demonstrating reasonable
consistency with the following documents that were approved as
part of the VCPC Floating Zone map amendment and identifying
any deviations from the master plan and the reasons for such
deviations.
(c) Permanent maintenance plan. The applicant shall submit a
permanent maintenance plan that establishes a yearly
maintenance plan which establishes a schedule of maintenance
activities to ensure the aesthetic quality and cleanliness of the
site. The maintenance plan shall include, but not be limited to,
a timetable for all maintenance activities with respect to private
storm drainage systems, utilities and other infrastructure,
including, but not limited to, landscaping and screening, roads,
parking areas, sidewalks, trails and berms, lighting, signage,
storage, refuse and litter control, snow removal and other site
amenities proposed in the plans. If the development is intended
to be a common-interest-ownership community pursuant to the
Common Interest Ownership Act (the "Act"),34 the applicant shall
submit proposed language to be included in the declaration of
§ 340-9.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-9.9
1:275
the community under the Act, binding each unit owner and the
unit owners' association to the requirements of the approved
maintenance plan. If the development is intended to be
something other than a common-ownership community, the
applicant shall submit a restrictive covenant and easement
document which details maintenance responsibilities or another
sufficient legal document which stipulates maintenance
covenants and easement arrangements to the satisfaction of the
Commission.
(4) Approval considerations. In reviewing any proposed special permit,
the Commission shall determine the following:
(a) That the application is consistent with the criteria set forth in
Article V, except as provided in the following subsection.
(b) That the application is reasonably consistent with the master
plan and accompanying documents; and that the potable water
and effluent disposal facilities described in § 340-9.8C(4) will be
operational prior to the use or occupancy of any land, building
or structure. A determination of reasonable consistency with the
master plan shall constitute a conclusive presumption that the
use, the location of a building, the square footage, height and
size of a building, and the density of any residential use are
in compliance with the criteria of Article V. If in its judgment
the Commission determines that changes have been made to the
master plan, including without limitation the size, density, mix of
uses, site layout, appearance and/or design of the development
that affect the application's fulfillment of the objectives of a
VCPC Floating Zone, the application may be found not
reasonably consistent with the master plan, which shall require
the filing of an amendment to the master plan.
(c) That all other applicable provisions of the Marlborough Zoning
Regulations in this chapter have been satisfied, except as
otherwise provided by this section and the master plan approved
in accordance herewith.
(5) Approval conditions. The Commission may approve, or approve with
modifications, or deny any proposed special permit in order to
achieve compliance with the master plan or the purposes of this
article.
33.Editor's Note: In the Town of Marlborough, the Conservation Commission acts as the
Town's inland wetlands and watercourses agency.
34.Editor's Note: See C.G.S. Ch. 828, § 47-200 et seq.
§ 340-9.9 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 340-9.9
1:276
ARTICLE X
General Industrial (GI) Zone Regulations
[Amended 5-7-2015, effective 6-1-2015]
§ 340-10.1. Special permit uses.
In a General Industrial Zone a special permit, issued by the Zoning
Commission based on conformance with the criteria defined in this chapter,
is required in order to construct a building or buildings for the uses listed
below. After a certificate of occupancy is issued for the building in
conformance with the approved site plan, any change in use allowed in
the General Industrial Zone may be allowed in the structure, except as
defined below by asterisks, as long as the parking requirements, sanitation
requirements, and building and fire code requirements, etc., can be met and
the exterior site plan is not changed. Such changes in use need approval
from the Zoning Enforcement Official (ZEO). In the event the ZEO
determines that the applicable requirements, regulations or other issues
within the jurisdiction of the Zoning Commission are not satisfied by the
change in use, the only appeal of that determination shall be via application
for a special permit for such change in use.
A. Office buildings.
B. Research laboratories.*
C. Warehouse, wholesale or storage.*
D. Manufacture, processing or assembly of goods, excepting that which
is dangerous by reason of fire, radiation or explosion, or injurious,
noxious or detrimental to the surrounding neighborhood by reason of
emissions.*
E. Grain sales and storage.*
F. Contractors' storage yards, except salvage and wrecking services.*
G. Public utility installation, needed for public convenience and necessity.*
H. Bus terminals, garaging and maintenance facilities.*
I. Public utility installation needed for public convenience and necessity.*
J. State and federal government buildings.*
K. Municipal facilities and uses.*
L. Lumber and building materials sales and storage.*
M. Accessory buildings and uses, subject to the requirements of Article VI.
N. School/public bus shelters.
O. Public telephone booths.
P. State-licensed child day-care center or group care home.*
§ 340-10.2. Special permit uses requiring approval from ZBA.
There are certain activities that may be proposed for a site that will require
approvals from both the Commission and the ZBA prior to the
commencement of said proposal. The following uses may be permitted only
after first receiving an approval of the proposed location by the ZBA and
then receiving the appropriate site development plan and special permit
approval from the Commission: (*see Note a).
A. Motor vehicle repair per C.G.S. § 14-54, as amended.*
B. Motor vehicle gasoline station per C.G.S. § 14-321, as amended.*
§ 340-10.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-10.2
1:277
NOTES:
a. These land uses have the potential for contaminating the groundwater
of the Town, consequently the Commission may require certain design
restrictions, such as but not limited to setbacks, material storage areas,
floor drains, stormwater management facilities and fire-protection
measures.
§ 340-10.3. Height, area, yard and floor area requirements.
A. Minimum lot size and frontage requirements.
(1) Lot size: 80,000 square feet (on-site well and on-site subsurface
sewage disposal).
(2) Frontage: 200 feet.
B. Minimum required yards.
(1) Front yard.
(a) Buildings or any portion thereof less than 25 feet in height: 40
feet.
(b) Buildings or any portion thereof more than 25 feet in height: 50
feet.
(2) Side yard: 25 feet.
(3) Rear yard: 25 feet.
(4) Buffer yard: 50 feet.
C. Maximum height: 40 feet.
D. Minimum floor area: 1,200 square feet.
E. Maximum building coverage: 25%.
F. Maximum lot coverage: 60%.
G. Maximum building size, single floor: 60,000 square feet.
§ 340-10.4. Standards and criteria.
A. Landscaping, screening and buffer areas shall be provided in
accordance with Article XIII of this chapter.
B. All uses shall be subject to site development plan approval and the plan
requirements of Article V.
C. Off-street parking and loading shall be provided in accordance with
Article XIII.
D. Signs shall be permitted, provided the provisions of Article XIII are
achieved.
E. The general requirements of Article III shall be satisfied.
F. All HVAC, elevator, utility, venting and other similar structures shall be
screened from view and shall not exceed 15% of the roof area of any
building.
G. No dust, dirt, fly ash, or offensive smoke shall be emitted into the air.
H. No offensive odor or noxious, toxic, corrosive fumes or gases shall be
emitted into the air.
I. No noise which is objectionable due to volume, frequency or shrillness
shall be transmitted outside the property where it originates.
J. No offensive or harmful wastes shall be discharged into any stream,
watercourse, adjoining property, sanitary sewer, septic system, or storm
drain.
§ 340-10.2 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 340-10.4
1:278
K. No activity shall be conducted which is hazardous or dangerous to
persons or property.
L. Vibration shall not be perceptible at the property lines.
M. Motor vehicle repair and motor vehicle gasoline stations shall satisfy the
requirements of § 340-13.8.
§ 340-10.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-10.4
1:279

ARTICLE XI
Designed Business Industrial Park Zone (DBIPZ)
§ 340-11.1. Purpose.
The DBIPZ provides a planned business and industrial park environment
employing design standards to assure proper control over the physical and
visual design of the Town's employment areas while providing for economic
development and employment opportunities along the Route 2 corridor. The
DBIPZ is a group of individual zones that share common procedural and
design requirements.
§ 340-11.2. Location.
No DBIPZ shall be established unless it complies with the following
requirements:
A. Each DBIPZ must consist of one or more lots comprising at least 20 acres
in total area.
B. Each DBIPZ must provide for at least 50 feet of frontage on Austin Drive,
Hebron Road, Jones Hollow Road, North Main Street, Planeta Drive,
Portland Road or West Road, which frontage shall provide the exclusive
means of access to and from the lots within the DBIPZ.
C. The DBIPZ must be located wholly within 4,000 feet from entrance/exit
ramps for CT Route 2.
§ 340-11.3. Subdistricts.
The Commission may divide each DBIPZ into one or more of the following
subdistricts: District 1, District 2, District 3, District 4 , District 5 and
District 6. Each of the foregoing subdistricts is further described in this
article. Each such subdistrict shall be considered a zone under this chapter,
and they are grouped together in this section due to the common procedural
and design elements that they share. The subdistricts shall collectively be
referred to as "DBIPZ."
§ 340-11.4. Uses.
A. Upon approval of a DBIPZ and its component subzones, the following
uses are permitted only following issuance of a special permit by the
Commission.
(1) Uses permissible in District 1:
(a) Bank.
(b) Beauty salons.
(c) Dropoff cleaners.
(d) Medical office buildings.
(e) Pharmacy.
(f) Private educational center.
(g) Full-service restaurants.
(h) Retail sales.
(2) Uses permissible in District 2:
(a) Auction house.
§ 340-11.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-11.4
1:281
(b) Business and professional, corporate and executive, bank and
financial offices.
(c) Banquet facilities and catering facility.
(d) Broadcasting and film studio production.
(e) Fitness center, including sports training center.
(f) Hotel and conference centers, with restaurants as an accessory
use.
(g) Medical office buildings.
(h) Printing, publishing, blueprinting and similar reproduction.
(i) Private educational center and/or commercial day-care center.
(j) Public utility installations needed for public convenience and
necessity.
(k) Technology and communication facilities.
(l) Multiuse buildings containing a combination of any of the uses
listed above, provided that uses of such buildings collectively
comply with all applicable provisions of this chapter.
(3) Uses permissible in District 3:
(a) Bakeries, wholesale; retail sales restricted to 20% of floor area.
(b) Bottling, brewery and distilling of beverages.
(c) Broadcasting and film studio production.
(d) Building and related trades, excluding uses which involve: the
use or storage of heavy construction equipment or trucks;
outdoor storage or parking of trailers, light equipment, lumber
or other bulk materials; or outdoor display of products or
services.
(e) Bulk fuel storage facilities: not to exceed 30,000 gallons.
(f) Business and professional, corporate and executive, bank and
financial offices.
(g) Fitness center, including sports training center.
(h) Indoor recreation center.
(i) Light manufacture, fabrication, processing or assembly of goods
and packaging products, such as light machine parts, electrical
components, electronic and photo-optic devices, office or
business equipment, plastic components, printing,
woodworking, sheet metal working, stone cutting, and
distributive storage and warehousing of such items. No use
shall be permitted under this paragraph that is dangerous by
reason of fire, radiation or explosion, or injurious, noxious or
detrimental to the surrounding neighborhood by reason of
emissions.
(j) Warehousing and storage is permitted only as an accessory use
to manufacturing and assembly of raw materials and finished
product materials of the specific business.
(k) Printing, publishing, blueprinting and similar reproduction.
(l) Research and development facilities, experimental engineering
research facility; experimental electronic laboratories.
(m) Technology and communication uses.
(n) Wholesale businesses with related sales offices and display
rooms.
§ 340-11.4 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 340-11.4
1:282
(o) Multiuse buildings containing a combination of any of the uses
listed above, provided that uses of such buildings collectively
comply with all applicable provisions of this chapter.
(4) Uses permissible in District 4:
(a) Banks.
(b) Grocery stores.
(c) Hotel and conference centers, with restaurants as an accessory
use; medical office buildings.
(d) Pharmacy.
(e) Full-service restaurant.
(f) Retail sales.
(5) Uses permissible in District 5:
(a) Auction house.
(b) Bakeries, wholesale; retail sales restricted to 20% of floor area.
(c) Bottling, brewery and distilling of beverages.
(d) Broadcasting and film studio production.
(e) Building and related trades, excluding uses which involve the
use or storage of heavy construction equipment or trucks;
outdoor storage or parking of trailers, light equipment, lumber
or other bulk materials; or outdoor display of products or
services.
(f) Bulk fuel storage facilities, not to exceed 30,000 gallons.
(g) Business and professional, corporate and executive, bank and
financial offices.
(h) Fitness center, including sports training center.
(i) Indoor recreation center.
(j) Light manufacture, fabrication, processing or assembly of goods
and packaging products, such as light machine parts, electrical
components, electronic and photo-optic devices, office or
business equipment, plastic components, printing,
woodworking, sheet metal working, stone cutting, and
distributive storage and warehousing of such items. No use
shall be permitted under this paragraph that is dangerous by
reason of fire, radiation or explosion, or injurious, noxious or
detrimental to the surrounding neighborhood by reason of
emissions.
(k) Medical office buildings.
(l) Printing, publishing, blueprinting and similar reproduction.
(m) Private educational center and/or commercial day-care center.
(n) Public utility installations needed for public convenience and
necessity.
(o) Research and development facilities, experimental engineering
research facility; experimental electronic laboratories.
(p) Technology and communication facilities.
(q) Warehousing and storage is permitted only as an accessory use
to manufacturing and assembly of raw materials and finished
product materials of the specific business.
(r) Wholesale businesses with related sales offices and display
rooms.
§ 340-11.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-11.4
1:283
(s) Multiuse buildings containing a combination of any of the uses
listed above, provided that uses of such buildings collectively
comply with all applicable provisions of this chapter.
(6) Uses permissible in District 6:
(a) Auction house.
(b) Bakeries, wholesale; retail sales restricted to 20% of floor area.
(c) Bank.
(d) Beauty salons.
(e) Bottling, brewery and distilling of beverages.
(f) Broadcasting and film studio production.
(g) Building and related trades, excluding uses which involve the
use or storage of heavy construction equipment or trucks;
outdoor storage or parking of trailers, light equipment, lumber
or other bulk materials; or outdoor display of products or
services.
(h) Bulk fuel storage facilities, not to exceed 30,000 gallons.
(i) Business and professional, corporate and executive, bank and
financial offices.
(j) Dropoff cleaners.
(k) Full-service restaurants.
(l) Indoor recreation center.
(m) Light manufacture, fabrication, processing or assembly of goods
and packaging products, such as light machine parts, electrical
components, electronic and photo-optic devices, office or
business equipment, plastic components, printing,
woodworking, sheet metal working, stone cutting, and
distributive storage and warehousing of such items. No use
shall be permitted under this paragraph that is dangerous by
reason of fire, radiation or explosion, or injurious, noxious or
detrimental to the surrounding neighborhood by reason of
emissions.
(n) Medical office buildings.
(o) Pharmacy.
(p) Printing, publishing, blueprinting and similar reproduction.
(q) Private educational center and/or commercial day-care center.
(r) Public utility installations needed for public convenience and
necessity.
(s) Research and development facilities, experimental engineering
research facility; experimental electronic laboratories.
(t) Retail sales.
(u) Technology and communication facilities.
(v) Warehousing and storage is permitted only as an accessory use
to manufacturing and assembly of raw materials and finished
product materials of the specific business.
(w) Wholesale businesses with related sales offices and display
rooms.
(x) Multiuse buildings containing a combination of any of the uses
listed above, provided that uses of such buildings collectively
comply with all applicable provisions of this chapter.
§ 340-11.4 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 340-11.4
1:284
B. Comparable use request. The Commission, at its sole discretion by a 2/
3 majority vote of the full Commission after review of the record for the
request, may permit other comparable uses other than those listed for
each subdistrict. The applicant has to demonstrate that the proposed
use has similar business operation characteristics relating to standards
of § 340-5.3, Site development plan, and is no more intensive than the
specific uses in the subdistrict. No uses in the prohibited use category of
this chapter shall be permitted.
C. Change in use. Any change that modifies the approved site development
plan shall require approval by the Commission as a subsequent site
development plan application. Any change in use that seeks to vary
special permit approval use or the conditions of any approval shall
require approval by the Commission as a special permit application.
D. Prohibited uses. Anything in this article to the contrary notwithstanding,
the following uses are prohibited in the DBIPZ and are not permitted
under any circumstances:
(1) Adult entertainment business.
(2) Adult-oriented business and retail.
(3) Asphalt/concrete plants.
(4) Bulk fuel storage facilities, in Districts 1, 2 and 4 only.
(5) Bus storage yard.
(6) Crematoria and cemeteries.
(7) Churches and other places of worship.
(8) Distribution/warehouse facilities.
(9) Earth excavation, mining and earth product processing.
(10) Funeral homes.
(11) Moving and storage facilities.
(12) Recycling and construction debris reprocessing facilities.
(13) Self-storage facilities.
(14) Slaughterhouse.
(15) Truck terminals.
(16) Residential uses, including any "residential uses" as that term is
used in C.G.S. § 8-30g(g) and how that term has been construed by
the Connecticut courts.
§ 340-11.5. Height, area, yard and floor area requirements.
A. By district.
(1) DBIPZ District 1.
(a) Lot size: 40,000 square feet.
(b) Frontage: 200 feet.
(c) Yards:
Minimum Required Yard
(feet)
Maximum Required Yard
(feet)
Front yard 20 40
Side yard 20 40
Rear yard 35 50
§ 340-11.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-11.5
1:285
(d) Maximum height: 35 feet.
(e) Minimum floor area: 1,200 square feet.
(f) Maximum building coverage: 25%.
(g) Maximum lot coverage: 75%.
(h) Maximum building footprint: 10,000 square feet.
(2) DBIPZ District 2.
(a) Lot size: 60,000 square feet.
(b) Frontage: 200 feet.
(c) Yards:
Minimum Required Yard
(feet)
Maximum Required Yard
(feet)
Front yard 30 50
Side yard 20 40
Rear yard 25 50
(d) Maximum height: 35 feet.
(e) Minimum floor area: 1,200 square feet.
(f) Maximum building coverage: 25%.
(g) Maximum lot coverage: 75%.
(h) Maximum building footprint: 30,000 square feet.
(3) DBIPZ 3.
(a) Minimum lot size and frontage requirement.
[1] Lot size: 60,000 square feet.
[2] Frontage: 200 feet.
(b) Yards:
Minimum Required Yard
(feet)
Maximum Required Yard
(feet)
Front yard 25 50
Side yard 20 40
Rear yard 25 50
(c) Maximum height: 35 feet.
(d) Minimum floor area: 1,200 square feet.
(e) Maximum building coverage: 25%.
(f) Maximum lot coverage: 75%.
(g) Maximum building footprint: 60,000 square feet.
(4) DBIPZ 4.
(a) Minimum lot size and frontage requirement.
[1] Lot size: 1,600,000 square feet.35
[2] Frontage: 300 feet.
(b) Yards:
35.Editor's Note: So in original.
§ 340-11.5 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 340-11.5
1:286
Minimum Required Yard
(feet)
Maximum Required
Yard
(feet)
State highway front yard 40 50
Local road front yard 30 50
Side yard 25 40
Rear yard 25 50
(c) Maximum height: 35 feet.
(d) Minimum floor area: 1,200 square feet.
(e) Maximum building coverage: 25%.
(f) Maximum lot coverage: 75%.
(g) Maximum building footprint: 50,000 square feet.
(5) DBIZ 5.
(a) Minimum lot size and frontage requirement.
[1] Lot size: 60,000 square feet.
[2] Frontage: 175 feet.
(b) Yards:
Minimum Required Yard
(feet)
Maximum Required Yard
(feet)
Front yard 30 50
Side yard 25 40
Rear yard 25 50
(c) Maximum height: 35 feet.
(d) Minimum floor area: 1,200 square feet.
(e) Maximum building coverage: 25%.
(f) Maximum lot coverage: 75%.
(g) Maximum building footprint: 50,000 square feet.
(6) DBIZ 6.
(a) Minimum lot size and frontage requirement.
[1] Lot size: 60,000 square feet.
[2] Frontage: 175 feet.
(b) Yards:
Minimum Required Yard
(feet)
Maximum Required Yard
(feet)
Front yard 30 50
Side yard 25 40
Rear yard 25 50
(c) Maximum height: 35 feet.
(d) Minimum floor area: 1,200 square feet.
(e) Maximum building coverage: 25%.
§ 340-11.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-11.5
1:287
(f) Maximum lot coverage: 75%.
(g) Maximum building footprint: 50,000 square feet.
B. Residential buffer.
(1) All setbacks when abutting residential property shall be increased to a
minimum of 50 feet, and adequate vegetative buffering as described in
§ 340-5.3, Site development plan, is required.
(2) The Commission will require a viewshed analysis plan/cross section to help
determine the proper buffering for abutting properties and Town Center area.
Additional plantings or other appropriate screening design techniques may be
required by the Commission.
C. Front-yard setback waiver. No building shall be located more than one and one-half
times the front-yard setback requirement from the street line unless a waiver is
granted by a vote of 2/3 of the full Commission.
D. Maximum height waiver. Maximum height may increase by five feet by a two-thirds'
vote of the full Commission to provide for architectural features to screen HVAC,
building vents, communication equipment, or other similar objects.
§ 340-11.6. Accessory buildings and uses.
A. Customary buildings and uses accessory to the uses above, which may
include assembly hall for meetings incidental to the business of the
principal use or for civic meetings; cafeterias, central heating and
cooling system, power generation (fuel cell) equipment storage and
maintenance, material storage, motor vehicle storage, child day-care
center, and recreation facilities for employees.
B. Security or reception buildings may be located between 15 and 50 feet
from the street line and shall not exceed 150 square feet and 12 feet in
height.
§ 340-11.7. Outdoor storage.
In Districts 3, 5 and 6 the Commission by special permit can allow outdoor
storage of equipment and materials for any permitted uses except for
building and related trades. Outdoor storage shall not occur in any required
buffer area, building setback area, in front of a building, or within 50 feet
of any abutting property line and 100 feet from an abutting residentially
zoned property. All outdoor storage areas shall have sufficient landscape
screening and fencing to prevent visibility from adjoining property and any
public street. No materials or equipment shall project above the screening
provided.
§ 340-11.8. Design standards.
The design standards of Article V shall expressly apply to all uses in the
DBIPZ.
§ 340-11.5 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 340-11.8
1:288
ARTICLE XII
Designed Development Zone Regulations
[Amended 5-7-2015, effective 6-1-2015]
§ 340-12.1. Intent.
A. These zoning regulations are designed for the typical development of single
principal detached structures on individual lots. It shall be the intent of
this article of this chapter to permit the development of groups of principal
buildings on a single lot only under the strictest control to assure that the
intent of this chapter is carried out.
B. The following zones are established to allow such variation and to permit a
total project to be developed as a single unit:
(DI) Designed Industrial Zone
(DR) Designed Recreation Zone
§ 340-12.2. Application procedure.
A. All applicants shall submit a preliminary site development plan to the
Commission for the purpose of presenting a preliminary design of the
proposed development to the community at an early stage in the design
process and to incorporate the applicable comments and suggestions
into the overall design.
B. At a minimum, the preliminary site development plan shall include
enough detail to measure for the requirements of this chapter and to
clearly present the proposal. This preliminary plan shall be submitted
with five copies of the plans, a description of the proposed uses and
plans that include:
(1) Title of the project, name of the developer, names of the
professionals preparing the plans, scale, date and a North arrow.
(2) A general location map indicating the surrounding properties
within 500 feet of the property.
(3) The boundaries of the subject site.
(4) The existing and proposed topography of the site.
(5) Soils map, particularly inland wetland areas.
(6) Road and parking plans.
(7) Recreation space plan.
(8) Location of water supply and sewage disposal systems.
(9) Building, structural layout and architectural rendering of the
proposed buildings.
(10) The number of proposed units.
(11) Architectural elevations of the buildings and the proposed floor
area of the buildings.
(12) Tabulations of the gross acreage of the development and the
percentage of lot coverage of buildings, open space, roads and
parking.
C. The plans shall be submitted to the administrative official at least seven
days prior to a regularly scheduled meeting. A public information
session for the preliminary site development shall be held within 65
§ 340-12.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-12.2
1:289
days after receipt of the preliminary plans. Notice of the time and place
of such information session shall be published in a newspaper having
a substantial circulation in the Town at least two times, the first not
more than 15 days nor less than 10 days before the date of such public
information session. The public information session will be held for the
purpose of receiving input and comment on the preliminary plan from
the general public.
D. The applicant shall submit the names of all property owners within 500
feet in all directions from the subject area as they appear in the records
of the Tax Assessor of the Town. The applicant shall be responsible
for sending notice for the public information session by certified mail
to the property owners appearing in the aforementioned records at
least 30 days before the public information session. The applicant shall
supply the ZEO with copies of the certified mail receipt forms. The ZEO
shall supply the applicant with a copy of the public information session
meeting notice.
E. After the public information session, the applicant may proceed to
submit the special permit application, Zone Map amendment application
and site development plans that satisfy the requirements of Article V of
this chapter as well as all other applications and requirements of the
Town.
F. The application package shall include an application for a special permit
satisfying the requirements defined in Article V. The special permit
application shall define the use(s) requested for the zone and shall
include a site development plan according to Article V.
G. The Zone Map amendment and special permit application shall be
submitted to the Town Planning Commission for comment, and any
report submitted by the Planning Commission shall be entered into the
minutes of the public hearing.
H. A public hearing for the Zone Map amendment application shall be held
no later than 65 days after receipt of the application.
I. The public hearing for the special permit application shall be held
immediately after the public hearing for the Zone Map amendment
application but before Zoning Commission action on the Zone Map
amendment application.
J. No special permit shall be approved without Zoning Commission
approval of the Designed Development Zone Map amendment.
K. The site development plan for any lot within a Designed Development
Zone shall not be modified unless and until the Commission shall have
approved a special permit application submitted by the owner of such
lot in the same detail as required for an initial application under Article
XII and accompanied by the fee per the Town's Land Use Fee Schedule.
Such special permit application shall be processed in the same manner
as a new application under this Article XII.
§ 340-12.3. General requirements for Designed Development Zones.
A. No parking or loading shall be permitted in any required front, rear or
side yard, except where otherwise permitted in this chapter.
§ 340-12.2 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 340-12.3
1:290
B. A twenty-five-foot-wide buffer zone that shall meet the requirements of
§ 340-13.3 shall be provided in all side and rear yards when abutting a
residential district. (See Appendix B.36)
C. All developments shall be located so as to provide direct assess to
major streets and highways and other transportation facilities without
creating traffic problems along minor streets and residential
neighborhoods outside of such zoning districts which will have adverse
effects on adjacent development.
D. The site shall be suitable for development in the manner proposed
without causing hazards to persons or property on or off the site from
flooding, erosion, slipping of the soil, or other danger, annoyances or
inconveniences. Conditions of soil, groundwater level, drainage and
topography must be appropriate in both land and pattern of use
intended.
E. Off-street parking and loading spaces shall meet the requirements of
Article XIII.
F. Loading and unloading space shall be provided entirely within the
property area.
G. All signs shall conform to the requirements of Article XIII.
H. Screening shall be provided for trash, refuse or refuse containers.
I. Landscaping shall be provided in accordance with Article XIII.
J. All uses shall be subject to the site plan requirement of Article V.
K. The general requirements of Article III shall be satisfied.
L. Interior walks are to be of sufficient width and construction to serve
emergency vehicles and apparatus.
M. The location of structures, shown on the site development plan, shall
be so arranged as to be harmonious and compatible with the adjacent
existing structures and with the general development within the
neighborhood.
N. All utilities shall be underground (electric, telephone, etc.).
O. All HVAC, elevator, utility, venting and other similar structures shall be
screened from view and shall not exceed 15% of the roof area of any
building.
P. No development under this section shall be approved unless the
dwelling units are to be serviced by public water supply or stateapproved
private water supply. If the developer proposes to provide
a private water supply, he shall assure the satisfactory continuing
operation and maintenance permanently until the equivalent public
utilities are available.
Q. All interior streets shall be constructed in compliance with the Town of
Marlborough Highway Specifications for Subdivision. The right-of-way
requirements and road width requirements may be waived if the streets
are considered by the Zoning Commission to be of local use only for the
site. In no case shall the paved portion be less than 20 feet.
R. The minimum space between buildings shall be 50 feet.
S. All plans for subsurface sewage disposal must be designed by a
professional licensed engineer and submitted to the State Department
36.Editor's Note: Appendix B is on file in the Town's office.
§ 340-12.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-12.3
1:291
of Health and the State Department of Energy and Environmental
Protection for their approval. The approval shall be issued in writing
before final approval shall be issued by the Commission.
T. The site shall be provided with an adequate stormwater and surface
water drainage system constructed and designed in accordance with
the Town of Marlborough Highway Construction and Design Standards.
The overall drainage system shall be designed such that the runoff rate
outside of the development during or after development does not exceed
the rate which existed before development. This may be accomplished
by retention basins, infiltration basins or other acceptable means.
U. Alcoholic liquor sales locations shall satisfy the requirements of
§ 340-13.9.
V. Motor vehicle repair and motor vehicle gasoline stations shall satisfy the
requirements of § 340-13.8.
§ 340-12.4. Prerequisite for Commission approval.
In consideration of the proposed Zone Map amendment, the Zoning
Commission shall ensure conformance with the criteria defined in Article
XVI and other provisions of this chapter.
§ 340-12.5. Special requirements.
A. Designed Industrial Zone.
(1) Location. Designed Industrial Zones are permitted by change of the zone to Designed
Industrial Zone.
(2) Special permit uses. In a Designed Industrial Zone a special permit, issued by the Zoning
Commission based on conformance with the criteria defined in this chapter, is required order to construct a building or buildings for the uses listed below. After a certificate occupancy is issued for the building in conformance with the approved site plan, any change
in use allowed in the Designed Industrial Zone may be allowed in the structure, except defined below by asterisks, as long as the parking requirements, sanitation requirements,
and building and fire code(s) requirements, etc., can be met and the exterior site plan is changed. Such changes in use need approval from the Zoning Enforcement Officer (ZEO). the event the ZEO determines that the applicable requirements, regulations or other issues
within the jurisdiction of the Zoning Commission are not satisfied by the change in use,
the only appeal of that determination shall be via application for a special permit for such
change in use.
(a) Office buildings.
(b) Research laboratories.*
(c) Warehouses, wholesale or storage.*
(d) Manufacture, processing or assembly of goods, excepting that which is dangerous by of fire, radiation or explosion, or injurious, noxious or detrimental to the surrounding
neighborhood by reason of emissions.*
(e) Grain sales and storage.
(f) Contractors' storage yards, except salvage and wrecking services.*
(g) Public utility garages, pole yards, and similar facilities.*
(h) Public utility installations needed for public convenience and necessity.
(i) State and federal government building.*
(j) Municipal facilities and uses.*
(k) Lumber and building materials, sales and storage.
§ 340-12.3 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 340-12.5
1:292
(l) Accessory buildings and uses subject to the requirements of Article VI.
(m) School/public bus shelters.
(n) Public telephone booths.
* NOTE: These land uses have the potential for contaminating the groundwaters Town, consequently the Commission may require certain design restrictions, not limited to setbacks, material storage areas, floor drains, stormwater management
facilities and fire-protection measures.
(3) Height, area, yard and floor area requirements.
(a) Minimum lot size and frontage requirements.
[1] Lot size: 400,000 square feet (on-site subsurface sewage disposal and on-site [2] Frontage: 300 feet.
(b) Minimum required yards.
[1] Front yard: 75 feet.
[2] Side yard: 50 feet.
[3] Rear yard: 50 feet.
[4] Buffer yard: 50 feet.
(c) Maximum height: 40 feet.
(d) Minimum floor area: 1,200 square feet.
(e) Maximum building coverage: 25%.
(f) Maximum lot coverage: 60%.
(g) Maximum building size, single floor: 60,000 square feet.
B. Designed Recreational Zone.
(1) Location. Designed Recreational Zones are permitted by change of the zone to Recreational Zone.
(2) Special permit uses. A special permit, issued by the Zoning Commission based on conformance
with the criteria defined in this chapter, is required to define the use(s) permitted in Recreation Zone. The following uses are permitted: (*see Note b).
(a) Use of land, including buildings, by clubs or organizations for recreation;
(b) The commercial selling or rental of goods only of the character that would premises;
(c) Any other use deemed to be recreation by the Zoning Commission;
(d) State and federal government buildings;
(e) Municipal facilities and uses;*
(f) Accessory buildings and uses, subject to the requirements of Article VI.
NOTE:
b. These land uses have the potential for contaminating the groundwaters consequently the Commission may require certain design restrictions, such limited to setbacks, material storage areas, floor drains, stormwater management and fire-protection measures.
(3) Standards and criteria. In addition to the general requirements for Designed Development
Zones as specified as § 340-12.3 of this article, the following criteria shall be satisfied the public health, safety and welfare:
(a) No structure used for recreation or other related purpose shall be located within of any adjoining residential property line or within 100 feet of any adjoining GC, DC, DI and DMR Zones and the street line.
(b) No land activity used for recreation shall be within 50 feet of any adjoining property § 340-12.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-12.5
1:293
(c) Vehicular access shall not be within 100 feet of any adjoining property line.
(4) Height, area, yard and floor area requirements.
(a) Minimum lot size and frontage requirements.
[1] Lot size: 400,000 square feet (on-site subsurface sewage disposal and on-site well).
[2] Frontage: 300 feet.
(b) Minimum required yards.
[1] Front yard: 75 feet.
[2] Side yard: 50 feet.
[3] Rear yard: 50 feet.
[4] Buffer yard: 50 feet.
NOTE:
Minimum yard requirements are designed to protect neighboring properties placement of buildings, parking areas or other structures and activities. The requirements shall not apply to athletic fields or play areas unless the Commission setbacks, except that the minimum buffer strip shall apply.
(c) Maximum height: 40 feet.
(d) Minimum floor area: 1,200 square feet.
(e) Maximum building coverage: 25%.
(f) Maximum lot coverage: 60%.
(g) Maximum building size, single floor: 60,000 square feet.
(5) Height, area, yard and floor area requirements.
(a) Minimum lot size and frontage requirements.
[1] Lot size: 400,000 square feet (on-site subsurface sewage disposal and on-site well).
[2] Frontage: 300 feet.
(b) Minimum required yards.
[1] Front yard: 200 feet.
[2] Side yard: 150 feet.
[3] Rear yard: 150 feet.
[4] Buffer yard: 50 feet.
NOTE:
Minimum yard requirements are designed to protect neighboring properties placement of buildings, parking areas or other structures and activities. The requirements shall not apply to athletic fields or play areas unless the Commission setbacks, except that the minimum buffer strip shall apply.
(c) Maximum height: 40 feet.
(d) Maximum building coverage: 10%.
(e) Maximum lot coverage: 60%.
§ 340-12.5 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 340-12.5
1:294
ARTICLE XIII
Special Regulations
[Amended 5-7-2015, effective 6-1-2015]
§ 340-13.1. Signs. [Amended 2-1-2018]
A. The purpose of this section is to further promote the public health, safety and
welfare by providing adequate standards to control the location, height, size,
number, illumination and overall design of signs. The specific requirements and
standards of this section have been formulated to prevent undue distraction of
motorists and pedestrians, to ensure compatibility of signs with permitted land
uses, to provide reasonable standards by which uses within various zones may
relate their function to the general public, and to preserve the general welfare by
controlling the aesthetics and attractiveness of signs in order to:
(1) Protect the residential, commercial, industrial and recreational character of
each zone.
(2) Mitigate any negative impact on adjoining properties.
(3) Assist in achieving a more desirable environment in order to maintain property
values and to encourage economic growth.
B. Residential zones.
(1) Permitted signs. Subject to the provisions of this § 340-13.1 and solely in connection
with a legal use maintained at a lot in a residential zone which is permitted as of
right or is legally maintained following the issuance of a zoning permit or a special
permit, pursuant to Article VI or Article XII (as applicable) of these regulations, the
following signs may be placed in a residential zone:
Type of Sign
Permitted Size
(square feet)
Zoning Permit
Size
(square feet)
Maximum Size
(square feet)
Address sign 2 — 2
Contractor's sign 6 — 6
Detached sign1 — 4 10
Development sign — 10 20
Home occupation
sign2
— 4 4
Nameplate sign 2 — 2
Political sign 6 — 6
Protection sign 2 — 2
Public interest sign — 16 32
Public safety sign 2 — 2
Temporary event
sign3
— 16 32
Temporary real
estate sign
6 — 6
§ 340-13.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-13.1
1:295
Type of Sign
Permitted Size
(square feet)
Zoning Permit
Size
(square feet)
Maximum Size
(square feet)
Temporary tag sale
sign
3 — 3
NOTES:
1 Detached signs are only permitted in a residential zone in connection with
those uses, other than a home occupation, legally maintained under these
regulations following issuance of a special permit pursuant to § 340-6.3A,
which require the visitation of the public or other parties not owning or
occupying the lot.
2 Home occupations signs are only permitted in a residential zone in
connection with a home occupation legally maintained under these
regulations following issuance of a special permit pursuant to § 340-6.3A.
3 Temporary event signs are only permitted in a residential zone on lots
owned by a public interest organization.
(2) Prohibited signs. Only signs expressly permitted pursuant to Subsection B(1) shall
be permitted in a residential zone. All other signs are strictly prohibited.
(3) Number of signs.
(a) Except as described in this § 340-13.1, and subject to the application
requirements and sign standards set forth in this § 340-13.1, any person or
entity which is an owner of a lot in a residential zone shall be permitted to place
the following number of signs on such lot: one of the following signs: detached
sign, home occupation sign or public interest sign, plus one nameplate sign or
one address sign, plus one contractor's sign, temporary event sign, temporary
real estate sign or temporary tag sale sign, plus as many political signs or
protection signs or public safety signs as permitted under this § 340-13.1.
(b) Any person or entity that is not an owner of a lot in a residential zone shall not
be permitted to place any signs on any lot within a residential zone.
(c) Any detached sign, home occupation sign, political sign, public interest sign,
public safety sign, temporary event sign, temporary real estate sign, and
temporary tag sale sign having two identical sign faces placed back-to-back in
a manner such that each sign face is no more than six inches apart shall be
deemed, for the purposes of this Subsection B(3), to be one sign.
(4) Placement standards. All signs permitted in a residential zone shall comply with all
of the general placement standards described in this § 340-13.1 and shall be located
a minimum distance from any lot line as follows:
Type of Sign
Minimum Distance From All Lot Lines
(feet)
Address sign 10
Contractor's sign 10
Detached sign 15
§ 340-13.1 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 340-13.1
1:296
Type of Sign
Minimum Distance From All Lot Lines
(feet)
Development sign 25
Home occupation 15
Nameplate sign —
Political sign 10
Protection sign 10
Public interest sign 15
Public safety sign 10
Temporary event sign 15
Temporary real estate sign 10
Temporary tag sale sign 10
(5) Illumination standards. No sign in any residential zone shall be illuminated.
C. Commercial zones.
(1) Permitted signs. Subject to the provisions of this § 340-13.1, and solely in connection
with a legal use maintained at a lot in a commercial zone which is permitted as of right
or is legally maintained following the issuance of a zoning permit or a special permit,
pursuant to Article VIII or Article XIII (as applicable) of these regulations, the following
signs may be placed in a commercial zone:
Type of Sign
Permitted Size
(square feet)
Zoning Permit
Size
(square feet)
Maximum Size
(square feet)
Awning sign — 16 50
Billboard sign1 — — 25
Detached sign2 — 16 50
Directory sign1 — 16 120
Directory
identification sign1
4 — 10
Nameplate sign 2 — 2
Political sign1 6 — 6
Protection sign1 2 — 2
Public interest sign1 — 16 50
Public safety sign1 4 — 4
Roof sign — 16 50
Temporary event
sign
— 10 50
§ 340-13.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-13.1
1:297
Type of Sign
Permitted Size
(square feet)
Zoning Permit
Size
(square feet)
Maximum Size
(square feet)
Temporary real
estate sign1
6 — 6
Wall sign — 16 50
Window sign — 5 10
NOTES:
1 Only an owner of a lot is permitted to place a billboard sign, directory sign,
directory identification sign, political sign, protection sign, public interest sign,
public safety sign or temporary real estate sign in a commercial zone. No
person or entity conducting any use on a lot may place any such sign on a lot,
unless such person or entity is the owner thereof.
2 No detached sign shall be permitted on any lot in a commercial zone on which
a directory sign has been placed.
3 The zoning permit size for detached signs shall be zero for any lot which has
two or more detached signs existing thereon or proposed therefor.
(2) Prohibited signs. Only signs expressly permitted pursuant to Subsection C(1) shall be
permitted in a commercial zone. All other signs are strictly prohibited.
(3) Number of signs.
(a) Except as described in this § 340-13.1, and subject to the application requirements and
sign standards set forth in this § 340-13.1, each owner or tenant maintaining a use in commercial zone shall be permitted to have one nameplate sign.
(b) Except as described in this § 340-13.1, and subject to the application requirements and
sign standards set forth in this § 340-13.1, each owner or tenant maintaining a use a commercial zone which requires the regular visitation of the public or other parties
owning or occupying the lot shall be permitted to have one of the following signs:
awning sign, detached sign, public interest sign, roof sign or wall sign.
(c) Except as described in this § 340-13.1, and subject to the application requirements and
sign standards set forth in this § 340-13.1, each owner or tenant maintaining a use a commercial zone which requires the regular visitation of the public or other parties
owning or occupying the lot shall be permitted to have four window signs, provided that
no single window shall contain more than one window sign.
(d) Except as described in this § 340-13.1, and subject to the application requirements and
sign standards set forth in this § 340-13.1, each owner or tenant maintaining a use a commercial zone which requires the regular visitation of the public or other parties
owning or occupying the lot shall be permitted to have one temporary event sign.
(e) Subject to the application requirements and sign standards set forth in this § 340-13.1,
an owner of a lot may place two directory signs on such lot, provided that no portion each such two directory signs on any single lot shall be less than 300 feet apart.
(f) Subject to the application requirements and sign standards set forth in this § 340-13.1,
an owner of a lot may affix one directory identification sign for such owner and each
other person or entity conducting a use on such lot requiring regular visitation of public or other parties not owning or occupying the lot.
§ 340-13.1 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 340-13.1
1:298
(g) In addition to the foregoing, but subject to the application requirements and standards set forth in this § 340-13.1, an owner of a lot may affix one contractor's and one temporary real estate sign.
(h) No person or entity shall place any political sign or protection sign on a lot, such person or entity is the owner of such lot, unless such political sign or protection
sign is expressly authorized by the owner of such lot. Notwithstanding anything Subsection C(3) to the contrary, any person or entity which is an owner of a lot permitted to place as many political signs or protection signs as permitted under § 340-13.1.
(i) The Zoning Commission, upon application of an owner or tenant, may issue a permit to allow such person or entity to place up to two of the following connection with such applicant's use at a lot: awning signs, roof signs, wall window signs. In no event shall the Zoning Commission issue a special hereunder if the aggregate size of such signs exceeds 50 square feet or if such or entity fails to comply with the application requirements and sign standards set in this § 340-13.1. Except on a building that fronts on two streets where there are or more tenants, the owner or tenants may request the Commission to allow up of the following signs in connection with such applicant's use at a lot: awning roof signs, wall signs, and the aggregate size of such signs does not exceed 120 feet and no individual sign shall exceed 50 square feet in size and the total aggregate
signage on the building shall not exceed 250 square feet.
(j) The Zoning Commission, upon application of an owner, may issue a special to allow such owner to place up to one billboard sign on a lot in connection such owner's use at a lot. In no event shall the Zoning Commission issue a permit hereunder if such billboard sign or such owner or entity fails to comply application requirements and sign standards set forth in this § 340-13.1.
(k) Any detached sign, directory sign, political sign, public interest sign, public safety temporary event sign and temporary real estate sign having two identical sign placed back-to-back in a manner such that each sign face is no more than six apart shall be deemed, for the purposes of this Subsection C(3), to be one sign.
(l) The following charts are intended to provide a short-form illustration of the provisions
of this Subsection C(3). In the event the following charts conflict with any provisions contained in this § 340-13.1, the other provisions of this § 340-13.1 prevail.
Signs Permitted To Be Maintained by an Owner of a Lot in a Commercial Number of Signs Type of Signs
1 Nameplate sign
1 of the following: (provided that no
detached sign shall be permitted if a
directory sign is located on the lot)
Awning sign
Detached sign
Public interest sign
Roof sign
Wall sign
4 (not to exceed 1 per window) Window sign
1 Temporary event sign
§ 340-13.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-13.1
1:299
Signs Permitted To Be Maintained by an Owner of a Lot in a Commercial Zone
Number of Signs Type of Signs
1 Directory sign
No limit Directory identification sign
1 Contractor's sign
1 Temporary real estate sign
No limit Political signs
No limit Protection signs
1 Billboard sign
Signs Permitted To Be Maintained by a Tenant of a Lot in a Commercial Zone
Number of Signs Type of Signs
1 Nameplate sign
1 of the following: (provided that no
detached sign shall be permitted if a
directory sign is located on the lot)
Awning sign
Detached sign
Public interest sign
Roof sign
Wall sign
4 (not to exceed 1 per window) Window sign
1 Temporary event sign
(4) Placement standards.
(a) All signs permitted in a commercial zone shall comply with all of the general placement
standards described in this § 340-13.1, and shall be located a minimum distance from
any curbline as follows:
Type of Sign
Minimum Distance From All
Curblines
(feet)
Awning sign N/A
Billboard sign 100
Contractor's sign 10
Detached sign 10
Directory sign 10
Directory identification sign N/A
Nameplate sign N/A
Political sign 10
Protection sign 10
§ 340-13.1 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 340-13.1
1:300
Type of Sign
Minimum Distance From Curblines
(feet)
Public interest sign 10
Public safety sign 10
Roof sign N/A
Temporary event sign 10
Temporary real estate sign 10
Wall sign N/A
(b) All signs permitted in a commercial zone shall be located a minimum distance from nonfrontage lot line as follows:
Type of Sign
Minimum Distance From Nonfrontage Lot Lines
(feet)
Awning sign N/A
Billboard sign 100
Contractor's sign 15
Detached sign 15
Directory sign 15
Directory identification sign N/A
Nameplate sign N/A
Political sign 15
Protection sign 10
Public interest sign 15
Public safety sign 10
Roof sign N/A
Temporary event sign 15
Temporary real estate sign 15
Wall sign N/A
Window sign N/A
(c) All signs permitted in a commercial zone shall be located a minimum distance from lot line immediately adjacent to a residential zone as follows:
§ 340-13.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-13.1
1:301
Type of Sign
Minimum Distance From All Lot
Lines Immediately Adjacent To a
Residential Zone
(feet)
Awning sign N/A
Billboard sign 200
Contractor's sign 50
Detached sign 50
Directory sign 50
Directory identification sign N/A
Nameplate sign N/A
Political sign 15
Protection sign 5
Public interest sign 50
Public safety sign 5
Roof sign N/A
Temporary event sign 50
Temporary real estate sign 15
Wall sign N/A
Window sign N/A
(5) Illumination standards. The Zoning Commission may issue a special permit to permit
the illumination of an awning sign, billboard sign, detached sign, directory sign, public
interest sign, roof sign or wall sign located in a commercial zone, provided that the
following criteria are satisfied:
(a) Each illuminated sign shall be illuminated to the minimum amount of illumination
required, as determined by the Zoning Commission, to provide sufficient
illumination of the sign, so as to protect the character of the neighborhood and
Town;
(b) Each illumination plan shall contemplate all actions necessary and appropriate,
as determined by the Zoning Commission, to illuminate exclusively the sign, with
minimal light spill, direct or objectionable glare, or light trespass;
(c) Each illumination plan shall contemplate all actions necessary and appropriate, as
determined by the Zoning Commission, to protect against public hazards; and
(d) Each illumination plan shall incorporate illumination sources in a manner that does
not detract from the aesthetic value of the lot, the neighborhood and the Town.
D. Industrial zones.
(1) Permitted signs. Subject to the provisions of this § 340-13.1, and solely in connection
with a legal use maintained at a lot in an industrial zone which is permitted as of right
or is legally maintained following the issuance of a zoning permit or a special permit,
pursuant to Article X or Article XIII (as applicable) of these regulations, the following
signs may be placed in an industrial zone:
§ 340-13.1 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 340-13.1
1:302
Type of Sign
Permitted Size
(square feet)
Zoning Permit
Size
(square feet)
Maximum Size
(square feet)
Detached sign2 — 16 50
Directory sign1 — 32 120
Directory
identification sign1
4 — 10
Nameplate sign 2 — 2
Political sign1 6 — 6
Protection sign1 2 — 2
Public interest sign1 — 16 50
Public safety sign1 4 — 4
Temporary event
sign3
16 — 32
Temporary real
estate sign1
6 — 6
NOTES:
1 Only an owner of a lot is permitted to place a directory sign, directory
identification sign, political sign, protection sign, public interest sign, public
safety sign or temporary real estate sign in an industrial zone. No person entity conducting any use on a lot may place any such sign on a lot, unless such
person or entity is the owner thereof.
2 No detached sign shall be permitted on any lot in an industrial zone on which directory sign has been placed.
3 Temporary event signs are only permitted in an industrial zone on lots owned
by a public interest organization.
(2) Prohibited signs. Only signs expressly permitted pursuant to Subsection D(1) shall permitted in an industrial zone. All other signs are strictly prohibited.
(3) Number of signs.
(a) Except as described in this § 340-13.1, and subject to the application requirements
and sign standards set forth in this § 340-13.1, each owner or tenant maintaining use in an industrial zone shall be permitted to have one nameplate sign.
(b) Except as described in this § 340-13.1, and subject to the application requirements
and sign standards set forth in this § 340-13.1, each owner or tenant maintaining use in an industrial zone which requires the regular visitation of the public or other
parties owning or occupying the lot shall be permitted to have one detached sign.
(c) Subject to the application requirements and sign standards set forth in § 340-13.1, an owner of a lot may place two directory signs on such lot, provided
that no portion of each such two directory signs on any single lot shall be less than
300 feet apart.
§ 340-13.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-13.1
1:303
(d) Subject to the application requirements and sign standards set forth in this
§ 340-13.1, an owner of a lot may affix one directory identification sign for such
owner and each other person or entity conducting a use on such lot requiring
regular visitation of the public or other parties not owning or occupying the lot.
(e) In addition to the foregoing, but subject to the provisions of this § 340-13.1, an
owner of a lot may affix one temporary real estate sign and, if such owner is a public
interest organization, one temporary event sign.
(f) No person or entity shall place any political sign or protection sign on a lot,
unless such person or entity is the owner of such lot, unless such political sign or
protection sign is expressly authorized by the owner of such lot. Notwithstanding
anything in this Subsection D(3) to the contrary, any person or entity which is an
owner of a lot shall be permitted to place as many political signs or protection signs
as permitted under this § 340-13.1.
(g) Any detached sign, directory sign, political sign, public interest sign, public safety
sign, temporary event sign and temporary real estate sign having two identical sign
faces placed back-to-back in a manner such that each sign face is no more than six
inches apart shall be deemed, for the purposes of this Subsection D(3) to be one
sign.
(4) Placement standards.
(a) All signs permitted in an industrial zone shall comply with all of the general placement
standards described in this § 340-13.1 and shall be located a minimum distance from
any curbline as follows:
Type of Sign
Minimum Distance From All Curblines
(feet)
Detached sign 15
Directory sign 15
Directory identification sign N/A
Nameplate sign N/A
Political sign 10
Protection sign 10
Public interest sign 10
Public safety sign 10
Temporary event sign 10
Temporary real estate sign 10
(b) All signs permitted in an industrial zone shall be located a minimum distance from any
nonfrontage lot line as follows:
Type of Sign
Minimum Distance From All Nonfrontage
Lot Lines
(feet)
Detached sign 15
Directory sign 15
§ 340-13.1 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 340-13.1
1:304
Type of Sign
Minimum Distance From All Nonfrontage
Lot Lines
(feet)
Directory identification sign N/A
Nameplate sign N/A
Political sign 15
Protection sign 10
Public interest sign 15
Public safety sign 10
Temporary event sign 15
Temporary real estate sign 15
(c) All signs permitted in an industrial zone shall be located a minimum distance from lot line immediately adjacent to a residential zone as follows:
Type of Sign
Minimum Distance From All Lot Lines
Immediately Adjacent to a Residential
Zone
(feet)
Detached sign 50
Directory sign 50
Directory identification sign N/A
Nameplate sign N/A
Political sign 15
Protection sign 5
Public interest sign 50
Public safety sign 5
Temporary event sign 50
Temporary real estate sign 15
(5) Illumination standards. The Zoning Commission may issue a special permit to permit
the illumination of a detached sign, directory sign, or public interest sign located in industrial zone, provided that the following criteria are satisfied:
(a) Each illuminated sign shall be illuminated to the minimum amount of illumination
required, as determined by the Zoning Commission, to provide sufficient
illumination of the sign, so as to protect the character of the neighborhood Town;
(b) Each illumination plan shall contemplate all actions necessary and appropriate,
as determined by the Zoning Commission, to illuminate exclusively the sign, minimal light spill, direct or objectionable glare, or light trespass;
(c) Each illumination plan shall contemplate all actions necessary and appropriate, determined by the Zoning Commission, to protect against public hazards; and
§ 340-13.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-13.1
1:305
(d) Each illumination plan shall incorporate illumination sources in a manner that does
not detract from the aesthetic value of the lot, the neighborhood and the Town.
E. Recreational zones.
(1) Permitted signs. Subject to the provisions of this § 340-13.1, and solely in connection
with a legal use maintained at a lot in a recreational zone which is permitted as of right
or is legally maintained following the issuance of a zoning permit or a special permit,
pursuant to Article XIII of these regulations, the following signs may be placed in a
recreational zone:
Type of Sign
Permitted Size
(square feet)
Zoning Permit
Size
(square feet)
Maximum Size
(square feet)
Political sign 6 — 6
Protection sign 4 — 4
Public safety sign — 16 50
Temporary event
sign1
— 10 32
Temporary real
estate sign
6 — 6
NOTE:
1 Temporary event signs are only permitted in a recreational zone on lots owned
by a public interest organization.
(2) Prohibited signs. Only signs expressly permitted pursuant to Subsection E(3) shall be
permitted in a recreational zone. All other signs are strictly prohibited.
(3) Number of signs.
(a) Except as described in this § 340-13.1 and subject to the application requirements
and sign standards set forth in this § 340-13.1, any person or entity which is an
owner of a lot in a recreational zone shall be permitted to place the following
number of signs on such lot: one temporary event sign, plus one temporary real
estate sign, plus as many political signs or protection signs or public safety signs as
permitted under this § 340-13.1.
(b) Any person or entity that is not an owner of a lot in a recreational zone shall not be
permitted to place any signs on any lot within a recreational zone.
(c) Any temporary event sign and temporary real estate sign having two identical sign
faces placed back-to-back in a manner such that each sign face is no more than six
inches apart shall be deemed, for the purposes of this Subsection E(3) to be one
sign.
(4) Placement standards.
(a) All signs permitted in a recreational zone shall comply with all of the general placement
standards described in this § 340-13.1 and shall be located a minimum distance from
any lot line as follows:
§ 340-13.1 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 340-13.1
1:306
Type of Sign
Minimum Distance From All Lot Lines
(feet)
Political sign 5
Protection sign 5
Public safety sign 5
Temporary event sign 15
Temporary real estate sign 15
(b) All signs permitted in a recreational zone shall be located a minimum distance from lot line immediately adjacent to a residential zone as follows:
Type of Sign
Minimum Distance From All Lot Lines
Immediately Adjacent to a Residential
Zone
(feet)
Political sign 15
Protection sign 5
Public safety sign 5
Temporary event sign 50
Temporary real estate sign 15
(5) Illumination standards. No sign in any recreational zone shall be illuminated.
F. General sign guidelines and standards.
(1) Size standards.
(a) Except as set forth in this Subsection F(1), no sign shall exceed the
permitted size for such type of sign and zoning district in which such sign
shall be located. By way of clarification, if no permitted size is prescribed for
a type of sign in a zoning district, the permitted size shall be deemed to be
zero square feet, and such sign shall not be erected, installed or otherwise
placed on any lot, except as otherwise permitted by this Subsection F(1).
(b) The Zoning Enforcement Officer, or any Town employee working under the
direction of the Zoning Enforcement Officer and exercising the duties of
the Zoning Enforcement Officer hereunder, may issue a zoning permit to
allow for a sign to exceed the permitted size for such type of sign and
zoning district in which such sign shall be located, provided that in no event
shall any such zoning permit be issued for a sign in excess of the zoning
permit size for such type of sign and zoning district in which such sign
shall be located. The Zoning Enforcement Officer or other Town employee
shall issue such zoning permit only after verifying that such proposed sign
complies with all guidelines, standards and provisions contained within this
§ 340-13.1.
(c) The Zoning Commission may issue a special permit to allow for a sign to
exceed the zoning permit size for such type of sign and zoning district in
which such sign shall be located, provided that in no event shall any such
special permit be issued for a sign in excess of the maximum size for such
§ 340-13.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-13.1
1:307
type of sign and zoning district in which such sign shall be located. The
Zoning Commission shall issue such special permit only after verifying that
such proposed sign complies with all guidelines, standards and provisions
contained within this § 340-13.1, and shall be issued only if the unique
characteristics of a lot and a proposed sign require.
(d) The size of any sign shall be measured in accordance with the measurement
standards set forth in this § 340-13.1.
(2) Measurement standards.
(a) Sign measurement shall be based upon individual letters or symbols
individually affixed to a surface, building, wall, window, or sign surface.
The area shall be considered to be that of the smallest rectangle which
encompasses all of the letters and symbols.
(b) For a sign consisting of individual letters or symbols individually affixed to
a surface, building, wall, or window, the area shall be considered to be that
of the smallest rectangle which encompasses all of the letters and symbols.
(c) The area of supporting framework (e.g., brackets, posts, etc.) shall not be
included in the area if such framework is incidental to the display.
(d) If a sign has two faces but is deemed to be one single sign pursuant to the
terms of this § 340-13.1, the sign area shall be taken as the area of either
face, and if the faces are unequal, the larger shall determine the area.
(3) Measurement of height. The height of any sign shall be measured from the
surface of the nearest public road up to the highest point of the sign. In
situations where a sign is intended to be visible from two roads of different
elevations, measurement shall be from the surface of the lower roadway.
(4) General placement standards.
(a) No sign shall be placed in such position as to endanger traffic on a street
or public way by obscuring a clear view, by creating confusion with official
street signs or signals or by creating an unnecessary and unsafe distraction.
(b) No sign, other than official street or highway signs, shall be erected or
maintained within the street or highway right-of-way.
(c) No sign shall be attached to any tree or utility pole, or be permitted to be
painted directly upon the roof of any building.
(d) No sign shall be located within 15 feet of any other sign on the same lot,
and no sign located on a frontage lot line shall be placed within 100 feet of
any other sign located on the same frontage lot line. The Commission, upon
application of an owner or tenant, may issue a special permit to allow such
person or entity in a mutlitenant building to place on the building with three
or more tenants canopy or wall signs located closer than 15 feet.
(e) All detached signs, directory signs, political signs, public interest signs,
temporary event signs, and temporary real estate signs shall be placed
along a frontage lot line, and each sign shall, to the extent possible, be
placed as close to such frontage lot line as permitted by this § 340-13.1.
(5) Safety standards.
(a) Except for contractor's signs and temporary event signs, all signs shall be
designed to be immovable and structurally attached and secured to the
ground, a building or another sign.
(b) No person shall erect a sign which is structurally unsafe, as determined by
the Building Official or the Zoning Enforcement Officer.
§ 340-13.1 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 340-13.1
1:308
(c) Signs which constitute a hazard to public safety and health by reason
of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation or abandonment shall not be
permitted, and each owner shall promptly remove or repair any such sign
existing on such owner's lot. All signs shall be maintained so as to present
a neat, clean appearance. Painted areas shall be kept in a safe, neat and
clean appearance and in good structural condition, and illumination shall
be maintained in good working order. Signs that are no longer safe, neat,
clean or in sound structural condition must be repaired or removed. Signs
which are no longer functional or advertising establishments that have been
abandoned or are no longer active shall be promptly removed or relocated
by the owner of the lot on which such sign stands.
(d) Signs which obstruct free entrance or exit from a door, window or fire
escape shall not be permitted.
(e) Signs which obstruct light or air or interfere with the proper functioning of
a building shall not be permitted.
(f) Upon the removal of any sign, the owner shall promptly restore the lot or
any structure thereon to the original condition of such lot or structure.
(6) Design guidelines and standards.
(a) The size of any awning sign, detached sign, directory sign, public interest
sign, roof sign, temporary event sign, wall sign or window sign shall be
restricted to ensure that signs do not overpower the buildings and facades
on such lot or neighboring lots.
(b) Lettering shall be of the style, size and color necessary to be legible to
the general public and aesthetically compatible with the character of the
neighborhood and Town, and all such lettering shall be simple and readable.
(c) The size of a sign shall not exceed the size necessary to be legible to
the general public and aesthetically compatible with the character of the
neighborhood and Town. The Zoning Commission hereby finds that the
maximum sizes permitted for many types of signs in various zoning districts
are unreasonably large in most applications, and such maximum sizes
should only be used in unique circumstances, such as for signs which are
substantially set back from a public road.
(d) Signs shall not cover unique or special architectural details, such as, but not
limited to, arches, sills, moldings, cornices, and transom windows.
(e) Materials used to construct and support signs should be selected to
enhance the Town and the property on which the sign will be located.
Examples of acceptable materials which may achieve this result include,
without limitation, carved wood, carved stone, gold leaf and their visual
equivalents.
(f) All of the same type of signs on a lot shall express a uniformity in scale,
style, design and placement of signs to create a sense of consistent
appearance, and all store units located at the same property shall
complement and be aesthetically compatible with one another.
(g) Restraint should be exercised when selecting colors. Colors should be
chosen to complement and not clash with the facade color of the building
and the aesthetic value of the neighborhood and the Town.
G. Prohibited signs. In furtherance of the provisions of Subsections B(2), C(2), D(2)
and E(2), but without limitation, the following signs shall be prohibited in all zones
within the Town:
§ 340-13.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-13.1
1:309
(1) Streamers, pennants, ribbons, spinners or other similar devices.
(2) Internally illuminated signs, flashing signs, neon signs, inflatable signs, and
signs containing reflective elements, which sparkle or twinkle.
(3) Signs advertising or identifying a business or organization which is either
defunct or no longer located on the premises.
(4) Off-premises signs.
(5) Any vehicle or trailer exhibiting any lettering or symbols and parked in such a
manner as to indicate that such vehicle is being used for the basic purpose of
advertising products sold, or directing people to a business or activity located
on or near the place where such vehicle is parked.
(6) Three-dimensional signs built to physically represent the object advertised.
(7) Signs which utilize supporting framework (e.g., brackets, posts, etc.) exceeding
20% of the sign area as measured pursuant to the terms of this § 340-13.1.
(8) Signs which are not expressly permitted in these regulations.
H. Application procedures and requirements.
(1) Except for a sign not exceeding its prescribed permitted size in the zoning
district in which such sign shall be located as described in Subsection F(1)(a),
no person shall erect, alter or relocate any sign without first obtaining a permit
from the Zoning Commission.
(2) With respect to any application for a zoning permit or special permit to allow
for the erection, alteration or relocation of a sign, an applicant shall deliver the
following to the Zoning Enforcement Officer, or any Town employee working
under the direction of the Zoning Enforcement Officer and exercising the duties
of the Zoning Enforcement Officer hereunder:
(a) An application fee, in the amount specified by the fee schedule set annually
by the Board of Selectmen.
(b) A graphic rendering of all sign details to scale, including, without limitation,
any symbols, letters, materials and colors, with complete measurements of
all dimensions of such sign.
(c) A graphic rendering of all details of the method of support, attachment
or other means of erecting, placing or attaching such sign, and if such
method of support or attachment shall be visible from a public road, such
rendering shall also include a depiction to scale of such method of support
or attachment, including complete measurements of all dimensions of such
method of support.
(d) A graphic rendering of the sign, its placement and the surrounding location,
including, if applicable, the method of support or attachment, depicting the
sign as seen from a public road.
(e) Complete design schematics detailing the means of illumination, if any, and
the position and location of such lighting.
(f) Plan depicting the exact location of the sign in relation to buildings,
structures, property lines and public roads within a five-hundred-foot
radius.
(g) A landscaping plan for any detached sign, directory sign or public interest
sign.
(3) With respect to any application for a special permit to allow for the erection,
alteration or relocation of a sign, the application materials described herein
shall be submitted in the manner prescribed herein at least seven days prior to
the next regularly scheduled Zoning Commission meeting date.
§ 340-13.1 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 340-13.1
1:310
(4) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained herein, existing signs may
be replaced by issuance of a zoning permit, provided such replacement sign
is substantially identical to the existing sign being replaced with respect to
location, height, size, type, illumination, structural materials and overall design
and appearance.
I. Miscellaneous provisions.
(1) Noncommercial signs. Notwithstanding any other provision in this § 340-13.1 or
these regulations to the contrary, any sign authorized in these regulations may
contain any noncommercial copy in addition to, or in lieu of, any other copy.
(2) Variances. The ZBA shall have no power to issue a variance permitting: a) any
type of sign in a zoning district in which such type of sign is not expressly
permitted by this § 340-13.1; b) an increase of any permitted size or zoning
permit size; c) a modification to the illumination standards and restrictions
contained herein; d) the general placement standards set forth herein; e) the
safety standards set forth herein; or f) the design guidelines and standards set
forth herein. The issuance of any variance by the Marlborough Zoning Board of
Appeals shall not waive the applicant's requirement to obtain a permit from the
Zoning Commission in accordance with this § 340-13.1.
(3) Severability. The provisions contained in this § 340-13.1 are declared severable,
to the maximum extent permissible by law. If any provision or provisions of
this § 340-13.1 or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held
invalid or unlawful, it is the intent of the Zoning Commission that said invalidity
shall not affect other provisions of these regulations, which shall remain in full
force and effect as if such portions so declared invalid or unlawful were not
originally part of this § 340-13.1, even if the surviving parts of this § 340-13.1
result in greater restrictions after any unlawful provisions are stricken. In
particular, and without limitation, in the event any portion of this § 340-13.1
is declared invalid as applied to noncommercial signs, this § 340-13.1, or any
surviving portions thereof, shall remain in full force and effect.
§ 340-13.2. Earth excavation, filling.
A. Exemptions. The following activities that would result in the excavation or filling
of sand, gravel, peat, stone, loam, dirt or other earth product are permitted in any
zone:
(1) To excavate or remove or fill less than 125 cubic yards of such earth materials
on any single parcel of land within a period of one year.
(2) To excavate or remove such foundation, trenching and landscaping as shall be
necessary in connection with work or premises where a building permit has
been issued.
(3) To excavate or remove or fill material within actual street rights-of-way held
by either the Town of Marlborough or the State of Connecticut or shown on
a subdivision map or development map approved by the Planning, Zoning or
Conservation Commission.
(4) To excavate or remove or fill in connection or association with the construction
or alteration of a building or structure on the same premises for which a zoning
or inland wetland permit has been issued.
(5) To install septic systems, waterlines, sewer pipe, storm drainage systems, gas,
electric, telephone services and all similar necessary utility features.
(6) To install the improvements associated with an approved subdivision.
§ 340-13.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-13.2
1:311
(7) For the necessary excavation, removal, filling or grading in Connecticut with an
existing roadway or parking lot.
(8) For a sanitary landfill operation of the Town of Marlborough.
B. Application requirements. Application for a permit for excavation or filling not
permitted in the preceding section may be made to the Zoning Commission by the
property owner or his authorized agent on a form provided by the Commission. The
application shall include:
(1) An application fee based upon the fee schedule established by the Marlborough Board of
Selectmen. (See Appendix C.37)
(2) The application shall be accompanied by five copies of a map at a scale of one inch equals
40 feet. The map shall include the following information and specifications:
(a) A key map at a scale of one inch equals 800 feet, locating the subject parcel and properties immediately adjacent to the parcel within 1,000 feet.
(b) A detailed topographic plan showing existing and proposed contour lines at two-contour intervals in the area to be excavated or filled as well as a topographic plan the entire premises at five-foot contour intervals based upon a survey prepared by a surveyor registered in the State of Connecticut at an A-2 level of accuracy. The grading
plan shall be prepared by and shall bear the seal of a professional engineer licensed the State of Connecticut.
(c) Existing and proposed drainage on the site and the specifications and details necessary
to describe these features.
(d) Details for regrading and revegetation of the site at conclusion of operations.
(e) In the case where more than 500 cubic yards of material is involved, a report from Hartford County Soil and Water Conservation District may be required.
(f) Proposed entrance and exit roadways, soil stockpile areas and stump burial areas.
(g) Intersecting property lines, names of abutting property owners and the location of structure, well or septic system within 200 feet of the site.
(h) All existing trees with a caliper over 30 inches measured two feet from the ground
surface in the subject area, all wetland soils, all watercourses, and all ledge outcrops.
(i) All existing and proposed structures, walls and fencing.
(j) A detailed erosion and sediment control plan and the associated construction sequence
to include the proposed commencement and completion dates for all activities.
(k) Type and number of machinery to be used in the processes to be conducted on premises are noted on the plan. No variation, except the substitution of identical models
of such machinery, shall be permitted without the further permission of the Zoning
Commission.
(l) The following approval block:
MARLBOROUGH ZONING COMMISSION, MARLBOROUGH, CT
DATE APPROVED DATE OF EXPIRATION
CHAIRMAN
SECRETARY
(m) The location of any soil borings or test pits, together with the soil profiles.
(n) Statistics regarding the amount of materials to be excavated or deposited.
37.Editor's Note: Appendix C is on file in the Town's office.
§ 340-13.2 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 340-13.2
1:312
C. General requirements. The permit shall not be approved until the Commission has
duly advertised and held a public hearing as prescribed by Article V of this chapter,
and the Commission is satisfied that the following standards are met:
(1) The activity permitted will not adversely affect the value or amenities of
property owners within 500 feet of the subject site boundaries.
(2) No dangerous condition is created or continued.
(3) The premises shall be excavated or filled and regraded or graded in conformity
with the plan as approved.
(4) No excavation or filling shall take place within 50 feet of any property line
without having prior written consent by the abutting property owner.
(5) No building shall be erected on the premises except as may be permitted by the
zoning regulations, except as temporary shelter for machinery and field office,
subject to the approval of the Zoning Commission.
(6) At all stages of operation, proper drainage shall be provided to prevent the
collection and stagnation of water and to prevent harmful effects on
surrounding properties.
(7) When excavation, removal or filling operations are completed, the excavation
or removal or filling shall be graded so that no gradients in disturbed earth
shall be steeper than a slope of three horizontal to one vertical. The exposed
area where removal takes place shall be covered with no less than four inches
of topsoil or loam and seeded with a suitable cover crop.
(8) The Commission may require that the permit shall not become effective until
the applicant has posted a bond with the Treasurer of the Town in an amount
and form agreed upon by the Town Engineer and Town Attorney and approved
by the Zoning Commission, sufficient to insure conformity with this chapter and
other conditions imposed by the Commission.
(9) Permits granted hereunder shall be limited to one-year duration from the date
granted. Nothing herein shall be construed to prevent new application at the
termination of such permit. The Commission may grant, upon written request
and after the submission of a separate application, extensions to the expiration
date for the permit. The application for an extension to a permit shall include
data regarding the total volume of material excavated from the site during
the term of the permit and the estimated quantity of the remaining excavation
material.
(10) The preservation of significant trees, vegetation and other natural resources.
(11) The activity will not result in an unreasonable disturbance to the health, safety
and welfare of the immediate neighborhood.
(12) The activities and associated operations shall not result in any washing,
processing, sorting, crushing, grading, mixing, fabrication or similar activities.
(13) Truck traffic access to and from the site and the work area shall be so arranged
as to minimize traffic hazards and effects on streets and the local
neighborhood.
(14) All trucks that enter or leave the site carrying materials shall be covered with
a tarpaulin or other suitable material as per C.G.S. § 14-271, as amended.
D. Decisions. As a means to ensure that the intent of this chapter is achieved, the
Commission may, in granting the permit, attach conditions that include but are not
limited to the following:
(1) Reasonable limitations on the hours of operation of the activities.
(2) The construction sequence and associated activities.
§ 340-13.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-13.2
1:313
(3) Fencing and screening as may be necessary to screen objectionable views or to
protect pedestrians and vehicles.
(4) Construction signs.
(5) The location, storage, transportation and burial of tree stumps and rock
excavation materials.
E. The Commission may, at its discretion, modify the procedural and site plan
requirement of this section of the chapter for activities in which less than 500 cubic
yards of material are involved. Prior to any modification of the requirements of
this section, the Commission shall determine that the proposed activity is minor in
nature and does not pose a threat to abutting properties and the natural resources
of the community. The Commission may only grant these waivers after a unanimous
vote. The reasons for any waiver permitted herein shall be stated in the minutes of
the Commission.
§ 340-13.3. Landscaping requirements.
Landscaping shall be provided for any use requiring special permit or site
development plan approval in a DBIZ, DMR, DR, GC, GI or VCD Zoning
District, and a landscape plan prepared by a landscape architect licensed
in the State of Connecticut shall be submitted to and approved by the
Commission.
A. General requirements.
(1) The plan shall identify existing and proposed trees, shrubs, ground
cover, and features such as rock outcroppings or stonewalls. The
plan shall show where the landscaping elements are and will be
located, shall indicate the size and species, and shall include the
planting and/or construction details. Where existing natural growth
is proposed to be retained, the plans shall include the proposed
methods to protect the existing growth both during and after
construction.
(2) Topsoil shall be redistributed on all regraded surfaces so as to
provide at least four inches of even cover to all disturbed areas of
the development and shall be stabilized by seeding, planting or other
acceptable techniques.
(3) Maximum effort shall be made to save and retain existing vegetation,
trees or stonewalls. To this end, no material, temporary soil deposits
or construction shall take place within four feet of shrubs and within
15 feet of trees to be retained. Protective barriers and/or tree wells
shall be installed around plants to be retained. Existing, healthy,
mature trees may be considered in meeting the requirements of this
chapter.
(4) Any landscaping element shown on an approved site development
plan, and which shall be in a condition that does not satisfy the intent
of this chapter, shall be replaced by the property owner.
(5) All landscaping in parking areas and on street frontage shall be
placed so that it will not obstruct sight distance.
(6) Refuse collection areas, utilities, loading and unloading areas shall
be screened around their perimeter by a buffer strip and shall be
located so as to minimize visibility from all streets.
§ 340-13.2 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 340-13.3
1:314
(7) When security or screening fences are required or necessary for
the operation and maintenance of certain permitted uses, the
Commission may require that such fences are adequately screened
from public view.
(8) All outdoor refuse collection, storage and unloading areas shall be
enclosed by a wall or fence, shall be equipped with a self-closing
spring-loaded gate, shall be located at least 25 feet from all buildings
and may be viewed as a fire hazard as per C.G.S. § 29-306, as
amended. No materials, equipment, refuse or refuse collection
facility may protrude above the height of such screening.
B. Parking area landscaping requirements.
(1) A minimum of 10% of the total parking site within the parking
perimeter shall consist of a landscaped permeable surface(s).
(2) All parking areas shall be planted with at least one tree for every
five parking spaces provided. These trees shall be a minimum of
1.5 inches in caliper measured one foot above the finished ground
level and at least 12 feet in height immediately after planting. In
addition, these areas shall be planted with grass, shrubs and other
vegetation. The Commission recommends the use of a variety of the
following trees: Chinese dogwood, Flowering ash, Crimean linden,
Zelkova, Sycamore maple, Red oak, Red maple, European mountain
ash, American sweetgum and Thornless honeylocust.
C. Buffer area landscaping requirements. When a side and/or rear yard in
a GC, CI, DMR, DC, DI or DR Zone is adjacent to a residential zone, the
side and/or rear yard abutting the residential zone shall be a minimum
of 50 feet with a twenty-five-foot buffer strip. (See Appendix B.38)
(1) Buffer strips shall provide a year-round visual screen in order to
minimize adverse impacts from a site on an adjacent property or
from adjacent area. It may consist of fencing, evergreens, walls,
shrubs, trees, berms, rocks, boulders, mounds, or combinations, to
achieve this objective. At least 75% of the plantings shall be a
minimum of six feet in height.
(2) The buffer strip shall not be used for parking, storage, refuse
collection, driveways or any other use.
(3) Where the existing topography, vegetation and/or landscaping
provides natural screening, the Commission may modify the planting
and/or buffer strip requirements.
(4) All applicants are encouraged to use a mix of evergreen species in
the buffer strip.
§ 340-13.4. Restriction of building in flood areas and wetland and
watercourse conservation areas.
A. Land which is designated as "floodway" on maps entitled Floodway-
Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, community panel numbers 090148
0001B through 0008B of the National Flood Insurance Program, or as
amended,39 on file with the Town Clerk, shall not be built on, but repairs
may be made to existing buildings in accordance with the requirements
38.Editor's Note: Appendix B is on file in the Town's office.
§ 340-13.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-13.4
1:315
of the National Flood Insurance Program. No filling of floodways shall be
permitted. Uses such as farming, nurseries, bathing places, picnic, golf,
tennis and other similar recreation areas are permitted if in accordance
with the requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program.
B. Land which is designated as "floodway fringe" on the above-described
maps may be developed in accordance with the permitted uses of the
designated zone, provided that the requirements of the National Flood
Insurance Program are met.
C. In cases where designated inland wetlands and watercourses are
involved, a permit for activities within the inland wetland and
watercourse conservation areas shall also be required under the
Marlborough Water Course Conservation Area includes a watercourse, a
wetland, or any combination thereof, and the designated upland review
area, all as defined in the Inland Wetlands and Watercourse Regulations
of the Town of Marlborough, as amended.40
§ 340-13.5. Off-street parking regulations.
A. Intent: To provide off-street parking for the total use of buildings and structures
hereafter constructed, reconstructed or enlarged and the change in uses of land. Said
parking shall be part of the site plan or prepared as a separate site plan and shall
include boundary screening and landscaping, parking sites, interior traffic circulation
patterns, loading areas, storm drainage facilities and traffic access. Further, it is the
intent of this chapter to promote and support bicycle and pedestrian access throughout
the community. To this end all parking lots must be designed to provide safe and
convenient pedestrian and bicycle access and movement as a part of any parking area
or structure design.
B. Purpose: To require the minimum amount of parking spaces necessary to adequately
serve all properties while reducing the creation of impervious land cover that results in
the loss of green space and generates unnecessary stormwater runoff.
C. General requirements.
(1) No parking shall be permitted in the minimum required front yard except within
the limits of the driveway servicing residential properties.
(2) All nonresidential parking should be located at the side or to the rear of all
buildings outside of the required yard setbacks and shall be designed so that
backing onto public streets is precluded.
(3) No area shall be credited as a parking space which is in any part credited or used
as a loading space, aisle area or accessway.
(4) All required parking spaces, except for single-family residences, shall be allweather-
surface parking areas.
(5) Safe and adequate pedestrian and vehicular traffic must be provided in all areas of
off-street parking. The interior pedestrian and vehicular traffic flow shall integrate
with the parking arrangement, and sufficient traffic aisles and lanes for safe
transit shall be provided.
(6) No exit from or entrance to an off-street parking facility shall be laid out or
maintained as to constitute or create a traffic hazard or nuisance, and any parking
39.Editor's Note: See the maps identified in Chapter 238, Floodplain Management, of the
Town Code.
40.Editor's Note: So in original.
§ 340-13.4 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 340-13.5
1:316
lot gates shall not move in a direction that will interfere with pedestrian and traffic
movement.
(7) Where computation of required parking spaces results in a fraction of a car space,
the required number of spaces shall be increased to the next whole number of
spaces.
(8) Where the standards for parking spaces are based on seating capacity, the actual
number of seats present within the structure shall be utilized. Where bench or
booth seating exists, the number of seats shall be one seat per 18 inches for
bench seating and one seat per 24 inches for booth seating. For other areas where
seating is not fixed, the seating capacity shall be determined as indicated by the
Building Code. Seasonal outdoor seating shall provide parking spaces at 50% of
the requirement.
(9) All parking spaces provided pursuant to this section shall be on the same lot with
the building, except that the Commission may permit the parking space to be on
any lot within a seven-hundred-fifty-foot radius of the building(s) only if there is a
shared parking agreement recorded on the Land Records.
(10) Parking areas shall have bumper and wheel guards where needed and shall be
adequately landscaped and striped. The parking facilities shall be maintained by
the owner of the premises, and the required off-street parking facilities shall
be maintained as long as the use or structure exists for which the facilities are
designed to serve.
(11) All parking shall be located in established parking areas as delineated on approved
plans. There shall be no storage of any materials, equipment and display of
merchandise, vehicle repair or servicing within required parking areas except as
part of approved building operations.
(12) All parking areas shall have a stormwater management plan in accordance with
§ 340-5.3 of this chapter utilizing best management practices.
(13) Tandem parking spaces are prohibited except in multifamily residential units
within an enclosed garage that has direct access to the residential unit it is
serving.
(14) Parallel parking spaces may only be utilized for industrial uses and may not
constitute more than 20% of the required parking spaces.
(15) No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for new construction or a change in use
until all the required parking is constructed and landscaping completed.
(16) Developments which utilize shopping carts (grocery stores, retail uses, etc.) shall
provide for interior and exterior shopping cart storage areas. Design and number
of cart storage areas shall be determined by the Commission at the time of
application.
D. Design requirements.
(1) All parking lots shall:
(a) Have a standard stall size of nine feet by 18 feet; compact stall size of eight feet stall size of 10 feet by 20 feet.
(b) Have rectangular parking stalls.
(c) Have aisle widths and parking angles in a minimum ratio as follows:
§ 340-13.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-13.5
1:317
Parking Angle
(degrees) Minimum Aisle Width Direction 45° 12 feet 9 inches One way
50° 12 feet 9 inches One way
55° 13 feet 3 inches One way
60° 14 feet 3 inches One way
65° 15 feet 2 inches One way
70° 16 feet One way
75° 24 feet Two way
90° 24 feet Two way
(d) Have no greater than six-percent slope.
(e) Have a number and location of access drives compatible with traffic circulation within the site and on the abutting street system.
(f) Provide sufficient stacking area (area where cars may need to wait in line to exit onto to enter to circulate in the parking lot) and stacking for at least two vehicles at the drives to the site.
(g) No parking space shall be designed to allow a vehicle to protrude or overhang sidewalks landscaped area.
(h) Minimize potential conflict points between pedestrians, bicycles and motor vehicles.
(i) Thirty percent of all required parking shall be for compact cars.
(j) Where specimen trees or other significant natural or man-made features of the landscape the Commission may allow a reduction of up to 5% of the number of required parking increase compact parking spaces above 30%, or a combination thereof, to preserve landscape features.
(k) Parking spaces reserved for the physically handicapped shall be provided as follows:
[1] Be no less than 15 feet wide by 18 feet long;
[2] Adequate pavement markings and signage for the physically handicapped containing "Handicapped Parking Only" is required for each space. These spaces should physically handicapped persons are not compelled to wheel or walk behind parked entrances, ramps, walkways and elevators. The spaces to be provided herein handicapped shall be counted toward the total number of spaces required.
[3] Number of spaces required.
Parking Spaces Provided Required Number of Accessible Up to 25 1
26 to 50 2
51 to 75 3
76 to 100 4
101 to 150 5
151 to 200 6
201 to 300 7
301 to 400 8
§ 340-13.5 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 340-13.5
1:318
Parking Spaces Provided Required Number of 401 to 500 9
501 to 1,000 2% of total
Over 1,000 20 + 1 for additional E. Bicycle accommodations.
(1) Bicycle parking spaces shall be provided for developments within the General
Commercial, General Industrial, Marlborough Village District or Designed Business
Industrial Zone Districts, as follows:
Industrial uses 1 space for every 15 parking stalls
Mixed-use developments Sum of multifamily and commercial/office/
retail
Multifamily residential 1 space for every 4 residential units
Commercial/office/retail 1 space for every 25 parking stalls
(2) All bicycle parking spaces shall be provided in the form of anchored bicycle racks locker-type facilities, unless otherwise approved by the Commission. Bicycle parking
facilities shall be designed and installed to include:
(a) Minimum space size: two feet by six feet per bicycle with a five-foot maneuvering
aisle.
(b) Minimize the number of potential conflict points between bicycles and motor
vehicles.
(c) Adequate lighting.
(d) All bicycle parking spaces shall be provided in the form of anchored bicycle racks locker-type facilities, unless otherwise approved by the Commission. Provision locking of bicycles to the rack or bicycle locker shall be provided.
(e) Where possible, bicycle parking shall be located within view of building entrances
or in view of windows and/or security personnel stations and shall be evenly
dispersed throughout the project site to provide convenient parking opportunities.
Bicycle racks shall be located at least three feet from any wall or obstruction.
(f) Bicycle racks' design shall utilize materials that are durable finishes that tolerate abrasions, and the materials and form shall be consistent with streetscape elements.
(g) Where a bicycle rack allows bicycles to be locked on both sides of the rack without
conflict, each side may be counted as one required space.
(h) One vehicular parking space may be reduced for every five bicycle rack spaces
provided.
(3) The Commission may reduce or waive the following requirements where the applicant
can demonstrate bicycle activity will not occur at the particular location.
F. Pedestrian access design standards. Any development's design must allow for the safe
flow of pedestrians though a system of convenient routes that bring them to central
walkways leading to main entrances. All pedestrian routes shall provide for:
(1) Safe separation of all walkways from motor vehicle traffic through the use of raised
sidewalks and/or landscaping between sidewalks and parking spaces and/or driving
aisles.
(2) Safe well-articulated pedestrian crossings demarcated with pavement markings,
pedestrian warning signs, and lighting.
§ 340-13.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-13.5
1:319
(3) Sidewalks or pathways with a minimum width of four feet.
(4) Inclusion of plantings, benches and lighting along walkways and at all pedestrian
crossings.
(5) Design, construction and maintenance to accommodate disabled individuals per the
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) requirements.
G. Parking space allowance. In determining the allowable number of parking spaces for
a particular use, the calculation shall utilize 85% of the total gross floor area of the
building's floor area that particular use occupies, unless otherwise specifically noted
below for a particular use. Total gross floor area is the sum of all gross floor areas of
a building, including floors below and above street grade, confined within the walls of
the building.
Use Number of Spaces Required
Residential
Assisted/congregate living facilities 1.25 spaces per dwelling unit or its equivalent
Garden apartments 1.2 spaces per unit
1 space per 5 units
Home occupation No additional parking is required
Multifamily housing 1 space per 1- and 2-bedroom units with
garages
1.5 spaces for 1- and 2-bedroom units without
garages
2 spaces for 3-bedroom units
1 space for every 5 units
Single-family residences 2 spaces; accessory dwelling units shall provide
1 space
Garage spaces shall count toward meeting the parking requirements.
Business
Banks and financial institutions 1 space per 300 square feet
5 queuing spaces per service aisle
Funeral homes 12 spaces per chapel/viewing room
1 space per business vehicle
Medical/dental offices 1 space per 200 square feet
Private proprietary education 1 space per 50 square feet of instruction
1 space per employee
Professional offices 1 parking space per 350 square feet
Commercial Retail
Convenience store 1 space per 250 square feet
§ 340-13.5 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 340-13.5
1:320
Use Number of Spaces Required
Convenience store with gasoline
sales
1 space per 250 square feet
50% of parking spaces at fuel pumps count
toward parking requirements.
Grocery store 1 space per 200 square feet of retail area
1 space per 500 square feet of office and
storage areas
Large appliance/furniture store 1 space per 500 square feet
1 space per business vehicle
Liquor store 1 space per 250 square feet
Pharmacy 1 space per 350 square feet of pharmacist area
1 space per 275 square feet of retail space
Retail nursery/garden center 1 space per 500 square feet of interior display
1 space per 2,500 square feet of outdoor
display
Retail sales and service
establishments
1 space per 275 square feet
Commercial Nonretail
Auction facilities 1 space per 300 square feet
Automobile sales 1 space per 5,000 square feet of outdoor
display
1 space per 300 square feet of indoor display/
office/storage
Plus automobile service and repair spaces
Automobile services and repair 4 spaces
1 space per 750 square feet
Car wash, self-service 2 spaces per stall
2 queuing spaces per bay
Lube-and-tune 1 space per bay
1 space per employee
2 queuing lane spaces per bay
Mailing/package facility 1 space per 150 square feet of patron area
1 space per 350 square feet of nonpatron area
Food Service
§ 340-13.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-13.5
1:321
Use Number of Spaces Required
Bakeries/deli, retail 1 space per 250 square feet
Banquet and catering on-site facility 1 space for each 3 fixed seats
1 space per 45 square feet nonfixed seating
areas
Catering kitchen, off-site delivery 2 spaces
1 space per employee on largest shift
1 space per business vehicle
Ice cream shop 1 space per 200 square feet
Restaurant, fast-food 1 parking space per 60 square feet
Restaurant, nightclub, tavern, grill,
or bar
1 space per each 3 seats or
1 space per 150 square feet of floor area
devoted to patron use, whichever is greater
1 space per 60 square feet of floor area devoted
to counter service, bar service or customer
waiting areas
Restaurant, takeout/delivery 1 space per 45 square feet of customer service
area
1 space per 250 square feet of noncustomer
service area
1 space per business vehicle
Industrial
Bakeries, wholesale 1 space per 500 square feet
Bottling, brewery and distilling of
beverages
1 space per 750 square feet
1 space per business vehicle
Broadcasting and film studio
production
1 space per 1,000 square feet
Building/equipment materials sales 1 space per 500 square feet of retail sales area
1 space per 1,500 square feet of outdoor
storage area.
Call center 1 space per 250 square feet
§ 340-13.5 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 340-13.5
1:322
Use Number of Spaces Required
Industrial or manufacturing
establishments
1 space per 1,250 square feet of floor area for
buildings 10,000 square feet or less
1 space per 2,500 square feet for buildings
larger than 10,000 square feet, plus 20% of the
building square footage shall be calculated as
office space
Medical laboratory without patient
visitation
1 space per 400 square feet
Printing or publishing facility 1 space per 500 square feet
1 space per business vehicle
Public utility facility 1 space per 400 square feet dedicated to office
1 space shall be provided for facilities without
office
Research and development facilities 1 space per 300 square feet of office
1 space per 500 square feet of nonoffice
Technology and communication
facility
1 space per 400 square feet
1 space per business vehicle
Warehousing facility 1 space per 1,000 square feet
1 space per business vehicle
Wholesale trade and distribution
centers
1 space per 750 square feet
1 space per business vehicle
Institutional
Government buildings 1 parking space per 400 square feet
Hospital 1 space per bed
1 space per 300 square feet per administration
office, clinic space, and research
1 space per 500 square feet of storage area
Library, museum, art gallery 1 space per 400 square feet
Post office 1 space per 150 square feet of patron area
1 space per 350 square feet of nonpatron area
1 parking space per business vehicle
§ 340-13.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-13.5
1:323
Use Number of Spaces Required
Schools 1 parking space per employee
1 parking space per 20 students
1 space per 4 seats in an auditorium or
gymnasium or cafeteria intended to be used as
any auditorium for the single area with the
largest seating capacity
Personal Service
Animal grooming 1 space per 300 square feet
Adult day care 1 space per employee
5 spaces for visitors
1 dropoff/pickup space per 10 clients
Art/dance studios 1 space per employee
1 space per 3 students based on Building Code
occupancy
Barbershop, beauty shop, nail salon 1 space per 200 square feet
1 space per client chair
Bed-and-breakfast, country inns 2 spaces
1 space per guest room
public food service, as required
Day-care centers 1 space per 500 square feet
1 space per employee on maximum shift
Kennels, commercial 1 space per 400 square feet, including runs
1 space per employee on maximum shift
Laundromat/dry cleaner 1 space per 400 square feet.
Laundromat self-service 1 space per 3 washing machines
Riding academies and stables 1 space per 3 animals utilizing the facilities
1 space per employee
1 parking space per 5 fixed event seats.
Veterinary clinic 1 space per 300 square feet of clinic/office area
1 space for each 5 kennel facilities
Places of Assembly
§ 340-13.5 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 340-13.5
1:324
Use Number of Spaces Required
Auditorium, church, stadium, theater
or other place of public assembly
1 parking space per each 5 seats or per 40
square feet of gross floor area within the main
auditorium or meeting hall, whichever provides
the greater number of parking spaces.
Ball fields 25 spaces per field
Exercise/fitness/health club 1 space per 60 square feet of open exercise
area
1 space for 150 square feet of equipment area
1 space per 200 square feet of other floor area
Hotel, motor court, tourist home, or
similar accommodations
1 space per guest room
1 space per 12 guest rooms
ancillary uses such as restaurant or meeting
rooms
Indoor recreational facilities 1 space per 3 persons based on maximum
occupancy
Outdoor recreation facilities 1 space per 5,000 square feet of recreation
area
Private clubs and lodges 1 space per 175 square feet.
For any use not specified herein, sufficient parking spaces shall be provided to the
standards of the most similar use specified in this chapter as determined by the
Commission. Mixed-use development parking requirements shall be the sum of the
parking requirements for the various uses, except where a reduction of parking spaces
is allowed by this section.
H. Maximum parking allowance. The Commission may approve parking lots with more
spaces than allowed, provided all of the spaces above the allowance number are
composed of a pervious surface and where adequate stormwater management is
provided. Also, the Commission may approve parking lots above the allowance
requirements where pervious surface treatment is not environmentally sound and
where a stormwater management system plan can demonstrate zero post-development
increase in peak discharge and that water quality discharge standards are met. The
maximum number of additional parking spaces that the Commission may permit is 25%
for impervious parking surfaces and 50% for pervious parking surfaces.
I. Parking space held on reserve.
(1) The Commission may permit a twenty-five-percent reduction in the construction of
the required on-site parking as long as the applicant can demonstrate he can meet
all the parking requirements and the proposed uses will not require the utilization
of all the parking spaces. If a reduction is granted, the site plan shall delineate
reserved parking spaces for future parking if it becomes necessary.
(2) In a phased development plan, areas designated as reserve parking for future
parking areas based on phasing must be clearly depicted on the phased
development site plan. The terms and conditions of the construction phasing of the
§ 340-13.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-13.5
1:325
buildings and parking area completion must clearly be set forth in notations on the
approved site plan.
(3) Such reserve parking areas must be kept planted and maintained rather than
surfaced for parking until such time as the additional parking space is necessary.
Further, no aboveground improvements shall be placed or constructed upon such
reserve parking areas.
J. Change in use or modification to existing structures. When the use of any building,
structure or premises is changed or expanded, resulting in an increase of more than
10% in the required number of off-street parking spaces, additional off-street parking
shall be provided consistent with parking requirements and standards of this chapter.
K. Spaces near obstructions. When the side of a parking space abuts a wall, column or
other obstruction that is taller than six inches, the width of the parking space shall be
increased by two on the obstructed side.41
L. Drive- through. Drive-through facilities may only be accessory to an allowable main
use. The use of drive-through facilities is limited to banks, pharmacies, or food service
establishments that meet the requirements below. [Amended 12-7-2017]
(1) The facility shall not be located between the building and the street, except on a
corner lot.
(2) The stacking area shall be located so that the area for five cars is located before
their reaching the service window.
(a) Stacking spaces shall be a minimum of 10 feet in width and 18 feet in length,
and shall be designed so as not to impede on- and off-site traffic movements
and sight distances at intersections.
(b) Stacking lanes shall be separated from other on-site parking and circulation
lanes by a raised median, planting area, or other acceptable method to ensure
the adequate channeling and safety of traffic movements.
(3) The principal pedestrian access to the building shall not cross the drive-through
lane.
(4) Hours of operation. When the drive-through facility use (i.e., menu board) is
located on a site within 100 feet of any residential dwelling, hours of operation for
the drive-up/drive-through service shall be limited to 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. daily.
If the drive-through facility use is located greater than 100 feet from a residential
dwelling, the hours of operation shall be limited to 5:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight.
(5) Each drive-through entrance/exit shall be at least 50 feet from an intersection of
public rights-of-way, measured at the closest intersecting curbs, and at least 25
feet from the curb cut on an adjacent property. Exceptions may be granted by the
designated approving authority when drive-through pull-out spaces are provided.
(6) Noise. Any drive-up or drive-through speaker system shall emit no more than
50 decibels, and at no time shall any speaker system be audible above daytime
ambient noise levels beyond the property lines of the site. The system shall be
designed to compensate for ambient noise levels in the immediate area.
(7) Drive-through lanes shall not be located adjacent to outdoor patio or eating areas.
(8) Menu boards. Menu boards shall not exceed 24 square feet in area, with a
maximum height of six feet, and shall face away from public rights-of-way. Outdoor
speakers shall be located at least 50 feet from any residentially zoned/occupied
parcel.
41.Editor's Note: So in original.
§ 340-13.5 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 340-13.5
1:326
(9) Minimum floor area for restaurants. To ensure that the drive-through service
facility is an accessory to a primary restaurant use, the minimum interior floor
area for drive-through restaurants shall be 1,000 gross square feet.
(10) Minimum site or part of center or development complex. A restaurant with drivethrough
facilities shall have a minimum one-acre land area or shall be part of a
commercial center or larger development complex of at least one acre.
M. Reduction in parking space for mixed-use development. For a mixed-use development
of land, the Commission may allow the following parking space reductions, at the
applicant's request:
(1) Up to 30% of the parking spaces required for the predominant use on a site may be
shared with other uses operating during the same time of day and days of the week.
The predominant use is considered to be that which requires the most parking of
those sharing the parking facilities.
(2) Up to 75% of parking spaces required for uses such as theaters (movie and live),
public auditoriums, bowling alleys, nightclubs, movie theaters, and similar
predominately evening uses may be shared with such uses as banks, offices and
similar predominately daytime uses.
(3) Up to 75% of the parking spaces required for such uses as houses of worship and
other uses exclusively in operation during the weekend may be shared with such
uses as medical offices, banks and other similar uses predominately in operation on
weekdays.
(4) Up to 50% of parking spaces required where there is a duly executed and recorded
shared parking agreement over an area that exceeds 5,000 square feet of parking
area.
N. Landscaping requirements.
(1) Purpose and applicability.
(a) The purposes of the parking lot landscape standards are to reduce the
environmental and visual impact of parking areas and the associated
impervious surface. Parking lot landscaping design shall, through the use of
native trees, shrubs and ground cover and other landscape design elements:
[1] Screen the views of parking areas from the street and adjoining properties.
[2] Reduce thermal impacts of stormwater runoff through canopy cover and
site design.
[3] Filter/retain stormwater runoff through the capture of 75% or more of the
first flush (first half inch) of stormwater runoff from impervious areas.
[4] Segment parking areas to no more than 10 spaces utilizing landscape
elements.
[5] Accommodate bicyclist and pedestrian movement through the parking area.
(b) These landscaping requirements shall apply to all new parking areas. For
existing parking areas that expand greater than 5,000 square feet, the whole
parking area shall provide interior and perimeter landscape plantings.
(2) Plant selection. All design shall only utilize a variety of native tree and plant species,
no planting material identified as an invasive species by the State of Connecticut
DEEP shall be utilized. No one species shall compromise more than 50% of the
plantings for the particular planting area. Bushes, shrubs and ground cover plant
materials must be in sufficient quantity and size so that within five years from
planting complete coverage of the area is achieved. Tree species selection shall
take into account that the canopy coverage of the impervious surface shall be
75% within 10 years; therefore, trees selected shall provide shade canopies with
§ 340-13.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-13.5
1:327
a minimum diameter of 10 feet at maturity. Temporary mulches are required in all
planting areas until full plant coverage is achieved. A minimum of one shade tree
for each five spaces of provided parking shall be required.
(3) Plant protection. Areas containing plant materials shall be protected from vehicle
damage and allow for a pedestrian crossing area outside the planted area. Vehicles
may overhang the landscape area no more than 18 inches. All plant materials
shall be maintained free from physical damage or injury arising from lack of
water, chemical damage, insects and diseases. A root barrier or equivalent shall be
installed per manufacturer's specifications for all trees within 10 feet of a paved
area or sidewalk. Plant materials showing such damage shall be replaced by the
same or similar species. Planting areas shall be kept free from weeds, debris and
undesirable materials which may be detrimental to safety, drainage or appearance.
(4) Perimeter landscaping.
(a) Perimeter landscaping is required for all parking areas, and the design shall
maintain for partial screening of vehicles to a minimum height of 30 inches and
maximum height of 42 inches measured from the finish grade of the parking
space(s) from the public street and abutting properties. Parking areas adjacent
to residential properties shall screen vehicle headlights through the use of an
ornamental wall or fence and/or dense foliage located at a minimum of four feet
from the curb stop. Screening provided through the use of plant material shall
be shown such that the foliage from the chosen plant material will accomplish
the screening within one year of planting. Perimeter planting area shall be a
minimum of six feet wide and shall contain canopy trees and shrubbery with
mulched bed and be located four to six feet from the edge of the curb or
impervious surface.
(b) Landscaping plantings within the driveway sight triangle shall conform to the
following standards: No trees shall be planted that have a main stem or trunk
greater than eight inches in diameter or have a dripline that falls below seven
feet, and no bush/shrub or ground cover shall exceed a height of 24 inches.
(5) Landscape islands.
(a) Interior landscaping is a requirement when there are eight or more parking
spaces, in addition to the perimeter landscaping requirements noted. In no case
shall there be more than 20 parking spaces in an unbroken row.
(b) At least 10% of the total parking area or 25 square feet of interior landscaping
per parking space, whichever is greater, shall be located within the perimeter of
the parking area. Additionally, interior landscaping tree plantings shall provide
a shade canopy of at least 10 feet at maturity, and there shall be a minimum of
two shade trees per landscaped island. At full maturity the shade canopy of the
trees shall provide shade to 75% of the parking area surface. There shall be a
minimum distance of four feet between all trees and the edge of the impervious
surface.
(c) Terminal landscape islands measuring a minimum of six feet by 16 feet inside
the curbing at a ratio of one set of islands for every eight spaces is required. All
parking aisles shall end in an island.
(d) Median islands shall have a minimum width of eight feet inside the curb for the
length of the parking row and may be interrupted with a pedestrian walkway. A
median island is required for every four parking rows at a minimum. Also, each
median island requires one canopy tree for every 40 feet in length. Additionally,
§ 340-13.5 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 340-13.5
1:328
for parking rows with more than 20 parking spaces utilizing a double-loaded
aisle design, a six-foot landscaped island shall run the length of the aisle.
(6) Drive-through areas. Screening of drive-through aisles shall utilize a five-foot
planter between the drive-through aisle and the parking area. The planter shall
include a minimum three-foot-tall (maximum four-foot-tall) landscaped barrier
planted with trees and other landscaping consistent with those in the parking area.
At no time shall the landscaped barrier be pruned in a manner that allows the
vehicle headlights from the drive-through aisle to be visible from abutting street
rights-of-way.
(7) Shading requirements. The shading requirement shall apply to all impervious
surfacing on which a vehicle can drive, including access drives, parking stalls,
and all maneuvering areas. The amount of shade provided by a given tree shall
be determined by utilizing the appropriate percentage and square footage of the
selected tree species crown after 10 years of planting. Shading credit is given at
twenty-five-percent increments based on the amount of tree crown that shades the
impervious surface. Overlapping shade does not count twice in the calculation. A
shade coverage plan shall be submitted as a part of any application and shall depict
the location of each tree, identify the species, size and shade area credited.
(8) Removal and replacement of landscaping elements, plant materials and trees from
approved plans.
(a) All plant material removed from an approved site plan shall be immediately
replaced with similar plant species in one-gallon containers for bushes and
shrubbery and the same species of trees at 1.5-inch caliper.
(b) Tree removal shall be limited to trees which are in poor health, structurally
distressed or unsafe. The removal of a tree shall be the final recourse upon
determining that it is infeasible to save the tree. Prior to removal, Town staff is
to be notified.
O. Lighting. Lighting shall be provided in all parking areas and shall conform to the
standards of § 340-3.16, Outdoor lighting. All fixtures shall be ornamental.
§ 340-13.6. Off-street loading regulation.
In any zoning district, in connection with every building or part thereof
hereafter erected which is to be occupied by manufacturing, storage,
warehouse, goods display, retail store, wholesale store, market, hotel,
hospital, laundry, dry cleaning, or other uses similarly requiring the receipt
or distribution of material or merchandise by vehicles, the following shall
be provided and maintained on the same lot with such building.
A. Dimensional requirements. Loading area for local delivery trucks and/or
berth for semitrailers' deliveries shall be provided as follows:
(1) Local delivery truck: 10 feet by 25 feet.
(2) Semitrailer truck: 12 feet by 50 feet.
B. General requirements.
(1) Loading space shall be not less than 14 feet in height.
(2) No such space shall be located within 50 feet of any property line.
(3) Loading space shall be located to the rear or side of the principal
building and appropriately screened from public view.
(4) No loading space shall encroach on any part of a fire lane, accessway,
parking aisle or parking space.
§ 340-13.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-13.6
1:329
(5) Any loading space located within 100 feet of a residential zone shall
incorporate noise and screening mitigation features such as walls,
berms, landscaping, architectural design features. The Commission may
limit the use of such a loading space.
(6) Loading spaces shall be delineated by permanent paint striping, signage
or by other method approved by the Commission.
(7) If there is a change in use or building size that meets the requirements
for an off-street loading space, such space shall be provided and
maintained.
C. Required spaces.
Office/Retail/Services Use
5,000 to 25,000 square feet 1 local delivery truck
Over 25,000 square feet 2 local delivery trucks or 1 local delivery
and 1 semitrailer
Industrial Uses
5,000 to 15,000 square feet 1 local delivery truck
15,000 to 50,000 square feet 1 semitrailer
Over 50,000 square feet 2 semitrailers and 1 local delivery truck
Institutional Uses
Less than 50,000 square feet 1 local delivery truck
Over 50,000 square feet 1 local delivery truck and 1 semitrailer
§ 340-13.7. Soil erosion and sediment control regulations for land
development.
A. Purpose: to ensure that proper provisions have been made to adequately
control erosion and sedimentation and reduce the danger of stormwater
runoff from a proposed development based upon the best available
technology.
B. Plan requirements. The plan shall contain but not be limited to:
(1) A narrative that describes:
(a) The schedule for grading and construction activities, including:
[1] A checklist outlining the start and completion dates of major
operations on the land: installation of erosion control
measures, clearing, grading, temporary stabilization,
building, permanent stabilization, maintenance and removal
of erosion control measures.
[2] The sequence of grading and construction activities.
[3] The sequence for installation and/or application of soil
erosion and sediment control measures.
[4] The sequence for final stabilization of the site.
[5] The name, address and telephone number of persons
responsible for maintenance during and after construction.
(b) The construction details, the installation procedures and the
operation and maintenance program for proposed soil erosion
and sediment control measures and stormwater facilities.
§ 340-13.6 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 340-13.7
1:330
(2) In addition to the site development plan requirements of Article V of
this chapter, the plan shall include:
(a) The location of and design details for all proposed soil erosion
and sediment control measures and stormwater management
facilities;
(b) The sequence of grading and construction activities;
(c) The sequence for installation and/or application of soil erosion
and sediment control measures;
(d) The sequence for final stabilization of the development site;
(e) Any other information deemed necessary and appropriate by
the applicant or requested by the Commission or its designated
agent.
C. Standards and criteria.
(1) Plans shall be developed in accordance with the principles as
outlined in the Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment
Control (1985), as amended;
(2) Plans shall minimize erosion and sedimentation during construction;
(3) Plans shall provide for stabilization and protection from erosion with
the project is complete;
(4) Plans shall prevent off-site erosion and/or sedimentation;
(5) The appropriate method from Chapter 9 of the Connecticut
Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control (1985), as
amended, shall be used in determining peak flow rates and volumes
of runoff unless an alternative method shall be approved by the
Commission.
D. Decisions. The Commission, the Hartford County Soil and Water
Conservation District or other designated agents of the Commission
(whichever is appropriate) shall approve (certify) that the soil erosion
and sediment control plan complies with the requirements and
objectives of this section or disapprove of the plan when the proposal
does not comply with this chapter.
E. Enforcement.
(1) Zoning permits shall not be issued for construction on any site until
the specific erosion control measures, as outlined in the plan, are
installed, inspected and approved by the designated agent of the
Commission.
(2) All erosion and sediment control measures and facilities shall be
installed and maintained by the developer/owner in proper working
order throughout the life of the project as scheduled according to the
approved plan.
(3) Any person, firm or corporation who violates the requirements of
these erosion control regulations may be fined under the provisions
of Connecticut General Statutes § 8-12, as amended.
(4) The Commission or its designated agent may require the submission
of an erosion and sediment control bond in an amount and form
satisfactory to insure compliance with the terms of this section.
§ 340-13.8. Motor vehicle repair and gasoline station regulations.
§ 340-13.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-13.8
1:331
A. Intent. The following regulations shall apply to the location, design,
construction, operation and maintenance of new, expanded or modified
motor vehicle repair and gasoline stations where approval is needed
from the ZBA and the Commission.
B. Permitted uses. Motor vehicle and gasoline stations shall include
establishments commonly known as gas stations, gasoline self-service
operations, auto repair shops, garages, tow truck service, automobile
and truck rental, and the sale of non-automobile-related goods and
services. Auto body repair, welding, painting, glass work, gasoline selfservice
operations and car-washing establishments shall not be
permitted as motor vehicle repair and gasoline stations.
C. Location. The location of the above-referenced uses shall not be
permitted on any lot which has a portion of any vehicle entrance to or
exit from the lot within 500 feet of any vehicle entrance to a college,
school and place of worship, hospital, library, theater, park, playground,
institution for children or other similar place of public gathering. No
existing use shall become a nonconforming use through the subsequent
erection of permitted uses.
D. Standards.
(1) All repair work shall be conducted within the principal building on
the lot.
(2) All site and floor drains which may receive detergent, chemicals,
oil or other pollutants shall be connected to a holding tank or other
equipment satisfactory to the State of Connecticut Department of
Energy and Environmental Protection. All such drainage shall not
in any case be directed to storm sewers or surface drainage.
(3) A landscaped area at least 15 feet in width shall be provided
between the pump island areas and the front and/or side street
line, if any, for the full length of the frontages, excluding the area
required for the entrance and/or exit curbs.
(4) All areas for the parking and storage of vehicles, including
customer and employee vehicles, shall be surfaced with an asphalt,
bituminous or cement pavement so as to provide a durable and
dustless surface.
(5) Storage tanks shall be located below grade.
(6) Gasoline self-service pump operations, pump islands and pump
island canopies shall conform to all minimum required yards,
except that these structures may be up to 35 feet from any front
property line.
(7) There shall be no outside display of merchandise except that
petroleum products in cans and windshield wiper blades may be
displayed outside the building, provided that such displays shall
not be placed closer to a street line than the pump island, and
coin-operated dispensing machines for soft drinks, milk, ice and
the like, provided that such machines are situated immediately
adjacent to the principal building and limited to one machine per
street frontage.
(8) No more than one bay shall open to the front yard.
§ 340-13.8 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 340-13.8
1:332
(9) There shall be no outside storage of inoperable motor vehicles or
motor vehicle parts.
(10) When required, there shall be an area of at least 1,000 square
feet which shall be located to the rear of the principal building
and which shall be designed and designated as a disabled vehicle
storage area. This area shall be adequately screened from adjoining
properties and streets and shall be used for all overnight storage
and/or parking of vehicles. The Commission may limit the maximum
number of vehicles that may be stored on or parked at a site
overnight.
(11) There shall be no more than two curb cuts per property, except that
corner lots may have a third curb cut. Curb cuts shall be separated
from other curb cuts and from the intersection of two streets by at
least 50 feet. Each curb cut shall have a width of no more than 25
feet exclusive of transition areas or corner tangents.
§ 340-13.9. Alcoholic liquor sales.
A. The Commission shall not issue a special permit to allow alcoholic liquor
sales unless the Commission determines that the proposed alcoholic
liquor sales shall not adversely affect public health, public safety and
property values.
B. No building or premises shall be used and no building shall be erected
or altered which is used or is arranged, intended or designed to be
used as a place where alcoholic liquors are to be sold for consumption
on or off the premises if that portion of said building or premises is
located within 500 feet measured by a straight line from any lot used
for a school, family day-care home, group day-care home, supervised
group quarters, place of worship, hospital, library or park, unless the
Commission determines that the alcoholic liquor sales shall not
adversely affect the health, safety or morals of persons attending any
such school, family day-care home, group day-care home, supervised
group quarters, place of worship, hospital, library or park.
C. Any special permit issued hereunder shall be limited to the specific
use or accessory use, as applicable, proposed by an applicant and shall
not be deemed to apply to all alcoholic liquor sales at the premises
generally. Any change in the character of the alcoholic liquor sales use
at a premises previously granted a special permit hereunder shall be
required to obtain a new special permit pursuant to this section.
§ 340-13.10. Commercial solar photovoltaic installations.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to promote the orderly creation
of commercial solar photovoltaic installations by providing standards for
the design, placement, construction, operation and monitoring of such
facilities.
B. Applicability. Construction and use of a commercial solar photovoltaic
installation or any part thereof which is interconnected to the local
utility electrical grid and generates electricity that can be sold directly
into the wholesale electricity market through the regional transmission
§ 340-13.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-13.10
1:333
organization and/or that can be used to serve all or part of the electric
load outside their own property needs.
(1) Special permits/site plan reviews. No tower or telecommunications
facility shall be erected, constructed or installed without first
obtaining a special use permit or a site plan review from the
Commission. A special use permit is required for: a) new tower
construction or major modification of an existing tower(s) or
repeater(s); b) telecommunications facilities or major modification
of existing facilities to be mounted on a tower or structure. A site
plan review permit is required for a telecommunications facility
that mounts onto an existing building or structure that does not
increase the height of the structure beyond what is permitted in this
chapter or the erection of an antenna onto an existing tower without
alteration to the height of the facility.
(2) Applicable regulations. In acting on the special permit application,
the Commission will proceed in accordance with §§ 340-5.1 and
340-5.3 and this section of this chapter.
C. Standards.
(1) Environmental impact statement. An environmental assessment
that meets CEPA requirements shall be submitted to the
Commission for each regulated facility site that requires such an
environmental assessment to be submitted to the CEPA.42
(2) Fencing and signs. The area around the tower and communications
equipment shelter(s) shall be completely fenced for security to a
height of not less than eight feet or more than 12 feet and gated.
Use of razor wire is not permitted. A sign of no greater than two
square feet, indicating the name of the facility owner(s) and a
twenty-four-hour emergency telephone number, either local or tollfree,
shall be posted adjacent to the entry gate. In addition, "No
Trespassing" or other warning signs and the federal registration
plate (where applicable) shall be posted on the fence or as required
to meet federal requirements.
(3) Five-year plan. All applications shall be accompanied by a written
five-year plan for the utilization of the proposed facilities. This
plan should include justification for capacity in excess of immediate
needs, as well as plans for any further development within the
Town.
(4) Glare. The installation design shall avoid off-site impacts from
reflectivity from the panels to surrounding existing buildings
abutting the site and/or those who may have impacts due to
elevation views. A viewshed analysis shall be submitted to
demonstrate any glare-related impact mitigation measures.
(5) Height: as measured from grade below the installation, shall not
exceed 20 feet.
(6) Landscaping/screening.
(a) Screening shall be required at the perimeter of the site. If the
tower or facility site is in a wooded area, a natural vegetated
buffer strip of undisturbed trees shall be retained for at least
100 feet in depth and at least 15 feet in height at all times
§ 340-13.10 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 340-13.10
1:334
around the perimeter, and only minimally disturbed where the
access drive is located.
(b) If the facility site is not in a wooded area, a vegetated barrier
at least 50 feet deep by 10 feet high around the perimeter
shall be planted by the applicant. It shall be of a type that has
the potential to reach a height of at least 15 feet at maturity.
Existing vegetation surrounding the site shall be preserved
and maintained to the greatest extent possible. All landscaping
shall be properly maintained to ensure its good health and
viability at the expense of the owner(s). All areas disturbed
during project construction shall be replanted with vegetation.
The Commission may require additional landscaping as is
deemed reasonably necessary in order to enhance compatibility
with adjacent residential and nonresidential land uses.
(7) Noise. Noise-producing equipment shall be sited and/or insulated to
guarantee that no increase in noise above ambient levels measured
at the property line occurs.
(8) Operation and maintenance plan. A plan detailing the operation
and maintenance of the facility, which includes measures for
maintaining all equipment, landscape maintenance, safe access to
and within the facility, and stormwater control maintenance.
(9) Setbacks. Any buildings and equipment installations shall be no
closer than 50 feet to any property line, except, when abutting state
land, reduced to 25 feet.
(10) Utility notification. No application will be approved until evidence
has been submitted to the Commission that the utility company
operating the power grid has approved the interconnection to the
power grid. Off-grid systems are exempt from this requirement.
Copies of all leases/contracts must be provided with the
application, with the exception of the financial terms of said leases/
contracts. Off-grid systems are exempt from this requirement.
(11) Abandonment or decommissioning. If the facility ceases to operate
for a period of 120 days or it has reached the end of it useful
operational span, the facility shall be removed. The owner or
operator shall submit notification by certified mail to the
Commission and the Building Department of the proposed date to
discontinue operations and plans for removal of the facility.
§ 340-13.11. Telecommunications facilities and towers.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to:
(1) Preserve the character and appearance of the Town of Marlborough
while allowing adequate telecommunications services to be
developed.
(2) Protect the scenic, historic, environmental and natural or man-made
resources of Marlborough.
(3) Locate towers and/or antennas in a manner which protects property
values as well as the general safety, health, welfare and quality
42.Editor's Note: See Connecticut Environmental Policy Act (CEPA).
§ 340-13.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-13.11
1:335
of life of the citizens of Marlborough and all those who visit this
community.
(4) Minimize the total number of towers throughout Marlborough.
(5) Provide standards and requirements for the regulation, placement,
design, appearance, construction, monitoring, modification and
removal of telecommunications facilities and towers.
(6) Require the sharing of existing towers and the clustering of new
facilities/towers where possible.
(7) Locate towers so that they do not have negative impacts, such as but
not limited to attractive nuisance, noise and falling objects.
(8) Ensure that new commercial uses are compatible with prevailing
rural residential land use patterns as specified in the Town of
Marlborough Plan of Conservation and Development.
(9) Provide a procedural basis for action within a reasonable period of
time for requests for authorization to place, construct, operate or
modify telecommunications facilities.
B. Consistency with federal law. The regulations in this section are
intended to be consistent with the Telecommunications Act of 1996
in that: 1) they do not prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the
provision of personal wireless services; 2) they are not intended to
be used to unreasonably discriminate among providers of functionally
equivalent services on the basis of the environmental effects of radiofrequency
emissions to the extent that the regulated services and
facilities comply with the FCC's regulations concerning such emissions.
C. Exemptions and disallowances. The following wireless
telecommunications facilities are exempt: police, fire, ambulance and
other emergency dispatch; amateur (HAM) radio, citizens band radio;
any existing commercial radio tower, and radio dispatch services for
local businesses. Also exempt from this section are antennas used solely
for residential household television and radio reception and satellite
dishes measuring two meters or less in diameter. No personal wireless
service facility shall be considered exempt from this section for any
reason, whether or not said facility is proposed to share a tower or other
structure with such exempt uses.
D. Special permits/site plan reviews. No tower or telecommunications
facility shall be erected, constructed or installed without first obtaining
a special use permit or a site plan review from the Commission. A
special use permit is required for: 1) new tower construction or major
modification of an existing tower(s) or repeater(s); 2)
telecommunications facilities or major modification of existing facilities
to be mounted on a tower or structure. A site plan review permit is
required for a telecommunications facility that mounts onto an existing
building or structure that does not increase the height of the structure
beyond what is permitted in this section or the erection of an antenna
onto an existing tower without alteration to the height of the facility.
E. Applicable regulations. In acting on the special permit application, the
Commission will proceed in accordance with §§ 340-5.1 and 340-5.3 and
this section of this chapter.
§ 340-13.11 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 340-13.11
1:336
F. Provision for hiring independent consultants. Due to the complex
technical character of the information to be provided by an applicant
pursuant to this section and the provisions, the Commission may hire
such consultants as it deems reasonably necessary to assist it with such
determinations as are to be made by it concerning such matters. All
expenses incurred by the Commission for such services as part of an
application process shall be deemed to be part of the application fee and
paid by the applicant. Any failure to pay such expenses shall constitute
a violation of the permit and cause the revocation of the permit and
all rights thereunder. Upon submission of a complete application for
a special use permit, the Commission may provide its independent
consultant(s) with the full application for their analysis and review.
Applicants with the filing of the special permit or site plan review
application shall obtain written permission from the owners of the
proposed property(ies) or facility site(s) for the Town's independent
consultant(s) to conduct any necessary site visit(s). The Commission
will forward a written estimate for the cost of the consultant to the
applicant. The applicant will pay this fee within 10 days of receipt of the
cost estimate. No application will be approved without full payment. In
lieu of estimates, the Commission may require the applicant to fund an
account, which the Town may draw upon, to insure reimbursement of
those fees; any funds not spent will be returned to the applicant.
G. Design requirements.
(1) Landscaping/screening.
(a) Screening shall be required at the perimeter of the site. If the
tower or facility site is in a wooded area, a natural vegetated
buffer strip of undisturbed trees shall be retained for at least
100 feet in depth and at least 15 feet in height at all times
around the perimeter, and only minimally disturbed where the
access drive is located. This provision shall not apply when
antennas are attached to existing structures, such as a
building, e.g., church steeple, as long as the equipment storage
is within an existing building.
(b) If the tower or facility site is not in a wooded area, a vegetated
barrier at least 50 feet deep by 10 feet high around the
perimeter shall be planted by the applicant. It shall be of a
type that has the potential to reach a height of at least 15 feet
at maturity. Existing vegetation surrounding the site shall be
preserved and maintained to the greatest extent possible. All
landscaping shall be properly maintained to ensure its good
health and viability at the expense of the owner(s). All areas
disturbed during project construction shall be replanted with
vegetation. The Commission may require additional
landscaping as is deemed reasonably necessary in order to
enhance compatibility with adjacent residential and
nonresidential land uses.
(2) Fencing and signs. The area around the tower and communications
equipment shelter(s) shall be completely fenced for security to a
height of not less than eight feet or more than 12 feet and gated.
§ 340-13.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-13.11
1:337
Use of razor wire is not permitted. A sign of no greater than two
square feet, indicating the name of the facility owner(s) and a
twenty-four-hour emergency telephone number, either local or tollfree,
shall be posted adjacent to the entry gate. In addition, "No
Trespassing" or other warning signs and the federal registration
plate (where applicable) shall be posted on the fence or as required
to meet federal requirements.
(3) Building design. Communications equipment shelter(s) and
accessory building(s) shall be designed to be architecturally
similar and compatible with each other and the building(s) on
adjoining properties. Building(s) shall be no more than 12 feet
high or 850 square feet. The building(s) shall be used only for
the housing of equipment related to the operation of a wireless
telecommunications network. If the building(s) will store any
hazardous materials, the design shall include a containment area
equal to 120% of the maximum volume of hazardous material
that will be stored on site. Buildings and related structures shall
use materials and textures that will blend them into the natural
setting to minimize the visual impact. Buildings shall be finished or
painted in stealth or neutral color tones.
(4) Tower finish. Tower(s) shall have a galvanized finish unless
otherwise required by the Commission. The Commission may
require the tower(s) to be painted or otherwise camouflaged to
minimize the adverse visual impact.
(5) Tower sharing/camouflaging. Tower(s) must be of a structural type
that will maximize potential sharing. Towers shall be designed
to allow for a vertical expansion to a height of 180 feet. The
Commission reserves the right to require stealth designs such as
towers made to resemble trees or other structures.
(6) Alternative technology. The applicant shall further demonstrate
with written documentation that it has investigated all available
"state of the art" alternative technologies which might be
effectively employed to provide adequate coverage and/or
adequate capacity to the Town in lieu of its proposed facility.
(7) Commercial advertising. Commercial advertising shall not be
allowed on any antenna, tower or accessory building or
communications equipment shelter.
(8) Lighting. No external lighting is permitted, except for manually
operated emergency lights for use only when operating personnel
are on site.
(9) Noise. Noise-producing equipment shall be sited and/or insulated
to guarantee that no increase in noise above ambient levels
measured at the property line occurs.
(10) Air navigation. No tower or telecommunications facility that would
be classified as a hazard to air navigation, as defined by the Federal
Aviation Regulations (Title 14 of CFR), is permitted.
(11) Tower structural design. All towers shall be designed so that they
collapse upon themselves should a failure occur.
§ 340-13.11 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 340-13.11
1:338
(12) Backup generator. All generators shall have mufflers and utilize
other techniques to reduce noise emission.
(13) Co-location and Town services.
(a) Licensed carriers shall share facilities and sites with other
licensed carriers where feasible, thereby reducing the number
of stand-alone facilities.
(b) The conversion of a single-use facility to a co-location shall
be considered a modification. The Commission may require as
a condition of approval of the special permit that the tower/
facility owners dedicate a space on the facility for the Town
of Marlborough's municipal emergency services and for public
health and safety purposes.
H. Application requirements.
(1) Appropriate signatures and contacts. The application form and
required documents include one each displaying original
signature(s) and two photocopies. The following shall be provided:
signature(s) of landowner(s), applicant(s), tower owner(s) on the
application form or as an attachment thereto.
(2) An affidavit from the owner of the property acknowledging
responsibility for the removal of a tower or facility that is deemed
"abandoned" or unsafe by the Commission or is in violation of this
section, or whose permit has expired and has not been renewed by
the Commission.
(3) Contacts. The applicant shall submit the exact legal name, address
or principal place of business and phone number of the following:
(a) Applicant. If any applicant is incorporated, a corporation,
partnership or other business entity, it shall also give the type
of business entity and the state in which it is registered.
(b) Person to whom correspondence or communications in regard
to the application are to be sent. Notice, orders and other
papers may be served upon the person so named, and service
shall be deemed to be service upon the applicant.
(c) Owner of the property on which the proposed tower shall be
located and the owner(s) of the tower on which the proposed
facility shall be located. Written permission of the owner(s)
to apply for the special use permit on the proposed property
or facility site(s) for the Town's independent consultant(s) to
conduct any necessary site visit(s).
(d) Identification, address, phone number and contact person for
each proposed service provider who might be named as an
applicant in addition to the landowner.
(4) Abutting property owners. The names and addresses of the record
owners of all abutting properties within 250 feet of the perimeter
of the subject property. The applicant shall notify all the above
property owners by certificate of mailing not more than 15 days
and not less than 10 days prior to the public hearing date. The
applicant shall submit the proof of mailing receipts to the
Commission prior to the commencement of the public hearing,
along with a signed statement from the applicant or its duly
§ 340-13.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-13.11
1:339
authorized agent certifying that all required property owners were
sent a notice. No such notice shall be required for a continued
public hearing unless the applicant fails to fulfill this requirement
for the opening public hearing date.
(5) Wireless telecommunications license. Applicants for a
telecommunications tower or facility must be a wireless
telecommunications carrier licensed by the FCC and shall submit a
copy of their license. A special use permit will not be granted for a
tower/facility to be built on speculation.
(6) Contract with provider. Copies of all leases/contracts must be
provided with the application, with the exception of the financial
terms of said leases/contracts.
(7) Evidence of need and existing coverage. Applicant shall provide a
statement of the benefits expected from the proposed facility with
as much specific information as is practicable. Along with written
documentation demonstrating that existing telecommunications
facility sites in Marlborough, in abutting towns, and within a tenmile
radius of the proposed site cannot reasonably be made to
provide adequate coverage and/or adequate capacity to the Town
of Marlborough. The documentation shall include, for each facility
site listed which is owned or operated by the applicant, the exact
location (in longitude and latitude, to degrees, minutes and
seconds to the nearest tenth of a second), ground elevation, height
of the tower or facility, type of antennas, antenna gain, height
of antennas on tower(s), output frequency, number of channels,
power output and maximum power output per channel. Potential
adjustments to these existing facility sites (including changes in
antenna type), orientation, gain, height or power output shall be
specified. Radial or tiled coverage plots showing each of these
facility sites, as they exist and with adjustments as above, shall be
provided as part of the application. Also, include a forecast of when
maximum capability would be reached for the proposed facility and
for facilities that would integrate with the proposed facility.
(8) Five-year plan. All applications shall be accompanied by a written
five-year plan for the utilization of the proposed facilities. This
plan should include justification for capacity in excess of immediate
needs, as well as plans for any further development within the
Town.
(9) Federal/state permits. Applicant shall submit copies of all pertinent
submittals of all required federal and state permits. If at the time
of application all the required permits have not been issued, then
the applicant shall submit these permits prior to the issuance of a
zoning permit for the proposed tower facility.
(10) Environmental impact statement. An environmental assessment
that meets FCC requirements shall be submitted to the
Commission for each regulated facility site that requires such an
environmental assessment to be submitted to the FCC.
(11) Plan of Conservation and Development compliance statement. The
applicant shall identify and assess the impact of the proposed
§ 340-13.11 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 340-13.11
1:340
facility on areas recommended for conservation in the
Marlborough Plan of Conservation and Development and the State
Plan of Conservation and Development.
(12) FAA review. A letter from the Federal Aviation Administration or
a designated FAA-approved consultant, indicating the proposed
construction complies with all FAA Regulations.
(13) Hazardous materials disclosure and mitigation plan. The applicant
will also list the location, type and amount of any materials
proposed for use within the facility that are considered hazardous
by federal, state or local governments. Additionally, supply
information concerning the methods of use, storage and disposal of
any hazardous materials and a containment plan.
(14) Site selection analysis. A document detailing the site search for the
facility and a list of rejected sites. Included in this document shall
be a detailed description and justification for the site selected,
including a description of siting criteria and the narrowing process
by which other possible sites were considered and eliminated,
including and not limited to environmental effects, coverage lost
or gained, potential interference with other facilities, and signal
loss due to geographical features compared to the proposed prime
and alternatives sites. This shall include a USGS topographic
quadrangle map (scale: one inch equals 2,00 feet43) marked to
show the site and all rejected sites.
(15) Utility statement.
(a) Shall include the proposed utilities, including distance from
source of power, sizes of service available and required,
locations of any proposed utility or communication lines, and
exact locations of the underground route. Detailed plans for
emergency power generation, including demonstration of
percent of electrical demand being proposed in event of loss of
commercial power; type of fuel, storage method and expected
means and frequency of fuel delivery to the site for power
generation.
(b) Amount of generator time based on historic power reliability
for the area of the facility, proposed frequency and duration
of tests, and description of muffler system and methods for
noise abatement. Feasibility of wind and/or solar power in
conjunction with storage batteries.
(16) Commitment to available space. Applicants for new tower
construction or modification permits shall provide a written,
irrevocable commitment valid for the duration of the existence of
the tower, to rent or lease available space for co-location on the
tower at fair market prices and terms without discrimination to
other telecommunications providers.
(17) Mitigation statement.
(a) Shall include the construction technique designed to
specifically minimize any adverse impacts on the natural
environment, including any special design features.
§ 340-13.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-13.11
1:341
(b) The methods utilized to preserve the natural vegetation for
wildlife habitat and screening for adjoining properties.
Additionally, if within the fall zone of a tower there is either a
designated inland wetland area or a watercourse, the applicant
shall include a plan for removal of the tower and restoration of
such areas.
(18) Land use statement. A description of the existing land use within a
one-half-mile radius of the site and any future planned land use of
the subject property.
(19) Applications/plans for other facility sites. Applicants shall submit
any applications or plans for other wireless telecommunications
facility sites within a ten-mile radius of the Town of Marlborough.
(20) Past approvals. The applicant shall submit copies of all land use
approvals granted for the property, including special permits, site
plan review, variances and inland wetlands.
I. Site development plan and other plans.
(1) Site plans and maps. All the information required by § 340-5.3 of
this chapter, as well as the following information:
(a) Proposed tower location and any appurtenances, including
supports and guy wires.
(b) Indicate proposed spot elevations at the base of the proposed
tower and at the base of any guy wires and the corners of all
appurtenant structures.
(c) Proposed utilities, the source of power and locations of any
proposed utility or communications lines, and exact locations
of the underground route.
(2) Driveways and underground utilities.
(a) Where new telecommunications towers and facilities require
construction of or improvements to driveways of the property,
to the extent practicable driveways shall follow the contour
of the land and be constructed or improved within existing
forest fringe areas and not in open fields. All existing and
proposed driveway access utilized shall have a two-inch-thick
paved travel surface, including any parking areas. All
driveways shall be gated at the edge of the street right-ofway
or at a point that allows a vehicle accessing the site
to completely park out of the travelway while opening the
gate. Utility or service lines shall be buried under ground.
The Commission may request input from the chiefs (or their
designees) of fire, police and other emergency services
regarding the adequacy of emergency access for the planned
driveway to the site.
(b) The Commission may waive the underground utility
requirement when the following conditions exist:
[1] Would result in the significant disturbance of wetlands.
[2] Ledge.
[3] Would result in the removal of significant trees.
43.Editor's Note: So in original.
§ 340-13.11 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 340-13.11
1:342
(3) Clearing limits. Limits of areas where vegetation is to be cleared
or altered, and justification for any such clearing or alteration.
(4) Signal propagation. Signal propagation and radio-frequency
studies, plots and related material shall be prepared, clearly
identified and signed by a qualified radio frequency engineer,
including propagation maps showing interfaces with any adjacent
service areas. Radial plots shall be in bright colors, showing clear
demarcations between signal strengths. Plans shall be on twentyfour-
inch by thirty-six-inch sheets, on as many sheets as necessary,
and at scales which are no smaller (i.e., no less precise) than
listed below. Each plan sheet shall have a title block indicating
the project title, sheet title, sheet number, date, revision dates,
scale(s), and original seal(s) and signature(s) of the professional(s)
who prepared the plan.
(5) Location map. Copy of a portion of the most recent USGS
Quadrangle Map, at a scale of 1:25:000,44 and showing the area
within at least two miles from the proposed tower site. Indicate
the tower location and the exact latitude and longitude (degrees,
minutes and seconds to the nearest tenth).
(6) Vicinity map. At a scale of one inch equals 416 feet with contour
intervals no greater than 10 feet (three meters), showing the entire
vicinity within a two-thousand-five-hundred-foot radius of the
tower site, and including the topography, public and private roads
and driveways, buildings and structure, bodies of water, wetlands,
landscape features, historic and archaeological sites, and habitats
for endangered or threatened species. Indicate the property lines
of the proposed tower site parcel and of all abutters to the tower
site parcel (from Assessor's maps or available surveys).
(7) (Reserved)
(8) (Reserved)
(9) (Reserved)
(10) Easements. Indicate any easements, including drainage, fall zone
restrictions, and access easement necessary to enter the site from
a public way to the tower and/or facility site, along with the names
of all abutters or property owners along the easement areas or who
have deeded rights to the easement. Additionally, the applicant
shall submit evidence to the Commission that the parties involved
have acknowledged a willingness to execute any necessary
easements as represented in the application.
(11) Proposed tower and appurtenances plan.
(a) Plans, elevations, sections and details at appropriate scales,
but no smaller than one inch equals 10 feet.
(b) Two cross sections through proposed towers, drawn at right
angles to each other and showing the ground profile to at least
100 feet beyond the limit of clearing, and showing any guy
wires or supports.
(c) Dimension of the proposed height of tower above average
grade at tower base.
§ 340-13.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-13.11
1:343
(d) Show all proposed antennas, including their location on the
tower.
(e) Details of proposed tower foundation, including cross sections
and details.
(f) Show location of all ground attachments, specifications for
anchor bolts and other anchoring hardware and details.
(g) Details of the tower's finish.
(h) Indicate relative height of the tower to the tops of surrounding
trees as they presently exist and the height to which they are
expected to grow in 10 years.
(i) Illustration of the modular structure of the proposed tower
indicating the heights of sections which could be removed
or added in the future to adapt to changing communications
conditions or demands.
(j) A professional structural engineer registered in the State of
Connecticut shall submit a written description of the proposed
tower structure and its capacity to support additional antennas
or other communications facilities at different heights and the
ability of the tower to be shortened if future communications
facilities no longer require the original height. Also, the
engineer shall submit all the structural design capabilities of
the structure, such as maximum wind design, stress point
calculations, etc.
(k) A description of available space on the tower, providing
illustrations and examples of the type and number of
telecommunications facilities which could be mounted on the
structure.
(12) Proposed communications equipment shelter plan.
(a) Plans, elevations, sections and details at appropriate scale, but
no smaller than one inch equals 10 feet.
(b) Number of antennas and repeaters, as well as the exact
locations of antennas and of all repeaters (if any) located on a
map as well as by degrees, minutes and seconds to the nearest
tenth of latitude and longitude.
(c) Mounting locations on tower or structure, including height
above ground.
(d) Antenna(s) types, manufacturer(s), model number(s).
(e) For each antenna, the antenna gain and antenna radiation
pattern.
(f) Number of channels per antenna, projected and maximum.
(g) Power input to the antenna(s).
(h) Power output, in normal use and at maximum output, for each
antenna and all antennas as an aggregate.
(i) Output frequency of the transmitter(s).
(j) For modification of an existing facility with multiple emitters,
the results of an intermodulation study to predict the
44.Editor's Note: So in original.
§ 340-13.11 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 340-13.11
1:344
interaction of the additional equipment with existing
equipment.
(k) Floor plans, elevations and cross sections at a scale no smaller
than 1/4 inch equals one foot of any proposed appurtenant
structure.
(l) Representative elevation views, including the roof, facades,
doors and other exterior appearance and materials.
J. Visibility tests. The applicant shall arrange a visibility test as specified
below. Not more than 15 days and not less than 10 days prior to
the public hearing, the applicant shall fly at a minimum a three-footdiameter
balloon for a three-day period. After the commencement of the
public hearing, the applicant shall erect a crane on the site at the tower
height. If the crane cannot achieve the tower height, the applicant shall
raise a three-foot-diameter brightly colored balloon at the maximum
height of the tower from the crane within 50 horizontal feet of the
center of the proposed tower. If the site is inaccessible to a crane,
the Commission may allow the use of the three-foot-diameter brightly
colored balloon. Visibility tests shall be for a four-day period and must
include a Saturday and Sunday. Balloons at a minimum shall be flown
from sunrise to 12:00 p.m. The dates (including second dates, in case
of poor visibility on the initial dates), times and location of the visibility
test shall be advertised by the applicant twice in the newspapers listed
below not more than 15 days and no less than 10 days and again not
more than five days and not less than two days in advance of the first
test dates. Such notice will be printed in the following newspapers the
Rivereast, Hartford Courant, and the Regional Standard. The applicant
shall notify in writing by certificate of mailing the Commission, the
Board of Selectmen, and all abutting property owners of the dates and
times of the test at least 10 days in advance. Additionally, the applicant
shall erect a sign at least six square feet in size on the property stating
the times of the visibility test a minimum of 10 days prior to the
beginning of the test.
(1) Visual analysis. The applicant shall develop and submit a written
analysis of the visual impact of the proposed tower for a minimum
of a two-mile radius. This analysis shall include photographs of the
visibility test taken from at least 10 different perspectives within the
Town of Marlborough from public areas such as roadways, schools,
parks and other Town properties. The Commission may increase or
decrease the radius depending on the elevation of a particular site.
(2) Visibility maps/sight lines. Applicant shall utilize the USGS
Quadrangle Map, at a scale of one inch equals 400 feet, with vertical
scale of one inch equals 40 feet. Trees shall be shown at existing
heights and at project heights in 10 years. A map of the Town of
Marlborough on which any visibility of the proposed tower from
a public way (including all existing public rights-of-way) shall be
indicated.
K. Dimensional requirements.
(1) Height of towers. Towers that provide service for one
telecommunications carrier shall not exceed the height of 130 feet.
§ 340-13.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-13.11
1:345
Towers that will provide service for two telecommunications carriers
shall not exceed the height of 150 feet. The Commission, upon
written request from the applicant, may grant additional tower
height up to 180 feet to accommodate future sharing when the
Commission finds such a request would not create a greater
negative visual impact on the community than a lower tower height
at the particular location and consideration of the following criteria
are met:
(a) A letter of intent for co-location from at least two other carriers.
(b) A location not directly abutting or in the R Zoning District.
(c) A location within the highway right-of-way of CT Route 2.
(d) A location on the Town Transfer Station property.
(2) Height of wireless facility other than tower structure.
(a) Requirements.
[1] Height, side- and roof-mounted facilities. Side- and roofmounted
personal wireless service facilities shall not project
more than 10 feet above the height of the existing building
or any building located on the same or abutting property nor
project more than 10 feet above the height limit permitted
in the zoning district that the property is located.
[2] Height, existing structures. New antennas located on any
of the following structures, such as water towers, guyed
towers, lattice towers, fire towers church steeples, and
cupolas, shall be exempt from the height restrictions of
the zoning district where located, provided that there is no
increase in height of the existing structure as a result of the
installation of the personal wireless service facility.
[3] Height, existing public utility structures. New antennas
located on electric transmission lines and distribution
towers, telephone poles and similar existing utility
structures may project an additional 20 feet above the
existing structure.
(b) Height exceptions. If any applicant desires a height greater than
permitted above, he may apply to the Commission for a special
permit to increase the height.
(3) No repeater shall be closer than 200 feet to a dwelling unit
measured at ground level nor less than 35 feet above the ground.
(4) Telecommunications tower setbacks. Where guy wire supports are
used, setbacks will begin at the base of the guy wire anchored to the
ground, not at the base of the tower. No tower shall be built:
(a) Within 1/2 times the height of the proposed tower horizontally
to any structure existing at the time of application which is used
as a primary or secondary residence or the structure of primary
use and assembly located on nonresidential property; no closer
than 750 feet to the property of any school (both public and
private), church or to any other public building or athletic fields.
Primary or secondary residences are those dwelling units that
include toilet facilities and facilities for food preparation and
sleeping.
§ 340-13.11 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 340-13.11
1:346
(b) Within 1 1/2 times the height of the tower horizontally to any
boundary line of the property under which the tower(s) or
facilities are located, except this restriction may be waived when
the adjoining property is owned by the same owner(s) as the
tower site. In this case the owner(s) shall place an easement
restricting the construction of any expansion of existing
buildings/structures or the construction of new buildings/
structures on the property within the tower fall zone setback
area as long as the tower exists. Also, the Commission may
allow the fall zones to extend within a neighboring property if
it finds that a substantially better design will result from such
a reduction. Such neighboring property shall be subject to an
easement, secured by the applicant, preventing the erection of
any structures within the fall zone area during the time the
tower is in place.
(c) Within the habitat of any state-listed rare or endangered wildlife
or species and a minimum of 150 feet from the perimeter of the
habitat area.
(5) Building(s)/ground equipment setbacks. All buildings housing
ground equipment or mounted ground equipment shall be set back
a minimum of 50 feet from all abutting property lines and may
be located within the fall zone. The Commission may increase this
setback for generators, depending upon their noise emission.
L. Monitoring and evaluation of compliance.
(1) Basic requirements.
(a) Pretesting. After the granting of a special permit and before
the facility begins transmission, the applicant shall pay for an
independent consultant RF engineer, chosen jointly with the
Commission, to monitor the background levels of EMF radiation
around the proposed facility site and at appropriate distances
from it and/or at any repeater locations to be utilized for the
applicant's wireless facilities. A report of the monitoring results
shall be prepared by the independent consultant and submitted
to the Zoning Commission.
(b) Any major modification of an existing facility or the activation of
any additional permitted channels shall require new monitoring.
(c) The Commission may request the applicant to perform testing
to verify that the emissions from the tower facility are in
compliance with all permits issued. Such a request for testing
shall not be made more than every two years. The applicant shall
have 35 days from the date of receipt of the request to perform
such testing and submit the results to the Commission. Failure
to comply will be considered a violation of the special permit.
(2) Excessive emissions.
(a) Should the monitoring of a facility site reveal that the site
exceeds the current FCC standards and guidelines, then the
owner(s) of all facilities utilizing the site shall be notified. In
accordance with FCC requirements, the owner(s) must
immediately reduce power or cease operation as necessary to
§ 340-13.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-13.11
1:347
protect persons having access to the site, tower or antennas.
In addition, the owner(s) shall submit to the Commission an
analysis of what caused the problem and a plan for the reduction
of emissions to a level that complies with the FCC standards
within 10 business days of noncompliance.
(b) Failure to accomplish this reduction of emissions within 15
business days of initial notification of noncompliance shall be a
zoning violation subject to fines and such other remedies as are
otherwise available to the Town, Commission or ZEO pursuant
to Connecticut General Statutes. If a violation does occur, the
Commission can request a maximum of four random testings for
a one-year period after the correction of the violation.
(3) Structural inspection. Tower owner(s) shall pay for an independent
State of Connecticut-registered professional structural engineer to
conduct inspections of the tower and all its appurtenances for their
structural integrity and safety. Guyed towers shall be inspected
every three years. Monopoles and nonguyed lattice towers shall
be inspected every five years. A report of the inspection results
shall be prepared by the independent consultant and submitted to
the Marlborough Zoning Commission. Any major modification of an
existing facility which includes changes to the tower dimensions or
antenna numbers or type shall require a new structural inspection.
(4) Unsafe structure. Should the inspection of any tower reveal any
structural defect(s) which, in the opinion of the independent
consultant, renders that tower unsafe, the following actions must be
taken: within 10 business days of notification of unsafe structure,
the owner(s) of the tower shall submit a plan to remediate the
structural defect(s) to the Building Official for approval; the
corrections shall be completed within 10 business days of the
submission of the remediation plan; failure to accomplish this
remediation of structural defect(s) within 10 business days of initial
notification shall be a zoning violation subject to fines. Such fines
shall be payable by the owner(s) of the tower until compliance is
achieved.
M. Abandonment and discontinuation of use.
(1) Any telecommunications facility which ceases to operate for six
consecutive months shall be deemed to be abandoned and removed
within 90 days. "Cease to operate" is defined as not performing the
normal functions associated with a telecommunications facility and
its equipment on a continuous and ongoing basis for a period of six
consecutive months.
(2) Determination of the date of abandonment shall be made by the
Zoning Enforcement Officer, who shall have the right to request
documentation and/or affidavits from the telecommunications tower
owner/operator/service provider(s) regarding the subject of tower
usage. Failure or refusal for any reason by the owner/operator/
service provider(s) to respond within 20 days to such a request shall
constitute prima facie evidence that the communications tower has
been abandoned. Upon a determination of abandonment and notice
§ 340-13.11 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 340-13.11
1:348
thereof to the owner/operator/service provider(s), the owner(s) and
all others listed as responsible parties shall remove the tower and
all facilities and remediate the site within 90 days. At the time
of removal, the facility site shall be remediated such that all
telecommunications facility improvements which have ceased to be
utilized are removed. If all facilities on a tower have ceased to
operate, the tower shall also be removed and the site shall be
revegetated. Existing trees shall only be removed if necessary to
complete the required removal. Applicant shall, as a condition of
the special use permit, provide a financial surety bond payable to
the Town of Marlborough and acceptable to the Commission to
cover the cost of removal of the telecommunications facility and the
remediation of the landscape should the facility cease to operate.
Any special permit granted for the facility will automatically expire.
N. Bonding. As a condition of approval of a special permit, the applicant
shall provide a separate demolition bond in an amount determined and
approved by the Commission. The bond shall be for duration and in
a form and manner of surety as determined by the Commission, with
provision for inspections and Town removal of facilities in the event of
failure to perform by the responsible parties.
O. Duty to remove. The following are considered jointly and severally to be
the responsible parties for wireless telecommunications tower and other
wireless facility removal and site remediation:
(1) The owner of the abandoned wireless telecommunications tower or
facility (and, if different, the operator of the abandoned tower or
facility).
(2) The owner of the land upon which the abandoned tower or facility
is located.
(3) The lessee, if any, of the land upon which the tower or facility is
located.
(4) The sublessee or sublessees, if any, of the land upon which the
tower or facility is located.
(5) Any communications service provider who or which, by ceasing to
utilize the tower or facility or otherwise failing to operate any of
its transmitters or antennas on the tower for which it leased space
or purchased the right to space on the tower for its transmitters
or antennas, and by such ceasing or failure to utilize the tower or
facility, in fact, caused the tower to become abandoned.
(6) Any person to whom, or entity to which, there has been transferred
or assigned any license issued by the FCC and under which the
tower owner/operator operated the tower/facility.
(7) Any person or entity which has purchased all or a substantial
portion of the assets of the tower owner/operator/service
provider(s).
(8) Any entity which has merged with, or which has arisen or resulted
from a merger with, the tower owner or operator or service
provider(s).
(9) Any person or entity which acquired the owner or the operator of
the abandoned tower or facility.
§ 340-13.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-13.11
1:349
(10) Any parent or subsidiary of any of the foregoing which happens to
be a corporation.
(11) Any managing partner of any of the foregoing which happens to be
a limited partnership.
(12) Any partner of any of the foregoing which happens to be a general
partnership.
P. Failure to remove. In the event that the responsible parties have failed
to remove the wireless communications tower or facility and to restore
the site within 90 days, the Town of Marlborough may remove the tower
and restore the site using the surety bonds deposited at the time of
application and may thereafter initiate judicial proceedings against the
responsible parties for any portion of the cost not covered by the surety
bond.
Q. Severability clause. The invalidity of any section or provision of this
chapter shall not invalidate any other section or provision hereof.
R. Findings of the Marlborough Zoning Commission. The applicant shall
comply with the requirements set forth in §§ 340-5.1 and 340-5.3,
inclusive, and shall provide all information required to permit the
Commission to evaluate the application. The Commission may, in
consultation with independent consultants, make all of the following
applicable findings before granting the special permit:
(1) Applicant is not already providing adequate coverage and/or
adequate capacity to the Town of Marlborough.
(2) Applicant is not able to use an existing tower/facility or structure,
either within or outside of Marlborough, either with or without the
use of repeaters, to provide adequate coverage and/or adequate
capacity to the Town of Marlborough.
(3) Applicant has endeavored to provide adequate coverage and
adequate capacity to the Town of Marlborough with the least
number of towers and antennas technically and economically
feasible.
(4) Efforts have been made to locate new towers adjacent to existing
towers.
(5) Applicant has agreed to rent or lease available space on the tower
under the terms of fair-market lease, with reasonable conditions and
without discrimination to other telecommunications providers.
(6) Proposed telecommunications facility(ies) or tower(s) should make
use of available municipal or state lands if those lands conform to
appropriate setbacks for this chapter and where visual impact can
be minimized.
(7) The proposal shall comply with rules as adopted in FCC-97-326,
as the same may be amended from time to time, and procedures
outlined in FCC Bulletin 65 regarding emissions and exposure to
electromagnetic radiation, and that the required monitoring
program shall be paid for by the applicant. Towers and
telecommunications facilities shall be located so as to minimize the
following potential impacts:
(a) Visual/aesthetic. Unless adequate coverage and adequate
capacity cannot otherwise be achieved, towers shall be sited off
§ 340-13.11 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 340-13.11
1:350
ridgelines and where their visual impact is least detrimental to
highly rated scenic areas, such as, but not limited to, those sites
designated as scenic in the Marlborough Plan of Development.
In determining whether or not a tower will have an undue
adverse visual impact on the scenic or natural beauty of a ridge
or hillside, the Commission shall consider, but not be limited to:
[1] The period of time and the frequency of viewing during
which the traveling public on a public highway would see the
proposed tower.
[2] The degree to which the tower is screened by topographic
features;
[3] Background features in the line of sight to the proposed
tower that obscure the facility or make it more conspicuous;
[4] The distance of the proposed tower from the viewing
vantage point and the proportion of the facility that is visible
above the skyline;
[5] The number of vehicles traveling on a public highway or
waterway at or near the critical vantage point;
[6] The sensitivity or unique value of the particular view
affected by the proposed development;
[7] Devaluation of property.
(b) Safety hazards. In cases of structural failure, ice accumulation
and discharge, and attractive nuisance.
(c) Electromagnetic radiation. In case the tower, guy wires or
telecommunications facility is found to exceed the FCC
guidelines.
S. Permit expiration. A special permit granted pursuant to this section
shall expire five years from the date of approval. The special permit may
be renewed for a new five-year period on application to the Commission,
in a form prescribed by the Commission, submitted to the Commission
not later than 90 days before the existing special permit's expiration
date. Upon such a renewal application, the applicant shall affirmatively
demonstrate that all the conditions which form the basis of the initial
approval have been implemented and there are no zoning violations
and the facility is providing adequate and necessary coverage for the
applicant's overall wireless network system.
T. Definitions and word usage. As used in this section, the following terms
shall have the meanings indicated. The word "shall" or "will" indicates
mandatory requirements; "may" is advisory and indicates
recommendations which are not mandatory.
ANTENNA — A device which is attached to a tower or other structure
for transmitting or receiving electromagnetic waves. Examples include,
but are not limited to, whip, panel and dish antennas.
AVAILABLE SPACE — The space on a tower or structure to which
antennas of a telecommunications provider are both structurally able
and electromagnetically able to be attached.
BASE STATION — The primary sending and receiving site in a wireless
telecommunications network. More than one base station and/or more
§ 340-13.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-13.11
1:351
than one variety of telecommunications providers can be located on a
single tower or structure.
BULLETIN 65 — Published by the FCC Office of Engineering and
Technology, as may be revised, specifying radiation levels and methods
to determine compliance.
CAMOUFLAGED FACILITY — Any telecommunications facility that is
designed to blend into the surrounding environment, such as towers
and/or attached equipment designed to look like trees or barn silos, etc.
CHANNEL — The segment of the radiation spectrum from an antenna
which carries one signal. An antenna may radiate on many channels
simultaneously.
CO-LOCATION — The use of a single mount on the ground by more than
one carrier (vertical co-location) and/or several mounts on an existing
structure by more than one carrier.
COMMISSION — The Marlborough Zoning Commission of the Town of
Marlborough.
DEM — Unit of measure of the power level of an electromagnetic
signal expressed in decibels referenced to one milliwatt (1/1000th watt),
correctly written as "dBm."
ELEVATION — The elevation at grade or ground level shall be given in
above mean sea level (AMSL). The height of the wireless service facility
shall be given in above ground level (AGL). AGL is a measurement
of height from the natural grade of a site to the highest point of a
structure. The total elevation of the wireless service facility is AGL plus
AMSL.
EQUIPMENT SHELTER — An enclosed structure, cabinet, shed or box
located at the base station, designed principally to house batteries and
electrical equipment used in connection with personal wireless service
transmissions.
FACILITY SITE — A property or any part thereof which is owned or
leased by one or more telecommunications providers and upon which
one or more telecommunications facility such as a tower or a mounted
antenna and required landscaping are located. This includes any lot or
location having met all other criteria in this section that may be able
to provide adequate coverage and adequate capacity to a significant
portion of the Town of Marlborough.
FALL ZONE — The area on the ground within a prescribed radius from
the base of a wireless communications facility. The fall zone is the area
within which there is a potential hazard from falling debris (such as ice)
or collapsing material.
FCC — Federal Communications Commission. The government agency
responsible for regulating telecommunications in the United States.
§ 340-13.11 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 340-13.11
1:352
GRADE OF SERVICE — A measure of the percentage of calls which are
able to connect to the base station during the busiest hour of the date.
Grade of service is expressed as a number, such as p.05, which means
that 95% of callers will connect on their first try. A lower number (p.04)
indicates a better grade of service.
GROUND-MOUNTED — Mounted on the ground (see "tower").
GUYED TOWER — A monopole tower or lattice tower that is tied to the
ground or other surface by diagonal cables.
HEIGHT OF TOWER — The vertical distance from the highest point of
the structure, including antenna, plus any device attached to the grade
before construction.
LATTICE TOWER — A type of mount that is self-supporting with multiple
legs and cross bracing of structural steel.
LICENSED CARRIER — A company authorized by the FCC to construct
and operate a wireless communications facility.
LOCATION — References to site location as the exact longitude and
latitude, to the nearest tenth of a second, which bearing or orientation
referenced to true North.
MAJOR MODIFICATION OF AN EXISTING FACILITY — Any change or
proposed change in power input or output, number of antennas, change
in antenna type or model, repositioning of antenna(s), change in number
of channels per antenna above the maximum number approved under
an existing special permit.
MAJOR MODIFICATION OF AN EXISTING TOWER — Any increase or
proposed increase in dimensions of an existing and permitted tower or
other structure designed to support telecommunications transmission,
receiving and/or relaying antennas and/or equipment.
MONITORING — The measurement, by use of instruments in the field,
of nonionizing radiation exposure at a site as a whole or from individual
telecommunications facilities, towers, antennas or repeaters.
MONOPOLE — A single self-supporting vertical pole with no guy wire
anchors, usually consisting of galvanized or other unpainted metal or a
wooden pole with below-grade foundations. (See "towers.")
MONOPOLE TOWER — The type of mount that is self-supporting with
a single shaft of wood, steel, fiberglass or concrete, and a platform (or
racks) for panel and whip antennas arrayed at the top.
MOUNT — The structure or surface upon which antennas are mounted,
including the following four types of mounts:45
OMNIDIRECTIONAL (WHIP) ANTENNA — A thin rod that transmits and
receives signals in all directions.
PANEL ANTENNA — A flat surface antenna usually developed in
multiples.
§ 340-13.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-13.11
1:353
PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE PROVIDER — An entity licensed by
the FCC to provide personal wireless services to individuals or
institutions.
PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICES — All equipment (including
repeaters) with which a personal wireless service provider broadcasts
and receives the radio frequency waves which carry its services and
all locations of said equipment or any part thereof. This facility may be
sited on one or more towers or structure(s) owned and permitted by
another owner or entity.
RADIATED-SIGNAL PROPAGATION STUDIES OR COVERAGE PLOTS
— Computer-generated estimates of the signal emanating and
prediction of coverage from antennas or repeaters sited on a specific
tower or structure. The height above ground, power input and output,
frequency output, type of antenna, antenna gain, topography of the
site and its surroundings are all taken into account to create these
simulations. They are the primary tools for determining whether a
site will provide adequate coverage for the telecommunications facility
proposed for the site.
RADIO FREQUENCY ENGINEER — An engineer specializing in the
design, review and monitoring of radio frequency technologies.
REGULATED FACILITY, SERVICE AND/OR SITE — The equipment,
towers, mounts, antennas and other structures subject to local zoning
regulation. This includes all telecommunications services not exempt
from local regulation under the provisions of the Connecticut General
Statutes and the authority of the Connecticut Siting Council, or not
exempt from local regulation pursuant to the Telecommunications Act of
1996 or other such federal legislation or federal authority.
ROOF-MOUNTED — On the roof of a building.
SECURITY BARRIER — A locked, impenetrable wall, fence or berm that
completely seals an area from unauthorized entry or trespass.
SEPARATION — The distance between one carrier's array of antennas
and another carrier's array.
SIDE-MOUNTED — On the side of a building.
STRUCTURALLY ABLE — The determination that a tower or structure
is capable of carrying the load imposed by the proposed new antennas
under all reasonably predictable conditions as determined by
professional structural engineering analysis.
STRUCTURE-MOUNTED — Mounted on a structure other than a
building.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY — All equipment (including
repeaters) with which a telecommunications provider broadcasts and
receives the radio frequency waves which carry its services and all
45.Editor's Note: So in original.
§ 340-13.11 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 340-13.11
1:354
locations of said equipment or any part thereof. This facility may be
sited on one or more towers or structures owned and permitted by
another owner or entity.
TOWER — A support structure intended to support antennas and
associated equipment. This includes:46
U. The Marlborough Zoning Commission declares a moratorium on all
applications for and approvals of permits for personal wireless service
facilities, as defined in the Telecommunications Act of 1996, for six
months from the date of adoption.
(1) For purposes of this section, the terms "telecommunications,"
"telecommunications equipment" and "personal wireless service
facility" shall have the meanings ascribed to them in 47 U.S.C.
§§ 153 and 332, as those sections may be amended from time to
time.
(2) Telecommunications towers or antennas (including, without
limitation, any personal wireless service facility) shall not be a
permitted use in any zone until the Zoning Commission adopts
revisions to the Zoning Ordinance regulating such
telecommunications towers or antennas or for six months following
the effective date of this chapter, whichever is sooner.
(3) This subsection shall not apply to any application for: a) the erection
of telecommunications tower or antenna which replaces an existing
telecommunications tower or antenna located on the same site; or
b) the co-location of additional telecommunications equipment such
as transmitters or receivers onto an existing telecommunications
tower or antenna; provided, however, that such tower or antenna
is otherwise currently permitted in the zone; that such applications
shall be approved in the same manner as the telecommunications
tower or antenna which is replaced or expanded thereby; and that
no such application shall be approved which would allow the
continuation or expansion of any nonconforming use.
46.Editor's Note: So in original.
§ 340-13.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-13.11
1:355

ARTICLE XIV
Nonconforming Lots, Structures and Uses of Land and Structures
§ 340-14.1. Statement of intent.
A. Within the zoning districts established by this chapter, or amendments
that may later be adopted, there shall exist lots, structures and uses of
land and structures which were lawful before this chapter was passed or
amended, but which would be prohibited, regulated or restricted under
the terms of this chapter or future amendments.
B. It is the intent of this chapter to permit these nonconformities to
continue until they are removed, but not to encourage their survival.
Such uses are declared by this chapter to be incompatible with permitted
uses in the zoning districts involved. It is further the intent of this
chapter that nonconformities shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or
extended if such a change increases the nonconformity or is used as
grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the
same zoning district.
C. A nonconforming use of a structure, a nonconforming use of land, or
a nonconforming use of a structure and land shall not be extended or
enlarged after passage of this chapter by attachment on a building or
premises of additional signs intended to be seen from off the premises
or by the addition of other uses of a nature which would be prohibited
generally in the zoning district involved. Nothing in this chapter shall
be deemed to require a change in the plans if construction was lawfully
begun prior to the effective date of adoption or amendment of this
chapter.
§ 340-14.2. Nonconforming lots of record.
A. In any zoning district in which single-family dwellings are permitted,
notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of this chapter,
a single-family dwelling and customary accessory buildings may be
erected on any single lot of record at the effective date of adoption
of amendments of this chapter. This provision shall apply even though
such lot fails to meet the requirements for area or lot frontage, or both,
that are generally applicable in the zoning district, provided that yard
dimensions and other requirements not involving area or frontage, or
both, of the lot shall conform to the regulations for the zoning district
in which such lot is located. Variance of yard requirements shall be
obtained only through action of the ZBA.
B. Nothing in this chapter shall restrict the future construction of
structures in conformance at the effective date of this chapter in
subdivisions in the process of approval at such effective date or in
subdivision approved prior to such effective date.
§ 340-14.3. Nonconforming uses of land.
Where at the effective date of adoption of amendments of this chapter
lawful use of land exists that is made no longer permissible under the terms
of this chapter as enacted or amended, such use may be continued so long
as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:
§ 340-14.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-14.3
1:357
A. No such nonconforming use shall be enlarged or increased or extended
to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective date
of adoption or amendment of this chapter.
B. No such nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any
other portion of the lot or parcel occupied by such use at the effective
date of adoption or amendment of this chapter.
C. If any such nonconforming use of land ceases to exist for a period of one
year, any subsequent use of such land shall conform to the regulations
specified by this chapter for the zoning district in which such land is
located unless the owner demonstrates to the satisfaction of the ZEO
that the owner's intent was not to abandon such use.
§ 340-14.4. Nonconforming structures.
Where a lawful structure containing a permitted use exists at the effective
date of adoption or amendment of this chapter that could not be built under
the terms of this chapter by reason of restrictions on area, lot coverage,
height, yards or other characteristics of the structure or its location on the
lot, such structure may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful,
subject to the following provisions:
A. Should such structure be destroyed or damaged by fire, explosion or
act of God it may be repaired or replaced to its original dimensions
existing immediately prior to such damage or destruction. If such repair
or replacement is not begun within one year from the date of such
damage or destruction, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity
with the provisions of this chapter.
B. Should such structure be moved for any reason for any distance
whatsoever, it shall be made to conform to the regulations for the zoning
district in which it is located after it is moved.
C. Such nonconforming structures shall not be structurally altered,
reconstructed or expanded unless such alterations or expansions
conform to all applicable setback, building height, coverage and use
requirements, or are alterations required by law. In addition,
maintenance and repair work required to keep a nonconforming
structure in sound condition shall also be permitted.
D. In accordance with the provisions of the Connecticut General Statutes
§ 8-13a, when a building is so situated on a lot that it violates this
chapter with respect to its relation to the boundaries of the lot, and such
building has been so situated for three years without the institution of
an action by the administrative official to enforce such regulations, such
building shall be deemed a nonconforming building in relation to such
boundaries. Although the structure may become legally nonconforming
with respect to its relationship to the boundaries of the lot, it shall not
become legally nonconforming with respect to any other provisions of
this chapter, uses of land, structures, or both, which were not legally
established prior to this chapter or in conformance with this chapter, and
shall not become legally nonconforming by the passage of time.
§ 340-14.3 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 340-14.5
1:358
§ 340-14.5. Nonconforming uses of structures.
If a lawful use of a structure, or a structure and lot in combination, exists at
the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter that would not
be allowed in the zoning district under the terms of this chapter, the lawful
use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the
following provisions:
A. No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this chapter in
the zoning district in which it is located shall be enlarged, extended,
constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered in a manner
which increases the nonconformity except in changing the use of the
structure to a use permitted in the zoning district in which it is located.
B. Any structure or structure and lot in combination, in or on which a
nonconforming use is superseded by a permitted use, shall thereafter
conform to the regulations for the zoning district in which such structure
is located, and the nonconforming use may not thereafter be resumed.
C. When a nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and lot in
combination, ceases to exist for one year, the structure and premises in
combination shall not thereafter be used except in conformance with the
regulations of the zoning district in which it is located unless the owner
demonstrates to the satisfaction of the ZEO that the owner's intent was
not to abandon such a use.
§ 340-14.6. Repairs and maintenance.
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or
restoring to a safe condition of any building or part thereof declared to be
unsafe by any official charged with protecting the public safety upon order
of such official.
§ 340-14.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-14.6
1:359

ARTICLE XV
Administration, Enforcement, Zoning Permits, Certificates of
Occupancy, Appeals
§ 340-15.1. Administration.
This chapter and all decisions, resolutions, determinations, orders,
directions and other actions taken by the Commission shall be enforced by
the Zoning Enforcement Officer. The ZEO may engage the services of any
person reasonably required in the discharge of the ZEO's duties hereunder.
§ 340-15.2. Zoning Enforcement Officer's powers and duties.
The ZEO shall have the following powers and duties:
A. To investigate complaints of violations and secure the correction of such
violations, including, without limitation, the exercise of the rights and
remedies set forth in the chapter.
B. To issue zoning permits for activities and uses that are permitted as of
right in this chapter.
C. To issue temporary use permits where authorized by this chapter.
D. To issue certificates of zoning compliance.
E. To decide on questions of interpretation and enforcement of this chapter.
F. To delegate any of the foregoing powers and duties to any other
enforcement officer as the ZEO deems appropriate, provided that, if the
Commission disapproves of any such delegation, such delegation shall
be void and of no effect.
§ 340-15.3. Compliance with regulations; enforcement.
A. Compliance with regulations. No building or structure shall be erected,
constructed, altered, converted or maintained, nor shall any building,
structure or land be used in violation of any provision of the statutes,
this chapter, any other applicable statute, ordinance, rule or regulation
of any other authority having jurisdiction under the statutes or this
chapter. Any owner or tenant of a lot (or any portion thereof) on which
there exists a violation shall immediately cease and desist from the
continuance or allowance thereof and shall immediately and fully correct
any such violation.
B. Procedures if violation is alleged or violation exists.
(1) Investigation. The ZEO and/or any other enforcement officer shall
use best efforts to investigate all complaints alleging a violation,
to prevent violations, to detect existing violations, and to report
the results of any investigation, actions taken and current status of
any violation to the Commission, and in so doing, such enforcement
officer shall determine the proper course of correction thereof.
(2) Written orders. After determining that a violation exists or is
reasonably likely to exist, the ZEO is empowered to issue a cease
and desist order. The Commission shall be empowered to cause the
recordation of any cease and desist order or a notice thereof on the
Land Records.
C. Statutory penalties.
§ 340-15.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-15.3
1:361
(1) Each violation party may be fined $100 for each day that such
violation continues, provided that, if such violation is determined to
be willful, such violation party may be fined $250 and/or imprisoned
for not more than 10 days per day that such violation continues.
(2) Each violation party having been served with a cease and desist
order who shall not have corrected such violation described therein
for more than 10 days after delivery of such cease and desist order
shall be subject to a civil penalty of $2,500, such fine being payable
to the Tax Collector.
(3) Each violation party having been served with a cease and desist
order for an earth violation who shall not have immediately
corrected such earth violation shall be subject to a civil penalty of
$2,500, such fine being payable to the Tax Collector.
(4) The Town, the Commission and the enforcement officers shall have
all rights and remedies afforded to such parties under § 8-12 of
the Connecticut General Statutes, including, without limitation, the
right to seek costs and attorneys' fees from any violation party.
The Commission and the enforcement officers are empowered to
forbear in the exercise of any of the rights and remedies afforded
under § 8-12 of the Connecticut General Statutes, provided that
such forbearance shall be solely an accommodation to a violation
party, and such violation party shall not be permitted to rely on
or assert as a defense such forbearance. In any instance whereby
an enforcement officer shall exercise such right of forbearance
hereunder, the ZEO or such enforcement officer shall include a
report of such forbearance at the next occurring meeting of the
Commission.
D. Municipal penalties.
(1) Each violation party may be subject to a municipal fine. Such
municipal fine shall be levied against any such violation party and
shall accrue for each day after an enforcement officer is deemed
to have given a municipal citation until such violation has been
cured to the satisfaction of the ZEO and/or the Commission. The
amount of such fine and such daily accrual shall be equal to the
amount established by the Board of Selectmen from time to time
pursuant to the Citation Ordinance.47 The enforcement officers are
hereby empowered to issue municipal citations to any violation party,
provided no municipal citation shall be given to any violation party
unless and until: a) a cease and desist order has been given; b)
either the minimum period to appeal such cease and desist order
as provided in this chapter has lapsed without appeal being made,
or such violation party has made timely appeal to the Zoning Board
of Appeals, which appeal was subsequently denied by said Zoning
Board of Appeals; and c) the Commission has given its authorization
for such enforcement officer to give such municipal citation.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, any enforcement officer may give
a municipal citation contemporaneously with the giving of a cease
and desist order for any significant violation, and the Commission's
authorization shall be deemed automatically given therefor.
§ 340-15.3 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 340-15.3
1:362
(2) The Commission is hereby empowered to forbear in the exercise
of any of the rights and remedies afforded under § 8-12a of the
Connecticut General Statutes and Subsection D(1) hereof, provided
that such forbearance shall be solely an accommodation to a
violation party, and such violation party shall not be permitted to rely
on or assert as a defense such forbearance once a municipal citation
has been issued.
(3) The rights and remedies of any person having been given a municipal
citation shall be governed by the Citation Ordinance.48
(4) The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall be empowered to seek final
judgments, file judgments, coordinate with the Chief Hearing Officer
(as such term is defined in the Citation Ordinance) and to otherwise
discharge all powers available to the Commission pursuant to the
Citation Ordinance.49
E. Remedies cumulative. All rights and remedies of the Commission and/
or the enforcement officers under this chapter, under the Connecticut
General Statutes, or otherwise, shall be cumulative, and the exercise
or partial exercise of any such right or remedy shall not preclude the
exercise of any other right or remedy.
§ 340-15.4. Zoning permits required.
No building or sign shall be erected, moved, added to, or strictly altered
without a permit issued by the Building Inspector and ZEO. No zoning
permit shall be issued except in conformity with the provisions of this
chapter or after written approval from the ZBA or a written order from a
court of appropriate jurisdiction is received.
§ 340-15.5. Application for zoning permit.
A. All applications for zoning permits shall be accompanied by four copies
of a plot plan submitted to the ZEO for consideration and determination
as to whether or not a building or site conforms to the provisions of
this chapter. In addition to the requirements of the Health or Building
Department and except where the ZEO determines otherwise, the plot
plan shall include the following information:
(1) The name and address of the record owner of the site;
(2) A statement describing the proposed use of the site;
(3) A general location map at one inch equals 800 feet, showing the
location of the subject site;
(4) Title of the project, names of the individual who prepared the plan,
date, North arrow, scale, date and a class A-2 survey prepared by a
licensed land surveyor registered in the State of Connecticut:
(a) The boundaries and dimensions of the site including the location
of all pins and monuments;
(b) The location of the existing street line;
47.Editor's Note: See Ch. 254, Land Use, Art. IV.
48.Editor's Note: See Ch. 254, Land Use, Art. IV.
49.Editor's Note: See Ch. 254, Land Use, Art. IV.
§ 340-15.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-15.5
1:363
(c) The location and dimensions of all existing and proposed
buildings and structures;
(d) The location of all wetlands and watercourses;
(e) The location and dimensions of all easements;
(f) The location of the proposed and existing wells;
(g) The proposed location and design of subsurface sewage disposal
systems, (prepared by a professional engineer licensed in the
State of Connecticut;
(h) The location of the proposed driveway;
(i) The proposed and existing contours of the site at two-foot
intervals;
(j) The minimum required yard building lines;
(k) Test pit and percolation test locations, data and the dates when
the tests were performed;
(l) Location of all existing and proposed footing and/or curtain
drains, sizes, type and proposed footing and/or curtain drains,
sizes, type and proposed outlet elevations;
(m) Project bench mark locations with description and elevation;
(n) An erosion and sediment control plan;
(o) Tabulations of total gross acreage of the site and the percentage
thereof proposed to be devoted to the lot coverage of the
buildings and structures;
(p) Tabulations of the zoning designation of the site, the minimum
front, side and rear yards, building height proposed and
permitted;
(q) Such additional data, maps, plans, surveys or statements as may
be required for the particular use or activity, including existing
or proposed uses of the building and land; number of families,
housekeeping units or rental units the building is designed to
accommodate; conditions existing on the lot; and such other
matters as may be necessary to determine conformance with
and provide for the enforcement of this chapter.
B. One copy of the plan shall be returned to the applicant by the Building
Official after he and the ZEO shall have marked such copy with their
signatures either as approved or disapproved.
§ 340-15.6. Expiration of zoning permit.
A. If the work described in any zoning permit has not substantially begun
within six months from date of issuance thereof, said permit may expire;
it shall be cancelled by the ZEO, and written notice thereof shall be given
to the person affected.
B. If the work described in any zoning permit has not been substantially
completed within two years from date of issuance thereof, said permit
may expire, and notice shall be given to the persons affected, together
with the notice that further work as described in the cancelled permit
shall not proceed unless and until a new zoning permit has been
obtained.
§ 340-15.7. Certificate of occupancy and compliance.
§ 340-15.5 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 340-15.7
1:364
A. No land shall be occupied or used, and no building hereafter erected or
moved shall be occupied or used, in whole or in part, for any purpose
until a certificate of occupancy or certificate of compliance has been
issued by the Building Inspector and signed by the ZEO, stating that the
use of the land or buildings complies with all provisions of this chapter.
Such a certificate may be applied for at the same time as the zoning
permit or thereafter and, if approved, shall be issued within 10 days
after notification by the permittee that the land or building is ready for
occupancy. This chapter shall not affect the moving of a portable building
within the boundaries of a lot on which it is situated.
B. The following as-built certified plot plan prepared by a land surveyor
licensed in the State of Connecticut shall be submitted, indicating:
(1) The exact location and dimensions of all buildings and structures;
(2) The exact location of the well;
(3) The exact location of all curtain drains, footing drains and outfalls;
(4) The exact location of any easements;
(5) The exact location of the driveway.
§ 340-15.8. Construction and use to be as provided in applications,
plans or permits.
Zoning permits issued on the basis of plans and applications approved by
the ZEO and Building Inspector authorize only the use, arrangement and
construction set forth in such approved plans and applications and no other
use, arrangement or construction. Use, arrangement or construction at
variance with that authorized may be deemed a violation of this chapter,
punishable in accordance with the General Statutes of the State of
Connecticut, as amended.
§ 340-15.9. Appeals from decisions of Zoning Enforcement Officer.
All decisions, requirements or orders issued by the ZEO shall be final,
provided that any person or persons aggrieved by said decision may, within
30 days of said decision or order, file an appeal on a form as provided for
by the Commission with the ZBA for relief. Upon receipt of an appeal, the
ZBA shall hold a duly noticed public hearing and thereafter may reverse or
affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify any order, requirement or decision of
the ZEO.
§ 340-15.10. Permit application fees.
A. The Board of Selectmen shall set fees annually for applications to defray
the costs of legal notices, publication of decisions, and filing. (See
Appendix C.50)
B. The Board of Selectmen shall set fees annually for building permits to
defray the costs of required inspections.
50.Editor's Note: Appendix C is on file in the Town's office.
§ 340-15.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-15.10
1:365

ARTICLE XVI
Amendments
§ 340-16.1. Amendments authorized.
This chapter or the Official Zoning Map may be amended or repealed as
provided in this chapter either on the initiative of the Zoning Commission or
by petition. The Commission is not required to hear any petition or petitions
relating to the same changes, or substantially the same changes, more
than once in a period of 12 months. The Zoning Commission may grant a
rehearing if it finds, or facts are presented in writing, that a material change
in the situation justifies this action in the interest of the public as well as
the petitioner.
§ 340-16.2. Zone Map amendment requirements.
A. Application requirements.
(1) A fee to defray the cost of legal notice and publication of decision. This fee schedule set annually by the Board of Selectmen. (See Appendix C for present fee schedule.51)
(2) A completed Zone Map amendment application.
(3) Submission of the application to the administrative official at least seven days prior a regularly scheduled meeting.
(4) Five copies and one Mylar copy of a site plan at a scale of one inch equals 40 feet, which
shall include the following:
(a) Title of development, date, North arrow, scale, key map scaled at one inch equals feet, name and address of record owner and the professional preparing the site (b) The subject parcel and adjacent properties within 100 feet of the property lines subject parcel;
(c) Location and use of all existing structures;
(d) The existing contours of the land at five-foot intervals;
(e) Location of existing watercourses, marshes, wooded areas, ledges, outcrops;
(f) An overlay of the detailed soil survey of the Department of Agriculture Resources Conservation Service, drawn at the scale of the site plan;
(g) The following approval block:
APPROVED
MARLBOROUGH ZONING COMMISSION
CHAIRMAN
SECRETARY
DATE
(5) In any petition for a Zone Map amendment, the Commission may require the submission
of plans showing proposals for the development of the land involved in the change,
including the location of buildings, streets, open space, and other such information the Zoning Commission considers helpful to its decision.
(6) If a protest against a Zone Map amendment is filed with the Commission, the applicant
shall submit a Class D survey that delineates all properties, any portion of which within 500 feet of the subject site, with the names of the present property owners, area
of the site, address of the property owner and a table that details this information. survey shall be prepared by a land surveyor licensed in the State of Connecticut.
§ 340-16.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-16.2
1:367
B. Application procedures.
(1) The Commission shall hold a public hearing within 65 days after receipt of an
application. Copies of the application shall be submitted to the Marlborough
Planning Commission for a report at least 35 days prior to the date assigned for
the public hearing.
(2) If any portion of the proposed Zone Map amendment site is within 500 feet
of the boundary of an adjoining municipality or a significant portion of the
traffic to and from the completed project will use its streets or a significant
portion of the sewer or drainage from the project will use and significantly
affect the adjoining Town's sewerage or drainage system or water runoff from
the improved site will affect the municipality's streets or property or private
property within it, the Commission shall notify the affected municipality's town
clerk of pending actions by certified mail within seven days of receiving an
application.
(3) If any portion of the proposed Zone Map amendment site is within 500 feet
of the boundary of another municipality located within the area of operation
of a regional planning agency, the Commission shall give written notice of
the proposal to the agency not later than 35 days before the date of the
public hearing. The applicant shall permit the ZEO to erect a temporary sign
advertising the public hearing on the property at least 10 days prior to the
public hearing.
C. Exemptions. For any proposed amendment to the Zoning Map initiated by the
Marlborough Zoning Commission, the requirements of Subsection A(1) and (4)(b)
through (f) shall not apply.
D. Zoning Commission decision guidelines. In considering any application to amend
the Zoning Map, the Commission shall ensure compliance with the following
criteria:
(1) The application form and plans are complete and contain all required
information.
(2) The amendment will promote the public's health, safety and general welfare.
(3) Consideration has been given to the following:
(a) The size, physical and environmental characteristics of the subject parcel.
(b) The character and supply of the land currently zoned in the proposed zone
classification.
(c) The effect of the proposal on existing land use in the subject area.
(d) The general effect of the proposal on existing infrastructure capacities.
(e) Compliance with the Plan of Development for the Town.
E. Zoning Commission action.
(1) The Commission shall approve or deny all applications within 65 days of the
date of the completion of the public hearing. Notice of the decision of the
Commission shall be communicated to the applicant in writing within 15 days
after such decision has been rendered and shall be published in a newspaper
having a substantial circulation in the Town within 15 days after such action has
been taken. The reasons for the action of the Commission shall be set forth in
the minutes.
(2) Such Zone Map amendment shall be approved only by a majority vote of all
members of the Commission, except as provided herein. If a protest against
51.Editor's Note: Appendix C is on file in the Town's office.
§ 340-16.2 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 340-16.2
1:368
a Zone Map amendment is filed at or before a hearing with the Commission,
signed by the owners of 20% or more of the area of the lots included in such
proposed change or of the lots within 500 feet in all directions of the property
included in the proposed change, such change shall not be adopted except by a
vote of 2/3 of all members of the Commission.
F. Filing with the Town Clerk. Upon approval, the Zone Map amendment shall be
recorded by the applicant, at his expense, at the office of the Town Clerk. A
Zone Map amendment shall become effective at such time as is fixed by the
Commission, provided a copy of such map amendment has been filed in the office
of the Town Clerk and notice of the decision of the Commission has been published
in a newspaper having a substantial circulation in the Town. Any Zone Map
amendment not so recorded within 90 days following its approval by the
Commission shall become null and void.
§ 340-16.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-16.2
1:369

ARTICLE XVII
Miscellaneous
§ 340-17.1. Provisions declared to be minimum regulations.
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall
be held to be minimum regulations, adopted for the promotion of the public
health, safety, morals or general welfare. Wherever the requirements of this
chapter are in variance with the requirements of any other lawfully adopted
rules, regulations, deed restrictions or covenants, the most restrictive or
that imposing the higher standard shall govern.
§ 340-17.2. Validity.
Should any section or provision of this chapter be declared by the courts
to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity
of the chapter as a whole, or any part thereof, other than the part declared
unconstitutional or invalid.
§ 340-17.3. Effective date.
This chapter shall take effect on November 13, 1989. A copy of the Zoning
Regulations and Revised Map of the Town of Marlborough, showing zoning
districts as herein described, are now on file at the office of the Town Clerk,
Town Hall, Marlborough, Connecticut.
§ 340-17.4. Repeal.
The previous Zoning Regulations, dated January 1, 1982, and amendments,
are hereby repealed.
§ 340-17.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-17.4
1:371
Chapter 410
SEWERS
§ 340-17.4 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 340-17.4
1:372
ARTICLE I
Introduction
§ 410-1. Findings and purpose.
A. The Town of Marlborough (the "Town"), through the Marlborough Water
Pollution Control Authority ("the MWPCA"), is the owner and operator
of a public sewer; and does not own, operate or have located within
the territorial limits of the Town any arrangements or devices for the
treatment of sewage and sludge; and has entered into a written contract
with the Colchester/East Hampton Joint Facilities and the Town of East
Hampton Water Pollution Control Authority whereby and wherein each
party has agreed to accept, treat and discharge the flow of sewage
from certain parts of the Town's public sewer into and out of the Water
Pollution Control Facility owned, operated and maintained by
Colchester/East Hampton Joint Facilities.
B. These regulations establish the procedures for making connections and
use of the public sewer in the Town. They also establish specific limits for
septic flows and pollutant discharges which by their nature or by their
interaction with sewage will be detrimental to the public health, cause
damage to the public sewer or the water pollution control facility, pollute
the waters of the State, or otherwise create a public nuisance. Further,
these regulations pertain to the sewer avoidance area of the Town.
C. These regulations are intended to:
(1) Inform the public as to the technical and administrative procedures
to be followed in obtaining connection to the public sewer system;
(2) Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the public sewer system
which will interfere with the collection and/or treatment system;
(3) Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the treatment system
which will pass through the system, inadequately treated, into the
waters of the state, or the atmosphere, or otherwise be incompatible
with the system;
(4) Improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewater and
sludge from the system;
(5) Ensure the proper operation of on-site septic systems outside the
sewer service areas in conjunction with the Chatham Health District.
D. These regulations authorize the issuance of wastewater discharge
permits; provide for monitoring, compliance, and enforcement activities;
establish administrative review procedures; require user reporting; and
provide for the setting of fees for the reasonable distribution of costs
resulting from the program established herein.
E. These regulations shall apply to the Town and to persons outside the
Town who contribute flow to the public sewer system. Except as
otherwise provided herein, the Town, through the MWPCA and its
officers, agents, employees and persons bearing proper credentials and
identification, shall implement and enforce the provisions of these
regulations.
§ 410-2. Water pollution control plan.
§ 410-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-2
1:373
A. Purpose and authority. In accordance with Chapter 103, and particularly
C.G.S. § 7-246, the MWPCA hereby establishes the Marlborough Water
Pollution Control Plan ("Plan") for the Town.
B. Area of concern. In response to statutory and regulatory requirements
administered and enforced by the Connecticut Department of Energy
and Environmental Protection, the Town initiated a sanitary survey
conducted from 1999 to 2002, to evaluate the condition of the existing
on-site sanitary waste disposal systems in the Lake Terramuggus
Watershed and the Marlborough Town Center Area. The study,
conducted by SEA Consultants, Inc., resulted in the publication of the
Lake Terramuggus Wastewater Facilities Plan for the Town of
Marlborough, Connecticut. On the basis of that facilities plan, the
MWPCA determined the geographical portion of the Town shown and
designated as the "Primary Sewer Service Area" and "Future Sewer
Service Area" on the Sanitary Waste Management Plan in which public
sewer construction is appropriate.
C. Sewer avoidance. Sewer avoidance is a desirable policy for
municipalities where public sewers are located in a limited service area,
do not exist, or are not planned. The MWPCA concludes that sewer
avoidance is appropriate as a policy for the Town outside of the public
sewer services areas depicted on the Sanitary Waste Management Plan.
D. Designation and delineation of service and nonservice areas. The
MWPCA hereby adopts and incorporates in this plan the map entitled
"Sanitary Waste Management Plan." The map officially designates the
Primary Sewer Service District, Secondary Sewer Service District, and
the Sewer Avoidance District.
§ 410-3. Right of revision.
The MWPCA reserves the right to establish, by regulation or through
wastewater discharge permits, more stringent standards than the existing
requirements and standards of these regulations on discharges to the public
sewer and to its facilities.
§ 410-4. Sewer service district boundaries.
A. The MWPCA hereby establishes a public sewer service district to be
known as the "Marlborough Sewer Service District," as shown on a
map entitled "Sanitary Waste Management Plan" prepared by Tighe and
Bond, Inc., dated December 2009, on file in the office of the Town Clerk
of Marlborough.
B. There is a finite limit to the quantity of sewage that the joint facilities
treatment plant can accept from Marlborough. It is thus not the intent
of the MWPCA to plan for growth of the Marlborough Sewer Service
District boundaries beyond those areas depicted on the Sanitary Waste
Management Plan. It is the role of the MWPCA to allocate flows within
the Marlborough Sewer Service District and to minimize any expansion
of the public sewer into the Sewer Avoidance District.
C. The Marlborough Sewer Service District is defined as depicted on the
Sanitary Waste Management Plan as:
§ 410-2 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 410-4
1:374
(1) Primary sewer service district. These areas are shown on the map as
being served by present sewer installations and design area.
(2) Secondary sewer service area.
(3) Sewer avoidance district.
§ 410-5. Amendment to district.
The MWPCA recognizes that mitigating circumstances such as community
needs may necessitate future amendments to the district boundaries. Any
request to amend the Sanitary Waste Management Plan boundaries will be
considered by the MWPCA, subject to the following criteria:
A. In considering a request to amend the Sanitary Waste Management Plan
boundaries the MWPCA shall take into consideration the following:
(1) Marlborough Plan of Conservation and Development.
(2) State Plan of Conservation and Development.
(3) Capitol Region Plan of Conservation and Development.
(4) Sanitary Waste Management Plan adopted by the MWPCA.
(5) The Marlborough Inland/Wetland Regulations and Zoning
Regulations.
B. The MWPCA will submit petitions for amendments to the Marlborough
Conservation Commission, the Marlborough Planning Commission, and
the Marlborough Zoning Commission for review and comments.
C. Prior to any vote by the MWPCA to amend the Marlborough Sewer
Service District boundaries a public hearing will be held. The petitioner
shall notify abutting property owners at least 14 days prior to any
hearing date by certificate of mailing, and the hearing must be legally
warned at least 14 days prior to being held.
D. The availability of wastewater pumping and treatment flow capacity as it
relates to the contractual daily flow limits with joint facilities permitted
and capacity of the systems physical facilities at that time.
§ 410-6. Application requirements for amendments to Sanitary
Waste Management Plan.
A. Application form.
B. A written statement of compliance with the policies and goals of the
Town, Regional and State Plans of Conservation and Development.
C. Proposed use of the property and projection of domestic sewage flows
associated with that use(s).
D. An A-2 survey of the boundaries of the petition area that shows the
names of property owners within the amendment area and direct
abutters.
E. Certificate of mailing receipts to abutters.
F. Other information deemed necessary by the MWPCA.
§ 410-7. Validity.
The invalidity of any section, clause, sentence or provisions of these
regulations shall not affect the validity of any other part of these regulations
which can be given effect without the invalid part or parts.
§ 410-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-7
1:375

ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 410-8. Terms defined.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACT or THE ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as
the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.
AS-BUILT DRAWINGS — Detailed drawing(s) prepared on completion of
the collection system, sealed by the design engineer, which show actual
construction and field dimensions, elevations, details, changes made to the
construction drawings by modification, details which were not included
on the construction drawings, horizontal and vertical locations of all
underground utilities which have been impacted by the sewer installation.
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF THE USER —
BIOLOGICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD) — The amount of oxygen necessary
for bacteria while bacteria are stabilizing decomposable organic matter
under aerobic conditions for five days. The determination of BOD shall
be performed in accordance with the procedures prescribed in the latest
edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Wastewater."
BUILDING COVERAGE — The combined area of a site covered by the roof
area or outside dimensions of all structures on the lot, which includes eaves
and other similar projections. Coverage shall include dwellings, garages,
accessory buildings, commercial structures, porches, decks and covered
walkways.
BUILDING DRAIN — That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a building's
plumbing which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage
pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer.
The president, vice president, secretary and treasurer of the
corporation of a principal business functions, or another appropriate
person(s) as they may designate in writing.
A.
If the user is a partnership or a sole proprietorship, a general partner
or proprietor, respectively, or another appropriate person(s) as he may
designate in writing.
B.
If the user is a federal, state or local governmental facility, a director
or highest appointed official designated to oversee the operation and
performance of the activities of the governmental facility or his
designee.
C.
If the user is an individual property owner; the owner of record as
shown on the most recent Grand List of the Town, or another
appropriate person(s) as he may designate in writing.
D.
§ 410-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-8
1:377
BUILDING SEWER — The tight sewer pipe extension from the building
drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal; it may also be called a
"house connection."
BUSINESS DAY — Normal Marlborough Town Hall Office operating hours.
CATEGORICAL STANDARDS — National Categorical Pretreatment
Standards or Pretreatment Standards.
COMMISSIONER — The Commissioner of Energy and Environmental
Protection for the State of Connecticut.
COMPATIBLE POLLUTANT — Biological oxygen demand, suspended solids,
pH and fecal coliform bacteria; plus any additional pollutants identified
in the water pollution control facility's NPDES permit, where the water
pollution control facility is designed to treat such pollutants and, in fact,
does treat such pollutants to the degree required by the NPDES permit.
COOLING WATER — The process water in general used for cooling
purposes to which the only pollutant added is heat and which has such
characteristics that it may be discharged to a natural outlet in accordance
with federal and state laws and regulations.
DEVELOPER — Any person or entity that extends the public sewer other
than the MWPCA.
DIRECTOR OF HEALTH — The Director of Health for the Town.
DOMESTIC SEWAGE — The sewage that consists of water and human
excretions or other waterborne waste incidental to the occupancy of a
residential building or nonresidential building, but not including
wastewater from water softening equipment, commercial laundry
wastewater, and blow-down from heating and cooling equipment, water
from cellar or floor drains, or surface water from roofs, paved surfaces, or
yard drains.
DRAINLAYER — An individual, partnership or corporation to whom the
State of Connecticut has issued a license to install and repair sewers,
sewer connections, subsurface disposal fields and septic tank systems,
during the period when such license is valid, and the proper agents and
representatives of such drainlayer.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY or EPA — The U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency and its duly authorized agents.
EQUIVALENT DWELLING UNIT (EDU) — Units used to allocate the
individual betterments and use assessment to property owners.
FATS, OILS AND GREASE (FOG) — Animal- and plant-derived substances
that may solidify or become viscous between the temperatures of 32° F. and
150° F. (0° C. to 65° C.), and that separate from sewage by gravity. Any
edible substance identified as grease per the most current EPA method as
listed in 40 CFR 136.3.
§ 410-8 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 410-8
1:378
FOG INTERCEPTOR or GREASE TRAP — A passive tank installed outside
a building or designed to remove fats, oils and grease from flowing sewage
while allowing sewage to flow through it, and as defined herein.
FOG RECOVERY UNIT (AGRU) — All active indoor mechanical systems
designed to remove fats, oil and grease by physical separation from flowing
sewage, as further defined herein.
FOOD PREPARATION ESTABLISHMENTS — Class III and Class IV food
service establishments and any other facility determined by the MWPCA
that may discharge FOG above the set limits in Section 5(b)(2) of the
DEEP's general permit for the discharge of sewage associated with food
preparation establishments. These facilities shall include but not be limited
to restaurants, hotel kitchens, hospital kitchens, school kitchens, bars,
cafeteria, and clubs. Class III and Class IV food services establishments
shall be as defined under Section 19-13-B42 of the State of Connecticut
Public Health Code, as amended from time to time.
GARBAGE — Animal or vegetable waste matter generated as a result of the
handling, preparation, cooking or serving of foods.
GRAB SAMPLE — A sample of sewage taken from a waste stream on a
one-time basis with no regard to the existing flow in the waste stream and
without consideration of the time.
GREASE INTERCEPTOR — A device installed on waste lines leading from
sinks, drains or other fixtures to remove excessive quantities of grease or
fat.
GRINDER PUMP — The pumps located on properties that convey sanitary
waste from users' properties to the public sewer.
GROUNDWATER — Water located in the subsurface that occupies a
saturation zone from which wells and springs are fed.
INDIRECT DISCHARGE or DISCHARGE — The introduction of pollutants
into the public sewer from any nondomestic source regulated under Section
307(b), (c), or (d) of the Act.
INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER — Wastewater from industrial processes,
trade or business and is distinct from domestic sewage.
INSPECTOR — An agent or employee assigned by the MWPCA to examine
and test material of the work furnished by a contractor for the construction
of a building sewer or any appurtenances thereof. Inspectors have no
authority to waive any portion of these regulations or the MWPCA
specifications unless explicitly authorized by these regulations.
INTERFERENCE — A discharge, which alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the POTW,
its treatment processes or operations, or sludge processes, use or disposal;
and therefore, is a cause of a violation of the Joint Facilities' and/or the
MWPCA NPDES permit or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or
disposal in compliance with any of the following statutory/regulatory
provisions or permits issued thereunder or any more stringent state or
§ 410-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-8
1:379
local regulations: Section 405 of the Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act,
including Title II commonly referred to as the "Resource Conservation
and Recovery Act (RCRA)"; any state regulations contained in any state
sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the Solid Waste
Disposal Act; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act; and the
Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act.
JOINT FACILITIES — "Joint facilities" consists of representatives of the East
Hampton WPCA and the Colchester Sewer and Water Commission.
JOINT FACILITIES TREATMENT PLANT — Treatment facility located in
East Hampton, Connecticut.
LARGE USER — Properties that discharge more than 2,500 gallons per day.
LEACHING SYSTEM — A structure, excavation or other facility designed to
allow settled sewage to percolate into the underlying soil without overflow.
MARLBOROUGH WATER POLLUTION CONTROL AUTHORITY (MWPCA
or WPCA) — The duly appointed committee of the Town charged with
the responsibility, among other things, of ensuring compliance with these
regulations.
MAY — "May" is permissive (see "shall").
MEDICAL WASTE — Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and
blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated
bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and
dialysis wastes.
NATIONAL POLLUTION DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES)
PERMIT — A permit issued pursuant to Section 402 of the Act (33 U.S.C.
§ 1342).
NATURAL OUTLET — Rivers, streams, brooks, waterways, lakes, ponds,
marshes, swamps, bogs and other bodies of water, natural or artificial,
public or private, which are contained within, flow through or border on the
boundaries of the Town.
NONRENDERABLE FATS, OILS AND GREASE — Nonrenderable fats, oils
and grease are food-grade grease that has become contaminated with
sewage, detergents or other constituents that make it unacceptable for
rendering.
NONRESIDENTIAL BUILDING — Any commercial, industrial, institutional,
public or other building not occupied as a dwelling. Apartments,
boardinghouses, hotels and motels and alike are nonresidential buildings.
NOTIFICATION OF APPROVED ALTERNATE FOG PRETREATMENT
SYSTEM — Written notification from the MWPCA for authorization to install
and/or operate an alternate FOG pretreatment system.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, firm, company, corporation,
association, joint-stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity or any
other legal entity, or its legal representatives, agents or assigns. The
§ 410-8 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 410-8
1:380
masculine gender shall include the feminine, and the singular shall include
the plural except where otherwise indicated by the context.
PH — A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution, expressed in
standard units, based on the logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen-ion
concentration. The concentration is the weight of hydrogen ions in grams
per liter of solution.
PLANS — Any documents which may include layout, topography,
construction specifications, site testing information, and seepage analysis
which have been prepared by a professional engineer.
POLLUTANT — Dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter
backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes,
chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked
or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, and municipal, agricultural,
and industrial wastes.
PRETREATMENT or TREATMENT — The reduction of the amount of
pollutants, the elimination of pollutants or the alteration of the nature of
pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in
lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a water
pollution control facility. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by
physical, chemical or biological processes, except as prohibited by Title 40,
Code of Federal Regulations, Section 403.6(d).
PROCESS WATER — A wastewater discharge which comes into contact with
industrial or commercial processes causing water quality deterioration.
PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER — An engineer licensed by the State of
Connecticut to practice engineering for the public.
PROHIBITED DISCHARGES — Absolute prohibitions against the discharge
of certain substances; these prohibitions appear in § 410-37 of these
regulations.
PROPERTY OWNER — "Property owner" or "owner of property" or "owner"
shall include the owner in fee of any real estate as well as tenants, lessees
or others in control or possession and use of the property in question or
those having any interest therein, and their agents or representatives as the
interest, duties, powers or liabilities of each may be.
PUBLIC SEWER — Collects and conveys domestic sewage to an appropriate
treatment facility through a common sanitary sewer system.
PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW) — A "treatment works,"
as defined by Section 212 of the Act, which is owned by the MWPCA or
the Joint Facilities or its designated agent. POTW includes any devices
or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling and
reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature and any
conveyances which convey wastewater to a treatment plant.
PUMP STATION — Collects the wastewater from the public sewer and
pumps the wastewater to a sewage treatment plant.
§ 410-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-8
1:381
REGIONAL FOG DISPOSAL FACILITY — A facility for the collection and
disposal of nonrenderable FOG approved by the DEEP.
RENDERABLE FATS, OILS AND GREASE — Renderable fats, oils and
grease are material that can be recovered and sent to renderers for
recycling into various usable products. Renderable grease is created from
spent products collected at the source, such as frying oils and grease from
restaurants. This material is also called "yellow grease."
RENDERABLE FATS, OILS AND GREASE CONTAINER — A closed
container that is leakproof for the collection and storage of food-grade fats,
oil and grease.
RESIDENTIAL BUILDING — Any house, apartment, trailer or mobile home,
or other structure occupied by individuals permanently or temporarily as a
dwelling place.
SANITARIAN — The duly appointed representative of the Health District
authorized to act for the official and the authority as defined in these
regulations and the State Public Health Code.
SANITARY SEWAGE — Domestic wastewaters and water-carried wastes
incidental to the occupancy of residential buildings or a nonresidential
buildings from its toilets, lavatory fixtures, kitchens, laundries and other
similar facilities.
SEEPAGE ANALYSIS — Determination through mathematical or physical
analysis of the soil composition for the movement of water through soil.
SEPTAGE — The liquids and solids which are removed from a tank used to
treat domestic sewage.
SEPTIC TANK — A watertight receptacle which is used for the treatment
of sewage and is designed and constructed so as to permit the settling of
solids, the digestion of organic matter by detention, and the discharge of
the liquid portion to a leaching system.
SEWAGE — Wastewater, water-carried wastes, or a combination of them
being the spent water from residential or nonresidential buildings.
SEWAGE COLLECTION SYSTEM — The structures and equipment required
to collect and convey sewage to the joint facilities treatment plant.
SEWER AVOIDANCE DISTRICT — The area of Marlborough located outside
the primary and secondary sewer districts as shown on the Sanitary Waste
Management Plan.
SHALL — "Shall" is mandatory (see "may").
SLUG — Any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste that exceeds
the concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds the
permitted discharge for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more
than five times the average twenty-four-hour concentration or flow during
normal operation that could be harmful to the POTW.
SOLUBLE OIL — Oil, either mineral or vegetable in origin, which disperses
in water or sewage at temperatures between 32° F. and 150° F. (0° C. to 65°
§ 410-8 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 410-8
1:382
C.). For the purposes of this regulation, emulsified oil shall be considered as
soluble oil.
STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC) CODE — The
classification system of industry pursuant to the Standard Industrial
Classification Manual issued by the United States Office of Management
and Budget.
STANDARD METHODS — The examination and analytical procedures set
forth in the most recent edition of "Standards Methods for the Examination
of Water and Wastewater," published jointly by the American Public Health
Association, the American Water Works Association and the WEF.
STATE — The State of Connecticut.
STORMWATER — Any flow occurring during or following any form of
natural precipitation that includes snowmelt runoff, discharge of rain or
other clean water from roofs and other impervious surfaces or elsewhere.
SUBSURFACE DRAIN — Any perforated or open joint pipe or other
constructed subsurface conveyance to which groundwater discharges or in
which groundwater is collected and transported.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — The solid matter, measured in milligrams per liter
(mg/l), which may be in suspension, floatable or settleable and is removable
by laboratory filtering as prescribed in the latest edition of "Standard
Methods for Examination of Water and Wastewater."
TOWN — The Town of Marlborough.
TOXIC POLLUTANT — Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as
toxic in regulations promulgated by the Administrator of the EPA under the
provisions of Section 307(a) of the Act or other acts.
USER — Any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of
sewage into the public sewer system.
WASTEWATER — Sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings,
industrial and manufacturing facilities, and institutional facilities, whether
treated or untreated, which flows to the public sewer.
WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT — A permit issued by the MWPCA in
accordance with Article III of these regulations to connect and discharge to
the existing public sewer.
WATER POLLUTION CONTROL FACILITY (WPCF) — An arrangement of
devices for the treatment of sewage and sludge.
WATERCOURSE — A natural or artificial channel that continuously or
intermittently passes water.
§ 410-9. Abbreviations.
The following abbreviations shall have the designated meaning:
§ 410-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-9
1:383
ASTM American Society for Testing Materials
BOD biological oxygen demand
CFR Code of Federal Regulations
C.G.S. Connecticut General Statutes
DEEP Connecticut Department of Energy and Environmental
Protection
EPA U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
FOG fats, oil and grease
GPD gallons per day
MG/L milligrams per liter
MWPCA Marlborough Water Pollution Control Authority
NPDES National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
POTW publicly owned treatment works
RCRA Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
SIC Standard Industrial Classification
TSS total suspended solids
U.S.C. United States Code
WEF Water Environment Foundation
§ 410-9 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 410-9
1:384
ARTICLE III
Building Sewers and Connections
§ 410-10. Permits for connections.
Any person proposing a new discharge into the public sewer system or a
substantial change in the volume or character of pollutants that are being
discharged into the public sewer system shall apply for a permit per this
article of these regulations. The MWPCA shall be notified more than 30
days prior to the proposed change or connection. The MWPCA shall not
issue a permit for a connection to the public sewer unless there is sufficient
capacity to adequately convey the wastewater flow being requested to the
public sewer.
A. A person intending to connect a building drain from his property to the
public sewer shall first obtain a permit to connect from the MWPCA or
its designated agent. The application shall be made on forms provided by
the MWPCA, and it shall be accompanied by plans showing the proposed
installation in sufficient detail to enable the MWPCA, Building Official,
and the Sanitarian to determine that the proposed installation meets the
requirements of these regulations and other applicable specifications,
codes and laws. The application shall be signed by the owner of the
premises to be served or by his authorized agent, who has been chosen
to perform the work of installing and connecting the building drain to
the public sewer. Following the approval of the application and plan, a
permit shall be issued to have the work performed by a properly licensed
contractor. In the event the premises changes ownership before the work
is completed, or if another contractor is chosen to perform or finish the
work, the original permit shall become void, and a new permit shall be
obtained by the new parties in interest.
B. Connection to the public sewer will be made only after a new building's
plumbing has been approved by the Building Official or his agent to
ensure that minimum standards are met for the installation. Existing
facilities are to have plumbing in good working order and repaired at
the owner's expense as required. A fresh air vent shall be required
for the building. No trench containing a building sewer to the public
sewer shall be backfilled until the Building Official, Sanitarian, and the
MWPCA or its agent has completed an inspection of and approved the
work as necessary under applicable codes and laws. The water level
present in the trench at the time of installation shall be maintained below
the sewer connection before the cap is removed, while the connection
is being made and until such time as it has been inspected, approved
and backfilled. The contractor shall notify the MWPCA, Building Official,
and the Sanitarian at least two business days before starting any work
authorized under the permit.
C. The MWPCA may revoke any permit to connect to the public sewer for
good cause.
§ 410-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-11
1:385
§ 410-11. Responsibility for costs and expenses.
All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection of the
building sewer shall be borne by the owner(s). The owner(s) shall indemnify
the Town and the MWPCA from any loss or damage that may directly or
indirectly take place by the installation of the building sewer. The permittee
and property owner agree that they shall at all times indemnify and hold
harmless the MWPCA and the Town and its officers and agents on account
of any and all claims for damages, losses, litigation, expenses, counsel fees
and compensation arising out of injuries (including death) sustained by or
alleged to have been sustained by the public, any or all persons on or near
the work, or by any other person or property, real or personal property of
the Town, which is caused in whole or in part by the acts or omissions of the
permittee, any contractor employed by the permittee or any subcontractor
or person, or anyone directly or indirectly employed by them, or any of them
while engaged in the performance of any work covered by this permit and
during any maintenance period specified or agreed upon in accordance with
this regulation.
§ 410-12. Separate connections.
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building, except where one building with a common owner stands at the
rear of another on an interior lot and no public sewer is available or can
be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, courtyard or
driveway. The building sewer that provides service for the building which
fronts on the public sewer may be extended to the rear building and the
whole considered as one building sewer, but the Town does not and will not
assume any obligation or responsibility for damage caused by or resulting
from any such connection. The MWPCA must have legal assurance that
the common ownership of land which the front and rear buildings occupy
cannot be split or subdivided and sold separately through the recording of a
legal document on the Marlborough Land Records restricting such property
division that is satisfactory to the MWPCA prior to the connection of the
buildings to the public sewer.
§ 410-13. Existing building sewers.
Existing building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only
when they are found, on examination and testing by the MWPCA through its
agents, employees and persons bearing proper credentials or identification,
to meet all requirements of these regulations. Additional permits may be
required by the Sanitarian and the Building Official.
§ 410-14. Compliance with state requirements.
The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer,
and the methods of excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing and
backfilling the trench, and connection of the building sewer to the public
sewer shall all conform to the requirements of the State Public Health Code,
§ 410-11 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 410-14
1:386
State Building and Plumbing Code or other applicable rules and regulations
of the Town and the MWPCA as designated in the permit application. In
the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and
procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and WEF
Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply.
§ 410-15. Building sewer elevations.
Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at
an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building
drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage
carried by such building drains shall be lifted by an approved means and
discharged to the building sewer. Duplex lift systems shall be provided for
commercial and industrial buildings with flows over 1,000 gallons per day
or as otherwise directed by the MWPCA.
§ 410-16. Guarding excavations.
It is the responsibility of the owner and permittee that all excavations for
building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and
lights so as to protect people from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways,
and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be
restored in a manner satisfactory to the Town.
§ 410-17. Building sewer proximity to water supply well
No building sewer shall be constructed within 25 feet of a water supply
well unless a waiver from the Director of Health is granted. If a building
sewer is constructed within 25 feet to 75 feet of a water supply well, it shall
be constructed in accordance with all applicable guidelines promulgated by
the Commissioner and/or the Connecticut Department of Health Services.
§ 410-18. Grinder pump and proximity to water supply well.
No grinder pump shall be located within 75 feet of a water supply well
unless a waiver from the Director of Health is granted. Additionally, no
grinder pump shall be located within 75 feet of Lake Terramuggus without
approval of the Marlborough Conservation Commission and the MWPCA.
§ 410-19. Installer.
All building sewers shall be installed by a drainlayer.
§ 410-20. Grinder pump access agreement.
A grinder pump access agreement shall be necessary for all grinder pump
installations.
§ 410-21. Wastewater discharge permit issuance process.
A. Permits to connect and discharge to the existing public sewer may be
granted only by the MWPCA or its designated agent. A permit to connect
§ 410-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-21
1:387
to the public sewer may only be issued when, in the opinion of the
MWPCA, the following conditions prevail:
(1) Permits will be limited to a specific volume and type of waste.
(2) The permit is for an existing structure, replacement structure, or
new construction approved by all applicable municipal agencies.
(3) The sewage shall be domestic in character and shall include no
substances harmful to the public disposal system. Commercial and
industrial users shall comply with the requirements of § 410-33,
Industrial and commercial wastes, of these regulations.
(4) Water conservation measures shall be implemented by large users
prior to connection to the public sewer.
(5) No single discharge shall exceed 2,500 gallons per day of
wastewater without a special volume exception permit from the
MWPCA, in accordance with § 410-36 of these regulations.
(6) The MWPCA or its designated agent may require a user to provide
information needed to determine compliance with these regulations.
This information may include:
(a) Peak and average flow rate;
(b) Chemical analysis of wastewater;
(c) Information on processes and products affecting wastewater
character;
(d) Quantities and disposal methods of specific liquids, sludges, oils,
solvents or other materials important to sewer-use control;
(e) A plot plan of users' sewers, with sewer and pretreatment facility
locations;
(f) Details of wastewater pretreatment facilities;
(g) Details of systems to prevent and control spills of unauthorized
wastes to the sewer.
(7) Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology,
pollution control or construction of appropriate containment
facilities designed to eliminate, reduce or prevent the introductions
of pollutants into the public sewer.
(8) Requirements for the development of a spill control plan or other
special conditions to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated or
nonroutine discharges.
B. A sewer connection permit is issued under the express condition that
every person acting under the same shall conform to the representations
and conditions of the application and shall conform to and be governed
by the regulations pertaining to public sewers of the MWPCA, including
amendments thereto, and all other pertinent laws, resolutions,
ordinances, rules and regulations of the Town. The MWPCA may waive
or modify the foregoing requirements for good cause.
C. The issuance of a permit by the MWPCA does not authorize any
excavation on private property or in any public easement, street,
highway or grounds, or doing any work therein or the placing of any
obstruction therein. For activity within a Town street right-of-way,
written authorization from the Marlborough Board of Selectmen and/or
its designee(s), and for activity within the Connecticut Department of
Transportation right-of-way, written authorization from the Connecticut
§ 410-21 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 410-21
1:388
Department of Transportation, and on private property, written
authorization of the property owner, is necessary prior to
commencement of activity. It is the responsibility of the permittee to
obtain all necessary authorizations.
§ 410-22. Wastewater discharge permit application contents.
A. All users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit must submit a
permit application. The MWPCA or its designated agent may require users
to submit as part of an application the following information based on the
type of discharge being sought, i.e., residential, commercial or industrial:
(1) For nonresidential activities, a description of the facilities and plant
processes on the premises, including a list of all raw materials and
chemicals used or stored at the facility which are or could accidentally
or intentionally be discharged to the public sewer;
(2) Number and type of employees and hours of operation;
(3) Each product produced by type, amount, process used, and rate of
production;
(4) Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum
per day);
(5) Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details to
show all sewers, floor drains, and appurtenances by size, location and
elevation, and all points of discharge;
(6) Time and duration of discharges;
(7) Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the MWPCA
or its designated agent to evaluate the wastewater discharge permit
application;
(8) Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification and recordkeeping
requirements necessary, based on federal, state or local laws.
B. All wastewater discharge permit and user reports must be signed by an
authorized representative of the user and contain the following certification
statement:
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments
were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a
system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and
evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person
or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible
for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of
my knowledge and belief, true, accurate and complete. I am aware that
there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including
the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations."
C. Incomplete or inaccurate applications will be denied.
D. A wastewater discharge permit shall include such conditions as are deemed
necessary by the MWPCA to prevent pass-through or interference, protect
the quality of the water body receiving the treatment plant's effluent,
protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge management and
disposal, and protect against damage to the POTW.
E. The Town and the MWPCA and its agents assume no responsibility that any
representations in the application for this permit are correct and assume no
§ 410-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-22
1:389
responsibility for any information furnished or not furnished. The permittee
and/or owner shall keep a copy of the MWPCA permit at the site while any
work is being done under its authority, and it shall be shown upon request
of any authorized person.
§ 410-23. Wastewater discharge permit appeals.
The MWPCA or its designated agent shall provide public notice of the
issuance of a wastewater discharge permit. Any person, including the user,
may petition in writing the MWPCA or its designated agent to reconsider
the terms of a wastewater discharge permit within 15 days of notice of its
issuance.
A. Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be a
waiver of the administrative appeal.
B. In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the wastewater
discharge permit provisions objected to, the reasons for this objection,
and the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the wastewater
discharge permit.
C. The effectiveness of the wastewater discharge permit shall not be stayed
pending the appeal.
D. If the MWPCA or its designated agent fails to act within 65 days, a
request for reconsideration shall be deemed to be denied. Decisions not
to reconsider a wastewater discharge permit, not to issue a wastewater
discharge permit, or not to modify a wastewater discharge permit shall
be considered final administrative actions for purposes of judicial review.
E. Aggrieved parties seeking judicial review of the final administrative
wastewater discharge permit decision must do so by filing a complaint
with the Superior Court Judicial District at Hartford, County of Hartford.
§ 410-24. Wastewater discharge permit modification.
The MWPCA or its designated agent may modify a wastewater discharge
permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons:
A. To incorporate any new or revised federal, state or local pretreatment
standards or requirements;
B. To address significant alterations or additions to the user's operation,
processes or wastewater volume or character since issuance of the
wastewater discharge permit;
C. To account for a change in the POTW that requires either a temporary
or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge;
D. To act on information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a
threat to the Joint Facilities Treatment Plant or personnel, the MWPCA
facilities or personnel, Town personnel, or the receiving waters;
E. To address violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater
discharge permit;
F. To address misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant
facts in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required
reporting;
G. To account for revision of or a grant of variance from categorical
pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13;
§ 410-22 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 410-24
1:390
H. To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater discharge
permit; or
I. To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation to a new
owner or operator.
§ 410-25. Wastewater discharge permit transfer.
Wastewater discharge permits held by large users may be transferred to
a new owner or operator only if the permittee gives notice to the MWPCA
or its designated agent in writing at least seven business days prior to the
closing. The notice to the MWPCA or its designated agent must include a
written certification by the new owner or operator which:
A. States that the new owner and/or operator has no immediate intent to
change the facility's operations and processes;
B. Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur; and
C. Written acknowledgement from the new owner(s) or operator(s) that
they have reviewed and will take responsibility for complying with the
existing wastewater discharge permit.
§ 410-26. Industrial discharge permit transfer.
Industrial discharge permits are issued to a specific industrial user for a
specific operation. An industrial discharge permit shall not be reassigned or
transferred or sold to a new owner, operator, new industrial user, different
premises or a new or change in operation without approval of the MWPCA
or its designee, which must be obtained at least 30 days in advance of any
transfer date. No such approval shall be granted absent the submission
to the MWPCA of a written agreement between the current and future
permittee which sets forth the date and terms of the transfer of the
industrial discharge permit and all responsibilities, obligations and
liabilities thereunder. Any succeeding owner or industrial user shall comply
with terms and conditions of the existing industrial discharge permit and
all the terms and requirements of these regulations. Failure to advance
the permit transfer as described above renders the wastewater discharge
permit void as of the date of facility transfer.
§ 410-27. Duration of industrial discharge permits.
Industrial discharge permits shall be issued for a specified time period not
to exceed two years. An industrial discharge permit may be issued for a
period less than a year or may be stated to expire on a specified date. An
industrial user shall apply for industrial discharge permit reissuance on a
form prescribed by the MWPCA at least 90 days prior to the expiration of
the industrial user's existing permit.
§ 410-28. Wastewater discharge permit revocation.
The MWPCA or its designated agent may revoke a wastewater discharge
permit after the holding of a show/cause hearing for good cause, including,
but not limited to, the following reasons:
§ 410-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-28
1:391
A. Failure to notify the MWPCA or its designated agent of significant
changes to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge;
B. Failure to provide prior notification to the MWPCA or its designated
agent of changed conditions pursuant to § 410-10 of these regulations;
C. Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the
wastewater discharge permit application;
D. Falsifying monitoring reports;
E. Tampering with monitoring equipment;
F. Refusing to allow the MWPCA or its designated agent timely access to
the facility premises and records;
G. Failure to meet effluent limitations;
H. Failure to pay fines;
I. Failure to pay sewer charges;
J. Failure to meet compliance schedules of the MWPCA and/or the
Commissioner;
K. Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater discharge
permit application;
L. Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business ownership
of a permitted facility;
M. Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement or any terms of
the wastewater discharge permit or these regulations.
§ 410-29. Wastewater discharge permit decisions.
The MWPCA or its designated agent will evaluate the data furnished by
the user and may require additional information. Within 65 days of receipt
of a complete wastewater discharge permit application, the MWPCA or
its designated agent will determine whether or not to issue a wastewater
discharge permit. The MWPCA or its designated agent may issue, modify or
deny any application for a wastewater discharge permit.
§ 410-30. Inspections.
The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the Building Official,
Sanitarian and the MWPCA's duly authorized agent when the building
sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The
connection shall be made under the supervision of the MWPCA or its
representative.
§ 410-31. Testing.
All four-inch-diameter building sewers shall be tested and demonstrated to
have a maximum infiltration amount not to exceed 100 gallons per inch mile
of pipe per 24 hours.
§ 410-28 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 410-31
1:392
ARTICLE IV
Use of Public Sewers
§ 410-32. Connection.
The owner of any property abutting a street, alley or right-of-way in which
a public sewer is located shall connect by means of a building sewer. All
building drains on the property shall be connected to the public sanitary
sewer within 90 days of receipt of the sewer connection notice sent by the
MWPCA to the property owner. In the event a property owner is unable
to make the connection to the public sewer within a ninety-day period,
the property owner shall submit a written request to the MWPCA for
an extension of time not to exceed 30 days. The MWPCA may grant
extension(s) of time not to exceed an additional 90 days. Building, health
and MWPCA permits are necessary to connect the building to the sewer line
or grinder pump. Failure to make a connection within 90 days without the
granting of a time extension from the MWPCA will result in removal of the
grinder pump core. Reinstallation of the grinder pump core by the MWPCA
will be made at time of connection, and the property owner will pay a fee to
be determined by the MWPCA for the removal and reinstallation at the time
of filing of an application to connect.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or repair any privy, privy
vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended for the disposal of
sewage if public sewers are available.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to uncover, make connections with
or opening into, discharge any wastes into, alter or disturb any public
sewer or appurtenance to the public sewer without prior authorization
of the MWPCA.
C. No person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage,
destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or
equipment which is part of the sewage collection and treatment system
or the water pollution control facility.
D. Any property which fails to connect to the public sewer after receipt
of the sewer connection notice shall not receive approval for the
construction of any additional building coverage or vertical expansion to
the existing principal or accessory building(s) on the property or new
building or the construction of a new structure.
§ 410-33. Industrial and commercial waste.
In general, no industrial or commercial wastes, except for the sanitary
wastes generated by employees, will be allowed into the sewer system.
Discharges of wastes other than sanitary waste may be allowed only to
the extent that the discharge substantially complies with pretreatment
standards set forth by the DEEP and EPA. The pretreatment regulations
that apply to industrial and commercial dischargers are an integral part
of these regulations. Industrial and commercial entities shall apply for
a special permit furnished by the MWPCA. The permit application shall
be supplemented by any plans, specifications, approvals, and any other
information considered pertinent in the judgment of the MWPCA.
§ 410-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-34
1:393
§ 410-34. Special traps for nonresidential properties.
A. Grease, oil and gross particle separators shall be provided when, in the
opinion of the Commissioner or the MWPCA, they are necessary for
the proper handling of sewage containing floatable grease in excessive
amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful substances;
except that such separators shall not be required for private living
quarters or dwelling units. Grease separators are required at all food
service establishments. Sizing information is to be provided to the
Sanitarian for review and approval and must conform to the IBC
National Plumbing Code, latest edition. Equipment used must be
identified by a plate confirming the Plumbing Drainage Institute rating
in gallons per minute.
B. All separators shall be of a type and capacity approved by the
Commissioner or the Sanitarian and shall be located as to be readily and
easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. In the maintaining of these
separators, the owner(s) shall be responsible for the proper removal
and disposal by appropriate means of the captured material and shall
maintain records of the dates and means of disposal, which are subject
to review by the Commissioner, the MWPCA, or Sanitarian. Any removal
and hauling of the collected materials shall be performed by a waste
disposal firm which possesses a valid permit from the Commissioner
under C.G.S. § 22a-454, as amended.
§ 410-35. Pretreatment of wastewater.
A. Where pretreatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided or
required for any sewage, they shall be maintained in satisfactory and
effective operation by the owner(s) at its expense, and the facilities are
subject to inspection and monitoring by the MWPCA.
B. The MWPCA or its designated agent may require any person discharging
into the public sewer to install and maintain, on his property and at
his expense, a suitable storage and flow-control facility to ensure
equalization of flow. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued solely
for flow equalization. Detailed plans describing such facilities and
operating procedure shall be submitted to the MWPCA or its designated
agent for review and shall be acceptable to the MWPCA or its designated
agent before such facilities are constructed. Users with the potential to
discharge flammable substances may be required to install and maintain
an approved combustible gas detection meter.
C. The review of such plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the
user from the responsibility of modifying such facilities as necessary to
produce a discharge acceptable to the MWPCA under the provisions of
these regulations.
§ 410-36. Special volume exceptions.
Any new discharge from a single source of domestic wastewater in excess of
2,500 gallons per day will be allowed only by special permit of the MWPCA.
On evaluating the request for a special permit, the MWPCA shall consider
such factors as the potential for flow reduction, the possibility of on-site
disposal for all or a portion of the wastewater, the treatment plant capacity,
§ 410-34 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 410-36
1:394
existing flow rates and the potential for exceeding the rate of flow projected
by the applicant. Special exceptions when granted shall be for a specific
volume of daily wastewater which shall not be exceeded. As an additional
consideration in evaluating the request, the authority may require evidence
of the gallonage per day as of the date of the adoption of this regulation and
may require flow reduction to the level of said gallonage as a condition for
connection.
§ 410-37. Discharge limitations regarding the use of public sewers.
A. This section of the regulations sets forth uniform requirements for all users of the
Marlborough public sewer and enables the Town to comply with all applicable state and
federal laws, including the Act.
B. Prohibited discharges.
(1) No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any unpolluted waters such as from water-softening equipment, commercial laundry wastewater, blow-down from cooling equipment, water from cellar or floor drains, or surface water from surfaces, yard drains, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains, sump pumps or other of surface runoff or groundwater to any sanitary sewer.
(2) Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers specifically designated as storm sewers and discharged to a watercourse in accordance applicable state and federal laws and regulations.
(3) No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed, directly or indirectly, any wastewater which will interfere with the operation or performance of the water pollution facility or the sewage collection system. These general prohibitions apply to all such a water pollution control facility, whether or not the user is subject to national standards or any other federal or state pretreatment standards or requirements. A user contribute the following substances to any water pollution control facility:
(a) Any volatile liquids, gasoline, fuel oil, benzene, solids or gases which by reason quantity are, or may be, sufficient either alone or by interaction with other fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the sewage collection pollution control facility or to the operation of the water pollution control facility. two successive readings on an explosion hazard meter at the point of discharge collection system (or at any point in the system) be more than 5% nor any single of the lower explosive limit (LEL) of the meter.
(b) Solids or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to the flow in interference with the operation of the water pollution control facility, including but not limited to, grease or garbage with particles greater than 1/2 inch in any guts or tissues, paunch, manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails, whole shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, nondissolvable wastepaper, gas, motor oil, tar, asphalt residues, residues from refining or processing of fuel mud or glass grinding or polishing wastes, or wipes (household cleaning/sanitary).
(c) Any sewage having a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 9.5 having any other capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of control facility or sewage collection system. The upper limit of pH for any industrial discharge shall be established under the discharger's state discharge permit.
(d) Any sewage containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity, either singly or other pollutants, to injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment process, to humans or animals or plant life, create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of control facility, or to exceed the limitation set forth in a categorical pretreatment § 410-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-37
1:395
pollutant shall include but shall not be limited to any pollutant identified pursuant to of the Act.
(e) Any noxious or malodorous sewage, gases or solids, which either singly and/or by other sewage are sufficient to prevent entry into the public sewers for their maintenance Sewage containing odor-producing substances exceeding limits which may be established Commissioner.
(f) Any sewage which, by interaction with other sewage in the public sewer, releases obnoxious forms suspended solids which interfere with the collection system, or creates a condition be deleterious to structures and treatment processes, or which may cause the effluent the water pollution control facility's NPDES permit to be exceeded.
(g) Any substance which may cause the water pollution control facility's effluent or any of the water pollution control facility, such as residues, sludges or scums, to be reclamation process where the water pollution control facility is pursuing a reuse program. In no case shall a substance discharged to the water pollution control the facility to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal criteria, guidelines developed under Section 405 of the Act, any criteria, guidelines or regulations affecting or disposal developed pursuant to the RCRA, Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances state criteria applicable to the sludge management method being used.
(h) Any substance which will cause a water pollution control facility to violate its NPDES receiving water quality standards.
(i) Sewage containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by treatment process employed or are amenable to treatment only to such degree pollution control facility's effluent cannot meet the limits stipulated in the Joint Facilities Plant's NPDES permit.
(j) Any water or waste containing 100 milligrams per liter or more of petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable
cutting oil or product of mineral oil origin, wastewaters which contain floatable fats, substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32° F. and to 65° C.).
(k) Any process wastewater from commercial laundries.
(l) Any waste from commercial kitchens, including restaurants, that is not pretreated.
(m) Wastes prohibited by the DEEP or EPA.
(n) Garbage that has not been properly shredded. Garbage grinders may be connected sewers from homes, hotels, institutions, restaurants, hospitals, catering establishments, places where garbage originates from the preparation of food in kitchens for consumption on the premises or when served by caterers.
(o) Radioactive waste or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may be established Commissioner in compliance with all applicable state and federal regulations.
(p) Materials which exert or cause:
[1] Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium sodium sulfate).
[2] Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye waste and vegetable tanning [3] Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine demand in such quantities significant load on the water pollution control facility.
[4] Unusual volume of flow or concentrations of waste constituting a "slug" as defined [5] Overflow from holding tanks or other receptacles storing organic wastes.
[6] Sewage with a concentration of pollutants in excess of the following limits shall be metals:
§ 410-37 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 410-37
1:396
Pollutants
Concentration: (mg/Arsenic as As 0.05
Barium as Ba 5.00
Boron as B 5.00
Cyanides as CN (amenable) 0.10
Fluoride as F 20.00
Chromium (Total) 1.00
Chromium (Cr +6) 0.10
Magnesium as Mg 100.00
Manganese as Mn 5.00
Copper as CU 1.00
Zinc as Zn 1.00
Cadmium 0.07
Lead 0.10
Tin 2.00
Silver 0.10
Mercury 0.01
Nickel 1.00
§ 410-38. Commissioner review.
A. Permit required.
(1) In accordance with C.G.S. § 22a-430, as amended, a permit from the
Commissioner is required prior to the initiation of a discharge of any
of the following wastewaters to a public sewer:
(a) Industrial wastewater of any quantity.
(b) Domestic sewage in excess of 1% of the design flow of the
receiving water pollution control facility or any domestic sewage
in excess of 50,000 gallons per day.
(2) A potential discharger must submit a permit application to the DEEP
not later than 90 days prior to the anticipated date of initiation of the
proposed discharge.
B. Action by Commissioner.
(1) If any sewage is discharged or is proposed to be discharged to
the public sewers which contains the substances or possesses the
characteristics enumerated in § 410-37 of these regulations, the
Commissioner may, in compliance with C.G.S. § 22a-430, as
amended:
(a) Reject the discharge of the wastes;
(b) Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to
the public sewers;
§ 410-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-38
1:397
(c) Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge.
(2) If the Commissioner permits the pretreatment or equalization of
waste flows, the design and installation of the equipment shall be
subject to the review and approval of the Commissioner, subject to
the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances, regulations and
laws.
C. The MWPCA shall have the right to reject the discharge of any wastes
or require more stringent effluent limitations than required by the user's
C.G.S. § 22a-430 permit, the decisions of the Commissioner
notwithstanding. Additionally, the MWPCA may require pretreatment
to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewer, require
control over the quantities and rates of discharge, and require payment
to cover the added cost of processing the wastes not covered by existing
taxes or sewer charges. If the MWPCA permits the pretreatment or
equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and
equipment for such pretreatment and equalization shall be subject to the
review and the approval of the MWPCA and the DEEP, and subject to
the requirements of all applicable MWPCA, Town, state and/or federal
codes.
D. When required by the Commissioner or the MWPCA, the owner of any
property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall
install a suitable structure together with such necessary meters and
other appurtenances in the building sewer to allow observations,
sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such structure, when
required, shall be accessible and safely located and shall be constructed
in accordance with plans approved by the Commissioner and the
MWPCA. The sampling structure shall be located at a point along the
industrial waste stream where a representative sample of the industrial
wastewater may be obtained prior to its being diluted by domestic
sewage in the building sewer. The structure shall be installed by the
owner at his expense and shall be maintained by the owner so as to be
safe and accessible at all times.
E. No statement contained in this article shall be construed as preventing
any special agreement or arrangement between the MWPCA and any
industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or
character may be accepted by the MWPCA for treatment, provided that
such agreement does not contravene any requirements of existing state
or federal regulations or the standards of the Joint Facilities Treatment
Plant's NPDES permit and is compatible with any user-charge and
industrial-cost-recovery system in effect.
§ 410-39. Measurement and testing.
A. All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters
and sewage to which reference is made in these regulations shall be
determined in accordance with the latest edition of "Standard Methods
for Examination of Water and Wastewater," published by the American
Public Health Association, and shall be determined by analysis of
suitable samples taken at appropriate locations.
§ 410-38 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 410-39
1:398
B. Sampling methods, location, times, durations and frequencies are to
be determined on an individual basis, subject to the stipulations and
general conditions of the discharger's state discharge permit. Sampling
shall be carried out by the customarily accepted methods to reflect
the effect of constituents on the sewage works and to determine the
existence of hazards to life, limb and property. The particular analyses
involved will determine whether a twenty-four-hour composite of all
outfalls of a property is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples
should be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids
analyses are obtained from twenty-four-hour composites of all outfalls;
whereas pH levels are determined from periodic grab samples.
C. When required by the MWPCA, the owner of any property serviced by
a building sewer shall install a suitable control manhole, together with
such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to
allow observation, sampling and measurement of wastes. The manhole
shall be installed by the owner at his expense, shall be maintained by
the owner so as to be safe and accessible at all times, and shall be
constructed in accordance with plans approved by the MWPCA or its
designated agent. In the event no special manhole has been required,
the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream
manhole in the public sewer to the point at which building sewer is
connected.
D. All industries discharging into a public sewer shall perform such
monitoring of their discharge as required by the Commissioner in any
state discharge permit issued pursuant to C.G.S. § 22a-430, as amended,
including, but not limited to, installation, use and maintenance of
monitoring equipment, keeping records and reporting the results to the
Commissioner. Such records shall be made available upon request of the
Commissioner, the MWPCA or the Town Sanitarian.
§ 410-40. Federal standards.
Upon the promulgation of the federal categorical pretreatment standard for
a particular industrial subcategory than is more stringent than limitations
imposed under these regulations for sources in that subcategory, the federal
standard shall supersede the limitations under these regulations.
§ 410-41. Dilution.
No user shall increase the use of process water in an attempt to dilute
a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to
achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the federal categorical
pretreatment standards or in any specific pollutant limitations which may
be developed by the Commissioner.
§ 410-42. Accidental discharge protection.
Each user shall provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited
materials or other substances regulated by these regulations. Facilities to
prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and
§ 410-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-42
1:399
maintained at the owner's or user's own cost and expense when required
by the Commissioner or MWPCA. The Commissioner or the MWPCA may
require that plans showing facilities and operating procedures be submitted
for review and approval prior to construction of the facilities.
A. Within five days following an accidental discharge, the user shall submit
to the MWPCA, the water pollution control facility superintendent and
the Commissioner a detailed written report describing the cause of the
discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to mitigate the
accidental discharge and to prevent similar future occurrences. Such
notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage or
other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the water
pollution control facility, fish, aquatic plants, or any other persons or
property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, civil
penalties or other liability which may be imposed by this regulation or
other applicable law.
B. Notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other
prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of a
dangerous discharge. Employers shall ensure that all employees are
advised of the emergency notification procedure.
§ 410-43. Upset.
A. For the purposes of this section, "upset" means an exceptional incident
in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with
categorical standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control
of the user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent
caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities,
inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, lack of
adequate training, or careless or improper operation.
B. An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought
for noncompliance with categorical standards if the requirements of
Subsection C below are met.
C. A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall
demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating
logs, or other relevant evidence, that:
(1) An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of the
upset;
(2) The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and
workmanlike manner and in compliance with applicable operation
and maintenance procedures; and
(3) The user has submitted the following information to the MWPCA or
its designated agent within 24 hours of becoming aware of the upset.
Reporting to the MWPCA or its designated agent does not relieve the
user from other state or federal reporting requirements.
D. A description of the groundwater and cause of noncompliance.
E. The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or, if
not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to
continue.
F. Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate and prevent
recurrence of the noncompliance.
§ 410-42 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 410-43
1:400
G. In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the
occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof.
H. Users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any claim
of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with
categorical standards.
I. Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent necessary
to maintain compliance with categorical standards upon reduction, loss
or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an
alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in
the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of
the treatment facility is reduced, lost or fails.
§ 410-44. Sealing discontinued building sewers and connections.
A. When any building or structure, or portions thereof, or any public sewer
is destroyed, demolished, abandoned or altered in a manner that any
building drain is no longer or will no longer be connected to the house
connection, the building sewer shall be capped at the street line for
gravity sewers and at the pump chamber for any individual grinder
pump. Capping of the sewer line shall be done by a licensed drainlayer
and requires a permit from the MWPCA.
B. Prior to issuance of any demolition permit from the Building Official,
the building sewer shall be capped, and if any owner is to abandon a
connection, the owner shall notify the MWPCA at least 30 days prior
to such abandonment of use. In the event of unplanned destruction or
demolition of a building or structure, the building sewer shall be capped
as soon as possible after the occurrence of the damage.
§ 410-45. Ownership and responsibility.
A. The MWPCA shall be responsible for inspections, repairs to,
maintenance of and reconstruction of the public sewer mains and pump
station. The MWPCA shall not provide service calls to building sewer
lines that are the responsibility of the property owner.
B. The MWPCA shall own and maintain the motor, pump and shredder
portions of the grinder pump only if it has been provided as a part of a
publicly funded project and only for the life of the public funding, and
if the owner has executed a grinder pump access agreement with the
MWPCA. In all other cases, the property owner shall own and maintain
the grinder pump and all appurtenances. In all cases the property owner
shall be responsible for payment of charges for electrical utility service
for operation of a grinder pump.
C. It is the sole responsibility of the property owner serviced by the public
sewer to maintain the building sewer and/or grinder pump in accordance
with these regulations and is a condition of a permit for discharge.
The property owner shall be responsible for the inspections, repairs
to, maintenance of and reconstruction of the building sewer and all
appurtenances of such building sewer.
D. In the event of a complaint regarding a sewer stoppage, the MWPCA
representative will ascertain if the main sewer line is clear, and any
stoppages therein will be relieved as quickly as possible. If the main
§ 410-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-45
1:401
sewer line is clear, the MWPCA representative will inform the owner
that stoppage is on its property and it needs to employ at its own
expense a licensed plumber or a drainlayer to clear the stoppage or
commence the necessary repairs to the building sewer. If the owner or
its representative ascertains the stoppage is within the house lateral
located in the street right-of-way, the MWPCA shall correct said
stoppage.
E. If the examination by a property owner or its designated service
professional reveals a problem within the building sewer, the following
actions should be taken for the investigation:
(1) Broken pipe. If the examination reveals that a break may lie within
the public sewer, the property owner shall contact the MWPCA. The
MWPCA will evaluate the problem area. If the break is found to be
within the public sewer, it will be repaired by the MWPCA. If the
break is found in the building sewer, all costs associated with the
repair shall be borne by the property owner, as well as costs incurred
by the MWPCA for the examination and/or repair.
(2) Obstruction. If the examination reveals that an obstruction of any
nature has occurred at any point within the building sewer, all costs
for removal of the obstruction shall be the sole responsibility of the
property owner, including all costs incurred by the MWPCA for the
examination and/or removal of the obstruction.
F. If the MWPCA determines that there is an infiltration or inflow into the
building sewer, the property owner shall make all necessary repairs at
its expense after receipt of notice from the MWPCA. If a property owner
fails to make necessary repairs and the MWPCA determines that action
is necessary to repair or replace the building sewer, the MWPCA will
make the required repairs and seek appropriate reimbursement from the
property owner.
§ 410-45 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 410-45
1:402
ARTICLE V
FOG Facilities
§ 410-46. General.
All facilities that generate and discharge fats, oils and grease in their
sewage flow shall install, operate and maintain a FOG pretreatment system
prior to connection to the public sewer.
§ 410-47. Application for permit.
A. FOG pretreatment systems shall be provided for:
(1) All food preparation establishments with a Class III or IV food
services license, including restaurants, cafeterias, diners and similar
nonindustrial facilities using food preparation processes that have
the potential to generate FOG in sewage at concentrations in excess
of the limits defined in these regulations and is also required to meet
the general permit of the C.G.S. § 22a-430b, as amended, prior to
connection to the public sewer.
(2) New and existing facilities which, in the opinion of the MWPCA,
require FOG pretreatment systems for the proper handling of
sewage containing fats, oils or grease; except that such FOG
pretreatment systems shall not be required for residential units.
(3) All sizing requirements for a grease interceptor or other approved
device/system are to be sized accordingly by an engineer at the
expense of the food establishment. Each unit must be able to handle
the anticipated flow and remove grease so as to not violate any part
of these regulations.
B. All new food preparation establishments which generate and discharge
sewage containing fats, oils and grease, and which will require a FOG
pretreatment system as determined by the MWPCA, shall include the
design and specifications for the FOG pretreatment system as part of the
sewer connection permit application. An application for a permit for the
FOG interceptor will need to be submitted with payment made to the
MWPCA at the current fee payment schedule set by the MWPCA.
C. All existing food preparation establishments with a Class III or IV food
services license which generate and discharge sewage containing fats,
oils and grease and which require a new FOG pretreatment system, that
have either changed ownership or started renovations of the interior
of the business, shall install said grease interceptor immediately or as
determined by the MWPCA.
D. Existing food preparation establishments with a Class III or IV food
services license which generate and discharge sewage containing fats,
oils and grease and which have an existing noncomplying FOG
pretreatment system must comply with this FOG regulation prior to
connection to the public sewer.
E. All costs and related expenses associated with the installation and
connection of the FOG interceptor(s) or alternate FOG pretreatment
system(s) shall be borne by the food preparation establishment. The food
preparation establishment shall indemnify the Town and its agents for
§ 410-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-47
1:403
any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly occur due to the
installation of the FOG pretreatment system.
F. An application for the design and installation of a FOG pretreatment
system shall be subject to review and approval by the MWPCA per these
regulations, the Sanitary Sewer Material and Construction Standards,
and subject to the requirements of all other applicable codes, ordinances
and laws.
§ 410-48. Discharge limits.
No facility shall discharge or cause to be discharged any sewage with a
FOG concentration in excess of the limits described in Article V of these
regulations as determined by the most current approved test for total
recoverable fats and grease listed in 40 CFR 136.3 or in concentrations or
in quantities which will harm either the sewer or water pollution control
facility, as determined by the MWPCA.
§ 410-49. Pretreatment system requirements.
A. Except as provided by § 410-50, the sewage generated from food
preparation establishments shall be treated to remove FOG using a FOG
interceptor.
B. Every structure at the subject facility shall be constructed, operated and
maintained in a manner to ensure that the discharge of food preparation
sewage is directed solely to the FOG interceptor or alternate FOG
pretreatment system. No diverting valve or bypass piping that could
prevent the discharge of food preparation sewage from entering
appropriate pretreatment equipment shall be present.
C. The contact person at each food preparation establishment shall notify
the MWPCA when the FOG pretreatment system is ready for inspection
and connection to the public sewer. The connection and testing shall
be made under the supervision of the MWPCA Inspector and/or the
Sanitarian. The Building Official must also inspect any interior
connections, and all applicable permits must be issued prior to the start
of work.
D. All applicable local plumbing/building codes shall be followed during the
installation of the FOG pretreatment system.
E. FOG interceptor requirements.
(1) The FOG interceptor shall be installed on a separate building
connection servicing kitchen flows and shall only be connected to
those fixtures or drains which can allow fats, oils and grease to be
discharged into the public sewer. This shall include:
(a) Pot sinks;
(b) Prerinse sinks or dishwashers without prerinse sinks;
(c) Any sink into which fats, oils or grease may be introduced;
(d) Soup kettles or similar devices;
(e) Work stations;
(f) Floor drains or sinks into which kettles may be drained;
(g) Automatic hood wash units;
(h) Dishwashers without prerinse sinks; and
§ 410-47 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 410-49
1:404
(i) Any other fixtures or drains that can allow fats, oils and grease
to be discharged into the sewer.
(2) No pipe carrying any sewage other than from those listed in the
paragraph above shall be connected to the FOG interceptor.
(3) No food grinder shall discharge to the FOG interceptor/trap.
(4) The FOG interceptor shall be located so as to maintain the
separating distances from well water supplies set forth in Section
19-13-B51d of the Public Health Code.
(5) The following minimum separating distances shall be maintained
between the FOG interceptor and the items listed below.
(a) Property line: 10 feet.
(b) Building served (no footing drains): 15 feet.
(c) Groundwater-intercepting drains, footing drains and storm
drainage systems: 25 feet.
(d) Open watercourse: 50 feet.
(6) All nonconcrete grease traps must be approved for use by the
MWPCA.
(7) The FOG interceptor/trap shall be accessible for convenient
inspection and maintenance. No structures shall be placed directly
upon or over the FOG interceptor.
(8) When necessary due to installation concerns, testing for leakage will
be performed using either a vacuum test or water-pressure test.
(a) Vacuum test. Seal the empty tank and apply a vacuum to two
inches of mercury. The tank is approved if 90% of the vacuum is
held for two minutes.
(b) Water-pressure test. Seal the tank, fill with water, and let stand
for 24 hours. Refill the tank. The tank is approved if the water
level is held for one hour.
§ 410-50. Alternate FOG pretreatment systems.
A. When it is not practical for the food preparation establishment to install
an outdoor in-ground FOG interceptor per § 410-49, an alternate FOG
pretreatment system such as an AGRU (automatic grease recovery unit)
may be utilized upon approval by the MWPCA and upon receiving a
"notification of approved alternative FOG pretreatment system."
Approval of the system shall be based on demonstrated (proven) removal
efficiencies and reliability of operation. The MWPCA will approve these
systems on a case-by-case basis. The contact person may be required
to furnish the manufacturer's analytical data demonstrating that FOG
discharge concentrations do not exceed the limits established in these
regulations. Installation of the above-mentioned device/system will
require a permit by the MWPCA along with the required fee, and
inspection of device/system will be required from both the MWPCA
Inspector and the Building Official.
B. Alternate FOG pretreatment systems shall consist of a FOG recovery
unit meeting the requirements of Subsection D, unless there are special
circumstances that preclude such installation, as approved by the
MWPCA.
§ 410-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-50
1:405
C. Alternate FOG pretreatment systems shall meet the requirements of
§ 410-49A through D and E(2) and (3) and shall be installed immediately
downstream of each of the fixtures and drains listed in § 410-49E(1).
D. Alternate FOG pretreatment system requirements.
(1) FOG AGRUs shall be sized to properly pretreat the measured or
calculated flows using methods approved by the MWPCA.
(2) FOG AGRUs shall be constructed of corrosion-resistant material
such as stainless steel or plastic.
(3) Solids shall be intercepted and separated from the effluent flow
using a strainer mechanism that is integral to the unit.
(4) FOG AGRUs shall operate using a skimming device, automatic
drawoff, or other mechanical means to automatically remove
separated FOG. This skimming device shall be controlled using a
timer, FOG sensor or other means of automatic operation. FOG
recovery units operated by timer shall be set to operate no less than
once per day.
(5) FOG AGRUs shall be included with an internal or external flowcontrol
device.
(6) FOG AGRUs shall be located to permit frequent access for
maintenance and inspection.
§ 410-51. Pretreatment equipment maintenance.
A. The FOG pretreatment system shall be maintained continuously in
satisfactory and effective operation at the food preparation
establishment's expense.
B. The contact person shall be responsible for the proper removal and
disposal, by appropriate means, of the collected material removed from
the FOG pretreatment system.
C. A record of all FOG pretreatment system maintenance activities shall be
maintained on the premises in a maintenance log for a minimum of five
years.
D. The contact person shall ensure that the FOG interceptor is inspected
when pumped to ensure that all fittings and fixtures inside the
interceptor are in good condition and functioning properly. The depth
of grease inside the tank shall be measured and recorded in the
maintenance log during every inspection along with any deficiencies and
the identity of the inspector.
E. The contact person shall determine the frequency at which its FOG
interceptor(s) shall be pumped according to the following criteria:
(1) The FOG interceptor shall be completely cleaned by a licensed waste
hauler when 25% of the operating depth of the FOG interceptor is
occupied by grease and settled solids or a minimum of once every
three months, whichever is more frequent.
(2) If the contact person can provide data demonstrating that less
frequent cleaning of the FOG interceptor will not result in a grease
level in excess of 25% of the operating depth of the FOG interceptor,
the MWPCA may allow less frequent cleaning. The contact person
shall provide data, including pumping receipts for four consecutive
cleanings of the FOG interceptor, complete with a report from the
§ 410-50 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 410-51
1:406
FOG hauler, indicating the grease level at each cleaning, and the
FOG interceptor or maintenance log.
(3) A maintenance log shall be maintained on the premises and shall
include the following information: dates of all activities, volume
pumped, grease depth, hauler's name, location of the waste disposal,
means of disposal for all material removed from the FOG interceptor,
and the name of the individual recording the information. The
maintenance log and waste hauler's receipts shall be made available
to the MWPCA for inspection on demand. Interceptor cleaning and
inspection records shall be maintained on file a minimum of five
years.
F. All removal and hauling of the collected materials must be performed
by state-licensed waste hauler. Pumped material shall be disposed of
at a regional FOG disposal facility. Pumping shall include the complete
removal of all contents, including floating materials, sewage and settled
sludge. Decanting back into the FOG interceptor shall not be permitted.
FOG interceptor cleaning shall include scraping excessive solids from
the walls, floors, baffles and all piping.
§ 410-52. FOG minimization.
A. The contact person shall make every practical effort to reduce the
amount of FOG contributed to the sewage system.
B. Renderable fats, oils and grease shall not be discharged into any building
connector or FOG interceptor. All renderable fats, oils and grease shall
be stored in a separate, covered, leakproof, renderable FOG container;
stored out of reach of vermin; and collected by a renderer.
C. Small quantities of FOG scraped or removed from pots, pans, dishes
and utensils shall be directed to the municipal solid waste stream for
disposal.
§ 410-53. Administration.
A. Technical standards as defined in the Sanitary Sewer Material and
Construction Standards shall apply when, in the opinion of the MWPCA,
excessive grease, oil or gross particles exist for a particular connection
as defined by § 410-37B.
B. The MWPCA shall have the right to inspect such facilities at any time
during normal business hours.
C. A grease trap log shall be furnished to the MWPCA, which shall state
the proper cleaning intervals for any FOG device/system. The log shall
be updated at every cleaning and be available for viewing by WPCA
personnel at all times. Failure to maintain grease logs will result in
monetary penalties.
D. All fryolator grease must be stored in a proper covered container until
removal by a renderer and not discharged to the public sewer. Violators
may be subject to a monetary penalty. Grease trap waste may, in most
cases, be disposed of by the renderer or the normal trash contractor.
E. All sinks not draining through a FOG device/system must be posted as
follows: NO CLEANING OF POTS, PANS, DISHES OR UTENSILS and NO
FATS, OILS OR GREASE.
§ 410-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-53
1:407
F. No chemicals, emulsifiers or grease cutters other than bacteria shall be
used in the maintenance of grease traps or building drains in the public
sewer.
§ 410-53 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 410-53
1:408
ARTICLE VI
Provisions for Extension of Sewers
§ 410-54. Policy on extending sewers.
A. In accordance with the provisions of the Water Pollution Control Plan, it
is the policy of the MWPCA to avoid extending sewers into undesignated
sewer service areas. It is the MWPCA's policy to extend sewers only if
there are no viable alternative methods to comply with DEEP orders or
to remedy a pressing pollution problem.
B. The MWPCA shall specify the terms and the nature of and limitations
on the water or waste liquids to be conveyed. Sewer plans must be
approved by the MWPCA prior to permitting the commencement of
work, and said plans for sewer work must be prepared by a professional
engineer.
§ 410-55. Authorized agreements with developers and other owners.
The MWPCA is authorized to enter into agreements on behalf of the Town
with developers or other owners of land for the construction of sewers
and related appurtenances by and at the expense of such developers or
owners, which sewers may become part of the public sewer system under
the conditions hereinafter stipulated. The Chairman of the MWPCA is
authorized to sign, on behalf of the MWPCA, all such agreements when the
same have been authorized by the MWPCA. The terms and the text of a
standard form of agreement for work under these regulations is attached as
Appendix A to these regulations.52 Any variations of said standard form for
any particular project thereunder shall require the approval of the MWPCA.
§ 410-56. Provisions of agreement.
A. Plans and specifications. The MWPCA shall specify the terms of such
plans and specifications which are made a part thereof, the limits, sizes
and grades of piping and appropriate materials, and the nature of and
limitation on the wastes or liquids to be conveyed.
B. Costs. Such agreements shall provide that the full cost of construction
of the sewer and all expense thereto shall be borne by the developer or
owner. Additionally, the developer or owner shall reimburse the MWPCA
for any incidental costs incurred by the MWPCA and/or the Town
concerning the project, such as review and approval of the plans and
specifications, verification of field data and information, changes to plan,
inspections, traffic control, etc.
C. Insurance. All such agreements shall provide that the developer or
owner or the contractor engaged by the developer or owner to perform
the work shall assume all risks and hold the Town harmless from any
and all claims for damages arising from the work or its conduct. To
secure against such risks, adequate liability, property damage and
compensation insurance in amounts fixed by the MWPCA and in content
and form acceptable by the MWPCA's legal counsel shall be required of
the developer or owner or contractor performing the work, who shall
52.Editor's Note: Said Appendix A is on file
§ 410-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-56
1:409
furnish proper and acceptable certificates of insurance before starting
work.
D. Bonding authority. The MWPCA shall require as part of said agreement
that a performance bond guaranteed by surety acceptable to the
MWPCA in amount and form be submitted to insure proper completion
and maintenance of the work for a period of time defined by the MWPCA
after construction is complete.
E. Inspection. The developer shall pay an inspection fee determined by
the MWPCA to the MWPCA prior to commencement of work. If the
inspection fee is expended prior to the completion of the construction,
the developer shall submit addition funds as determined by the MWPCA
within five business days after receipt of the request for additional
funds. The work undertaken under such agreements shall be under the
direction of the MWPCA. An inspector will be assigned by the MWPCA
to inspect all work under such agreements. Any work performed without
proper inspection may not be accepted and shall be uncovered and
may be required to be removed and rebuilt if required by the inspector
or the MWPCA. Any work performed that does not comply with the
specifications and standards of the Town and the orders of the MWPCA
will be stopped until there has been compliance with all requirements.
§ 410-57. Incorporation into the public system.
After certification by the MWPCA that any sewer construction under the
terms of an agreement has been done in accordance with these regulations
and the plans, specifications and standards of the MWPCA, and that any
maintenance period fixed in the agreement has expired, or that adequate
security by bond or otherwise has been furnished to assure such
restoration, the MWPCA may incorporate said sewer into the public sewer
system of the Town.
§ 410-58. Town authority.
No provision of this section shall be construed to reduce or diminish the
requirements of the Town and any other authority having jurisdiction over
the owner or agent for the extension.
§ 410-59. Right-of-way easements.
When the work is not in an accepted public highway right-of-way, easements
shall be conveyed to the MWPCA or Town prior to the acceptance of the
sewer; said easements shall be satisfactory to the MWPCA and/or the Town.
§ 410-60. As-built drawings.
Upon completion of the work and prior to acceptance of the sewer and
water lines, the developer or owner shall furnish the MWPCA with "as-built"
maps showing utility locations, building service and lateral connections
with distance ties certified as as-built by a land surveyor or professional
engineer in Mylar and electronic format in latest form of AutoCAD and
§ 410-56 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 410-60
1:410
GIS. These drawings shall also show the certified leakage infiltration results
from water and sewer line tests. Leakage and/or infiltration shall not exceed
100 gallons per inch mile of pipe per 24 hours.
§ 410-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-60
1:411

ARTICLE VII
Sewer Benefit Assessment Policy
§ 410-61. Statement of purpose.
The purpose of this sewer benefit assessment policy is to provide the basis
for levying sewer benefit assessments against properties located in the
Town, as authorized by Chapter 103 of the Connecticut General Statutes.
§ 410-62. Collection of water pollution control revenues.
There is hereby established the title of Collector of Water Pollution Control
Revenues (CWPCR). The CWPCR is hereby designated as the person
entitled and empowered to prepare and cause to be recorded in the
Marlborough Land Records all notices of assessments, notices of
installment payment of assessment, notices of deferred assessment and
notices continuing liens for unpaid and delinquent assessments. Said
CWPCR is hereby empowered to collect sewer assessments in accordance
with any provisions of the Connecticut General Statutes for the collection
of property taxes. Said CWPCR is further designated the person who is
empowered to collect all sewer use and connection charges in accordance
with the provisions of the Connecticut General Statutes.
§ 410-63. Classification of properties for sewer benefit assessment
purposes.
A. Residential properties, year-round or seasonal occupancy, shall include:
(1) Single-family dwelling: a dwelling for one single family.
(2) Single-family dwelling with "in-law" apartment: a dwelling for a
single family with an additional living unit.
(3) Duplex dwelling: a dwelling for two family units.
(4) Multiunit dwelling: a dwelling for three or more family units.
B. Commercial/industrial property includes properties used for commercial
and industrial purposes, excluding residential use classified under
Subsection A above and excluding restaurant properties classified under
Subsection C below, and shall include but are not limited to:
(1) Retail. Including properties used for all common retail operations,
including, but not limited to, grocery and convenience stores, gas
stations, nurseries, beauty salons, pharmacies, florists and kennels.
(2) Professional offices include, but are not limited to, banks, post
offices, medical offices and law offices.
(3) Light industrial includes, but is not limited to, machine shops and
automotive repair garages.
(4) Motel, hotel and rooming house. Buildings normally operated for
commercial purposes, providing rooms, toilet facilities, and may
include dining and other facilities.
C. Restaurant properties shall include:
(1) Restaurants.
(2) Luncheonettes.
(3) Taverns.
(4) Cocktail lounges.
§ 410-61 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-63
1:413
(5) Bakeries/deli.
D. Institutional properties shall include:
(1) Churches.
(2) Schools.
(3) Government buildings - libraries/museums.
E. Mixed-use properties shall include:
(1) Residential/commercial, residential/restaurant, commercial/
restaurant.
F. Any other use of property benefiting from the availability of public
sewers.
§ 410-64. Base sewer benefit assessment - equivalent dwelling unit.
The minimum base assessment to be levied against all properties is to
recover capital expenditures in a reasonable manner based on the value of
having the benefit of public sewers. The minimum base assessment amount
is subject to change by action of the MWPCA as the rates of inflation, prices
and costs increase or decrease. As provided below, the equivalent-dwellingunit
charge may be modified depending on the particular use classification
of the property.
§ 410-65. Determination of amount of sewer benefit assessment.
A. In accordance with C.G.S. § 7-249, as amended, the MWPCA will
determine the sewer benefit assessment. The total benefit amount is
determined by taking the minimum base assessment rate and
multiplying it by the EDUs for the applicable property. In accordance
with C.G.S. § 7-250 as amended, the MWPCA shall hold a public hearing
on the assessment and send notice of said public hearing and assessment
amount to any affected property owner. Appeals of assessments are to
be made to the Superior Court Judicial District at Hartford, County of
Hartford within the time frame specified in C.G.S. § 7-250, as amended.
B. In addition to and in recognition of the appreciated value of the
availability of public sewers by reason of inflation and property
appreciation and the costs of financing the original sewer construction
loans and carrying such loans for the benefit of subsequent users, the
minimum base assessment rate computed for future users of the system,
in accordance with the herein-outlined assessment policy, shall be
subject to yearly increases.
§ 410-66. Vacant land and buildings or structures constructed or
expanded after initial assessment.
Vacant residential land will not be assessed by the MWPCA until such time
as it is developed and derives a direct benefit from the public sewer. Vacant
commercial or industrial land will be assessed one EDU. The assessment
of vacant land and the assessment of building or structures constructed or
expanded after the initial assessment shall be subject to the provisions of
§§ 410-70 and 410-71 below.
§ 410-63 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 410-67
1:414
§ 410-67. Deferred assessments for public properties.
Sewer assessments for public properties may be deferred. Assessments
so deferred shall be assumed by the Town and not assumed by the other
property owners using the public sewer. Record of said deferment and the
amount of assessment shall be kept at the office of the Town Clerk and,
should the ownership of said property be changed or should public property
be used for other purposes, the assessment will become due and payable.
§ 410-68. Deferred assessments for private properties.
A. Sewer assessments for private properties may be deferred if the
property contains a one-hundred-percent fully code-compliant septic
system, including one-hundred-percent reserve area, and the septic
system was installed after September 1, 2004.
B. If the property owner seeks a connection to the public sewer, then the
full assessment will become due and payable prior to issuance of a
permit to connect.
§ 410-69. Amount of deferred assessments.
The amount of a deferred assessment shall be calculated at the time a
connection is sought as described in § 410-70A of these regulations.
§ 410-70. Determination of special connection charges.
In general, the following rule or method for determining a special
connection charge shall be used as the basis for assessing properties
previously deferred or unassessed for their share of benefits derived from
the construction of local sewers and for the apportionment of sanitary
sewers built by developers and for properties previously assessed which
have or will have a greater intensity of use in accordance with the
Connecticut General Statutes.
A. Deferred assessments. Wherever an assessment has been deferred and
a connection to the sewer system is sought, a deferred assessment
charge shall be imposed. Calculation of the deferred assessment charge
shall be determined by taking the minimum base assessment rate and
multiplying it by the EDUs for the applicable property. The minimum
base assessment used for the calculation is the applicable rate for the
year the deferment is sought.
B. Sewers built by developers or other owners.
(1) Wherever a developer has installed a local sewer passing through
land owned by others in accordance with the provisions of § 410-55
of these regulations, a special connection charge shall be imposed,
consisting of the connection charge applicable at the time the
connection is sought and any other MWPCA charge that is a part of
a particular developer's agreement.
(2) For the purposes of the remainder of this section of the regulations
with regard to a parcel of property, a "developer," "an owner" or
an "owner's agent" will be referred to as an "owner" or "owners."
§ 410-67 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-70
1:415
The owner of another property related to that of an owner only by
proximity will be referred to as an "owner of other property."
(3) When a sewer has been built for the MWPCA under a developer's
permit agreement and passes land owned by an owner of other
property who may request a house connection to the sewer, no
connection shall be permitted by the MWPCA unless:
(a) The owner of other property pays a special connection charge as
§ 410-70 of these regulations; or
(b) (Reserved)
(c) The MWPCA has approved the design of the sewer connection
sought.
C. Assessment of properties not previously assessed. Whenever a sewer
has been laid out and constructed by the MWPCA after the initial
construction phase to serve a particular section of highway or a
particular area, no connection will be permitted thereto for any property
which has not been previously assessed. The MWPCA may, by
appropriate vote, permit payment of said assessment over a period to be
determined by the MWPCA.
D. Charges for industrial users of federally financed sewage systems.
Industrial cost-recovery payments required by the EPA and the
Commissioner shall be determined, billed and paid for in accordance
with the most current and applicable federal rules and regulations,
as published and amended. Disbursement of the funds recovered from
industrial users shall also be made by the Town in accordance with the
same rules and regulations.
§ 410-71. Supplemental charges for increased intensity of use.
Wherever an assessment has been levied against a property and an
increased intensity of use has taken or will take place, such as construction
of new or expanded buildings or structures or a substantial change in
use after the initial assessment has been levied, a supplemental sewer
connection charge may be imposed. The MWPCA, in such cases, shall
determine the amount of the additional connection charge to be levied
against such land in accordance with the increased intensity of use and in
accordance with the established formula for levying such charges, which
shall take into consideration any previous assessment charges levied. No
building permit shall be granted for said construction until the special
connection charge so levied by the MWPCA has been paid or until an
agreement providing for the payment of said charge over a period of time,
executed by the landowner and suitable for recording on the Land Records,
has been completed and delivered to the MWPCA.
§ 410-72. Collection of deferred assessments.
When a deferred assessment is declared due and payable, it shall be
collectible in the same manner and in the same amount as defined in
§ 410-64 of these regulations.
§ 410-70 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 410-73
1:416
§ 410-73. Collection of special connection charges when no
assessment has been made.
In all cases in which the MWPCA has constructed or caused to be
constructed through a developer's agreement a public sanitary sewer or
sewers through any public highway or highways within its territorial limits
or its jurisdiction, for which no assessment of benefits and damages has
been made, the MWPCA may establish special connection charges as
defined in § 410-70 of these regulations. If the MWPCA elects to extend the
payment of the assessment over a period of years, as provided in § 410-75 of
these regulations, the special connection charges may be payable in equal
annual installments until such time as the equitable cost of installing such
sewer has been paid by the property owner or owners whose property has
been benefited by the construction and use of such sewer.
§ 410-74. Sewer use charge adjustments.
Special rates may be established where unusual conditions exist, at the
discretion of the MWPCA. Minimum charges may also be adopted.
§ 410-75. General payment information.
A. Sewer benefit assessments levied as part of any future construction of
Marlborough's sewerage system may be payable over a period of years,
not to exceed 20 years, as determined by the MWPCA. The unpaid
balance of a benefit assessment may be assumed by any subsequent
owner of the property on transfer of the property.
B. The MWPCA may adopt a plan subject to the limitations of C.G.S.
§ 7-253a, which allows for the deferral of principal payments for those
elderly taxpayers eligible for property tax relief under the provisions of
C.G.S. §§ 12-129b and 12-170a.53
C. The MWPCA may levy sewer benefit assessments under the terms of
developer's agreements that are generally in accordance with the
provisions of the policy. Details of such payment terms are available from
the Administrator of the MWPCA.
D. Assessments for public properties may be deferred. Any deferred
assessments shall be assumed by the Town and not assumed solely by
the property owners within the sewer service district. At such time
that the public property is transferred to a private entity, the benefit
assessment will be applied to the property.
53.Editor's Note: C.G.S. § 12-170a was repealed in 1985.
§ 410-73 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-75
1:417

ARTICLE VIII
Annual Sewer Use Charge System
§ 410-76. Annual levy.
In accordance with the provisions of C.G.S. § 7-255, as amended, a use
charge shall be levied annually on all properties connected to the public
sewer.
§ 410-77. Basis for charge.
A. The annual charge for each residential property shall be based upon
the equivalent discharge by a single-family dwelling unit of 300 gallons
per day sanitary wastes per day. A single-family dwelling unit shall be
defined as a three-bedroom dwelling unit or less.
B. "Equivalent dwelling unit" (EDU) is a unit with approximately the same
average discharge as a single-family dwelling unit. An additional 0.25
EDU shall be added for each bedroom in a single-family dwelling unit
above three bedrooms.
C. Charges for nonresidential uses will be based on the technical standards
of the State of Connecticut Public Health Code and an additional flow
factor of 1.25. Food service establishments' flow will include 50 takeout
meals per day.
D. Any property which does not fit within the classifications set forth in the
State of Connecticut Public Health Code will be given an EDU number
based upon the estimated average discharge of wastes per day of the
planned use as compared to the average discharge of sanitary wastes
per day of a single-family dwelling unit.
E. A minimum of one EDU shall be assigned to each property required to
be connected to the public sewer.
F. EDUs for properties with multiple uses will be based upon the sum of the
EDU for each use.
G. The sewer use charge for users discharging high-strength wastes or
other pollutants will be additionally charged based on the cost of
treating the wastewater or managing the effluent or sludge.
§ 410-78. Base rate.
A. The MWPCA shall annually adopt a projected Operation, Maintenance
and Replacement Budget. The budget so adopted shall be divided by the
anticipated number of EDUs to be connected to the system to establish
the base user fee rate to be charged for each EDU. In computing
individual user charges (base rate multiplied by the property's EDU
number), the number of EDUs shall be rounded to the hundredth and the
charge derived from this calculation shall be rounded off to the nearest
dollar.
B. The operation and maintenance portion of the budget shall be adjusted
annually to reflect the actual costs incurred in the previous fiscal year
and anticipated cost increases. No money transfer resulting from excess
operation and maintenance budget expenses shall be transferred to any
other Town accounts. The money shall be retained solely for sewer usage
budget items.
§ 410-76 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-78
1:419
C. The MWPCA will hold a public hearing yearly on the Operation,
Maintenance and Replacement Budget and the annual user charge.
Appeals of user charge assessments are to be made to the Superior
Court Judicial District at Hartford, County of Hartford within the time
frame specified in C.G.S. § 7-255, as amended.
§ 410-79. Due dates for user fee payments.
A. Payment of the initial user fee charge will be due at the time of the
connection to the sewer and will cover the proportionate share of a full
year for the period from the connection through the annual use fee due
date as determined by the MWPCA. Subsequent use charges will be due
and payable in full on or before the annual due date.
B. User fee charges shall be payable by October 31 each year. In the case
of a property which was not connected during the entire period, the
charges shall be prorated on a monthly basis for the actual number
of months within the stated period that the property was connected. A
period of 15 days or more shall be deemed a full month.
§ 410-80. Liability for payment.
A. Owners of property against which the user charge is levied shall be liable
for payment and for interest on delinquent payment from the due date
until such charge is paid in full. Interest shall be computed in the manner
provided in C.G.S. § 7-258 and C.G.S. § 12-146, as amended.
B. Sewer charges not paid within one year of the due date shall be
delinquent; such charges together with interest thereon shall constitute
a lien on the property on which the building is located, and such lien may
be foreclosed and such charges may be collected in the matter provided
in the Connecticut General Statutes for property tax liens. Each such
lien shall take precedence over all other liens and encumbrances except
property taxes and may be foreclosed in the same manner as a lien for
property taxes.
§ 410-81. Collection of water pollution control revenues.
Shall be done in accordance with § 410-72.
§ 410-82. Collection of user charge for unconnected properties.
All properties not connected after issuance of the connection notice shall be
liable for the annual user charge.
§ 410-78 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 410-82
1:420
ARTICLE IX
Inspection, Penalties, Validity
§ 410-83. Powers and authority of inspectors.
A. The MWPCA, through its officers, agents, employees and persons in
contract with it bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be
permitted to enter all properties within the sewer district and gain
access for purposes of grinder pump inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of
these regulations.
B. During the performance of the necessary work on private properties
referred to in the above subsection, the MWPCA through its officers,
agents and employees shall observe all safety rules applicable. The user
shall be held harmless for injury or death to the MWPCA officers, agents
and employees, and the MWPCA and the Town shall indemnify the user
against loss or damage to its property by the MWPCA officers, agents
and employees and against liability claims and demands for personal
injury or property damage asserted against the user and growing out of
the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by
negligence or failure of the user to maintain safe conditions as required
in § 410-16 of these regulations.
§ 410-84. Permission to enter private property.
A. Where the MWPCA/Town holds a duly negotiated easements or grinder
pump agreement, entry onto the property for the purposes of, but not
limited to, inspection of any portion of the sewage works lying within
said easement or agreement area will take place from time to time with
reasonable notice when possible. All entry and subsequent work, if any,
on said easement or agreement area shall be done in full accordance
with the terms of the negotiated easement pertaining to the private
property involved and/or the conditions of the grinder pump agreement.
B. If the MWPCA or its designated agent has been refused access to a
building, structure or property, or any part thereof, and believe that
there may be a violation of these regulations or that there is a need
to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling
program of the MWPCA designed to verify compliance with these
regulations or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the
overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, then the
MWPCA or its designated agent may seek issuance of a search warrant
from the Superior Court Judicial District at Hartford, Hartford County.
§ 410-85. Permitted construction times.
No sewer or appurtenance may be cut into or connection made therewith,
or any pipe laid, except in the presence of or under the directions of an
inspector authorized by the MWPCA. At least three business days' notice
must be given to the agent of the MWPCA before such inspector is needed
on the work. In general, inspectors will be available between the hours
of 8:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. on Mondays through Fridays. Deviation of these
§ 410-83 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-85
1:421
construction times is only permitted after authorization by the MWPCA or
in the case of emergency construction.
§ 410-86. Penalties.
Any person found to be violating any provision of these regulations shall
be served by the MWPCA with written notice, stating the nature of the
violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory
correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in
such notice, permanently cease all violations. Any person violating any of
the provisions of these regulations and/or any provisions of a wastewater
discharge permit issued by the MWPCA will be subject to the provisions of
Article X, Administrative Enforcement Remedies, and/or Article XI, Judicial
Enforcement Remedies, of these regulations and shall become liable to
the MWPCA and the Town for any expense, loss or damage occasioned by
reason of such violation.
§ 410-87. Reports from users.
All users shall provide appropriate reports to the MWPCA or its designated
agent as the MWPCA or its designated agent may require as a part of
a permit to discharge or from time to time when the MWPCA finds it
necessary to request such reports. Failure to submit the required reports
to the MWPCA is a violation of these regulations, and the MWPCA will
take the appropriate action in accordance with Article X, Administrative
Enforcement Remedies, and/or Article XI, Judicial Enforcement Remedies,
of these regulations.
§ 410-88. Notice of violation; repeat sampling and reporting.
If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must notify
the MWPCA or its designated agent within 24 hours of becoming aware
of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and
submit the results of the repeat analysis to the MWPCA or its designated
agent within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation or sooner if
requested by the MWPCA. Failure to submit the required reports to the
MWPCA is a violation of these regulations, and the MWPCA will take
the appropriate action in accordance with Article X, Administrative
Enforcement Remedies, and/or Article XI, Judicial Enforcement Remedies,
of these regulations.
§ 410-89. Discharge standards.
All discharges shall be in accordance with the qualities defined in these
regulations. Should the MWPCA determine that the sewage does not come
within the standards, the MWPCA shall order the user to implement
pretreatment of the effluent to meet those standards. Any additional cost to
the MWPCA for the treatment because of these discharges shall be directly
passed on to the user responsible for such discharge.
§ 410-85 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 410-89
1:422
ARTICLE X
Administrative Enforcement Remedies
§ 410-90. Notification of violation.
A. When the MWPCA or its designated agent finds that a user has violated,
or continues to violate, any provision of these regulations, a wastewater
discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment
standard or requirement, the MWPCA or its designated agent may serve
upon that user a written notice of violation. Within five business days
of the receipt of this notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan
for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific
required actions, shall be submitted by the user to the MWPCA or its
designated agent. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user
of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the
notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the
MWPCA or its designated agent to take any action, including emergency
actions or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of
violation.
B. Any party in receipt of a notice of violation may petition in writing to the
MWPCA that a show cause hearing in accordance with § 410-92 be held
by the MWPCA.
§ 410-91. Consent orders.
The MWPCA or its designated agent may enter into consent orders,
assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents
establishing an agreement with any user responsible for noncompliance.
Such documents will include specific action to be taken by the user to
correct the noncompliance within a time period specified by the document.
Such documents shall have the same force and effect as the administrative
orders issued pursuant to §§ 410-93 and 410-94 of these regulations and
shall be judicially enforceable.
§ 410-92. Show cause hearing.
Allows users that receive a notice of violation an opportunity to appear
before the MWPCA or its designated agent and show cause why the
proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice of a show cause
hearing shall be served on the user, specifying the time and place for the
meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and
a request that the user show cause why the proposed enforcement action
should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or
by certificate of mailing at least five days prior to the hearing. Such notice
may be served on any authorized representative of the user. A show cause
hearing shall not be a bar against or prerequisite for taking any other action
against the user.
§ 410-90 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-93
1:423
§ 410-93. Compliance orders.
When the MWPCA or its designated agent finds that a user has violated,
or continues to violate, any provision of these regulations, a wastewater
discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment
standard or requirement, the MWPCA or its designated agent may issue
an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that the user
come into compliance within a specified time. If the user does not come into
compliance within the time provided, sewer service may be discontinued
unless adequate treatment facilities, devices or other related
appurtenances are installed and properly operated. Compliance orders also
may contain other requirements to address the noncompliance, including
additional self-monitoring and management practices designed to minimize
the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewer. A compliance order
may not extend the deadline for compliance established for a pretreatment
standard or requirement, nor does a compliance order relieve the user of
liability for any violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance of a
compliance order shall not be a bar against or a prerequisite for taking any
other action against the user.
§ 410-94. Cease and desist orders.
A. When the MWPCA or its designated agent finds that a user has violated,
or continues to violate, any provision of these regulations, a wastewater
discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment
standard or requirement, or that the user's past violations are likely to
recur, the MWPCA or its designated agent may issue an order to the user
directing it to cease and desist all such violations and directing the user
to:
(1) Immediately comply with all requirements; and
(2) Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be
needed to address a continuing or threatened violation, including
halting operations and/or terminating the discharge.
B. Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against or a
prerequisite for the MWPCA taking any other action against the user.
§ 410-95. Emergency suspensions.
A. The MWPCA or its designated agent may immediately suspend a user's
discharge, after notice to the user, whenever such suspension is
necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which reasonably
appears to present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment
to the health or welfare of persons. The MWPCA or its designated
agent may also immediately suspend a user's discharge, after notice and
opportunity to respond, that threatens to interfere with the operation of
the POTW or which presents, or may present, an endangerment to the
environment.
(1) Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately
stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user's failure
to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the
MWPCA or its designated agent may take such steps as deemed
necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection,
§ 410-93 MARLBOROUGH CODE § 410-95
1:424
to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving stream,
or endangerment to any individuals. The MWPCA or its designated
agent may allow the user to recommence its discharge when the user
has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the MWPCA or its designated
agent that the period of endangerment has passed, unless the
termination proceedings in § 410-27 of these regulations are
initiated against the user.
(2) A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge
presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written
statement, describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the
measures taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the MWPCA
or its designated agent prior to the date of any show cause or
termination hearing under § 410-27 or 410-92 of these regulations.
B. Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior
to any emergency suspension under this section.
§ 410-96. Termination of discharge.
A. In addition to the provisions in § 410-27 of these regulations, any user/
owner who violates the following conditions is subject to discharge
termination:
(1) Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions;
(2) Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and
characteristics of its discharge;
(3) Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater
volume, constituents and characteristics prior to discharge;
(4) Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose
of inspection, monitoring or sampling; or
(5) Violation of the pretreatment standards of these regulations.
B. Such user/owner will be notified of the proposed termination of its
discharge and be offered an opportunity to show cause under § 410-92 of
these regulations why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise
of this option by the MWPCA or its designated agent shall not be a bar
to or a prerequisite for taking any other action against the user.
§ 410-95 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-96
1:425

ARTICLE XI
Judicial Enforcement Remedies
§ 410-97. Injunctive relief.
When the MWPCA or its designated agent finds that a user has violated,
or continues to violate, any provision of these regulations, a wastewater
discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment
standard or requirement, the MWPCA or its designated agent may petition
the Superior Court Judicial District at Hartford, County of Hartford through
the MWPCA's attorney for the issuance of a temporary or permanent
injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific
performance of the wastewater discharge permit, order or other
requirement imposed by these regulations on activities of the user/owner.
The MWPCA or its designated agent may also seek such other action as
is appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief, including a requirement for
the user to conduct environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive
relief shall not be a bar against or a prerequisite for taking any other action
against a user/owner.
§ 410-98. Administrative fine.
A. A user/owner who has violated or continues to violate any provision
of these regulations, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued
hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall be
liable to the Town for a maximum civil penalty of $250 per violation per
day in accordance with C.G.S. § 7-148(c)(10)(A). In the case of a monthly
or other long-term average discharge limit, penalties shall accrue for
each day during the period of the violation.
B. The MWPCA or its designated agent may recover reasonable attorneys'
fees, court costs and other expenses associated with enforcement
activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of
any actual damages incurred by the MWPCA.
C. Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against or a prerequisite
for taking any other action against a user/owner.
§ 410-99. Remedies nonexclusive.
The remedies provided for in these regulations are not exclusive. The
MWPCA or its designated agent may take any, all, or any combination of
these actions against a noncompliant user.
§ 410-100. Criminal prosecution.
In addition to other actions available to the MWPCA, the MWPCA may
institute criminal prosecution of any person or user, as allowed by state and
federal law, for violation of the provisions of these regulations.
§ 410-97 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-100
1:427

ARTICLE XII
Supplemental Enforcement Action
§ 410-101. (Reserved)
§ 410-102. Performance bonds.
The MWPCA or its designated agent may decline to issue or reissue a
wastewater discharge permit to any user who has failed to comply with
any provision of these regulations, a previous wastewater discharge permit
or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or
requirement, unless such user first files a satisfactory bond, payable to
the MWPCA and Town, in a sum not to exceed a value determined by
the MWPCA or its designated agent to be necessary to achieve consistent
compliance.
§ 410-103. Liability insurance.
The MWPCA or its designated agent may decline to issue or reissue a
wastewater discharge permit to any user who has failed to comply with
any provision of these regulations, a previous wastewater discharge permit
or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or
requirement, unless the user first submits proof that it has obtained
financial assurances sufficient to restore or repair damage to the POTW
caused by its discharge.
§ 410-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-103
1:429

ARTICLE XIII
Public Access to Information
§ 410-104. Public information.
In accordance with C.G.S. Chapter 14, Freedom of Information Act, all
information maintained by the MWCPA relating to the operation and
maintenance of the public sewer system shall be available to the public
without restriction.
§ 410-105. User request for exclusion of records from public access.
Public access to records will only be restricted when the user specifically
requests in writing to the MWPCA for exclusion of its records and is able
to demonstrate the statutory authority for the granting of such request,
or other legal or satisfactory reason that the release of such information
would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to
protection as trade secrets under applicable state and federal law. Any such
request must be asserted at the time of submission of information or data.
§ 410-106. Confidentiality.
If the MWPCA finds that a user can demonstrate certain information made
available to the MWPCA shall be held confidential, the portions of
information received that might disclose trade secrets or secret processes
shall be held in a file denoting that the information in that file is not to be
made available for public inspection. However, any confidential information
shall be made available immediately upon request of governmental agencies
for uses related to the NPDES program, pretreatment program, and in
enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report or
the property owner. Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other
effluent data as defined by 40 CFR 2.302 will not be recognized as
confidential information and will be available to the public without
restriction.
§ 410-104 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-106
1:431

ARTICLE XIV
Regulation in Force
§ 410-107. Adoption and amendments.
A. These regulations shall take effect upon filing with the Town Clerk after
adoption by the Marlborough Water Pollution Control Authority.
B. Passed and adopted by the MWPCA of the Town of Marlborough, State
of Connecticut, on the 14th day of January 2010, with an effective date
of the 22nd day of January 2010.
C. Amendments.
(1) General rewrite of the regulations: May, 14, 2015.
§ 410-107 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-107
1:433