CODE OF ORDINANCES TOWN OF NORTH STONINGTON, CONNECTICUT 
____________ 
Published in 2005 by Order of the Board of Selectmen 
____________ 
 
> 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
TOWN OF 
NORTH STONINGTON, CONNECTICUT 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Nicholas H. Mullane, II  
First Selectman 
____________ 
William Peterson 
William Hescock 
Board of Selectmen 
____________ 
Norma J. Holliday 
Town Clerk 
____________ 
Frank N. Eppinger 
Town Attorney 


CURRENT OFFICIALS 
____________ 
Michael A. Urgo 
First Selectman 
____________ 
Robert A. Carlson 
Nita B. Kincaid 
Board of Selectmen 
____________ 
Antionette Pancaro 
Town Clerk 
____________ 
Robert Avena 
Town Attorney 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a codification of the general and permanent ordinances of the Town of North 
Stonington, Connecticut. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the ordinances adopted by the board of 
selectmen. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end 
thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time 
with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the 
reader can locate any ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various 
sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of 
the Code together and which refer to relevant State law have been included. A table listing the State law 
citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many 
state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The 
figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of 
the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first 
section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same 
time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For 
example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-
2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions 
may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter 
embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the 
subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may 
be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical 
arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon 
are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon 
represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the 
left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter 
immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of 
codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding 
prefixes: 
CHARTER 
CHT:1 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
CHTCT:1 
LOCAL ACTS 
LA:1 
LOCAL ACTS COMPARATIVE TABLE 
LACT:1 
CODE 
CD1:1 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES 
CCT:1 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
SLT:1 
CHARTER INDEX 
CHTi:1 
LOCAL ACTS INDEX 
LAi:1 
CODE INDEX 
CDi:1 
 
Indexes 
    The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed 
under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and 
still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous 
cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the 
particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of 
the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory 
legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will 
be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new 
pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. 
As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the 
amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher 
that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, 
that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Roger D. Merriam, Senior Code Attorney, and 
Ellen K. Torof, Senior Code Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is 
gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance 
throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Frank N. Eppinger, Town Attorney, Nicholas H. Mullane, II, First 
Selectman, and Norma J. Holliday, Town Clerk, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress 
of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a 
Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the Town readily accessible to all citizens and 
which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the Town's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the 
Town of North Stonington, Connecticut. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: 
organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross 
references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; 
and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express 
written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the Town of North Stonington, Connecticut. 
©?Copyrighted material.  
Municipal Code Corporation and the North Stonington, Connecticut. 2005. 
HISTORY OF NORTH STONINGTON 
    North Stonington, which had been named in 1724 while still a part of the Town of Stonington, had 
been incorporated as a separate town in 1807, and had become the Town of North Stonington. 
    A great many people seem not to know the many reasons why the Town of North Stonington 
became incorporated. Some seem to think that the population increase had something to do with it. There 
are others who think that distance to travel to their house of worship had something to do with it. Then 
there are others who seem to believe that the difficulty of attending Town Meetings had a great deal to do 
with it due to the great distance to be traveled to attend these meetings. The foremost and primary reason 
was none other than taxation, taxes which were considered unjust due to the fact that these taxes were 
levied against North Stonington for improvements made for the Town of Stonington. 
    To understand the reason why taxation was the issue I would like to refer you to the "History of the 
Town of Stonington" as written by Thomas Wheeler, pertaining to its ecclesiastical history, to quote: 
    The first church organized in the Town of Stonington was formed June 2, 1674. 
    The 2nd Congregational Church of Stonington was organized in 1727. The controversy over the 
boundary line, dividing the Town of Stonington into two religious societies, and the location of their first 
meeting-house, served to divide the people as to the choice of a pastor for the church. 
    After calling Mr. William Worthington, Mr. Thomas Croghead and Mr. Jabez Wright, they finally 
agreed upon Mr. Ebenezer Russell as and for their gospel preaching minister, who was ordained 
February 22, 1727, at which time the church was organized. Reverend Russell continued pastor of the 
church until his death, which took place May 22, 1731. 
    The church and society then invited Mr. Joseph Fisk, who was ordained December 27, 1732, and for 
a few years Mr. Fisk's pastorate was eminently successful. 
    "The new light" awakening, as it was generally called by the people, served to divide the church, 
which resulted in the Organization of Strict Congregational or Separatist Church September 11, 1746. 
These two Congregational Churches maintained separate religious worship until March 16, 1827, when 
they were reunited under the ministrations of Reverend Joseph Ayer, 1827-1846. 
    The next church in the Town of Stonington was the Baptist Church, organized at Pung-Hung-we-
nuck Hill in 1743, and was the outcome of the Great Awakening (so-called) which commenced under the 
preaching of Drs. Edwards and Whitfield. 
    The next church of Stonington was the Baptist Church organized 1775 at Long Point (now 
Stonington Boro) where most members resided. 
    No more churches were organized in Stonington before the division of the Town in 1807, pending the 
agitation and controversial feeling between the inhabitants of the Northern, and Southern sections of the 
Town of Stonington, relative to the Old Mail Stage Route, and the layout of the new highway from 
Stonington Boro to old Mystic, and the construction of the bridge over Lambert's Cove, Pine Tree Point to 
Quana duct. 
    In order to give the electors of the Town an opportunity to decide the matter in question, a Town 
Meeting was legally warned and held at the old meeting-house at the Road, April 5, 1807, for the express 
purpose of dividing the Town of Stonington so as to relieve the tax payers of the Northern section of the 
Town from the cost of the new highway and bridge. 
    The meeting was largely attended and after an animated and heated discussion of the matter in 
question it was voted, by a small majority thereof, to divide said Town into two separate townships by the 
old society line, and that the North part shall be called Jefferson. 
    When the General Assembly met the May following, the division of the Town was duly considered 
and adopted and divided on the line suggested, but the name of Jefferson for the new Town was not 
adopted for the reason that the society of North Stonington had been so named by the General Assembly 
and had had charge of schools therein for a great many years, and the name had become identified with 
its vital interests, so it was considered not best to change it, and the new Town was called North 
Stonington. 


SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have 
been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent 
nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general 
and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be 
able to gain a more complete picture of the code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. 
Date  
Adopted 
Include/  
Omit 
Supp. No. 
Ord. of 
?1-24-2011 
Include 
6 
Ord. of 
?1-24-2011 
Include 
6 
Ord. of 
?6-13-2011 
Include 
6 
Ord. of 
?4-10-2006 
Include 
7 
Amd. of 
10-22-2013 
Include 
7 
Ord. of 
10-22-2013 
Include 
7 
Ord. of 
11-23-1993 
Include 
8 
Ord. of 
?5-12-2014 
Include 
9 
Town meeting 
?6-?2-2014 
Include 
10 
Ord. of 
10-20-2014 
Include 
10 
Ord. of 
10-20-2014 
Include 
10 
Ord. of 
?2-23-2015 
Include 
11 
Ord. of 
12-14-2015 
Include 
12 
Ord. of 
?3-14-2016 
Include 
12 
Ord. of 
11-28-2016 
Include 
13 
Ord. of 
?4-24-2017 
Include 
13 
Ord. of 
?9-18-2017 
Include 
14 
Ord. of 
?5-22-2018 
Include 
15 

?4-?1-2019 

Errata 
 


PART I - LOCAL ACTS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed in this part are resolutions and acts of the General Assembly pertaining to the 
Town. Appropriate section numbers and catchlines have been added. History notes state the source of 
each section. Other additions for clarity are indicated by brackets. 


Sec. 1. - Town incorporated. 
    Upon petition of John Holmes, and others, of Stonington 
    RESOLVED BY THE ASSEMBLY, That all the inhabitants of said town of Stonington, living on the 
north side of a strait line from Mystic River, at the west end of the line which divides the First from the 
Second Ecclesiastical Society, southerly and easterly to Pawquatuck River be, and they are hereby 
incorporated into a distinct town, by the name of "North Stonington," and the inhabitants thereof shall 
enjoy all the powers, privileges, immunities, and franchises which the inhabitants of other towns in this 
State have and enjoy, provided, that the said town be restricted to the choice of one Representative in the 
General Assembly. 
    And all the lands lying on the north side of said line, shall be and belong to said town, and said town 
of North Stonington shall pay its just proportion of all charges and debts due and owing from said town of 
Stonington, and take all its proportion of the present poor of said town, and shall receive its proportion of 
all property and stock, and its proportion of all public monies belonging to said town of Stonington, the 
proportion in the cases aforesaid, to be determined according to the list of said town of Stonington for the 
year 1806, and the town and freemen's meetings shall be holden in such place in the town of North 
Stonington as the inhabitants thereof shall direct. 
    And the first meeting in said town shall be holden on the 15th day of June next, at Fish's meeting 
house in said town, and Latham Hull, Esq. of said town shall be moderator of said first meeting, and said 
Hull shall warn said first meeting by setting notification thereof, on the public sign post in said town of 
North Stonington at least eight days before the day of meeting. And said town at their first and other 
meetings, shall have the same powers at other towns in this State have, and the town officers elected at 
said first meeting shall hold their respective offices until the next annual town meeting. 
(Conn. Gen. Assbly. Res. of May 1807; Town Meeting Book Vol. 1, p. 2, 6-15-1807) 


Sec. 2. - Annexing part of the Society Of North Stonington to the First Society Of Preston. 
    RESOLVED BY THIS ASSEMBLY, That part of the seventh school District, and the whole of the 
eighth school district, in the Ecclesiastical Society of North Stonington, comprised and described within 
the following bounds and limits, to wit - Beginning on the east line of the said town of Preston, at a bound 
at the head of Mr. Cyrus Punderson's mill pond; thence running south-easterly, so as to strike the south 
side of Mr. Charles Swaim's dwelling house; thence northerly to the east end of the dwelling house of 
Thomas Browning, Esquire; thence north to the south line of said Preston, be set off, and the same are 
hereby set off from the Ecclesiastical Society of North Stonington, and annexed to the said first society of 
Preston; and that the territory so annexed, be and continue to be a part of said first Ecclesiastical Society; 
and that the inhabitants of said territory, enjoy the same and equal privileges, in all Ecclesiastical and 
School matters and interests, with the other inhabitants of said first Ecclesiastical Society. 
(Conn. Gen. Assbly. Res. of May 1831, Vol. 1, p. 552) 


Sec. 3. - Annexing a part of the Third School District in North Stonington to the Fourteenth School 
District in Groton. 
    RESOLVED, That Philip Gray, Zeruiah Crandall, and Lucinda Stanton, all of North Stonington, and 
now residing in the third School District in said town, be, and they are hereby set to and associated with 
"The Fourteenth School District of Groton," and that they and the houses and lands by them occupied in 
said District in North Stonington, and their lists, be computed, reckoned and considered, to all intents and 
purposes, for the allowance of school money to said fourteenth School District, as if they were part and 
parcel thereof, and of the School Society of which said last mentioned District constitutes a part. 
(Conn. Gen. Assbly. Res. of May 1833, Vol. 2, p 1072) 


Sec. 4. - Annexing certain persons of the School Society Of North Stonington to the Fourteenth District in 
the Second School Society of Groton. 
    RESOLVED, that Joseph Ayer, James Bailey, and Nathan Peckham, all of North Stonington, and 
now residing in the third district of said town, be, and they are hereby set to, and associated with the 14th 
school district of the second school society in Groton; and that they and the houses and lands by them 
owned and occupied in said district, in North Stonington, and their lists be computed, reckoned and 
considered, to all intents and purposes, and for the allowance of school money, to the 14th school district, 
and to be a part and parcel thereof, and of the school society of which said 14th district constitutes a part. 
(Conn. Gen. Assbly. Res. of May 1834, Vol. 2, p. 1087) 


Sec. 5. - Annexing certain persons to the Fourteenth District in the School Society in Groton. 
    WHEREAS Joseph Ayer, James Bailey and Nathan Peckman, have petitioned this Assembly to be 
set off from the third School District in the School Society of North Stonington, and annexed to the 
fourteenth District in the second Society of Groton, as per petition on file, dated 28th day of April 1834. 
    RESOLVED, Joseph Ayer, James Bailey and Nathan Peckman, all of North Stonington, and now 
residing in the third School District in said town, be and they are hereby set to, and associated with "The 
Fourteenth School District of the Second School Society in Groton," and that they, and the houses and 
lands by them owned and occupied in said District in North Stonington, and their lists be computed, 
reckoned and considered, to all intents and purposes, and for the allowance of school money, to said 
fourteenth School District, and to be a part and parcel thereof, and of the School Society of which said 
fourteenth District constitutes a part. 
(Conn. Gen. Assbly. Res. of May 1834, Vol. 1, p. 1072) 


Sec. 6. - Annexing Abel Main to the School Society in Ledyard. 
    RESOLVED, That the said Abel Main be and is hereby separated from said school society of North 
Stonington and annexed to the Fourteenth School District in the School Society of Ledyard. 
(Conn. Gen. Assbly. Res. of 1843, Vol. 4, p. 1145) 


Sec. 7. - Annexing Dudley Main to the Fourteenth School District of Ledyard. 
    RESOLVED, That Dudley Main, of North Stonington, and now residing in the third school district in 
said town, be and he is hereby set to and associated with the fourteenth school district of Ledyard, and 
that he and the houses and lands by him owned in said district, in North Stonington, and his list be 
computed, reckoned and considered, to intents and purposes, and for the allowance of school money, to 
said fourteenth school district, as part and parcel thereof, and of the school society of which said last 
mentioned district constitutes a part. 
(Conn. Gen. Assbly. Res. of May 1853, Vol. 4, p. 1145) 


Sec. 8. - Annexing William Wilkinson of North Stonington, to the Twelfth School District in Preston. 
    RESOLVED BY THE ASSEMBLY, That William Wilkinson, of the town of North Stonington, in the 
county of New London, be and he hereby is, with land by him owned in the Eighth School District, in said 
town, separated from said Eighth School District and annexed to the Twelfth School District of the town of 
Preston, in said county, for all school purposes. Said land is bounded and described as follows, to wit: 
Commencing at a bound near the dwelling house of Eloise Leonard; 
Thence running easterly on the highway to the land of William Wilkinson; thence north, thirty rods, to the 
north-west corner of house lot; thence easterly, eighty rods, to a bound between the Eighth District of 
North Stonington and North West Corner District; thence southerly, on line of said district, forty rods, to 
corner bound; thence westerly, seventy-five rods, to a bound line between the said Eighth District and the 
Hewitt District in said North Stonington; thence northerly, twenty rods, to first mentioned bound; 
containing in all about sixty acres. 
(Conn. Gen. Assbly. Res. of 6-22-1859, Conn, Sp. Acts Vol. 5, p. 309) 


Sec. 9. - Confirming certain votes of the Towns of Stonington and North Stonington. 
    WHEREAS, By vote of the inhabitants of the towns of Stonington and North Stonington, the 
boundary line between said towns has been fixed as the boundary line between the first, second and fifth 
school districts of the town of North Stonington, and the eighth, thirteenth and fifteenth school districts, of 
the town of Stonington: therefore, 
    RESOLVED BY THIS ASSEMBLY: SECTION 1. That the action of said towns establishing said 
boundary lines between said school districts be, and the same hereby ratified and confirmed, and the 
boundary line between said towns as the boundary line between said school districts. SECTION 2. The 
territory heretofore embraced in the Eighth, Thirteenth And Fifteenth School Districts of the town of 
Stonington, lying and being in the town of North Stonington, and the boundary lines between the said 
First, Second And Fifth School Districts be, and the same hereby extended due south to the boundary 
line between said Towns. 
(Conn. Gen. Assbly. Res. of 6-17-1870, Conn. Sp. Acts Vol. 6, p. 823) 


Sec. 10. - Changing the lines of school districts in the Towns of Voluntown and North Stonington. 
    RESOLVED BY THIS ASSEMBLY: That all the real estate now owned by John C. Miller, Robert P. 
Palmer, James M. Cook, Eda Kenyon, D. L. Crandall, William B. Ray, A. J. Bennett and wife, Mrs. Cyrus 
W. Brown, Erastus Parke and Palmer A. Brown, which is now located in school district number one 
(called the Ray district) in the town of Voluntown, be and the same hereby annexed to and made part of 
school district number eleven of the town of North Stonington, to which latter district the residents on said 
premises shall hereafter belong. 
(Conn. Gen. Assbly. Res. of 3-18-1884, Conn. Sp. Acts Vol. 9, p. 944) 


Sec. 11. - Changing lines of school districts in Voluntown and North Stonington. 
    RESOLVED BY THIS ASSEMBLY: That all the real estate now owned by Ethel Palmer and wife, 
Matthew Newton, Stephen A. Palmer and Gardner W. Ecclestone, which is now located south of the 
Russell Burdick farm, so called, within the limits of school district number two, in the town of Voluntown, 
be and the same is hereby annexed to and made part of school district number twelve of the town of 
North Stonington, to which latter district the residents on said premises shall hereafter belong. 
(Conn. Gen. Assbly. Res. of 3-18-1884, Conn. Sp. Acts Vol. 9, p. 944) 


Sec. 12. - Changing lines of school districts in North Stonington and Voluntown. 
    RESOLVED BY THIS ASSEMBLY: That all the real estate owned by Benjamin Thompson, Dwight C. 
Thompson, Charles H. Babcock, Irving F. Babcock, James E. Wilson, and the estate of Abby Ryder, 
deceased, and Edith Kenyon, which is situated within school district number twelve of the town of North 
Stonington, and all the real estate now owned by Charles H. Babcock and Irving F. Babcock, which is 
situated within school district number eleven of the town of North Stonington, to which latter district any 
residents now or hereby after on said real estate shall belong. 
(Conn. Gen. Assbly. Res. of 3-24-1886, Conn. Sp. Acts Vol. 10, p. 325) 


Sec. 13. - Incorporating the Third Baptist Church, North Stonington. 
    RESOLVED BY THIS ASSEMBLY: SECTION 1. That the present members of the Third Baptist 
Church of the town of North Stonington, and others who shall hereafter become members thereof, be and 
they are hereby constituted and treated a body politic and corporate by the name of the Third Baptist 
Church, North Stonington, for the purpose of maintaining a church for the worship and service of God, 
and shall have perpetual succession, with power to sue and be sued, plead and be impleaded in all suits 
whatsoever, either at law or in equity, and to purchase, receive, hold, use, mortgage, rent, invest, sell, 
and convey any and all estate, both real and personal, not exceeding in value the sum of twenty thousand 
dollars. SECTION 2. Said association shall have power to adopt and enforce by-laws, as it shall deem 
proper and necessary for carrying out the purposes of its organization; PROVIDED that no by-laws shall 
be adopted inconsistent with the laws of this state or of the United States. 
(Conn. Gen. Assbly. Res. of 5-16-1889, Conn. Sp. Acts Vol. 10, p. 1060) 


Sec. 14. - Authorizing officials of the Town of North Stonington to deposit public funds in Rhode Island. 
    The officials of the town of North Stonington are authorized to deposit public funds in the name of the 
town in any bank whose main place of business is in this state or in the state of Rhode Island, provided 
such bank shall be organized under the provisions of the banking laws of the United States, this state or 
the state of Rhode Island and provided such deposits shall be subject to limitations as to amounts in 
accordance with provisions of the General Statutes. 
(Conn. Gen. Assbly. Res. of 6-29-1951, Conn. Sp. Acts Vol. 6, p. 192) 


Sec. 15. - Election of the Board of Finance in the Town of North Stonington. 
(a) ?The terms of members of the Board of Finance in the town of North Stonington in office on the 
effective date of this act shall expire on the first Monday of October, 1955. 
(b) ?At the annual town election to be held on the first Monday of October, 1955, there shall be elected 
six members of the Board of Finance, two to serve for two years, two to serve for four years and two 
to serve for six years. At such election no elector shall vote for more than one member in each 
category. Biennially thereafter there shall be elected two such members to serve for six years and 
until their successors are elected and have qualified. At each such election no elector shall vote for 
more than one member of said board for the same term. 
(Conn. Gen. Assbly. Res. of 6-2-1955, Conn. Sp. Acts Vol. 27, p. 201, §§ 1, 2) 


Sec. 16. - Validating the acts of the Assessors and Board of Tax Review of the Town of North Stonington. 
    All acts of the assessors and board of tax review of the town of North Stonington, otherwise valid 
except that the time requirements of Sections 12-117 [G.S. § 12-117] , were not complied with, are 
validated. 
(Conn. Gen. Assbly. Res. of 6-2-1961, Conn. Sp. Acts Vol. 30, p. 116) 


Sec. 17. - Special Act in accordance with Conn. Gen Stat. section 7-9b Hours of voting at referenda. 
    The Town of North Stonington, in accordance with Connecticut General Statutes 7-9b, amend[ed] 
the hours of referenda, for days other than state and local elections, by vote of its legislative body that the 
polls at such referenda shall be open at an earlier hour but not earlier than 6:00 a.m. A motion [was] 
made and seconded to approve item #4 [of the June 2, 2014, meeting as presented. [It was] explained 
[that] the absentee ballot process, and that changing the hours would not make a difference for someone 
who is out of town. There needs to be a longer time between town meetings and voting to allow for 
mailing absentee ballots to people who are not available to come in, discussion followed. 
    The original motion approved by a show of hands 26 yes, 4 no. 
(Town Meeting, June 2, 2014, Item #4) 


LOCAL ACTS COMPARATIVE TABLE 
This table shows the location of the sections of the Local Acts and any amendments thereto. 
Conn. Gen. Assbly.  
Date 
Conn. Sp. Acts 
Vol. 
Page 
?Section this  
Local Acts 
May 1807(Res.) 



1 
May 1831(Res.) 

1 
552 
2 
May 1834(Res.) 

1 
1072 
5 
May 1833(Res.) 

2 
1072 
3 
May 1834(Res.) 

2 
1087 
4 
1843(Res.) 

4 
1145 
6, 7 
?6-22-1859(Res.) 
Conn. Sp. Acts 
5 
309 
8 
?6-17-1870(Res.) 
Conn. Sp. Acts 
6 
823 
9 
?3-18-1884(Res.) 
Conn. Sp. Acts 
9 
944 
11 
?3-24-1886(Res.) 
Conn. Sp. Acts 
10 
325 
12 
?5-16-1889(Res.) 
Conn. Sp. Acts 
10 
1060 
13 
?6-29-1951(Res.) 
Conn. Sp. Acts 
6 
192 
14 
?6-?2-1955(Res.) 
Conn. Sp. Acts 
27 
201 
15 
?6-?2-1961(Res.) 
Conn. Sp. Acts 
30 
116 
16 
 


Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 


Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
    The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated 
the "Code of Ordinances, Town of North Stonington, Connecticut," and may be so cited. 
State Law reference— Compilations of ordinances, G.S. § 7-148a. 


Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
    The following definitions and rules of construction shall apply to this Code and to all ordinances 
unless the context requires otherwise: 
    Generally. The ordinary signification shall be applied to all words, except words of art or words 
connected with a particular trade or subject matter when they shall have the signification attached to them 
by experts in such trade or with reference to such subject matter. In all interpretations the courts shall 
look diligently for the intention of the city council, keeping in view, at all times, the old law, the evil and the 
remedy. Grammatical errors shall not vitiate, and a transposition of words and clauses may be resorted to 
when the sentence or clause is without meaning as it stands. 
    Liberal construction; minimum requirements; overlapping provisions. All general provisions, terms, 
phrases and expressions contained in this Code shall be liberally construed in order that the true intent 
and meaning of the city council may be fully carried out. In the interpretation and application of any 
provision of this Code, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of 
the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of this Code 
imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the other provisions of this Code, the provision 
imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. The specific controls over 
the general. 
    Board of Selectmen. The term "Board of Selectmen" means the Board of Selectmen of the Town of 
North Stonington, Connecticut. 
    Code. The term "Code" means the Code of Ordinances, Town of North Stonington, Connecticut, as 
designated in Section 1-1. 
    Conjunctions. In a provision involving two or more items, conditions, provisions or events, which 
items, conditions, provisions or events are connected by the conjunction "and," "or" or "either . . . or," the 
conjunction shall be interpreted as follows, except that the conjunctions "and" and "or" can be 
interchangeable: 
(1) ?The term "and" indicates that all the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply. 
(2) ?The term "or" indicates that the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply singly 
or in any combination. 
(3) ?"Either . . . or" indicates that the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply singly 
but not in combination. 
    Delegation of authority . A provision that authorizes or requires a Town officer or Town employee to 
perform an act or make a decision authorizes such officer or employee to act or make a decision through 
subordinates. 
    Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to 
firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. Words of one gender include all other genders. 
    G.S. The abbreviation "G.S." refers to the General Statutes of Connecticut, as amended or revised. 
Any reference to a State act by title is to such act as amended or revised. 
    Includes. The term "includes" does not limit a term to a specified example. 
    Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be 
construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers. 
    Keeper and proprietor. The terms "keeper" and "proprietor" mean any person, whether acting alone 
or through a servant, agent or employee. 
    May. The term "may" is to be construed as being permissive and not mandatory. 
    Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
    Must. The term "must" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
    Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons 
and things as well as to one person and thing. Words in the singular include the plural. Words in the plural 
include the singular. 
    Oath. A solemn affirmation is the equivalent to an oath and a person shall be deemed to have sworn 
if such person makes such an affirmation. 
    Officers, departments, etc. References to officers, departments, board, commissions or employees 
are to Town officers, Town departments, Town boards, Town commissions and Town employees. 
    Owner. The term "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, 
tenant in common, joint tenant, or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
    Person. The word "person" shall extend and be applied to associations, firms, partnerships and 
bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals. The term "person" means any human being, any 
governmental or political subdivision or public agency, any public or private corporation, any partnership, 
any firm, association or other organization, any receiver, trustee, assignee, agent, or other legal 
representative of any of the foregoing or any other legal entity. 
    Personal property. The term "personal property" means any property other than real property. 
    Property. The term "property" shall include real and personal property. The term "property" includes 
real property, personal property and mixed property. 
    Real property. The term "real property" includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
    Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of a street between the curb line and the adjacent 
property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways. 
    Shall. The term "shall" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
    State. The term "State" means the State of Connecticut. 
    Street. The term "street" means any street, avenue, boulevard, road, alley, lane, viaduct or other 
public way in the Town. 
    Tenant, occupant. The terms "tenant" and "occupant," applied to a building or land, include any 
person holding a written or oral lease of or who occupies, the whole or a part of such building or land, 
either alone or with others. 
    Tense . Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
    Town. The term "Town" means the Town of North Stonington, Connecticut. 
    Week. The term "week" means a period of seven consecutive days. 
State Law reference— Rules of construction of terms used in the General Statutes, G.S. § 1-1. 


Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections; history notes; references. 
(a) ?The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere 
catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and are not titles of such sections, or of any part of 
the section, nor unless expressly so provided shall they be so deemed when any such section, 
including the catchline, is amended or reenacted. 
(b) ?A history appearing in parentheses after a section in this Code indicates the legislative history and 
has no legal effect. Cross references, editor's notes and State law references that appear in this 
Code after sections or subsections or that otherwise appear in footnote form are provided for the 
convenience of the user of the Code and have no legal effect. 


Sec. 1-4. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a) ?The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any previously repealed ordinances in force before or at 
the time the ordinance repealed took effect 
(b) ?The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal 
took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense 
committed under the ordinance repealed. 


Sec. 1-5. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a) ?All ordinances adopted subsequent to this Code that amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code 
may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of the Code and printed for inclusion in 
the Code. 
(b) ?Amendments to provisions of this Code may be made with the following language: "Section 
(Chapter, Article, Division or Subdivision, as appropriate) _____ of the Code of Ordinances, Town of 
North Stonington, Connecticut, is hereby amended to read as follows: …." 
(c) ?If a new section, subdivision, division, article or chapter is to be added to the Code, the following 
language may be used: "Section (Chapter, Article, Division or Subdivision, as appropriate) _____ of 
the Code of Ordinances, Town of North Stonington, Connecticut, is hereby created to read as 
follows: …." 
(d) ?All provisions desired to repealed should be repealed specially by section, subdivision, division, 
article or chapter number, as appropriate, or by setting out the repealed provisions in full in the 
repealing ordinance. 


Sec. 1-6. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a) ?Supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the 
Town. A supplement to this Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of 
ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in 
the Code. The pages of the supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code 
and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete. The new 
pages shall be so prepared that when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the 
date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b) ?In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code that have been repealed shall be 
excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c) ?When preparing a supplement to this Code, the person authorized to prepare the supplement may 
make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts or ordinances included in the 
supplement, insofar as necessary to do so in order to embody them into a unified code. For example, 
the person may: 
(1) ?Arrange the material into appropriate organizational units. 
(2) ?Supply appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions 
and sections to be included in the Code and make changes in any such catchlines, headings 
and titles or in any such catchlines, headings and titles already in the Code. 
(3) ?Assign appropriate numbers to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions and sections to be 
added to the Code. 
(4) ?Where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing numbers assigned to titles, 
chapters, articles, divisions or sections. 
(5) ?Change the words "this ordinance" or similar words to "this chapter," "this article," "this 
division," "this section" or "Sections ____ to ____ " (inserting section numbers to indicate the 
sections of the Code that embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated in the 
Code). 
(6) ?Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of the 
ordinances inserted in the Code. 


Sec. 1-7. - General penalty. 
(a) ?In this section "violation of this Code" means any of the following: 
(1) ?Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared unlawful, an offense, a violation, an 
infraction, a public nuisance or a misdemeanor by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized 
by ordinance. 
(2) ?Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance or by rule or regulation 
authorized by ordinance. 
(3) ?Failure to perform an act if the failure is prohibited or is made or declared unlawful, an offense, 
a violation, an infraction, a public nuisance or a misdemeanor by ordinance or by rule or 
regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(b) ?In this section "violation of this Code" does not include the failure of a Town officer or Town 
employee to perform an official duty unless it is specifically provided that the failure to perform the 
duty is to be punished as provided in this section. 
(c) ?Except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance, a person convicted of a violation of this Code 
shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $100.00. 
(d) ?Except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance, with respect to violations of this Code: 
(1) ?That are continuous with respect to time, each day that the violation continues is a separate 
offense. 
(2) ?That are not continuous with respect to time, each act constitutes a separate offense. 
(e) ?The imposition of a penalty does not prevent suspension or revocation of a license, permit or 
franchise or other administrative sanctions. 
(f) ?The imposition of any punishment hereunder shall not prevent the enforced abatement of any 
unlawful condition by the Town. Violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time are a 
public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of a penalty 
does not prevent injunctive relief. 
State Law reference— Penalties for ordinance violations, G.S. § 7-148(c)(10)(A). 


Sec. 1-8. - Severability of parts of Code. 
    If any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, or section of this Code shall be declared invalid or 
unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall 
not affect any of the remaining provisions of this Code. The sections, subsections, paragraphs, 
sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code and all provisions adopted by reference in this Code are 
severable so that if any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause and phrase of this Code or of 
any provision adopted by reference in this Code is declared unconstitutional or invalid by a valid judgment 
of a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect the validity of any other section, 
subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause and phrase of this Code or of any provision adopted by 
reference in this Code. 


Sec. 1-9. - Provisions deemed continuation of existing ordinances. 
    The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantially the same as legislation previously 
adopted by the Town relating to the same subject mater, shall be construed as restatements and 
continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 


Sec. 1-10. - Code does not affect prior offenses or rights. 
(a) ?Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code affects any offense or act committed or 
done, any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established before the effective date 
of this Code. 
(b) ?The adoption of this Code does not authorize any use or the continuation of any use of a structure 
or premises in violation of any Town ordinance on the effective date of this Code. 


Sec. 1-11. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code affects the validity of any ordinance or 
portion of an ordinance listed below. Such ordinances continue in full force and effect to the same extent 
as if published at length in this Code. 
(1) ?Annexing property into the Town. 
(2) ?Deannexing property or excluding property from the Town. 
(3) ?Promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance of bonds or other 
instruments of indebtedness. 
(4) ?Authorizing or approving any contract, deed, or agreement. 
(5) ?Making or approving any appropriation or budget. 
(6) ?Granting any right or franchise. 
(7) ?Providing for salaries or other employee benefits not codified in this Code. 
(8) ?Levying, imposing or otherwise relating to taxes not codified in this Code. 
(9) ?Adopting or amending the comprehensive plan. 
(10) ?Amending the zoning map or zoning atlas, or rezoning specific property or otherwise 
pertaining to zoning. 
(11) ?Dedicating, accepting or vacating any plat or subdivision or providing subdivision regulations. 
(12) ?Dedicating, establishing naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, 
repairing or vacating any street. 
(13) ?Establishing the grade or any street or sidewalk. 
(14) ?Levying or imposing any special assessment. 
(15) ?Providing traffic or parking regulations for specific locations. 
(16) ?That is temporary, although general in effect. 
(17) ?That is special, although permanent in effect. 
(18) ?The purpose of which has been accomplished. 


Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION 


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 


Sec. 2-1. - Date of annual Town Meeting. 
    The Town of North Stonington shall have its Annual Town Meeting on the first Monday in May of 
each year. 
(Town Meeting of 5-27-1957; Res. of 3-19-1984) 
State Law reference— Town Meetings, G.S. § 7-1 et seq. 


Sec. 2-2. - Annexation by a tribe or governmental entity. 
    The Town of North Stonington through the Board of Selectmen shall oppose annexation of any land 
in North Stonington by a tribe or a governmental entity, including annexation by a tribe, pursuant to 25 
CFR 151, of any land located outside the boundaries of a tribe's federally recognized reservation. 
(Ord. of 11-23-1993) 


Secs. 2-3—2-22. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE II. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES 


Sec. 2-23. - Town Clerk. 
(a) ?The Town Clerk for the Town of North Stonington shall receive a salary in lieu of all fees and other 
compensation provided for in the General Statutes, said salary to be fixed by the legislative body of 
the Town of North Stonington. 
(b) ?The fees or compensation provided by the general statutes to be paid to the Town Clerk shall be 
collected by such Town Clerk and he/she shall deposit all such money collected by him/her in 
accordance with such provisions of the law governing the deposit of monies belonging to said Town. 
(c) ?The Town Clerk is empowered to appoint assistants, with the approval of the Board of Selectmen, 
as provided by G.S. §§ 7-19 and 7-38 to perform the duties of Town Clerk and Registrar of Vital 
Statistics. 
(d) ?Pursuant to G.S. § 9-185, the Town Clerk and Registrar of Vital Statistics shall be appointed by the 
Board of Selectmen. The term of office shall be four years and until his or her successor has been 
appointed and has qualified. A good faith effort will be made to employ a Town Clerk who is a 
resident of the Town of North Stonington. The first person so appointed to the office of Town Clerk 
shall be appointed upon the expiration of the term of office of the official in the office at the effective 
date of this ordinance [from which this subsection is derived] or the occurrence of a vacancy in said 
office, whichever first occurs. 
(Ord. of 5-31-1988, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 9-9-2002(2); Ord. of 4-24-2017) 
State Law reference— Authority to establish salary in lieu of fees, G.S. § 7-34b. 


Sec. 2-24. - Tax Collector. 
(a) ?Appointment of Municipal Collector of Taxes; term of office. 
(1) ?The Board of Selectmen of the Town of North Stonington is hereby authorized and empowered 
to appoint a Municipal Collector of Taxes who shall have and exercise all rights, powers and 
duties as conferred upon Municipal Collector of Taxes under the Connecticut General Statutes 
as amended from time to time. The Board of Selectman shall appoint the Municipal Collector of 
Taxes, which appointment shall be effective as of April 1 of the calendar year immediately 
following the year that the Board of Selectmen takes office pursuant to each biennial municipal 
election. 
(2) ?The term of office of each Municipal Collector of Taxes shall terminate on the second 
anniversary of said April 1 appointment date, and shall not be coterminous with that of the 
Board of Selectmen. Each Municipal Collector of Taxes shall be appointed or reappointed by 
the Board of Selectmen for a like period in accordance with the same procedure. Any vacancy 
in the office of the Collector of Taxes shall be filled by the Board of Selectmen within 30 days 
after the occurrence of such a vacancy and the person appointed to fill such vacancy shall hold 
office for the unexpired portion of the term of his or her predecessor. 
(b) ?Qualifications; terms and conditions of employment. 
(1) ?The Board of Selectmen are hereby authorized and empowered to establish the job description 
and qualifications of the municipal collector of taxes, as may be amended from time to time, 
pursuant to and/or in accordance with the applicable, if any, provisions of any the-existing 
collective bargaining agreement, employment agreement and/or Town policies. 
(2) ?Subject to subsection (c) of this section, the Board of Selectmen are authorized and 
empowered to set the terms and conditions of employment (inclusive of wages and hours), 
pursuant to and/or in accordance with the applicable, if any, provisions of any then-existing 
collective bargaining agreement, employment agreement and/or Town policies. 
(c) ?Discipline, termination, reappointment and non-reappointment. During the term of office, the First 
Selectman shall have the authority to discipline and/or terminate the employment of the Municipal 
Collector [of] Taxes pursuant to and/or in accordance with the applicable, if any, provisions of any 
then-existing and applicable collective bargaining agreement, employment agreement, Town policies 
and/or Connecticut General Statutes, as amended from time to time. The Board of Selectmen retains 
all rights and authority to reappoint and/or non-reappoint any municipal collector of taxes for a 
successor term; the Board of Selectmen's reappointment and/or non-reappointment of a Municipal 
Collector of Taxes shall not be subject to the terms any collective bargaining agreement, 
employment agreement and/or Town policies, and shall not arbitrable under, nor subject to the just 
cause standards, set forth in any collective bargaining agreement, employment agreement and/or 
Town policy. 
(Ord. of 5-27-1997, §§ 1—3; Ord. of 8-27-2001(4); Ord. of 5-12-2014, §§ 1—3) 
State Law reference— Authority to provide for appointed Collector of Taxes, G.S. § 9-185. 


Secs. 2-25—2-53. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE III. - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS 


Sec. 2-54. - Economic Development Commission. 
(a) ?Establishment. The Town of North Stonington hereby establishes an Economic Development 
Commission in accordance with G.S. § 7-136 as amended. 
(b) ?Purpose and annual report. 
(1) ?The Commission shall conduct research into the economic conditions and trends in North 
Stonington, shall make recommendations to appropriate officials and agencies of North 
Stonington regarding action to improve its economic condition and development, shall seek to 
coordinate the activities of and cooperate with unofficial bodies organized to promote such 
economic development and may advertise and may prepare, print and distribute books, maps, 
charts and pamphlets which in its judgment will further its official purposes. 
(2) ?The commission shall annually prepare and transmit to the Annual Town Meeting and the 
Board of Selectmen of North Stonington a report of its activities and of its recommendations for 
improving such economic conditions and development. 
(c) ?Members; bi-partisan. 
(1) ?The Commission shall consist of eight regular members and two alternate members who are 
electors of the Town of North Stonington. No more than four regular members shall be from any 
one political party. No more than one alternate member shall be from any one political party. 
a. ?Terms of office: Regular members shall serve four-year terms. Alternate members shall 
serve two-year terms. As terms of each regular member and alternate member of the 
Economic Development Commission expires, a successor or successors shall be elected 
at the biennial election of the Town of North Stonington to serve for a term of four and two 
years respectively. 
b. ?In the event any regular member or alternate member fails to fulfill their term of office, the 
position shall be deemed vacant. Vacancies shall be filled by appointment of the Board of 
Selectmen, Any vacancy shall be filled by a member of the same political party. If, after 90 
days, no member of the same political party is available to fill the vacancy, the Board of 
Selectmen may appoint an unaffiliated elector to fill the vacancy. The appointment shall be 
from the date of declared vacancy until the immediate following regular election at which 
time the elector shall serve the unexpired term of office of said vacancy. 
(2) ?Terms of office shall commence two weeks after the day of the biennial election. 
(d) ?Expenses, appropriation. 
(1) ?Commission members shall receive no compensation for their services as such, but shall be 
reimbursed for necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their official duties subject to 
the availability of appropriations for such expenses. 
(2) ?The Commission may, subject to the availability of appropriation, appoint employees necessary 
for the discharge of its duties. 
(3) ?The Town may annually appropriate for the purposes of the Commission a sum not exceeding 
one-twentieth of one percent of the last completed grand list of taxable property. 
(Ord. of 1-31-1963(1), §§ 1—4; Ord. of 3-19-1984, § 1; Ord. of 7-13-1987; Amd. of 6-16-2008; 
Amd. of 4-6-2009; Amd. of 10-22-2013) 


Sec. 2-55. - Board of Education. 
    The membership of the Board of Education for the Town of North Stonington shall consist of eight 
members. Such Town shall elect four members, of which no more than two of whom shall be from one 
political party, to hold office for two years and four members, of which no more than two of whom shall be 
from any one political party, to hold office for four years, each from the date of election; and at each Town 
election thereafter shall elect members of such Board in place of the member whose terms expire, each 
for a term of four years from the date of election. A vacancy from whatever cause in the Board of 
Education shall be filled by an elector to serve until the next election. 
(Ord. of 7-17-1989; Ord. of 9-25-2006) 
State Law reference— Authority to fix number of Board of Education and membership thereon, 
G.S. § 9-205. 


Sec. 2-56. - School Building and Planning Committee. 
(a) ?Terms of office. The terms of office of all present members serving on the Permanent School 
Building and Planning Committee shall expire and terminate as of the effective date of the ordinance 
from which this section derives. 
(b) ?Membership. Said Committee shall consist of ten members, not more than five of whom shall be 
from any one political party, to be appointed by the Board of Selectmen or a majority of them for a 
term of two years. 
(c) ?Residency requirements. Each member shall be a resident of the Town. 
(d) ?Vacancies. All vacancies shall be filled for the remainder of a member's unexpired term by the 
Board of Selectmen with a person of the same political party as the person who held office prior to 
the vacancy. 
(e) ?Responsibilities. The Committee shall have the responsibility, in cooperation with the Board of 
Education, to conduct studies into the need for school facilities and the methods of construction, 
financing and related matters, together with such other powers and authorities as may be given by 
the Town Meeting from time to time. 
(f) ?Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, the legal voters of the Town of North Stonington 
in Town Meeting may by resolution determine from time-to-time to establish an ad hoc School 
Building Committee with respect to new construction of, or renovation, improvements and/or 
additions to, school facilities, such committee to act in lieu of the Permanent School Building and 
Planning Committee. Each such committee may be charged by the Town Meeting, without limitation, 
to conduct studies regarding the need for the respective school facilities and the methods of 
construction, financing and related matters, together with such other powers, authorities and duties 
as may be granted by the Town Meeting from time-to-time. Each such committee shall consist of not 
less than seven members nor more than 11 members, as to be determined by the Town Meeting, 
which members shall be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the Board of Selectmen. Each 
committee member shall serve until such member's successor is appointed and qualified, or the 
committee disbanded. Committee members shall receive no compensation for their services as 
such, but shall be reimbursed for their necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their 
committee duties, subject to budgetary limitations. Necessary expenses of each such committee 
may be included in the cost of the respective project. In the performance of its duties and in the 
exercise of its powers aforesaid, no such committee shall incur any expenses or obligate the Town to 
pay any expense in excess of the funds appropriated by the Town for such purpose. The records of 
each such Committee shall be filed with the Town Clerk and open to public inspection. Upon 
completion of its charge, each such committee shall make a complete report and accounting to the 
Board of Selectmen and the Town. 
(Ord. of 12-15-1986(3), §§ 1—6; Ord. of 9-29-2008, § 1) 


Sec. 2-57. - Southeastern Connecticut Tourism District. 
(a) ?The Town of North Stonington hereby joins the Eastern Connecticut Regional Tourism District. 
(b) ?The Town of North Stonington, having a population of 5,276 according to the federal census of 
2015, shall have one representative on the Board of Directors of the Eastern Regional District, who 
shall be appointed by the Board of Selectmen. Appointments shall be for a three-year term. 
(Ord. of 3-25-1991, § 2; Ord. of 5-22-2018) 
State Law reference— Regional tourism districts, G.S. ch. 184b, § 10-397. 


Sec. 2-58. - Southeastern Connecticut Council of Governments. 
    The Town of North Stonington hereby adopts G.S. §§ 4-124i—4-124p, providing for the formation of 
the Southeastern Connecticut Council of Governments, and does hereby join such Regional Council of 
Governments when and as such Council is duly established in accordance with said statutes, upon the 
adoption of said statutes by not less than 60 percent of the eligible municipalities within Southeastern 
Connecticut Planning Region, as defined by the Secretary of the Office of Policy and Management or his 
designee, and upon certification by the Secretary of the Office of Policy and Management or his designee 
that a Regional Council of Governments has been duly established. 
(Ord. of 10-19-1992) 


Sec. 2-59. - Flood and Erosion Control Board. 
    A Flood and Erosion Control Board is established for the Town of North Stonington, Pursuant to G.S. 
§ 25-84, as amended. The board shall be composed of five members as follows: every member of the 
Board of Selectmen; the Chairman of the Conservation Commission; and the Chairman of the Inland 
Wetlands and Watercourses Commission. Their terms on the Flood and Erosion Control Board to run with 
their terms in the allocating position. 
    The Flood and Erosion Control Board will have all of the powers and duties specified in G.S. §§ 25-
84 to 25-98. 
(Ord. of 4-5-2010) 
Cross reference— Floods, ch. 10. 


Sec. 2-60. - Municipal Building Committee. 
(a) ?Committee established. There is hereby established a Municipal Building Committee of the Town of 
North Stonington, which shall be known as the "Municipal Building Committee." 
(b) ?Membership. The Municipal Building Committee shall be appointed by the Board of Selectmen and 
shall consist of no less than five and no more than 11 members in accordance with G.S. § 9-167a 
(minority representation). 
(c) ?Ex officio members. A member of the Board of Selectmen shall serve as an ex officio member of the 
Committee. 
(d) ?Residency requirement. Each member of the Committee shall be a resident of the Town. 
(e) ?Vacancies. All vacancies on the Committee shall be filled for the remainder of the project by the 
Board of Selectmen. Committee's recommendations will be considered. 
(f) ?Powers and duties. 
(1) ?This Committee is established by, and will serve at the pleasure of, the Board of Selectmen for 
the purpose of undertaking, supervising, managing, overseeing, and executing the construction 
of new municipal buildings or structures or major alterations or additions to existing municipal 
buildings in the Town of North Stonington upon the written request and authorization of the 
Board of Selectmen. 
The powers and duties of the Municipal Building Committee shall include: 
a. ?Regular meetings of the Committee shall be held not less than once every three months. 
The Committee may hold special meetings as it deems appropriate. 
b. ?Conducting preliminary studies for each project regarding the scope, cost, and feasibility of 
the new municipal building or major alteration or addition including methods of 
construction, financing and related matters and submitting those findings to the Board of 
Selectmen for approval. 
c. ?Negotiating contracts with all the required professionals including, but not limited to, 
architects and construction firms for the project subject to the approval of the Board of 
Selectmen which are within its jurisdiction and for which the necessary funds have been 
appropriated. 
d. ?Reviewing plans and taking the project for approval, if necessary, to the Board of 
Selectmen. 
e. ?Supervising, managing, controlling and executing the project as authorized and for which 
funding has been appropriated. 
f. ?Monitoring the progress of the project, receiving invoices, authorizing the payment of 
invoices, and making necessary change orders if within the scope of the project and the 
powers granted to it by this article. 
g. ?During all phases of the construction process, reporting at least bimonthly in person and in 
writing to the Board of Selectmen. Such reporting shall include, but not be limited to, the 
progress of the project and any change orders the Committee has authorized. 
h. ?Cooperating with auditors acting as agents of the Town upon request. 
i. ?Maintaining and providing all the records associated with each project in electronic format to 
the Town Clerk updated on a bimonthly basis so as to be open and available for public 
inspection. 
1. ?Said records shall include, but shall not be limited to, all final plans and latest revision 
for the project including modifications. 
2. ?The initial budget for the project, the final budget therefore and all change orders of 
budget modifications. 
3. ?All bid documents and modifications thereto, all bids received, all construction 
contracts, change orders, and all architectural contracts and changes thereto. 
4. ?The itemized project budget and the itemized amount expended to date on all 
contracts associated with the project and all related expenditures. 
5. ?Copies of all correspondence with reference to the project, except privileged 
communications. 
6. ?Complete financial records for the project in electronic format. 
7. ?Copies of the minutes of each meeting of the Committee regarding the project. 
j. ?Submit a final report upon completion of the project to the Board of Selectmen for final 
approval which report shall include the total project cost. 
(2) ?The Committee may be granted such other powers, authorities and duties not specifically 
enumerated herein recommended by the Board of Selectmen and granted by the Town Meeting 
as required from time to time. 
(g) ?Compensation and expenses. Committee members shall receive no compensation for their services 
as such, but shall be reimbursed for their necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their 
committee duties subject to budgetary limitations with prior approval. Necessary expenses incurred 
in the performance of committee duties may be included in the cost of the project subject to approval 
by the Board of Selectmen. In the performance of its duties and in the exercise of the aforesaid 
powers, no such committee shall incur any expenses or obligate the Town to pay any expense in 
excess of the funds appropriated by the Town for such purpose. 
(Ord. of 10-22-2013) 


Sec. 2-61. - First Selectman Voting Ordinance. 
    In accordance with CGS § 9-188, votes cast for a candidate for First Selectman shall count for that 
office only. Votes cast for an unsuccessful candidate for First Selectman shall not be counted as votes for 
that candidate as a member of the Board of Selectmen. 
(Ord. of 3-14-2016) 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted March 14, 2016, added provisions to the Code but did not 
specify the manner of inclusion. At the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as 
§ 2-61. 


Secs. 2-62—2-75. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE IV. - FINANCE 


Sec. 2-76. - Finance Board. 
(a) ?A Town Finance Board is hereby established. 
(b) ?The Town of North Stonington shall be empowered to elect two alternate members for the Board of 
Finance that shall be electors and taxpayers in the Town. Alternate members shall have all the 
duties and powers of regular members and shall be seated if a regular Board member is absent or is 
disqualified; such regular member shall designate an alternate to act. In the event that an absent or 
disqualified regular member shall fail or refuse to designate an alternate to so act, the majority of the 
regular members of the Board of Finance not absent and not disqualified may designate an 
alternate, subject to the provisions of the Connecticut General Statutes with respect to minority 
representation, to so act for such absent or disqualified regular member. The new alternates shall be 
elected at the Town's next regular election and be subject to the provisions of the Connecticut 
General Statutes with respect to minority representation and serve four- and six-year terms 
respectively and then follow the six-year terms of the Board thereafter. In case of a vacancy in the 
alternate membership of the board of finance, the full members of the board shall, at a special 
meeting called by the chairman for the purpose, by a majority vote, appoint a successor, who shall 
serve until the next town election and until his successor is elected and has qualified. At the next 
town election following the occurrence of such vacancy, the electors shall elect a successor to fill the 
vacancy for the unexpired portion of the term and the office to be filled shall be designated on the 
official ballot by the words "To fill vacancy for .....", followed by the duration of the unexpired term. 
(Town Meeting of 11-6-1934; Ord. of 10-20-2014) 


Sec. 2-77. - Fiscal year. 
    The uniform fiscal year is adopted. 
(Town Meeting of 1-15-1942) 
State Law reference— Adoption of uniform fiscal year, G.S. § 7-382. 


Sec. 2-78. - Publication of annual budget. 
    The Board of Finance shall waive the publication of its recommended budget meeting and shall 
provide for the printing or mimeographing of copies of such report in numbers equal to ten percent of the 
population of said Town according to last completed federal census, which copies shall be available for 
distribution five days before the annual budget meeting. 
(Ord. No. 4, 4-7-1958) 


Sec. 2-79. - Appropriations for fire protection. 
    The Town of North Stonington may make appropriations to provide for the furnishing of fire 
protection by any person, firm or corporation. 
(Ord. of 3-2-1978(2)) 
State Law reference— Authority to provide for fire protection, G.S. § 7-148(c)(4)(B). 


Sec. 2-80. - Appropriations for ambulance service. 
    The Town of North Stonington may make appropriations to provide for the furnishing of ambulance 
service by any person, firm or corporation. 
(Ord. of 3-2-1978(3)) 
State Law reference— Authority to provide for fire protection, G.S. § 7-148(c)(4)(D). 


Sec. 2-81. - Waiver of fees for charitable organizations. 
    Any application fee and/or permit fee required to be filed pursuant to any rule or regulation of any 
agency or board of the Town of North Stonington, including, but not limited to, land use boards and 
commissions, may be waived by the Board of Selectmen at any regular meeting of such board on behalf 
of any charitable or qualified nonprofit organization. 
(1) ?Charitable organization means any person who is or holds himself out to be established for any 
benevolent, educational, philanthropic, human, scientific, patriotic, social welfare or advocacy, 
public health, environmental, conservation, civic or eleemosynary purposes, or for the benefit of 
law enforcement officers, firefighters, or other persons who protect the public safety. 
(2) ?Person means any individual, corporation, association, partnership, trust, foundation, or any 
other entity however styled. 
(3) ?Qualified nonprofit organization means any private, nonprofit organization qualified under 
Section 501 (c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as the same may be amended from 
time to time, other than a health care institution or institution for higher education. 
(Ord. of 11-14-1994(1)) 


Chapter 3 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Liquor Control Act, G.S. § 30-1 et seq. 


Sec. 3-1. - Consumption of alcoholic liquor within the public highways, parks, grounds and beaches. 
(a) ?The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section shall have the meanings 
ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alcoholic liquor shall be defined in the Liquor Control Act (G.S. § 30-1 et seq.) of the State of 
Connecticut as the same may be amended from time to time. 
    Possession with the intent to consume shall mean having in one's possession, or control, 
alcoholic liquor in a glass or an open bottle, can or other receptacle suitable to permit consumption. 
    Public highway shall mean all public highways with and under the control of the Town of North 
Stonington and shall include all sidewalks. 
    Public parks, grounds and beaches shall mean all areas within the Town of North Stonington 
owned or under the control of the Town of North Stonington or customarily used by the general 
public. 
(b) ?No person shall consume, or possess with intent to consume, any alcoholic liquor within the limits of 
the public highways, parks, grounds and beaches of the Town of North Stonington. 
(c) ?The restaurant building and patio at 386 Norwich Westerly Road, North Stonington, Connecticut (tax 
assessor's parcel 9642, Account M 148000, tax assessment list of October 1, 2010 shall be exempt 
from [this section] dealing with the "consumption of alcoholic liquor with the public highways, parks, 
grounds and beaches". 
(Ord. of 3-2-1978(1), §§ 1—3; Ord. of 1-24-2011) 
State Law reference— Alcoholic liquor defined, G.S. § 30-1. 


Chapter 4 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Dogs and other companion animals, G.S. § 22-327 et seq. 


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 


Secs. 4-1—4-18. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE II. - CATS 


Sec. 4-19. - Keeping. 
(a) ?No person owning or keeping any cat shall permit such animal to substantially damage property 
other than the property of the owner or keeper or cause an unsanitary, dangerous, or unreasonably 
offensive condition. 
(b) ?Any violation of this provision shall be an infraction. 
(Ord. of 9-9-2002(1)) 
State Law reference— Authority to so provide, G.S. § 22-339d; penalty for infractions, G.S. § 
51-164m. 


Chapter 5 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS 


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 


Sec. 5-1. - Occupancy of newly constructed or relocated dwellings. 
(a) ?Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the 
meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different 
meaning: 
    Dwelling means a building designed or used as living quarters. 
(b) ?Certificate of occupancy. No dwelling constructed or relocated after the effective date of the 
ordinance from which this section is derived shall be occupied in whole or in part until a certificate of 
occupancy shall have been issued by the Building Official. 
(c) ?Application and issuance. Application for such a certificate shall be made in writing to the Building 
Official stating the name and address of the owner and location and description of the dwelling. The 
Building Official shall issue a certificate after receipt of a statement in writing by the Ledge Light 
Health District, stating that the water supply, drainage, and sewage system on said premises have 
been inspected, meet the standards of the CT Public Health Code, and are satisfactory in the opinion 
of the Ledge Light Health District, and a Certificate of Zoning Compliance has been issued by the 
Zoning Official after approval of a certified as-built plan. 
(d) ?Penalty. Any owner of a dwelling who permits same to be occupied for which a certificate of 
occupancy has not been obtained in accordance with this section shall be guilty of an offense. 
(Ord. No. 6, § 5, 10-20-1959; Ord. of 1-31-1963(2), §§ 1—5; Ord. of 5-22-2018) 
State Law reference— Certificate of occupancy, G.S. § 29-265. 


Sec. 5-2. - Adoption of State Building Code. 
(a) ?The Town of North Stonington hereby adopts as of September 15, 1970, the State Building Code. 
(b) ?The Board of Selectmen shall appoint the members of the Board of Appeals and fill any vacancies 
on such Board as they arise. 
(Ord. of 8-20-1970(2), §§ 1, 2) 
State Law reference— State Building Code, G.S. § 29-252 et seq.; Board of Appeals, G.S. § 
29-266. 


Sec. 5-3. - State Building Demolition Code. 
    The Building Official shall be the administrative officer to administer G.S. ch. 541, pt. IV (G.S. § 29-
401 et seq.). 
(Ord. of 9-10-1970, § 12; Ord. of 5-22-2018) 


Sec. 5-4. - Penalties for violations of State Building Code. 
(a) ?Any person who shall violate a provision of the State Building Code or shall fail to comply with any 
of the requirements thereof or shall erect, construct, alter or repair a building or structure in violation 
of any approved plan or directive of the Building Official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the 
provisions of the code shall be punished as provided in G.S. § 29-254a. 
(b) ?Any person who shall continue any work in or about the building after having been served with a 
stop order, except such work as he is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe conditions, 
shall be punished as provided in G.S. § 29-254a. 
(Ord. of 1-31-1972(1), §§ 1, 2) 


Secs. 5-5—5-26. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE II. - PERMITS 


Sec. 5-27. - Required; fees. 
(a) ?Before commencement of any construction of any new building or other structure or alteration, 
removal, demolition, or renovation of an existing structure, the owner shall file with the Building 
Official the appropriate permits and acquire all appropriate approvals as required by the Town of 
North Stonington and the State of Connecticut including but not limited to the Connecticut Building 
Code. 
(b) ?No fee or permit is required for necessary routine maintenance or repairs to existing buildings as 
defined in the building codes of the State of Connecticut. 
(c) ?The fees to be paid to the Town for permits, inspections and other services under the Connecticut 
Building Code shall be as established by the Town Meeting. 
(Ord. of 11-14-1994(2), §§ 1, 2) 


Sec. 5-28. - Waiver of fees for owners over 62 years of age. 
    Building permit fees and separate permit fees may be waived, by the Building Official for owner-
occupied single-family homes where at least one of the record owners is aged 62 or over and where the 
permit is to replace or upgrade the roofing, siding, windows, electrical or heating systems. 
(Ord. of 8-27-2001(3)) 


Sec. 5-29. - Withholding issuance or approval of a building permit application contingent upon the 
payment of real estate property taxes. 
(a) ?In accordance with G.S. § 7-148(c)2(B) as amended, approval of all building applications, 
certificates of occupancy and use, or other permit applications made to the North Stonington Building 
Official, shall be withheld for delinquent real estate property taxes for the property for which an 
application was made; as defined by the Office of Policy and Management Assessment and Taxation 
statutes. 
(b) ?The Tax Collector shall file with the Building Official a list of all properties and owners who are 
delinquent in the payment of real estate property taxes as of August 1 and February 1 of each fiscal 
year. 
(c) ?Prior to approving or renewing any building application the Building Official shall confirm with the 
Tax Collector that all taxes, charges, or assessments imposed by the Town are current and paid in 
full for the property for which an application was made. 
(d) ?The Building Official may grant a building application without the payment of all delinquent taxes if 
he certifies, in writing, that an emergency exists affecting the health and safety of the occupants of a 
building or property where there are delinquent real estate property taxes. 
(Ord. of 12-14-2015) 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted December 14, 2015, added to the Code but did not 
specify the manner of inclusion. At the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as 
§ 5-29. 


Secs. 5-30—5-59. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE III. - UNSAFE BUILDINGS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to cause removal and demolition of unsafe building and structures, G.S. 
§ 7-148 (c)(7)(iii). 


Sec. 5-60. - Dangerous buildings or structures. 
(a) ?Defined. All buildings or structures which have any or all of the following defects shall be deemed 
"dangerous buildings": 
(1) ?Those which have been damaged by fire, wind or other causes so as to have become 
dangerous to life, safety, morals, or the general health and welfare of the occupants or the 
people of the Town of North Stonington. 
(2) ?Those which have become or are so dilapidated, decayed, unsafe, unsanitary or which so 
utterly fail to provide the amenities essential to decent living that they are unfit for human 
habitation, or are likely to cause sickness or disease, so as to work injury to the health, morals, 
safety or general welfare of those living therein. 
(3) ?Those having parts thereof which are so attached that they may fall and injure members of the 
public or property. 
(4) ?Those which because of their condition are unsafe, unsanitary, or dangerous to the health, 
morals, safety and general welfare of the people of this Town. 
(b) ?Dangerous buildings deemed nuisances. All dangerous buildings within the terms of Subsection (a) 
of this section are hereby declared to be public nuisances. 
(c) ?Inspections. The Building Official shall inspect any building or structure in the Town designated by 
the Board of Selectmen except the interior of private dwellings for the purpose of determining 
whether any conditions exist which render such places a dangerous building within the terms of 
Subsection (a) of this section, and shall be paid for costs and a reasonable fee by the Board of 
Selectmen. 
(d) ?Repair or demolition. Whenever the Building Official in making an inspection as provided in the 
preceding section shall find that any building or structure is a dangerous building within the 
standards set forth in Subsection (a) of this section, he shall order said dangerous building to be 
repaired or demolished. 
(e) ?Order to owner for repair or demolition. The Building Official making an order provided in the 
preceding subsection shall cause such order to be put in writing and served upon the owner of the 
premises affected, or upon the owner's agent in charge of such premises, or upon the occupant 
thereof, as the circumstances may require. 
(f) ?Service of order. Such order shall be personally served upon such owner, agent or occupant by the 
Building Official by delivering to such owner or agent a true copy thereof; provided, however, that 
when such owner or agent cannot be found within the Town, or when the premises are unoccupied, 
service may be made upon such owner or agent by registered mail. The person serving such order 
shall certify upon the original order the date of the service, and how and upon whom it was made, 
shall return the original order to the officer who issued the same. 
(g) ?Appeal. The owner or occupant of the premises or the owner's authorized agent in charge thereof 
may, within ten days after the service of an order as provided in the preceding subsection, request a 
hearing upon such order before a Board of Review appointed as provided in Subsection (j) hereof. 
The Board of Review shall conduct such a hearing, after due notice to such owner, occupant or 
agent, and the Building Official who issued the order, of the time and place thereof, and shall review 
such order and may affirm, repeal or modify it. The Board of Review shall render its decision upon 
such order within ten days from the date of the hearing. 
(h) ?Extension of time. Any person upon whom an order has been served as provided in Subsection (e) 
hereof shall comply with such order within ten days after service thereof, or, if a hearing is requested, 
within ten days after the Board of Review has rendered its decision upon such hearing; provided 
however that for good cause shown the Board of Review may extend the time complying with such 
order for a period not exceeding 90 days. 
(i) ?Failure to comply with order. If the owner, the owner's agent in charge of the premises, or the 
occupant fails to comply with the order provided for in Subsection (d) hereof the Building Official shall 
cause such building or structure to be repaired or demolished, as the facts may warrant. 
(j) ?Board of Review. The Board of Selectmen shall be the Board of Review. 
(k) ?Costs. The Tax Collector shall collect from the property owner designated by the Building Official the 
total amount of the costs of such repair or demolition plus penalty of six percent. Such costs may be 
recovered in an action at law against the owner, or shall become a lien upon the premises in 
connection with which it was incurred and such lien shall exist from the date of completion of the 
repairs or demolition. Such lien shall expire one year after the date on which it commences to run 
unless a certificate continuing such lien prepared in the same manner as a municipal tax lien under 
G.S. Ch. 205 (as amended) shall be logged for the record by the Tax Collector in the office of the 
Town Clerk before the expiration of such period. 
(l) ?Penalty for failure to comply. The owner of any dangerous building who shall fail to comply with any 
order to repair or demolish said building or structure shall be guilty of an offense. 
(Ord. of 9-10-1970, §§ 1—11; Ord. of 5-22-2018) 


Chapter 6 - BUSINESSES 


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 


Secs. 6-1—6-18. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE II. - MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS 


DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 


Sec. 6-19. - Short title. 
    This article shall be known and may be cited as "Massage Establishment Article for the Town of 
North Stonington." 
(Ord. of 12-23-1996(1), § 1) 


Sec. 6-20. - Purpose. 
    It is hereby resolved that the business of operating a massage establishment as defined herein is a 
business affecting the public health, safety, and general welfare, and as such necessitates regulation and 
control. 
(Ord. of 12-23-1996(1), § 2) 


Sec. 6-21. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, and words shall have the meaning 
given herein: 
    Chief of Police shall mean the First Selectman of North Stonington, or his designee. 
    Director of Health shall mean the Director of Health for the Town of North Stonington, or his 
designee. 
    Employee shall mean any and all persons other than masseurs and masseuses who render any 
service in a massage establishment, but who have no physical contact with customers or clients. 
    Massage shall mean any method of pressure on, friction against or stroking, kneading, rubbing, 
pounding, vibrating or stimulating of the external soft parts of the body with the hands or with the aid of 
any mechanical or electrical apparatus or appliance with or without any such supplementary aids as 
rubbing alcohol, liniments, antiseptics, oils, powder, creams, lotions, ointments, or other similar 
preparations commonly used in this practice. 
    Massage establishment shall mean any establishment by whatever name called, where any person 
engages in or carries on or permits to be engaged in or carried on any of the activities of massage as 
defined in this section. 
    Masseur shall mean a male who engages in the practice of massage for any consideration 
whatsoever. 
    Masseuse shall mean a female who engages in the practice of massage for any consideration 
whatsoever. 
    Outcall massage service shall mean any business, the function of which is to engage in or carry on 
massages at a location designated by the customer or patron rather than at a massage establishment. 
    Recognized school shall mean any school or institution that is recognized by the Connecticut 
Department of Education or the Connecticut Commission on Higher Education, which has for its purpose 
the teaching of the theory and practice, the method, profession or work of massage including anatomy, 
physiology, hygiene and professional ethics. Such school must require a resident course of study of 
whatever the State of Connecticut requires. 
(Ord. of 12-23-1996(1), § 3) 


Sec. 6-22. - Promulgation of rules and regulations. 
    The Chief of Police or the Director of Health may make and enforce reasonable rules and regulations 
not in conflict with, but to carry out the intent of, this article. The Chief of Police and Director of Health 
shall, upon making any regulations or rule, file a copy of said rule or regulation with the Town Clerk, who 
shall keep same in the Town Hall, in a book provided for such purpose. 
(Ord. of 12-23-1996(1), § 4) 


Sec. 6-23. - Inspections. 
    The Chief of Police and the Director of Health, or their designees, shall from time to time, but not less 
than twice a year, make an inspection of each massage establishment in the Town for the purposes of 
determining that the provisions of this article are complied with. Such inspections shall be at a reasonable 
time, in a reasonable manner. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to allow such inspection officer 
access to the premises or to hinder such officer in any matter. 
(Ord. of 12-23-1996(1), § 5) 


Secs. 6-24—6-49. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 2. - ESTABLISHMENT PERMITS 


Sec. 6-50. - Permit required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct or carry on or permit to be engaged in, 
conducted, or carried on, in or upon any premises in the Town, the operation of a massage establishment 
without first having obtained a permit from the Chief of Police. 
(Ord. of 12-23-1996(1), § 6) 


Sec. 6-51. - Filing of application; filing fee. 
    Each applicant for a permit to maintain, operate or conduct a massage establishment shall file an 
application with the Chief of Police and pay a filing fee in the amount established by the Town Meeting, 
which fee shall not be refundable, to the Town Clerk. 
(Ord. of 12-23-1996(1), § 7) 


Sec. 6-52. - Contents of application; information needed. 
    The application for a permit to operate a massage establishment shall be in writing, signed and 
sworn to by the applicant and shall set forth: 
(1) ?The name and address of each applicant; 
(2) ?That the applicant is at least 18 years of age; 
(3) ?The proposed place of business and facilities therein; 
(4) ?The exact nature of the massage to be administered; 
(5) ?Two portrait photographs of the applicant at least two inches by two inches and a complete set 
of the applicant's fingerprints. Said fingerprints shall be taken by the Chief of Police, or his/her 
designee; 
(6) ?Business, occupation or employment history of the applicant for the three years immediately 
proceeding the date of the application; 
(7) ?Massage or similar business license history of the applicant; whether such person has 
previously operated in this or another city, town or state, under license; has had such license 
revoked or suspended, the reason therefor, and the business activity or occupation subsequent 
to such action of suspension or revocation; 
(8) ?Any criminal conviction, except minor traffic violations; 
(9) ?Plans for the physical layout of the massage establishment; 
(10) ?If the applicant is not a practitioner of massage then the application shall designate a licensed 
practitioner of massage to be the agent of the principal owner and operator and to be in 
constant direct and personal supervision of said establishment; 
(11) ?A list of all persons having a beneficial financial interest in the massage establishment and the 
amount of each person's interest if 10 percent or over. If a corporation holds 10 percent or 
more, the names and addresses of the corporate officers; 
(12) ?Appropriate certificates, licenses, etc., showing proper compliance with all applicable rules, 
regulations, ordinances, and statutes including zoning, building and health laws and regulations; 
(13) ?A written statement of operating policies and procedures pertaining to such matters as times 
of operation, accessibility, personal policies, methods and schedules of cleaning and sanitizing 
and provisions for safety and health of clients and employees; 
(14) ?Such other information as may be necessary in order for the Chief of Police to make any 
determination required by this article. 
(Ord. of 12-23-1996(1), § 8) 


Sec. 6-53. - Permit application; notification of denial. 
    Application for a permit to conduct a massage establishment shall be submitted to the Chief of Police 
60 days in advance of the opening for operation of the establishment. Any permit issued under these 
regulations shall be valid until the next renewal date unless suspended or revoked. Upon denial of an 
application of an original permit the Chief of Police shall notify the applicant in writing of such denial by 
mailing a notice to him at the address shown on his application. 
(Ord. of 12-23-1996(1), § 9) 


Sec. 6-54. - Issuance of permit. 
    The Chief of Police shall issue a permit to operate a massage establishment within 30 days of the 
receipt of the application upon finding: 
(1) ?All requirements concerning operation and facilities described in this article will be complied 
with as of the effective date of the permit; 
(2) ?Compliance with all other statutes, codes or ordinances, including health, zoning, building, fire 
and safety requirements, of the Town of North Stonington and the State of Connecticut as of the 
effective date of the permit; 
(3) ?That the nature of the massage administered will not endanger the health or safety of patrons 
of the massage establishment; 
(4) ?That the applicant or any person directly engaged in the operation or management of the 
massage establishment has not been convicted of any felony, an offense involving the 
unauthorized practice of the healing arts, sexual misconduct with minors, obscenity, keeping or 
residing in a house of ill fame, solicitation of a lewd or unlawful act, prostitution or pandering, 
and has not had a permit to operate a massage establishment suspended or revoked in this 
State or any other state; 
(5) ?That the applicant has furnished authorization to the Chief of Police to seek information and 
conduct an investigation into the truth of the statements set forth in the application and the 
qualifications of the applicant for the permit. 
(Ord. of 12-23-1996(1), § 10) 


Sec. 6-55. - Renewal of permits. 
(a) ?A permit to operate a massage establishment shall be valid, unless revoked or suspended, for one 
year from the date of issuance. 
(b) ?Application for renewal shall be made at least 60 days before expiration and shall be in the form and 
manner as required for the original permit. 
(c) ?Each application for renewal of a permit shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount as provided 
for the original permit. 
(d) ?The Chief of Police shall renew each permit no later than 30 days before expiration upon making 
findings as required for issuance of the original permit. 
(e) ?If renewal of the permit is denied, the Chief of Police shall notify the holder of the permit in writing 
not less than 30 days before expiration of the permit including the facts and specific section or 
sections of this article upon which his determination was made. 
(Ord. of 12-23-1996(1), § 11) 


Sec. 6-56. - Revocation or suspension of permit. 
    Any permit for a massage establishment may be revoked or suspended by the Chief of Police if the 
applicant is involved in any violations, including but not limited to the following: 
(1) ?Is convicted of any offense involving moral turpitude, obscenity, sexual misconduct, keeping or 
residing in a house of ill fame, solicitation of a lewd or unlawful act, prostitution or pandering, the 
record of conviction being conclusive evidence thereof; 
(2) ?Uses or permits to be used on the premises any narcotic or any controlled drug as defined in 
G.S. § 21a-242 to an extent or in a manner that such use is illegal or impairs his ability to direct 
the establishment and endangers the client or customer; 
(3) ?Fails to maintain standards prescribed by the State Department of Health, the North Stonington 
Department of Health, and the North Stonington Chief of Police; 
(4) ?Furnishes or makes any misleading or false statement or report in relation to this article; 
(5) ?Refuses to submit to the Chief of Police any reports or refuses to make available to the Chief of 
Police any records required by the Chief of Police in investigating the establishment for 
purposes associated with this article; 
(6) ?Fails or refuses to submit to an investigation or inspection by persons authorized by the Town 
of North Stonington to conduct fire, building, health or law enforcement related inspections; 
(7) ?Fails to provide or maintain equipment and keep in a safe and sanitary condition the premises 
established for and used by clients and customers pursuant to minimum standards prescribed 
by the Connecticut Department of Health and/or the North Stonington Health Department; 
(8) ?Employs any unlicensed masseurs or masseuses; 
(9) ?Willfully or deliberately violates any of the provisions of this article, or the rules and regulations 
established by the Chief of Police or the Health Director pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. of 12-23-1996(1), § 12) 


Secs. 6-57—6-85. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 3. - MASSEUR, MASSEUSE PERMIT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Massage therapists, G.S. § 20-206a et seq. 


Sec. 6-86. - Masseur or masseuse permit required. 
    No person, including an applicant for a massage establishment permit, shall engage in the practice 
of massage without first having obtained a masseur or masseuse permit from the Chief of Police. 
(Ord. of 12-23-1996(1), § 13) 


Sec. 6-87. - Filing of application; fee. 
    Each applicant for a masseur or masseuse permit shall file an application with the Chief of Police 
and pay a filing fee in the amount established by the Town Meeting, which fee which shall not be 
refundable. 
(Ord. of 12-23-1996(1), § 14) 


Sec. 6-88. - Contents of application; information needed. 
    The application for a masseur or masseuse permit shall be in writing, signed and sworn to by the 
applicant, and shall contain the following: 
(1) ?The name and address of the applicant; 
(2) ?Social Security number; 
(3) ?Applicant's height, weight, color of hair and eyes, and a full set of applicant's fingerprints 
(fingerprints to be taken by the Chief of Police or his designee); 
(4) ?Written evidence that the applicant is at least 18 years of age; 
(5) ?Business, occupation, or employment history of the applicant for three years immediately 
preceding the date of application; 
(6) ?Whether such person has been convicted of any crime within the last ten years except minor 
traffic violations; 
(7) ?Name and address of the recognized school attended, the dates attended, and a copy of the 
diploma or certificate of graduation awarded the applicant, showing the applicant has 
successfully completed not less than 270 hours of instruction; 
(8) ?Two portrait photographs of the applicant at least two inches by two inches; 
(9) ?A physician's certificate issued by a physician licensed to practice in the State of Connecticut, 
showing that the applicant has been examined and found to be free of contagious or 
communicable disease and showing that the examination was conducted within 30 days prior to 
the submission of the application. Such physical examination shall, in addition to any normal 
procedures, consist of a serological examination and a chest x-ray; 
(10) ?Such other information as may be necessary in order for the Chief of Police to make any 
determination required by this article. 
(Ord. of 12-23-1996(1), § 15) 


Sec. 6-89. - Issuance of permit. 
    The Chief of Police shall issue a masseur or masseuse permit within 30 days after such application 
has been filed upon finding: 
(1) ?That the applicant has complied with the requirements of Section 6-88; 
(2) ?That the applicant has not been convicted of a felony, an offense involving the unauthorized 
practice of the healing arts, sexual misconduct with minors, obscenity, keeping or residing in a 
house of ill-fame, solicitation of a lewd or unnatural act, prostitution or pandering; 
(3) ?The applicant has not had a permit suspended or revoked in this State or any other state; 
(4) ?The applicant has furnished authorization to the Chief of Police to seek information and 
conduct an investigation into the truth of the statements set forth in the application and the 
qualifications of the applicant for the permit. 
(Ord. of 12-23-1996(1), § 16) 


Sec. 6-90. - Notification upon refusal to issue. 
    The Chief of Police shall notify the applicant in writing of his decision to refuse to issue the permit 
and his reason(s) therefor. 
(Ord. of 12-23-1996(1), § 17) 


Sec. 6-91. - Renewal of permits. 
(a) ?A masseur or masseuse permit shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance unless 
suspended or revoked. 
(b) ?Application for renewal shall be made at least 60 days before expiration and shall be in the form and 
manner for the original permit. 
(c) ?Each application for a renewal shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount as provided for in the 
original permit and shall be nonrefundable. 
(d) ?The Chief of Police shall renew each permit no later than 30 days before expiration upon making 
findings as are required for issuance of the original permit; 
(e) ?If renewal of the permit is denied, the Chief of Police shall notify the holder of the permit in writing 
not less than thirty (30) days before expiration of the permit including the facts and specific section or 
sections of this article upon which his determination was made. 
(Ord. of 12-23-1996(1), § 18) 


Sec. 6-92. - Revocation or suspension of masseur or masseuse permit. 
    Any masseur or masseuse permit may be revoked or suspended by the Chief of Police if the permit 
holder is involved in any violations including but not limited to the following: 
(1) ?Is convicted of any offense involving moral turpitude, obscenity, sexual misconduct, keeping or 
residing in a house of ill fame, solicitation or a lewd or unlawful act, prostitution or pandering, 
the record of conviction being conclusive evidence thereof; 
(2) ?Uses any narcotic or any controlled drug as defined in G.S. §§ 21a-240 and 21a-242 or any 
alcoholic beverage to an extent or in a manner that such use is illegal or impairs the permit 
holder's ability to properly perform his duties or endangers the customer or client; 
(3) ?Furnishes or makes any misleading or false statement or report in relation to this article; 
(4) ?Refuses to submit to the Chief of Police any reports or refuses to make available to the Chief of 
Police any records required by the Chief in investigating the permit holder for purpose of this 
article; 
(5) ?Willfully or deliberately violates any of the provisions of this article or the rules and the 
regulations established by the Chief of Police or the Health Director pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. of 12-23-1996(1), § 19) 


Secs. 6-93—6-112. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 4. - ADMINISTRATION 


Sec. 6-113. - Notification of revocation or suspension; hearing. 
(a) ?Written notification. The Chief of Police shall not revoke or suspend any permit issued under this 
article without notifying the holder of the permit in writing of the facts and of the specific section or 
sections of this article upon which his determination was made and of the holder's right to request a 
hearing before the Chief of Police and to present evidence or argument on all facts or issues 
involved. 
(b) ?Hearing. A request for a hearing under this division shall stay any revocation or suspension until 
such time as a hearing has been held and a decision rendered thereon; provided however that if the 
Chief of Police finds that the public health, safety or welfare imperatively requires emergency action 
and incorporates a finding to that effect in his notice, the permit may be summarily suspended, 
pending a hearing thereon, which hearing shall be promptly instituted and all facts and issues 
promptly determined. 
(Ord. of 12-23-1996(1), § 20) 


Sec. 6-114. - Hearing on denial of permit or renewal. 
(a) ?Request. Any person aggrieved by the denial of a permit to operate a massage establishment or a 
masseur or masseuse permit or by the denial of renewal of such permit may request, in writing, a 
hearing before the Chief of Police, at which hearing such person shall be afforded the opportunity to 
present evidence and argument on all facts and issues involved. 
(b) ?Sceduling. The Chief of Police shall, upon receiving a request for a hearing under this division, 
schedule a hearing not later than 15 days from the date of actual receipt of the request and shall 
notify all parties of the time and place thereof. 
(c) ?Decision. The Chief of Police shall render a decision within ten days of the date of a hearing held 
under Subsection (b) of this section. 
(Ord. of 12-23-1996(1), § 21) 


Sec. 6-115. - Transfer of permit. 
    No permit shall be transferable except with the written consent of the Chief of Police; provided, 
however, that upon the death or incapacity of the permittee the massage establishment may continue in 
business for a reasonable period of time to allow for an orderly transfer of the permit. 
(Ord. of 12-23-1996(1), § 22) 


Sec. 6-116. - Violations and penalty. 
    Every person, except those persons who are specifically exempt by this article, whether acting as 
individuals, owner, employee of the owner, operator or employee of the operator, or acting as a 
participant or worker in any way, who gives a massage or conducts a massage establishment without first 
obtaining a permit and paying a permit fee to the Town of North Stonington or shall violate any of the 
provisions of this article or of the rules and regulations established by the Chief of Police or the Director of 
Health pursuant to this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a fine not to exceed 
$100.00 or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 60 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. of 12-23-1996(1), § 23) 
State Law reference— Penalties for ordinance violations, G.S. § 7-148(c)(10)(A). 


Secs. 6-117—6-145. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE III. - ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESSES 


Sec. 6-146. - Short title. 
    This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Adult-Oriented Business Article for the Town of 
North Stonington." 
(Ord. of 12-23-1996(2), § I; Ord. of 8-5-2002, § I) 


Sec. 6-147. - Policy statement. 
    The Town Meeting of the Town of North Stonington, Connecticut, finds: 
(1) ?Adult-oriented establishments located in the Town of North Stonington require special 
supervision from the Town's public safety and zoning enforcement agencies in order to protect 
and preserve the health, safety and welfare of the patrons of such establishment, as well as the 
health, safety and welfare of the Town's citizens. 
(2) ?Statistics and studies performed by a substantial number of cities and towns in the United 
States indicate that: 
a. ?Large numbers of persons, primarily male, frequent such adult-oriented establishments, 
especially those which provide closed booths, cubicles, studios and rooms for the private 
viewing of so-called adult motion pictures and/or video tapes and/or live entertainment; and 
b. ?Persons under the age of 18 may be attracted to adult-oriented establishments and seek to 
enter or loiter about them without the knowledge or permission of their parents and 
guardians; and 
c. ?Closed booths, cubicles, studios and rooms within adult-oriented establishments have been 
used by patrons, clients or customers of such adult-oriented establishments for the 
purpose of engaging in certain sexual acts; and 
d. ?Male and female prostitutes have been known to frequent such establishments in order to 
provide sex for hire to the patrons, clients or customers of such establishments within such 
booth, cubicles, studios and rooms; and 
e. ?Doors, curtains, blinds and/or other closures installed in or on the entrances and/or exits of 
such booths, cubicles, studios and rooms which are closed while such booths, cubicles, 
studios and rooms are in use encourage patrons using such booths, cubicles, studios and 
rooms to engage in sexual acts therein with prostitutes, thereby promoting and 
encouraging prostitution and the commission of sexual acts which cause blood, semen and 
urine to be deposited on the floors and/or walls of such booths, cubicles, studios and 
rooms, which deposits could prove detrimental to the health and safety of other persons 
who may come into contact with such deposits; and 
f. ?The reasonable regulation and supervision of such adult-oriented establishments tend to 
discourage such sexual acts and prostitution, and thereby promote the health, safety and 
welfare of the patrons, clients and customers of such establishments. 
(3) ?The continued unregulated operation of adult-oriented establishments, including, without 
limitation, those specifically cited at Subsection (1) hereof, is and would be detrimental to the 
general welfare, health and safety of the citizens of North Stonington. 
(4) ?The Constitution and laws of the State of Connecticut grant to the Town powers, especially 
police power, to enact reasonable legislation and measures to regulate and supervise adult-
oriented establishments as hereinafter defined in order to protect the public health, safety and 
welfare. 
(5) ?It is not the intent of the Town Meeting, in enacting this section, to deny any person rights to 
speech protected by the United States Constitution and/or State Constitution, nor is it the intent 
of the Town Meeting to impose any additional limitations or restrictions on the contents of any 
communicative materials, including sexually oriented films, video tapes, books and/or other 
materials. 
(6) ?Further, by enacting this section, the Town Meeting does not intend to deny or restrict the 
rights of any adult to obtain and/or view any sexually oriented materials protected by the United 
States Constitution and/or State Constitution, nor does it intend to restrict or deny any 
constitutionally protected rights that distributors or exhibitors of such sexually oriented materials 
may have to sell, distribute or exhibit such material. 
(Ord. of 12-23-1996(2), § II; Ord. of 8-5-2002, § II) 


Sec. 6-148. - Definitions. 
(a) ?The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings 
ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Adult amusement machine includes any amusement machine that is regularly used for presenting 
material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to 
"specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas," as defined below, for observation by patrons. 
    Adult bookstore means an establishment having any portion of its stock and trade in books, films, 
video cassettes, or magazines and other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their 
emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified 
anatomical areas." This definition shall not apply to any establishment in which such materials are 
concealed so as not to permit the observation of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical 
areas" by the general public. 
    Adult entertainment means any exhibition of any motion pictures, videotapes, live performances, 
displays or dances of any type, which has as a significant or substantial portion of such performances any 
actual or simulated performance of "specified sexual activities" or exhibition and viewing of "specified 
anatomical areas." 
    Adult mini-motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of less than 50 persons 
regularly used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, 
describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" for observation by 
patrons therein. 
    Adult motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons 
regularly used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, 
describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" as defined below for 
observation by patrons therein. 
    Adult-oriented establishment shall include, without limitation, "adult bookstores," "adult motion 
picture theaters," "adult mini-motion picture theaters," and commercial establishments containing one or 
more "adult amusement machines." "Adult-oriented establishment" further means any premises to which 
the public, patrons or members are invited or admitted and which are so physically arranged as to provide 
booths, cubicles, rooms, studios, compartments or stalls separate from the common areas of the 
premises for the purpose of viewing adult entertainment when such establishment is operated or 
maintained for a profit, direct or indirect. 
    Amusement machine includes any machine which upon the payment of a charge or upon the 
insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate or disk, may be operated by the public for use as a game, 
entertainment or amusement, whether or not registering a score and whether or not electronically 
operated. 
    Chief of Police shall mean the First Selectman of the Town of North Stonington or his designee. 
    Employee means any and all persons, including independent contractors, who work in or at or render 
any services directly related to the operation of an adult-oriented establishment. 
    Entertainer means any person who provides entertainment within an adult-oriented establishment as 
defined in this section, whether or not a fee is charged or accepted for entertainment and whether or not 
entertainment is provided as an employee or an independent contractor. 
    Inspector means an employee of the Director of Public Health, the Zoning Enforcement Officer, the 
Building Inspector, any Resident State Trooper, any Officer or member of the North Stonington Police 
Department, the Fire Marshal, and any person to whom any of those officials or the Board of Selectmen 
may delegate the duty to perform functions under this section. 
    Minor shall be deemed to refer to a person under the age of 18 years. 
    Operator means any person, partnership or corporation operating, conducting or maintaining an 
"adult oriented establishment." 
    Specified anatomical areas means: 
(1) ?Less than completely and opaquely covered: 
a. ?Human genitals and pubic region; 
b. ?Buttocks; 
c. ?Female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and 
(2) ?Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely opaquely covered. 
    Specified sexual activities means: 
(1) ?Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; 
(2) ?Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy; 
(3) ?Fondling or erotic touching of human genital, pubic region, buttocks or female breasts. 
(b) ?The terms "specified anatomical areas" and "specified sexual activities" as used in this section do 
not include materials depicted in any medical publications or films, in any bona fide educational 
publications or films, any art or photography publications which devote at least 25 percent of the 
lineage of each issue to articles and advertisements dealing with subjects of art or photography, in 
any news periodical which reports or describes current events and which, from time to time, 
publishes photographs of nude or semi-nude persons in connection with the dissemination of the 
news, or in publications or show photographs or depictions of nude or semi-nude persons when 
describing cultures in which nudity or semi-nudity is indigenous to the population. 
(Ord. of 12-23-1996(2), § III; Ord. of 8-5-2002, § III) 


Sec. 6-149. - Operating requirement. 
(a) ?License required. 
(1) ?Except as provided in Subsection (a)(4) below, from and after the effective date of the 
ordinance from which this section is derived, it shall be unlawful for any person, partnership or 
corporation to engage in, conduct, or carry on or permit to be engaged in, conducted, or carried 
on, in or upon any premises in the Town, the operation of an adult-oriented establishment 
without first obtaining a license to operate from the North Stonington Chief of Police. 
(2) ?A license may be issued for only one adult-oriented establishment located at a fixed and 
certain place. Any person, partnership, or corporation which desires to operate more than one 
adult-oriented establishment must have a license for each. 
(3) ?It shall be a violation of this article for any entertainer, employee, owner, or operator to 
knowingly work in or about, or to knowingly perform any service directly related to the operation 
of any unlicensed adult-oriented establishment. 
(4) ?All existing adult-oriented establishments at the time of the passage of this article must submit 
an application for a license within 60 days of the effective date of this article. If no application is 
filed within said 60-day period, then such existing adult-oriented establishment shall cease 
operations. 
(5) ?Each license shall be specific to a licensee and to a location and may not be sold, assigned or 
transferred to any person, corporation or partnership in any way. 
(b) ?No operator or employee of an adult-oriented establishment shall allow or permit any minor to enter 
into such establishment or to loiter upon the grounds and parking lot of such establishment. 
(c) ?Each adult-oriented establishment shall display prominently a sign in the dimensions of 24 inches by 
24 inches outside each entrance bearing the words "Adult-Oriented Establishment — Persons Under 
18 Not Admitted" in white letters against a red background. 
(d) ?No adult-oriented establishment shall be conducted in such a manner that permits the observation 
of any material depicting specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas from the outside of 
the building that houses the adult-oriented establishment. 
(e) ?Every adult-oriented establishment doing business in the Town on and after the effective date of the 
ordinance from which this article is derived shall be well lighted at all times and be physically 
arranged in such a manner that the entire interior portion of the booths, cubicles, rooms or stalls, 
wherein adult entertainment is provided, shall be clearly visible from the common areas of the 
premises. Visibility into such booths, cubicles, rooms or stalls shall not be blocked or obscured by 
doors, curtains, partitions, drapes, or any other obstruction whatsoever. After the effective date of the 
ordinance from which the article is derived, it shall be unlawful to install enclosed booths, cubicles, 
rooms or stalls within adult-oriented establishments for the purpose of viewing adult entertainment. 
(f) ?The operator of each adult-oriented establishment shall be responsible for and shall provide that any 
room or other area used for the purpose of viewing adult entertainment shall be well lighted and 
readily accessible at all times and shall be continuously open to view in its entirety. The premises 
shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to 
which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than 1.0 footcandle as measured at 
the floor level. It shall be the duty of the operator and its agents to ensure that the illumination 
described above is maintained at all times that any patron is present on the premises. 
(g) ?Every act or omission by an employee constituting a violation of the provisions of this article shall be 
deemed the act or omission of the operator if the operator, or as a result of the operator's negligent 
failure to supervise the employee's conduct, and the operator shall be punishable for such act or 
omission in the same manner as if the operator committed the act or caused the omission. 
(h) ?An operator shall be responsible for the conduct of all employees while on the licensed premises, 
and any act or omission of any employee constituting a violation of the provisions of this article shall 
be deemed the act or omission of the operator for purposes of determining whether the operator 
shall be subject to the penalties imposed by this article. All adult-oriented establishments shall be 
open to inspection at all reasonable times by inspectors or such other persons as the Town Meeting 
may designate. 
(i) ?No adult-oriented establishment shall be permitted on a site that is less than 500 feet from an area 
zoned residential or from a nonconforming residential use. The 500 feet shall be the straight 
horizontal distance from any boundary line of a parcel of land upon which a building housing an 
adult-oriented establishment is located to any boundary of a zoning district that is zoned for 
proposed or existing residential use or to said nonconforming residential use. 
(j) ?No adult-oriented establishment shall be permitted on a site that is less than 1,000 feet from an 
existing adult-oriented establishment. The 1,000 feet shall be the straight horizontal distance from 
any boundary line of a parcel of land upon which a building housing an adult-oriented establishment 
exists to any other proposed building housing an adult-oriented establishment. 
(k) ?No adult-oriented establishment shall be permitted on a site that is less than 2,000 feet from a public 
park, preexisting school, including a licensed daycare (whether public or private), or place of 
worship, meaning to include parish houses and convents. The 2,000 feet shall be the straight 
horizontal distance from any boundary line of a parcel of land upon which the proposed building 
housing an adult-oriented establishment to any boundary line of a parcel of land used as a public 
park or upon which a building housing a school or place of worship as defined herein exists. 
(Ord. of 12-23-1996(2), § IV; Ord. of 8-5-2002, § IV) 


Sec. 6-150. - Application for license. 
(a) ?Any person, partnership or corporation desiring to secure a license shall make application to the 
Chief of Police. The application shall be obtained from and filed in triplicate with and dated by the 
Town Clerk. A copy of the filled-out application shall be distributed promptly by the Town Clerk to the 
Chief of Police and to the applicant. 
(b) ?The application for a license shall be upon a form provided by the Town Clerk as provided in 
Appendix A hereto, the terms of which are incorporated in this section. An applicant for a license, 
which shall include all partners or limited partners of a partnership applicant, and all officers or 
directors of a corporate applicant and all stockholders holding more than five percent of the stock of 
a corporate applicant, or any other person who is interested directly in the ownership or operation of 
the business, shall furnish the following information under oath: 
(1) ?Name and address, including all aliases. 
(2) ?Written proof that the individual is at least 18 years of age. 
(3) ?All residential addresses of the applicant for the past ten years. 
(4) ?The applicant's height, weight, color of eyes and hair. 
(5) ?The business, occupation or employment of the applicant for ten years immediately preceding 
the date of application. 
(6) ?Whether the applicant previously operated in this or any other county, town, city or state under 
an adult-oriented establishment license or similar business license, whether the applicant has 
ever had such a license revoked or suspended, the reason therefor, and the business entity or 
trade name under which the applicant operated that was subject to the suspension or 
revocation. 
(7) ?All criminal statutes, whether federal or State, or Town section violation convictions, forfeiture 
of bond and pleading of nolo contendere on all charges, except minor traffic violations. 
(8) ?Fingerprints and two portrait photographs at least two inches by two inches of the applicant. 
(9) ?The address of the adult-oriented establishment to be operated by the applicant. 
(10) ?If the applicant is a corporation, the applicant shall specify the name of the corporation, the 
date and state of incorporation, the name and address of the registered agent and the name 
and address of all shareholders owning more than five percent of the stock in said corporation 
and all officers and directors of the corporation. 
(c) ?Within 75 days of receiving an application for a license the Chief of Police shall notify the applicant 
whether the application is granted or denied. The Chief of Police shall grant the application and issue 
the license only upon a favorable recommendation from the Resident State Troopers/North 
Stonington Police Department and upon the fulfillment of all of the following requirements: 
(1) ?The required fees have been paid. 
(2) ?The application conforms in all respects to the provisions of this section. 
(3) ?The applicant has not made a material misrepresentation of fact in the application. 
(4) ?That neither the applicant if an individual, nor any person financially interested if a corporation, 
or any of the partners including limited partners, nor the holder of any profit interest, nor the 
manager or other person principally in a charge of the operation of the proposed business has 
been convicted of, or pleaded nolo contendere or guilty to, any felony or to a misdemeanor 
involving moral turpitude. 
(5) ?The applicant has not had a license similar to the one issued pursuant to the provisions of this 
article issued by another local authority suspended or revoked for cause within the five-year 
period immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application. 
(6) ?The proposed business complies with all applicable laws of the Town of North Stonington 
Planning and Zoning Commission. 
(7) ?The applicant, manager or other person principally in charge of the operation of the business is 
at least 18 years of age. 
The Chief of Police shall deny the application if any or all of the requirements set forth in Subsections 
(c)(1)-(7) of this section have not been met. 
(d) ?Whenever an application is denied, the Chief of Police shall advise the applicant in writing of the 
reasons for such action. 
(e) ?Failure or refusal of the applicant to give any information relevant to the investigation of the 
application, or his or her refusal or failure to appear at any reasonable time and place for 
examination under oath regarding said application, or his or her refusal to submit to or cooperate 
with any investigation required by this article shall constitute an admission by the applicant that he or 
she is ineligible for such license and shall be grounds for denial thereof by the Chief of Police. 
(Ord. of 12-23-1996(2), § V; Ord. of 8-5-2002, § V) 
Editor's note— Appendix A, referred to in this section, is not printed herein but is on file in the 
offices of the Township Clerk. 


Sec. 6-151. - Standards for issuance of license. 
(a) ?To receive a license to operate an adult-oriented establishment, an applicant must meet the 
following standards: 
(1) ?Individual. If the applicant is an individual: 
a. ?The applicant shall be at least 18 years of age. 
b. ?The applicant shall not have been convicted of or pleaded nolo contendere to a felony or 
any crime involving moral turpitude, prostitution, obscenity or other crime of a sexual 
nature in any jurisdiction within five years immediately preceding the date of the 
application. 
c. ?The applicant shall not have been found to have previously violated this article within five 
years immediately preceding the date of the application. 
(2) ?Corporation. If the applicant is a corporation: 
a. ?All officers, directors and stockholders required to be named under Section 6-150(b) shall 
be at least 18 years of age. 
b. ?No officer, director or stockholder required to be named under Section 6-150(b) shall have 
been convicted of or pleaded nolo contendre to a felony or crime involving moral turpitude, 
prostitution, obscenity or other crime of a sexual nature in any jurisdiction within five years 
immediately preceding the date of the application. 
c. ?No officer, director or stockholder required to be named under Section 6-150(b) shall have 
been found to have previously violated this article within five years immediately preceding 
the date of the application. 
(3) ?Organization. If the applicant is a partnership, joint venture, or any other type of organization 
where two or more persons have a financial interest: 
a. ?All persons having a financial interest in the partnership, joint venture or other type of 
organization shall be at least 18 years of age. 
b. ?No persons having a financial interest in the partnership, joint venture or other type of 
organization shall have been convicted of or pleaded nolo contendere to a felony or any 
crime involving moral turpitude, prostitution, obscenity or other crime of a sexual nature in 
any jurisdiction within five years immediately preceding the date of the application. 
c. ?No person having a financial interest in the partnership, joint venture or other type of 
organization shall have been found to have violated any provision of this article within five 
years immediately preceding the date of the application. 
(b) ?No license shall be issued unless the Resident State Troopers/North Stonington Police Department 
have investigated the applicant's qualifications to be licensed. The results of that investigation shall 
be filed in writing with the Chief of Police no later than 60 days after the date of the application. 
(Ord. of 12-23-1996(2), § VI; Ord. of 8-5-2002, § VI) 


Sec. 6-152. - Fees. 
    A license fee of in the amount established by the Town Meeting shall be submitted with the 
completed application for a license. If the application is denied, one-half of the fee shall be returned. 
(Ord. of 12-23-1996(2), § VII; Ord. of 8-5-2002, § VII) 


Sec. 6-153. - Renewal of license. 
(a) ?Application. Every license issued pursuant to this article will terminate at the expiration of one year 
from the date of issuance, unless sooner revoked, and must be renewed before operation is allowed 
in the following year. Any operator desiring to renew a license shall make application to the Chief of 
Police. The application of renewal must be filed not later than 60 days before the license expires. 
The application for renewal shall be obtained and filed in triplicate with and dated by the Town Clerk. 
A copy of the application for renewal shall be distributed promptly by the Town Clerk to the Chief of 
Police and to the operator. The application of renewal shall be upon a form as provided in Appendix 
A hereto, the terms of which are incorporated in this article, provided by the Town Clerk and shall 
contain such information and data, given under oath or affirmation, as is required for an application 
for a new license. 
(b) ?Fee. A license renewal fee in the amount established by the Town Meeting shall be submitted with 
the application for renewal. In addition to the renewal fee, a late penalty in the amount established by 
the Town Meeting shall be assessed against the applicant who files for a renewal less than 60 days 
before the license expires. If the application is denied, one-half of the total fees collected shall be 
returned. 
(c) ?Information concerning qualification. If the Resident State Troopers/North Stonington Police 
Department are aware of any information bearing on the operator's qualifications, that information 
shall be filed in writing with the Chief of Police. 
(Ord. of 12-23-1996(2), § VIII; Ord. of 8-5-2002, § VIII) 
Editor's note— Appendix A, referred to in this section, is not printed herein but is on file in the 
offices of the Township Clerk. 


Sec. 6-154. - Revocation of license. 
(a) ?Reasons for. The Chief of Police shall revoke a license for any of the following reasons: 
(1) ?Discovery that false or misleading information or data was given on any application or material 
facts were omitted from any application. 
(2) ?The operator or any employee of the operator violates any provision of this article or any rule or 
regulation adopted by the Board of Selectmen pursuant to this article; provided, however, that in 
the case of a first offense by an operator where the conduct was solely that of an employee, the 
penalty shall not exceed a suspension of 30 days if the Board shall find the operator had no 
actual or constructive knowledge of such violation and could not by the exercise of due 
diligence have had such actual or constructive knowledge. 
(3) ?The operator becomes ineligible to obtain a license. 
(4) ?Any cost or fee required to be paid by this article is not paid. 
(5) ?Any intoxicating liquor or cereal malt beverage is served or consumed on the premises of the 
adult-oriented establishment. 
(b) ?Written notice. The Chief of Police, before revoking or suspending any license, shall give the 
operator at least ten days' written notice of the charges against him, and the opportunity for a public 
hearing before the said Chief of Police. 
(c) ?Transfer of license. The transfer of a license or any interest in a license shall automatically and 
immediately revoke the license. 
(d) ?Waiting period for operator and premises. Any operator whose license is revoked shall not be 
eligible to receive a license for one year from the date of revocation. No location or premises for 
which a license has been issued shall be used as an adult-oriented establishment for six months 
from the date of revocation of the license. 
(e) ?Notice to Town Clerk. The Chief of Police shall give notice to the Town Clerk of any revocations or 
suspensions. 
(Ord. of 12-23-1996(2), § IX; Ord. of 8-5-2002, § IX) 


Sec. 6-155. - Appeal. 
(a) ?Application for hearing. Within five days of receipt of notification of a denial, suspension, or 
nonrenewal of a license, the applicant/licensee may submit a written application to the Town Clerk 
requesting a public hearing before the Board of Selectmen. At such hearing the applicant/licensee 
shall have the opportunity to present evidence bearing upon the question. If the applicant/licensee 
makes application for a hearing within five days of notification of a denial, suspension, or 
nonrenewal, a hearing shall be scheduled to take place no later than 15 days from date of the 
application for such hearing. A notice of hearing shall be posted not less than ten days before the 
date of such hearing in a conspicuous place on the property of the adult-oriented establishment. 
Immediately after such hearing, the Board of Selectmen shall enter their vote to either sustain or 
overrule the denial, suspension, or nonrenewal. Within five days after such hearing, the Board of 
Selectmen shall issue written notice of a final decision, and issue any license where applicable. All 
operations of the adult-oriented establishment shall be maintained, pending the final decision being 
issued by the Board of Selectman. 
(b) ?Appeal to superior court. Any denial, nonrenewal, suspension or revocation of a license that is 
sustained in a written decision after a hearing as provided for in Subsection (a) above, shall be 
appealable to the superior court within 15 days of written notice thereof by any person aggrieved in 
accordance with the procedure established for zoning appeals by the Connecticut General Statutes. 
Any denial of renewal, suspension or revocation shall be stayed during the appeal unless otherwise 
ordered by the superior court. 
(Ord. of 8-5-2002, § X) 


Secs. 6-156—6-178. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE IV. - TOBACCO VENDING MACHINES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Local regulation of tobacco vending machines preserved, G.S. § 12-289a(h). 


Sec. 6-179. - Findings. 
    The following findings are made by the Town Meeting concerning tobacco vending machines: 
(1) ?G.S. §§ 53-344 and 53-344a make it unlawful for any person engaged in the manufacture or 
sale of cigarettes to sell, barter, give or deliver cigarettes to any individual under the age of 18 
years; 
(2) ?Cigarettes are most heavily advertised consumer product in the United States and the tobacco 
industry spends more than $8.24 billion on advertising and promotion of cigarettes; 
(3) ?Connecticut medical costs related to treating smoking related diseases exceeds $1 billion 
every year; 
(4) ?Tobacco kills more people than AIDS, alcohol, car accidents, murder, suicide, drugs and fire 
combined; 
(5) ?More than three million young people under the age of 18 consume more than 947 million 
packs of cigarettes annually in the United States, yielding gross sales to the tobacco industry 
each year of approximately $1 billion; 
(6) ?In Connecticut nearly one of every three high school students and 13 percent of middle school 
children used tobacco within the last 30 days; 
(7) ?Every year, 12,000 Connecticut children become daily smokers; 
(8) ?The average start smoking age in Connecticut is 11 years old; 
(9) ?Current laws and regulations have proved ineffective and inadequate in preventing the illegal 
purchase of cigarettes by children under the age of 18 years, particularly from cigarette vending 
machines; and 
(10) ?G.S. § 12-289a(h) authorizes a town or municipality to ban and significantly restrict the 
placement of vending machines for cigarettes, tobacco or smokeless tobacco products. 


Sec. 6-180. - Cigarette vending machines. 
    No person shall dispense, or cause to be dispensed, cigarettes, tobacco or smokeless tobacco 
products from vending machines at any location within the Town of North Stonington. A vending machine 
means a machine used for the purpose of automatically merchandising packaged cigarettes, tobacco or 
smokeless tobacco products after the proper amount of payment by the purchaser. 
(Ord. of 8-27-2001(2), §§ 1, 2) 


Secs. 6-181—6-190. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE V. - VENDORS, HAWKERS AND SOLICITORS 


Sec. 6-191. - Permit required for vending and hawking. 
    No person, except those exempted by the statutes of the state, shall vend or hawk upon the public 
streets, walks, or grounds of the Town any groceries, meats, provisions, fruits, goods, wares, or other 
merchandise at public or private sale or auction, or vend or peddle such articles from house to house 
within the Town, unless such person shall have a permit to do so from the first selectman. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2005, § 1) 


Sec. 6-192. - Permit required for soliciting orders of purchase for future delivery of goods, etc. 
    No person, over the age of 16 years shall solicit orders of purchase for future delivery of any goods, 
wares, or merchandise, including magazines and other printed matter, from door to door, or by telephone 
from and within the Town, or on any streets, walks, or grounds within the Town, unless such person shall 
have a permit to do so from the first selectman. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2005, § 2) 


Sec. 6-193. - Application. 
    An applicant for a permit shall complete an application blank provided by the first selectman which 
shall contain the following information: the name, home address, and local address, if any of the 
applicant; 
(1) ?A physical description of the applicant, setting forth the applicant's age, height, weight, color of 
hair and eyes; 
(2) ?The name and address of the person for whom home orders are to be solicited or filled; 
(3) ?The nature of the goods, wares or merchandise for which orders are to be solicited; 
(4) ?A statement as to whether the applicant has been convicted of any felony or misdemeanor in 
the previous three years and, if so, what; 
(5) ?A statement as to the period during which the applicant intends to solicit orders; 
(6) ?Such other credentials and other evidence of identity, including a photograph to be attached to 
the permit, and good moral character and conduct of the applicant may reasonably be required 
by the First Selectman. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2005, § 3) 


Sec. 6-194. - Issuance of permit; duration. 
    If the First Selectman shall determine after reasonable investigation, that the applicant is of good 
moral character and proposes to engage in lawful and legitimate enterprise, he shall then issue the permit 
for a period not to exceed one year. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2005, § 4) 


Sec. 6-195. - Permit fee. 
    There shall be a permit fee of $25.00 payable upon the issuance of the permit. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2005, § 5) 


Sec. 6-196. - Carrying and exhibition of permit; nontransferability. 
    A permit shall be nontransferable and shall be carried at all times by the permittee to whom issued, 
when engaged in the activities described in Section 6-191 and Section 6-192 hereof, and shall be 
exhibited by any such permittee whenever he shall be requested to do so by any Selectmen of the Town, 
police officer or any person solicited. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2005, § 6) 


Sec. 6-197. - Revocation of permit. 
    Any such permit may be revoked by the First Selectman for any false statement made by the 
applicant in the application for a permit or contained in the credentials or evidence furnished by him to 
secure a permit, for violation by the permittee of any of the ordinances of the Town or any state or federal 
law, or whenever the permittee shall in the judgment of the First Selectman cease to possess the 
character and qualifications required by this article for the issuance of such permit. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2005, § 7) 


Sec. 6-198. - Conduct. 
    Any person soliciting within the Town whether or not required to secure a permit under the provisions 
of this article shall: conduct himself at all times in an orderly and lawful manner; give a written receipt for 
all goods, wares or merchandise, or orders taken for same, which 
receipt shall be signed by the permittee and shall set forth a brief description of the items sold or ordered, 
the total purchase price thereof and the amount of the payment received by the permittee from the 
purchaser. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2005, § 8) 


Sec. 6-199. - Exceptions. 
    This article shall not apply to any salesman selling goods to retail or wholesale stores for resale, nor 
to any person soliciting funds or selling or taking orders for any goods, wares, and merchandise for or on 
behalf of any benevolent, educational, philanthropic, humane, patriotic or eleemosynary organization or 
institution. Any person who has or has had for the 12 months preceding the effective date of this article 
(April 27, 2006) a regular place of business or residence within the Town, and any person employed by or 
soliciting for any person employed by or soliciting for any person that or has had for 12 months preceding 
the effective date of this article, a regular place of business within the Town, and any person required to 
have a state license for the purpose of doing business shall not be required to secure permit, but all other 
provisions of this article shall apply to such persons. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2005, § 9; Ord. of 5-22-2018) 


Sec. 6-200. - Penalties. 
    In accordance with Connecticut General Statutes Section on Penalties. Any person who engages in 
the business of a peddler or hawker without complying with the provisions of any such ordinance shall be 
fined in accordance with Connecticut General Statutes. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2005, § 10) 


Secs. 6-201—6-220. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE VI. - FARMING 


Sec. 6-221. - Purpose. 
    Pursuant to the powers conferred upon by G.S. § 7-148(c)(7)(E), (c)(8), and (c)(10)(A), and in 
furtherance of the goals of G.S. § 19 a-341, the Town adopts this article to recognize the importance of 
protecting prime farmland, to identify those parcels for which preservation is a priority, and to foster 
farming as a way of life by declaring this municipality's support of the farmer's right to farm. 
(Ord. of 12-17-2007(1)) 


Sec. 6-222. - Definitions. 
    Except as otherwise specifically defined, the words "agriculture" and "farming" shall include 
cultivation of the soil, dairying, forestry, raising or harvesting of any agricultural or horticultural commodity, 
including the raising, shearing, feeding, caring for, training and management of livestock, including 
horses, bees, poultry, fur-bearing animals and wildlife, and the operation, management, conservation, 
improvement or maintenance of a farm and its buildings, tools and equipment, or salvaging timber or 
cleared land of brush or other debris left by a storm, as an incident to such farming operations; the 
production or harvesting of maple syrup or maple sugar, or any agricultural commodity, including lumber, 
as an incident to ordinary farming operations or the harvesting of mushrooms, the hatching of poultry, or 
the construction, operation or maintenance of ditches, canals, reservoirs or waterways used exclusively 
for packaging, processing, freezing, grading, storing or delivering to storage or to market, or to a carrier 
for transportation to market, or for direct sale any agricultural or horticultural commodity as an incident to 
ordinary farming operations, or, in preparation of such fruits or vegetables as an incident to the direct 
sale. Farmers sometimes work around the clock. Often that work involves the use of large farm 
implements. Daytime and nighttime peace and quiet can be disturbed by common agricultural practices, 
especially during the spring and fall field work seasons. 
    The term "farm" includes farm building, and greenhouses, hoophouses and other temporary 
structures or other structures used primarily for the raising and, as an incident to ordinary farming 
operations, the sale of agricultural or horticultural commodities. 
(Ord. of 12-17-2007(1)) 


Sec. 6-223. - The right to farm. 
    Notwithstanding any general statute or municipal ordinance or regulation pertaining to nuisances to 
the contrary, no agricultural or farming operation, place, establishment or facility, or any of its 
appurtenances, or the operation thereof, shall be deemed to constitute a nuisance, either public or 
private, due to alleged objectionable: 
(1) ?Odor from livestock, manure, fertilizer or feed; 
(2) ?Noise from livestock, or farm equipment used in normal, generally acceptable farming 
procedures; 
(3) ?Dust created during plowing or cultivation operations; 
(4) ?Use of chemicals, provided such chemicals and the method of their application conform to 
practices approved by the Commissioner of Environmental Protection, or, where applicable, 
Commissioner of Health Services; or 
(5) ?Water pollution from livestock or crop production activities, except the pollution of public or 
private drinking water supplies, provided such activities conform to acceptable management 
practices for pollution control approved by the Commissioner of Environmental Protection; 
provided such agricultural or farming operation, place, establishment or facility has been in 
operation for one year or more, and has not been substantially changed and such operation 
follows generally accepted agricultural practices. Inspection and approval of the agricultural or 
farming operation, place, establishment or facility by the Commissioner of Agriculture or his 
designee shall be prima facie evidence that such operation follows generally accepted 
agricultural practices. 
(Ord. of 12-17-2007(1)) 


Sec. 6-224. - Willful or reckless misconduct not protected. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply whenever a nuisance results from negligence or willful or 
reckless misconduct in the operation of any such agricultural or farming operation, place, establishment 
or facility, or any of its appurtenances. 
(Ord. of 12-17-2007(1)) 


Sec. 6-225. - Impact upon zoning. 
    Nothing contained in this article shall restrict the power of the Planning and Zoning Commission 
under G.S. ch. 124. The Commission is urged to adopt regulations consistent with this article, and to 
make the permanent preservation of farmland within this municipality, a criterion in its planning and policy 
decisions. 
(Ord. of 12-17-2007(1)) 


Chapter 7 - CIVIL EMERGENCIES 


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 


Secs. 7-1—7-18. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE II. - EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS AGENCY[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Emergency management, G.S. § 28-1 et seq. 


Sec. 7-19. - Established; director. 
(a) ?The Town of North Stonington, Connecticut, hereby establishes, in accordance with G.S. ch. 517 
(G.S. § 28-1 et seq.), the North Stonington Civil Preparedness Agency. 
(b) ?The North Stonington Civil Preparedness Agency shall be under the supervision and direction of a 
Director appointed by the Board of Selectmen to serve at its pleasure. With reasonable conformance 
to applicable federal and State statutes, the Director shall organize the agency into such subdivisions 
as may be necessary for the efficient conduct of the business of agency. 
(Ord. of 3-22-1979(1), § 1) 
State Law reference— Local organization required, G.S. § 28-7(a). 


Sec. 7-20. - Advisory Council. 
    There shall be a Civil Preparedness Advisory Council appointed by the Board of Selectmen to advise 
it in civil preparedness matters and policy. The Council members shall serve for two years concurrent with 
the terms of office of the members of the Board of Selectmen. The Advisory Council shall consist of not 
less than five nor more than nine members. 
(Ord. of 3-22-1979(1), § 2; Ord. of 5-22-2018) 
State Law reference— Advisory council required, G.S. § 28-7(b). 


Sec. 7-21. - Responsiblities. 
    The Agency shall be responsible for the development and maintenance of current plans and 
programs that may be needed in response to an emergency caused by enemy attack upon this country or 
by any natural or man-made disaster. 
(Ord. of 3-22-1979(1), § 3) 


Sec. 7-22. - Equipment and supplies. 
    This Agency is empowered, subject to the budget approved by Town Meeting, to obtain needed 
equipment and supplies to fulfill its responsibilities. 
(Ord. of 3-22-1979(1), § 4) 


Sec. 7-23. - Emergency powers of First Selectman. 
    In an emergency situation, the First Selectman is in full charge of all Town personnel and equipment 
and the Director of the Civil Preparedness Agency shall act as his advisor and chief of staff in directing 
the Town's emergency response activities. In a disaster situation, the First Selectman is empowered to 
apply to the State and also through the State to federal agencies for any appropriate disaster assistance 
that may be made available. 
(Ord. of 3-22-1979(1), § 5) 


Chapter 8 - COURTS 


Sec. 8-1. - Maximum number of Justices of the Peace. 
    The number of Justices of the Peace for the Town of North Stonington shall be 30. 
(Ord. of 12-15-1986(2)) 
State Law reference— Authority to provide lesser number, G.S. § 9-183a. 


Chapter 9 - ENVIRONMENT 


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 


Sec. 9-1. - Conservation Commission. 
(a) ?Created. The Town of North Stonington does hereby authorize the creation of a new Commission, 
whose name shall be the North Stonington Conservation Commission. 
(b) ?Powers and duties. The Commission shall have the powers and duties as set forth in G.S. § 7-131a. 
(c) ?Appointment. The members and alternate members of this Commission shall be appointed by the 
First Selectman of North Stonington, to serve for terms as designated in this section. Such alternate 
members, when seated, shall have all the powers and duties of a member of the Commission. The 
First Selectman may remove any member or alternate member for cause, and may fill any vacancy. 
(d) ?Terms of office. The original membership of the North Stonington Conservation Commission shall 
consist of a total of five members and two alternate members whose terms are as follows: one 
member for a term of one year, one member for a term of two years, one member for a term of three 
years, one member for a term of four years, and one member for a term of five years, and one 
alternate member for a term of two (years and one alternate member for a term of three years; 
thereafter, members and alternate members shall be appointed for a term of five years or until their 
successors are appointed and qualified. 
(e) ?Membership requirements. The members of the North Stonington Conservation Commission shall 
be electors of the Town of North Stonington, and they shall not hold any salaried position in the 
Town of North Stonington. 
(Ord. of 9-8-2003(2)) 
State Law reference— Authority to create Conservation Commission, G.S. § 7-131a. 


Sec. 9-2. - Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission. 
(a) ?Created. The Town of North Stonington, Connecticut, does hereby authorize the creation of a new 
Commission, whose name shall be the North Stonington Inland Wetlands and Watercourses 
Commission, which Commission shall be the agency responsible for regulating activities that affect 
the inland wetlands and watercourses of the Town of North Stonington pursuant to G.S. § 22-a-42. 
The Commission shall consist of seven (7) regular members and no alternate members. 
(b) ?Powers and duties. The North Stonington Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission shall 
have all the powers and duties by law, and shall administer the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses 
Regulations, which are currently in effect in the Town of North Stonington, and shall develop, adopt, 
and administer any amendments to such regulations, in conformity with regulations promulgated by 
the Commissioner of the Connecticut Department of Energy and Environmental Protection, for the 
purpose of protecting and preserving inland wetlands and watercourses within the Town of North 
Stonington. 
(c) ?Appointment. The members of the North Stonington Inland Wetlands and Watercourses 
Commission shall be appointed by the Board of Selectmen, to serve a term of five years. 
(d) ?Terms of office. As terms expire, or as vacancies occur, the Board of Selectmen shall appoint 
successors to fill the vacated terms. 
(e) ?Membership requirements. The members of the North Stonington Inland Wetlands and 
Watercourses Commission shall be electors of the Town of North Stonington, and they shall not hold 
any salaried position in the Town of North Stonington. 
(Ord. of 9-8-2003(1); Ord. of 5-22-2018) 
State Law reference— Authority to create Commission, G.S. § 22-a-42; powers generally, G.S. 
22a-36—22a-45a. 


Secs. 9-3—9-20. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE II. - WATER POLLUTION CONTROL AUTHORITY[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— An Ord. of September 25, 2000, added material to the Code pertaining to the Water 
Pollution Control Authority. In order to facilitate codification and keep related material together, Article II 
has been added at the discretion of the editor. Additionally former § 9-3 has been renumbered as § 9-21 
to include it with other material that pertains to the same subject. 


Sec. 9-21. - Water Pollution Control Authority. 
(a) ?Established. There shall be a Water Pollution Control Authority in the Town of North Stonington with 
all powers granted under law. 
(b) ?Terms. The Water Pollution Control Authority shall consist of five members to be appointed by the 
Board of Selectmen for terms of two years. 
(c) ?Membership requirements. The members of the Water Pollution Control Authority shall be residents 
of the Town of North Stonington, and if any member shall cease to be a resident of the Town, his 
office shall be deemed vacant. The members of the Water Pollution Control Authority shall serve 
without salary. 
(Ord. of 1-31-1972(2), §§ 1—3; Ord. of 2-25-1980, § 1; Ord. of 9-18-2017) 
State Law reference— Water pollution control authorities, G.S. § 7-246. 


Sec. 9-22. - Regulations established by Authority. 
    These regulations for the use of sewerage systems within the Town of North Stonington are hereby 
established by the North Stonington Water Pollution Control Authority ("Authority") in accordance with the 
provisions of G.S. Ch. 103 (specifically, § 7-247). 
(Ord. of 9-25-2000, Art. I) 


Sec. 9-23. - Purpose. 
    These regulations are established to fulfill the objectives set forth in the North Stonington Water 
Pollution Control Plan adopted by the Authority on January 18, 1994 (the "plan"), as it may be amended. 
The findings, policies and objectives set forth in that plan are hereby adopted and incorporated herein by 
reference. It is specifically the purpose of these regulations to further the policy of sewer avoidance within 
the Town of North Stonington, but to provide municipal sewerage facilities to specific and limited areas 
within the Town in order to fulfill the Town's objectives for targeted industrial and other business-related 
nonresidential growth. Therefore, these regulations provide for the extension of municipal sewers only to 
those specific properties located within the North Stonington Sewer District, as established under Section 
9-25. 
    It is further the purpose of these regulations to prevent, minimize, and remediate the pollution of 
surface water and groundwater caused by the subsurface disposal of sewage. 
(Ord. of 9-25-2000, Art. II) 


Sec. 9-24. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of these regulations, the following terms shall be defined as follows: 
    Community sewerage system shall have the meaning set forth in G.S. § 7-245 of the Connecticut 
General Statutes (1997), as amended. 
    Delegated private sewerage system shall mean a private sewerage system for which the Town of 
North Stonington has delegated the power of review and approval to the North Stonington Water Pollution 
Control Authority. 
    Municipal sewerage system shall mean a sewerage system owned or operated by the Town of North 
Stonington, the Town of Stonington, or both. 
    Private sewerage system shall mean any sewage disposal system that is designed to provide for the 
disposal of 2,000 gallons or more of sewage per day, and that is not operated or proposed to be operated 
by a municipality, or by a municipal, state or federal agency. 
    Sewage shall mean any substance, liquid or solid, that may contaminate, pollute, or affect the 
cleanliness or purity of any water. 
    Sewerage system shall mean any device, equipment, appurtenance, facility and method for 
collecting, transporting, receiving, treating, disposing of or discharging sewage. 
(Ord. of 9-25-2000, Art. III) 


Sec. 9-25. - Use of the municipal sewerage system. 
(a) ?Establishment of sewer district. The Authority hereby establishes a sewer district to be known as the 
North Stonington Sewer District (the "sewer district"). The lands comprising the sewer district are 
specifically limited to the following areas: 
(1) ?The area comprising the OR zoning district, as depicted on the official zoning map of the Town 
of North Stonington as of the effective date of these regulations (9-25-2000, and as of October 
2014, said land is now part of the Economic Development District. 
(2) ?The area comprising that portion of the HC zoning district located at the northeast corner of the 
intersection of Connecticut Routes 2 and 184, as depicted on the official zoning map of the 
Town of North Stonington as of the effective date of these regulations (9-25-2000, and as of 
October 2014, said land is now part of the Economic Development District. No other portion of 
the HC zoning district is included in the sewer district. 
(3) ?The contiguous land area owned by the State of Connecticut as of the effective date of these 
regulations (9-25-2000) and located immediately south of Connecticut Route 617 and west of 
Connecticut Route 49 (as of October 2014, said land is now part of the Economic Development 
District). 
The establishment of the sewer district is not intended, and shall not be deemed, to create any private or 
public rights to connect to the municipal sewerage system. The fact that a lot or parcel of land is located 
within the sewer district shall not, in and of itself, be a sufficient basis for the authority to allow a 
connection to the municipal sewerage system. Rather, the authority shall permit such connection only for 
the following lots or parcels within the sewer district, subject, however, to the provisions of subsection (c) 
of this section: 
(1) ?Properties that have been identified by the authority as having subsurface sewage disposal 
systems that, as of the effective date of these regulations, had already failed and that are 
incapable of being repaired or replaced on-site due to physical limitations and public health 
code requirements; 
(2) ?Properties that are zoned for industrial or other business-related, nonresidential development 
and that are served by a metered water-supply system; 
(3) ?Properties allowed to be connected to the municipal sewerage system in accordance with 
subsection (b) of this section. 
It is specifically the intention of the Authority and the purpose of these regulations to exclude from 
connection to the municipal sewerage system any properties not included in the categories set forth 
above or described in subsection (b) of this section, regardless of whether such excluded properties are 
within the sewer district or are proximate to the sewer line. Such exclusion is deemed by the Authority to 
be necessary to further the policy of sewer avoidance and to reserve the available capacity of the 
municipal sewerage system, as it may be provided under any intermunicipal agreement or agreements 
between the Town of Stonington and the Town of North Stonington, for properties to be developed for 
industrial or other business-related, nonresidential uses. 
(b) ?Connection of other properties to the municipal sewerage system. As set forth in subsection (a) of 
this section, it is the intention of the Authority that no properties other than those specifically 
identified in subsection (a) of this section be connected to the municipal sewerage system, 
regardless of whether such other properties may be near, abut, or contain any portion of the 
municipal sewerage system. Nonetheless, the Authority may allow the connection of other properties 
to the municipal sewerage system if, and only if, all of the following criteria have been met: 
(1) ?The connection of such property to the municipal sewerage system must be necessary to 
remedy the failure of a subsurface sewage disposal system; 
(2) ?The Authority must be provided with written certifications by a professional engineer properly 
licensed within the State of Connecticut and by the Ledge Light Health District, or a Town 
consultant having equivalent qualifications, that it is not feasible to repair or replace the failed 
septic system on-site and that all administrative remedies under the Connecticut Public Health 
Code, including the possibility of waivers or variances, have been exhausted; 
(3) ?The failed septic system must either have been: 
a. ?In existence on the date of adoption of these Regulations; or 
b. ?Constructed after the date of adoption of these Regulations in accordance with all then-
existing local, state, and federal land-use, health, and environmental laws (including, but 
not limited to, statutes, ordinances, regulations and codes), subject to the additional 
provisions set forth below. 
(4) ?The property to be connected must either: 
a. ?Abut a portion of the municipal sewerage system already in existence; or 
b. ?Abut another lot that is already served by, or that abuts any portion of the municipal 
sewerage system already in existence, 
Provided the Authority may refuse to allow the connection of any property to the municipal 
sewerage system if the remediation of the septic-system failure on such property would require 
the extension of the municipal sewer line by more than 200 feet (not including the length of any 
private sewer lateral line necessary to connect the failed septic system to the municipal 
sewerage system); and 
(5) ?The Authority must find that there is sufficient excess capacity available in the municipal 
sewerage system to accommodate the additional wastewater flows under any intermunicipal 
agreement or agreements the Town of North Stonington may have with the Town of Stonington. 
A septic system constructed after the date of adoption of regulations shall not be deemed to have been 
constructed in accordance with the provisions of subsection (3), above, unless the applicable laws would 
have allowed the construction of the septic system regardless of the existence or planned extension of 
the municipal sewerage system. 
(c) ?Power of authority to refuse connection. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (a) and (b) of 
this section, the Authority reserves the power and right to refuse to allow any property, whether 
within or outside of the sewer district, to connect to the municipal sewerage system. Such refusal 
may be made if, in the judgment of the Authority, the proposed connection would result in 
wastewater flows of a volume or character that would, or could reasonably be expected to, have an 
adverse effect on any portion of the municipal sewerage system, including that portion located within 
the Town of Stonington. For purposes of this section, the term "adverse effect" includes, but is not 
limited to, overloading or chemical or physical damage to any portion of the municipal sewerage 
system. The Authority may also refuse to allow the connection of any property to the municipal 
sewerage system if, in the judgment of the Authority, the projected flow volumes would use up a 
substantial portion of the excess capacity available to the Town of North Stonington under any 
intermunicipal agreement or agreements with the Town of Stonington, and the Authority determines 
that the preservation of such excess capacity is necessary or desirable to accomplish other 
development objectives of the Town of North Stonington. 
In determining whether to refuse any request for connection to the municipal sewerage system, the 
Authority may also consider any potential impact of the use for which the connection has been proposed 
on groundwater quality and quantity, groundwater recharge, and existing and potential water supplies or 
water-supply sources. 
(d) ?Orders to connect. In accordance with G.S. § 7-257, the Authority may order the owner of any 
building to which the municipal sewerage system is available to connect the building to the system. 
No such order shall be issued until after a public hearing with respect thereto after due notice in 
writing to such property owner. Any owner aggrieved by such an order may appeal in accordance 
with the provisions of the General Statutes. If any owner fails to comply with an order to connect, the 
Authority shall cause the connection to be made and shall assess the expense thereof against such 
owner. It is the intention of the Authority that all properties within the sewer district having septic 
systems that have failed, and that cannot be replaced or repaired on site, be connected to the 
municipal sewerage system as soon as practicable after such connection becomes possible. 
(e) ?No increase in flows. The Authority recognizes that the capacity of the municipal sewerage system 
to receive sanitary sewage discharges from properties located within the Town of North Stonington 
may be limited by, among other things, intermunicipal agreements between the Town of North 
Stonington and the Town of Stonington. Therefore, it is the intention of the Authority that the average 
daily wastewater flows (measured on a monthly basis) from properties connected to the municipal 
sewerage system may not be significantly increased beyond permitted flows, as defined below, 
without the express written approval of the Authority. The permitted flow for any use shall be an 
average daily wastewater flow (measured on a monthly basis) that the Authority determines to be 
reasonably necessity for the conduct of an existing or proposed use. In making a determination as to 
the amount of any permitted flow, the Authority may consider any relevant information, including, but 
not limited to, available records of actual wastewater flows for existing uses. Any increase of more 
than five percent of 500 gallons per day, whichever is less, in a permitted flow shall be considered 
significant and shall not be allowed without the express written approval of the Authority. 
In order to facilitate the Authority's review of compliance with the provisions of these regulations, the 
owners or lessees of all nonresidential properties that are connected to the municipal sewerage system 
and that have projected or actual wastewater flows of 5,000 gallons per day or more shall be required to 
provide the Authority with written, daily records of the amounts of water usage on their respective 
properties. 
Compilations of such records shall be submitted to the Authority no less than once every three months. 
(f) ?Requirement of reporting land-use changes. In order that the Authority may properly monitor 
wastewater flows from properties connected to the municipal sewerage system, it is necessary that 
information regarding any significant changes to the uses of those properties be reported to the 
Authority. Therefore, any owner of property connected to the municipal sewerage system shall, prior 
to the construction of any additional buildings or structures on the property or any alteration of an 
existing building or structure that would increase its bulk volume, file with the Authority: 
(1) ?A written notice of intent to undertake such construction or alteration, together with sufficient 
plans to enable the Authority to understand and review the nature and potential effects of such 
construction or alteration on water usage; and 
(2) ?A written statement of the extent to which such construction or alteration, and the uses to which 
such new or altered buildings or structures may be put, may be reasonably expected to 
increase the average daily wastewater flows from the property. 
The Authority may refuse to allow the additional wastewater flow if it determines that the flow would 
either: 
(1) ?Exceed the capacity of the municipal sewerage system, as permitted under any intermunicipal 
agreement or agreements; or 
(2) ?Adversely affect any part or any process of the municipal sewerage system in the Town of 
North Stonington or the Town of Stonington. 
(g) ?Penalties for noncompliance. If the Authority finds that any connection has been made to the 
municipal sewerage system, or that any flows to the municipal sewerage system have been 
increased, in violation of any provision of these regulations, the Authority may order the 
disconnection of the noncomplying property from the municipal sewerage system, or may issue such 
other orders or take such other actions as may be allowed by law to bring such properties into 
compliance with these regulations. Except as provided hereafter, no such order shall be issued until 
after a public hearing with respect thereto after due notice in writing to such property owner. The 
Authority may issue such an order without first holding a hearing if it deems the immediate issuance 
of such order to be necessary to prevent imminent and substantial harm to any portion of the 
municipal sewerage system, whether located in the Town of North Stonington or the Town of 
Stonington; however, the Authority, shall, in such circumstances, provide an opportunity for a hearing 
as soon as practicable after issuing such order and shall provide due notice of the hearing in writing 
to the property owner. 
Nothing in this Article shall be deemed to prevent the Authority from taking immediate action to remediate 
or correct any condition or conditions that, in the judgment of the Authority, pose a threat of imminent and 
substantial harm to any portion of the municipal sewerage system, whether located in the Town of North 
Stonington or the Town of Stonington. 
(h) ?Assessments and sewer use charges. The Authority is hereby authorized to levy benefit 
assessments upon the lands and buildings located in the Town of North Stonington especially 
benefited by the acquisition, construction, or extension of the municipal sewerage system pursuant 
to these regulations, whether such lands or buildings abut on such system or not, and upon the 
owners of such land and buildings, according to such rules as the Authority may hereafter adopt, 
pursuant to the powers vested in the Authority under G.S. § 7-249, as amended, and subject to the 
right of appeal provided therein. In addition, the Authority may establish and revise fair and 
reasonable charges for connection with and for the use of the municipal sewerage system in 
accordance with the provisions of G.S. § 7-255, as amended, and subject to the right of appeal set 
forth herein. 
(i) ?Sewer connection approval and fees: Nonresidential and multifamily residential uses. 
(1) ?Approval required. Whenever it is proposed that property located in the Town of North 
Stonington be used for nonresidential or multifamily residential purposes, and that such property 
be connected to municipal sewerage facilities; or whenever any such use is proposed for 
property already connected to such facilities, such proposal must be reviewed by the Authority. 
No such connection shall be made without the approval of the Authority. 
(2) ?Application for approval. Any person who proposes to connect nonresidential or multifamily 
residential property located in the Town of North Stonington to municipal sewerage facilities, or 
to use an existing connection to such facilities for nonresidential or multifamily residential 
purposes, shall submit an application to the Authority on such forms as the Authority may 
require, together with sufficient information to demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the Authority, 
that the proposed sewerage system will comply with all applicable local, state and federal health 
and environmental laws ad regulations. 
(3) ?Fees for processing application. 
a. ?The application for such proposed connection or use of an existing connection shall pay a 
base fee of $500.00 to the Authority at the time of application. For purposes of these 
regulations, the "time of application" shall be the date upon which the applicant presents 
plans for the proposed connection or use to the Authority for review. The base fee is 
intended to offset, in part, the Town's costs for administrative and technical review and 
processing, including, but not limited to, publication of legal notices, preliminary review by 
Town administrative and technical staff, and hearing and transcription expenses. 
b. ?The applicant shall pay any further fees in an amount equivalent to the total amount of all 
fees and expenses charged by the Town of North Stonington's consultants and attorneys 
for engineering, environmental and legal review of the proposed connection or use of 
documents to be executed by the Town, the Authority, the applicant or others in connection 
with such review. Such additional fee must be paid in full before the connection is made or 
the use is established. 
c. ?The base fee and additional fees set forth in this section shall be in addition to, and not in 
lieu of, such other charges as may be established by law or regulation for the connection of 
property located in the Town of North Stonington to municipal sewerage facilities. 
(Ord. of 9-25-2000, Art. IV; Ord. of 5-22-2018) 


Sec. 9-26. - Community and delegated private sewerage systems. 
(a) ?Approval required. No community or delegated private sewerage system shall be constructed or 
operated without the review and approval of the Authority. 
(b) ?Application for approval. An applicant for approval of a proposed community or delegated private 
sewerage system shall submit an application to the Authority on such forms as the Authority may 
require, together with sufficient information to demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the Authority: 
(1) ?That the proposed community or delegated private sewerage system will comply with all 
applicable local, state, and federal health and environmental laws and regulations; 
(2) ?That the proposed community or delegated or delegated private sewerage system has been 
designed by a properly qualified civil engineer or other properly qualified professional; 
(3) ?That the proposed community or delegated private sewerage system will not cause 
unreasonable pollution to surface water or groundwater within the Town of North Stonington; 
(4) ?That the proposed community or delegated private sewerage system will be owned and 
managed in accordance with the criteria set forth in G.S. § 7-246f, as amended. 
(c) ?Fees for processing application. 
(1) ?The applicant for a proposed community or delegated private sewerage system shall pay a 
base fee of $500.00 to the Authority at the time of application. For purpose of these regulations, 
the "time of application" shall be the date upon which the applicant presents plans for the 
proposed community or delegated private sewerage system to the Authority for review. The 
base fee is intended to offset, in part, the Town's costs for administrative and technical review 
and processing, including, but not limited to, publication of any required legal notices, 
preliminary review by Town administrative and technical staff, and hearing and transcription 
expenses. 
(2) ?The applicant shall pay any further fees in an amount equivalent to the total amount of all fees 
and expenses charged by the Town's consultants and attorneys for engineering, environmental 
and legal review of the proposed connection and of documents to be executed by the Town, the 
Authority, the applicant or others in connection with such review. Such additional fee must be 
paid in full before the community or delegated private sewerage system is deconstructed. 
(3) ?The base fee and additional fees set forth in this section shall be in addition to, and not in lieu 
of, such other charges as may be established by law or regulation for the construction or 
operation of community or delegated private sewerage systems in the Town of North 
Stonington. 
(Ord. of 9-25-2000, Art. V; Ord. of 5-22-2018) 


Sec. 9-27. - Amendments. 
    These regulations may be amended by the Authority from time to time as it deems necessary. 
(Ord. of 9-25-2000, Art. VI) 


Sec. 9-28. - Authority to adopt regulations for the use of sewerage systems. 
(1) ?The power to adopt and amend regulations for the supervision, management, control, operation and 
use of sewerage systems within the Town of North Stonington shall be vested exclusively in the 
Water Pollution Control Authority of the Town of North Stonington to the extent allowed by state law, 
including, but not limited to, G.S. ch. 103, as it may be amended. 
(2) ?Any regulations adopted or amended, whether before or after the effective date of this section, by 
the Water Pollution Control Authority of the Town of North Stonington acting under its lawful scope of 
authority pursuant to G.S. ch. 103, as it may be amended, shall be deemed to supersede any 
contrary regulations previously adopted by town ordinance, including, but not limited to, the 
ordinance adopted by Town Meeting on September 25, 2000. 
(3) ?Nothing in this section shall be deemed to authorize the Water Pollution Control Authority of the 
Town of North Stonington to regulate sewerage systems except to the extent such authority is 
expressly delegated to water pollution control authorities by G.S. ch. 103, as it may be amended. 
(4) ?This section shall take effect 15 days after publication, in accordance with the Connecticut General 
Statutes. 
(Ord. of 1-24-2011) 
Editor's note— Ord. of Jan. 24, 2011 did not specify manner of inclusion. To facilitate 
indexing, said provisions have been codified as § 9-28 of this chapter. 


Chapter 11 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Public health and well-being, G.S. § 19a-1a et seq.; municipal health authorities, 
G.S. § 19a-200 et seq.; general health powers, G.S. § 7-148(c)(7)(H)(viii). 


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 


Secs. 11-1—11-18. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE II. - FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Food generally, G.S. § 21a-13 et seq.; State regulation of food and food 
establishments, G.S. § 19a-36a. 


DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 


Sec. 11-19. - Compliance with rules; license suspension. 
    The Director of Health, or his authorized representative, shall periodically survey the premises, 
equipment, and operation of all persons holding valid food-service, food-catering service, or itinerant 
food-vending license. If he finds that any licensee is operating in violation of the Public Health Code of the 
State of Connecticut, or other applicable statutes, ordinances, or rules and regulations, he shall issue an 
order to the licensee forthwith to take such measures as are necessary for full compliance with the said 
code. Any license issued under the terms of this article may be suspended by the Director of Health for a 
violation, by the licensee, of any of the terms of said code or other applicable statutes, ordinances, or 
rules and regulations. 
(Ord. of 10-3-1972, § 6) 


Sec. 11-20. - Plan submission. 
    When a food-service or food-catering service establishment is hereafter constructed, or when an 
existing structure is converted for use as a food-service or catering service establishment, properly 
prepared plans and specifications for such construction, remodeling, or alteration, showing layout 
arrangements, and construction materials of all areas, and the location, size, and facilities, shall be 
submitted to the Director of Health for approval before such work is begun. 
(Ord. of 10-3-1972, § 7) 


Sec. 11-21. - Adoption of State law. 
    The regulations adopted and promulgated by the State Commissioner of Public Health pursuant to 
G.S. § 19a-36a are hereby adopted by reference. 
(Ord. of 10-3-1972, § 9) 


Sec. 11-22. - Exemption. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to any nonprofit organization. 
(Ord. of 10-3-1972, § 12) 


Secs. 11-23—11-45. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 2. - LICENSES 


Sec. 11-46. - Required; display. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a food-service establishment, food-catering service, or 
an itinerant food-vending business in the Town of North Stonington who does not possess a valid license 
issued to him by the Director of Health. Such a license must be prominently displayed by the licensee, 
and no license issued under this article may be transferred from one person to another person, business, 
or establishment. 
(Ord. of 10-3-1972, § 1) 


Sec. 11-47. - Expiration. 
    Licenses so issued shall expire on June 30 of each year and may be renewed upon payment of the 
annual fee and presentation of a certificate from the Director of Health as evidence of inspection of such 
license within 90 days prior to June 30. 
(Ord. of 10-3-1972, § 2) 


Sec. 11-48. - Fee—Amount. 
    An annual fee in the amount established by the Town Meeting shall be charged for a license issued 
to a food-service establishment, food-catering service or an itinerant food-vending business. If more than 
one food-service establishment, place where food to be catered is prepared, or vehicle for itinerant food-
vending business is operated by the same owner, a separate license shall be required for each 
establishment and/or vehicle. 
(Ord. of 10-3-1972, § 2) 


Sec. 11-49. - Same—Collection. 
    The Clerk of the Town of North Stonington may issue licenses in the name of the Director of Health 
upon presentation of a valid certificate of a favorable inspection of the premises of the applicant. The fee 
collected upon issuance of the license will be paid to the Town Clerk and conveyed to the Town of North 
Stonington, Connecticut. 
(Ord. of 10-3-1972, § 3) 


Sec. 11-50. - Application. 
    Before a license may be issued to a new owner of an existing food-service establishment or food-
catering service or an owner of a new food-service establishment or food-catering service, an application 
for such a license must be filed with the Director of Health. Said application must contain the name of the 
owner and/or operator of the new food-service establishment, a description of the scope of the operation, 
the type of service and where provided. New applications shall be filed with the Town Clerk, who shall 
forward the applications to the Director of Health. The application must be accompanied by a fee of 
$10.00 which is paid to the Town Clerk and is nonrefundable. 
(Ord. of 10-3-1972, § 4) 


Sec. 11-51. - Compliance with Public Health Code. 
    Upon receipt of an application for a license, the Director of Health shall survey the premises and 
equipment of the applicant, and if the same are found to be in compliance with the Rules and Regulations 
of the Public Health Code of the State of Connecticut, and other applicable statutes, ordinances or rules 
and regulations of the North Stonington Health Department, he shall issue the applicant a valid license. 
(Ord. of 10-3-1972, § 5 ) 


Sec. 11-52. - Inspections to determine compliance. 
    The Director of Health, or his authorized representative, shall be permitted to enter, at any 
reasonable time, any food service or food-catering service establishment within the Town of North 
Stonington for the purpose of making inspections to determine compliance with this article. 
(Ord. of 10-3-1972, § 8) 


Sec. 11-53. - Penalty. 
    Any person who shall operate a food-service establishment, food-catering service, or itinerant food-
vending business without having applied for and received a license, or whose license has been 
suspended, as provided hereinabove, shall be deemed in violation of this article and shall be guilty of an 
offense. 
(Ord. of 10-3-1972, § 10) 


Secs. 11-54—11-90. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE III. - SEWERAGE SYSTEMS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance of December 17, 2007, repealed the former article III, §§ 11-91, 11-92, and 
enacted a new article III as set out herein. The former article III pertained to septic systems and derived 
from the ordinance of 11-14-1994(3), §§ 1, 2. 


Sec. 11-91. - Policy. 
(a) ?The regulation of sewerage systems in the Town is essential to protect the health and safety of the 
residents of the Town; and 
(b) ?Sewerage systems that are designed to operate for the disposal of 2,000 gallons or more of sewage 
per day, and that are not operated or proposed to be operated by a municipality, or by a municipal, 
state, or federal agency, are of particular concern because of the increased risk to public health and 
safety in event of failure of such systems; and 
(c) ?It is in the Town's interest to provide for a more thorough municipal review of systems prior to their 
construction and operation. 
(Ord. of 12-17-2007(2), § 1) 


Sec. 11-92. - Authorization. 
    It is hereby ordained that the North Stonington Water Pollution Control Authority is hereby 
authorized, pursuant to G.S. §§ 7-148(c) and 7-246f, to review and regulate the construction and 
operation of any sewerage system that is designed to provide for the disposal of 2,000 gallons or more of 
sewage per day and that is not operated or proposed to be operated by a municipality, or by a municipal, 
state or federal agency. The Authority may require the payment of reasonable fees to offset the expenses 
of its review of such systems. Such review and regulation shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, any 
other review or regulation required for such systems under any other applicable provision of law. The 
Authority is further authorized to establish and require the payment of benefit assessments and sewer 
use charges for properties which are connected to any such sewerage system. 
(Ord. of 12-17-2007(2), § 2) 


Chapter 12 - MANUFACTURED HOMES AND TRAILERS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Mobile manufactured homes and mobile manufactured home parks, G.S. § 21-64 
et seq.; mobile and modular homes, G.S. § 21-85 et seq.; general powers relative to trailers and trailer 
parks, G.S. § 7-148(c)(7)(A)(iv). 


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 


Secs. 12-1—12-18. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE II. - MOBILE HOME PARKS 


Sec. 12-19. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed 
to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Individual mobile home shall mean a mobile home parked or intended to be parked off the public 
highway on land other than a mobile home park for occupancy. 
    Mobile home shall mean such a trailer which is equipped with bathing facilities, flush toilet, and 
appropriate plumbing. Any trailer not so equipped shall be deemed a mobile home if such equipment is 
added to it. 
    Mobile home park shall mean a tract of land operated or to be operated commercially for the parking 
of two or more mobile homes or trailers for occupancy. 
    Occupied and occupancy shall mean the use of a mobile home or other trailer as living quarters. 
    Trailer shall mean any vehicle with or without wheels which is used or intended to be used as living 
quarters for a person or persons. 
(Ord. of 4-26-1962, § 1) 


Sec. 12-20. - Mobile home parks. 
(a) ?No person, firm or corporation shall establish mobile home park within the Town of North 
Stonington. 
(b) ?No person, firm or corporation shall maintain, conduct or operate a mobile home park or increase 
the number of mobile home sites in any mobile home park in the Town of North Stonington without 
first having obtained all appropriate permits from the Land Use Office as determined by the Zoning 
Enforcement Official. 
(Ord. of 4-26-1962, § 2; Ord. of 5-22-2018) 


Secs. 12-21—12-23. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted May 22, 2018, repealed §§ 12-21—12-23, which 
pertained to application and plan, public hearing, and license for mobile home park, and derived 
from an ordinance adopted April 26, 1962, §§ 3—5. 


Sec. 12-24. - Individual mobile homes. 
    No person, firm or corporation shall park for occupancy or shall occupy a mobile home parked off the 
public highways in the Town of North Stonington, other than as is permitted in the Zoning Regulations (as 
amended) for temporary use during the construction or significant repair of a residence. 
(Ord. of 4-26-1962, § 6; Ord. of 5-22-2018) 


Secs. 12-25—12-28. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted May 22, 2018, repealed §§ 12-25—12-28, which 
pertained to conversion to permanent home, emergencies, existing mobile home parks and 
existing individual mobile homes, and derived from an ordinance adopted April 26, 1962, §§ 7—
10. 


Sec. 12-29. - Miscellaneous provisions. 
(a) ?Substituting new home for one already licensed. No part of this article shall be construed as 
prohibiting any owner of a mobile home parked for occupancy in the Town of North Stonington on 
April 26, 1962, or licensed after such date from substituting a new mobile home for the one already 
parked or licensed. 
(b) ?Sale of mobile home; new owner. If the owner of any licensed mobile home shall sell such mobile 
home together with the lot on which it is parked, the new owner shall have the right to occupy the 
same. 
(c) ?Sale of lot with mobile home; new owner. If the owner of any lot on which a licensed mobile home is 
parked on April 26, 1962, shall sell such lot with such mobile home, the new owner of such lot shall 
have the right to occupy the same. 
(Ord. of 4-26-1962, § 11; Ord. of 5-22-2018) 


Secs. 12-30, 12-31. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted May 22, 2018, repealed §§ 12-30, 12-31, which pertained 
to revocation of license and failure to obtain license to, and derived from an ordinance adopted 
April 26, 1962, §§ 12, 13. 


Chapter 13 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— General powers of Town, G.S. § 7-148. 


Sec. 13-1. - Abandoned refrigerators. 
(a) ?Refrigerator defined. The term "refrigerator" shall be construed to mean any ice box, or similar box 
or cabinet, designed to preserve its contents, and equipped with a locking device, or devices 
operated manually, or automatically from the exterior thereof only, and large enough to admit or 
contain a child, without limits as to age. 
(b) ?Removal of doors, etc. No person, firm or corporation shall discard, store, abandon or otherwise 
dispose of any unused refrigerator, or similar receptacle, in any location which may be frequented by 
children, or which is available to children, without first having removed all doors, and locking devices 
of any kind, either manual or automatic. 
(c) ?Disposal in dumps. The disposal or dumping of any refrigerator or similar receptacle from which the 
doors have not been removed by any person, firm or corporation, in any "Public Dump" or "Private 
Dump" or to any area of this Town shall be deemed to be a violation of this Code and a nuisance. 
This provision shall apply to the owner of such refrigerator or similar receptacle, and to any person 
as agent who transports the same. 
(Ord. No. 1, §§ 1—3, 10-4-1954) 
State Law reference— Abandonment of refrigerator, G.S. § 53-215. 


Sec. 13-2. - Motorboats on Lake of Isles. 
(a) ?No person shall operate a power-driven boat upon Lake of Isles at a rate of speed of eight miles per 
hour or more. 
(b) ?No person shall operate a power-driven boat upon Lake of Isles in an unsafe, unreasonable or 
inconsiderate manner, having regard to the condition of traffic upon the Lake, weather and other 
conditions appertaining at the time. 
(Ord. of 12-13-1967) 
State Law reference— Local regulation of boats, G.S. § 15-136. 


Chapter 14 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to establish, operate and maintain parks and recreation facilities, G.S. § 
7-148(c)(6)(A)(i); park and recreation capital and nonrecurring expense fund authorized, G.S. § 7-129a. 


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 


Sec. 14-1. - Recreation Commission. 
(a) ?Established. There shall be a Recreation Commission in the Town of North Stonington with the 
powers to establish, maintain, sponsor and conduct recreation places, playgrounds, swimming and 
skating facilities, and with the authority to conduct, sponsor and promote recreation, play, sport and 
physical training. 
(b) ?Director. The Recreation Commission may employ a Director of Recreation and fix the Director's 
compensation subject to the Selectmen's prior approval. Additional part-time employees may be 
hired directly by the Recreation Commission with their salaries paid from monies for the appropriate 
program as are approved in advance in each year's current budget. 
(c) ?Expending monies. The Recreation Commission may expend monies budgeted to it in each current 
Town Budget for the purposes stated in this article. Any monies paid to or collected by the 
Recreation Commission for activities sponsored by the Commission shall be paid over to the General 
Fund of the Town and any indebtedness incurred by the Commission within said budget shall be 
paid from the General Fund. Gifts made specifically to the Recreation Commission for specific 
recreation purposes may be retained by the Commission in a special gift account until used for the 
intended purpose. 
(d) ?Members. The Recreation Commission shall consist of seven members who shall be residents of 
the Town of North Stonington and who shall be appointed by the Board of Selectmen for terms of 
two years. The members of the Recreation Commission shall serve without compensation. 
(e) ?When member deemed resigned; successor. If any member shall (i) cease to be a resident of the 
Town, or (ii) shall absent himself from the three consecutive regular meetings without the approval of 
the chairman, the member shall be deemed to have resigned and, if so deemed by the chairman, the 
Board of Selectmen shall appoint a successor to fill the unexpired term of said member. If it is 
determined by a majority vote of the Commission that the chairman has been absent from three 
consecutive meetings without good cause, he shall be deemed to have resigned and the Board of 
Selectmen shall appoint a successor to fill the unexpired term of said member. 
(f) ?Appeal of vacancy. Any member deemed to have resigned by reason of absence may within ten 
days of written notice petition the Board of Selectmen for a hearing concerning the same before the 
filling of the vacancy so created. If the Board of Selectmen shall determine that said vacancies were 
for just cause and the business of the Commission is not likely to be delayed by the absence of such 
member in the future, such member shall be reinstated for the balance of the term. 
(Ord. of 12-15-1986(4), §§ 1—5) 


Secs. 14-2—14-20. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE II. - PUBLIC USE OF PARKS AND RECREATIONAL FACILITIES 


Sec. 14-21. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed 
to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Park is a Town-owned park, parkland, playground, beach, boating facility, recreation place or facility, 
open space or any other area, place, building or structure in the Town owned or used by the Town and 
devoted to active or passive recreation. 
    Person may be extended to mean any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company 
or organization of any kind. 
    Public means Town-owned as opposed to privately owned. 
    Recreation Director is the Director of Recreation of the Town. 
(Ord. of 4-23-1990) 


Sec. 14-22. - Parking operating policy. 
(a) ?Opening and closing hours. Except as hereinafter expressly permitted, no one shall enter or remain 
in any park, playground or other facility before 6:00 a.m. or after sunset, except that lighted areas will 
remain open to a time determined by the Recreation Commission and approved by Board of 
Selectmen. Exceptions to the required opening and closing hours will require a permit. Any section 
or part of any park may be declared closed to the public by the Board of Selectmen or the Recreation 
Commission at any time and for any interval of time, either temporarily or at regular or stated 
intervals for maintenance of the facility or if the park has been properly reserved be a group. 
(b) ?Exceptions. Exceptions to the provisions of this article are made for officials or employees of the 
Town when said officials or employees are carrying out their assigned duties or work in the service of 
the Town. 
(c) ?Reservations. Certain facilities or areas in a park may be reserved for the exclusive use of a group 
of persons for a period of time provided a permit is therefore obtained from the Recreation 
Commission. 
(1) ?Time limit for application. Organizations and organized groups desiring to use the parks shall 
apply for a permit at least 15 days prior to the day requested. 
(2) ?Application procedure. Application shall be filed with Recreation Director upon forms to be 
supplied by him seeking such information as is reasonably necessary for a fair determination as 
to whether a permit should be issued. 
(3) ?Standards for issuance. The Recreation Director shall issue a permit when he finds: 
a. ?That the proposed activity or use of the park will not reasonably interfere with or detract 
from the general public's enjoyment of the park; 
b. ?That the proposed activity and use will not reasonably interfere with or detract from the 
promotion of public health, welfare, and safety and recreation; 
c. ?That the proposed activity or use cannot reasonably be expected to incite violence, crime, 
or disorderly conduct; 
d. ?That the proposed activity will not entail unusual, extraordinary or burdensome expense or 
police operation by the Town; 
e. ?That the facilities desired have not been reserved for other use on the day and at the hour 
required in the application; 
f. ?That a certificate of liability coverage for personal injury and for property damage is in force 
during the time for which the application is made. Liability insurance is required for groups 
using park facilities over a given period of time on a periodic basis. The Board of 
Selectmen shall, in their discretion, set forth the minimum limits of the above required 
insurance; 
g. ?That arrangements have been made with the Police Department for the hiring of any police 
supervision deemed necessary by the Board of Selectmen and/or Recreation Commission. 
(4) ?Appeal. Within four days after receipt of an application the Recreation Director shall apprise an 
applicant in writing of his reasons for refusing a permit and any aggrieved person shall have the 
right to appeal in writing within four days to the Recreation Commission, which shall consider 
the application under the standards set forth in Subsection (c)(3) of this section and sustain or 
overrule the Recreation Director's decision within seven days. The decision of the Recreation 
Commission is and shall be final. 
(5) ?Effect of permit. 
a. ?A permittee shall be bound by all park rules and regulations and all applicable ordinances 
fully as though the same were inserted in said permit. 
b. ?The permit shall cover the use of the described site only and shall not include permission to 
use any other area. 
c. ?The permit shall be valid for the date indicated. No area will be held for a postponement 
date. 
(6) ?Liability of permittee. The person to whom a permit is issued shall be liable for any loss, 
damage, or injury sustained by any person by whatever reason of negligence of the person to 
whom such permit has been issued. Such person shall be liable for such negligence. 
(Ord. of 4-23-1990; Ord. of 5-22-2018) 


Sec. 14-23. - Rules of conduct and prohibited acts. 
(a) ?Generally. All parks and other facilities under the jurisdiction of the Recreation Commissioners will 
be governed and controlled by the following rules of conduct and by other rules and regulations set 
forth herein pertaining to specific parks or facilities. 
(1) ?Public gathering, permit requirements. An organization, group or individual requesting 
permission to hold or present an organized event, assembly, public speech, musical program, 
festival, or similar activity in any park area shall obtain a permit from the Recreation Director in 
accordance with the sections set forth in this article. 
(2) ?Commercial vendors; selling. No individual or commercial entity shall operate any vending 
enterprise, nor offer for sale or sell any goods or services, unless such vendor is employed or 
retained by the Recreation Commission, or is licensed by the appropriate authorities and has 
obtained a permit from the Board of Selectmen under current Town ordinance. 
(3) ?Domestic animals. Domestic animals shall not be permitted to enter or go at large in any park, 
except dogs held on a leash by their keepers. 
(4) ?Horses. Horseback riding is not allowed in any park except on designated bridle trails; horses 
shall be thoroughly broken and properly restrained, and ridden with due care, and shall not be 
allowed to graze or go unattended. 
(5) ?Structures, plants, trees, earth, water. No person shall: 
a. ?Mark deface, disfigure, tamper with, destroy, displace or remove any building, bridges, 
tables, benches, fireplaces, railings, paving, or paving materials, water lines or public 
utilities or parts or appurtenances thereof, signs, notices or placards whether temporary or 
permanent, monuments, stakes, posts, boundary markers, or other structures, equipment, 
facilities, park property or appurtenances whatsoever, either real or personal; 
b. ?Dig or remove any soil, rock, sand, stones, trees, shrubs, plants, wood or other materials, 
or make any excavation by tool, equipment, blasting or other means or agency; 
c. ?Construct or erect any building or structure of whatever kind for temporary use, or run or 
string any public service utility into, upon, or across any park, except on special written 
permit from the Recreation Director; 
d. ?Damage, cut, carve, mark, transplant or remove any plant, or injure the bark, or pick 
flowers or seed of any tree or plant, or dig or otherwise disturb grass areas, or in any other 
way injure the natural elements of any park area; 
e. ?Climb any tree or wall; climb, stand or sit upon monuments, vases, planters, fountains, 
railings, fences or upon any other property or structure not designated or customarily used 
for such purpose; 
f. ?Attach any rope or cable or other contrivance to any tree, fence, railing, bridge, bench, or 
other property or structure; 
g. ?Throw, discharge, or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the waters of any fountain, 
river, pond, lake, stream, or other body of water in or adjacent to any park or any tributary, 
stream, storm sewer, or drain flowing into such water, any substance, matter or thing, liquid 
or solid, which will or may result in the pollution of said waters. 
(6) ?Wildlife. No person shall hunt, molest, harm, frighten, kill, trap, pursue, chase, tease, shoot or 
throw missiles at any animal, wildlife, reptile or bird nor remove or have in his possession the 
young of any wild animal, nor the eggs, nest or young of any reptile or bird. 
(7) ?Disturbing conduct. No one shall engage in breach of the peace or disorderly conduct as 
defined by State statute (Connecticut State Statutes, Penal Code). 
(8) ?Litter/dumping. No person shall take in, dump, deposit, place or cause to be placed, or leave 
any bottles, broken, glass, ashes, paper, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage, refuse, or 
other trash on any park land or in any waters in or contiguous to any park. Refuse and trash 
produced in any park shall be placed in proper receptacles where provided; where receptacles 
are not provided, all such rubbish or waste shall be carried away from the park by the persons 
responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere. 
(9) ?Ball playing. Ball playing and other group games may be played in nondesignated open areas 
only where such activity does not interfere with the normal use of the park by general public. 
(10) ?Fires. No one shall light, kindle or use any fire unless such person has obtained a permit from 
the Recreation Director, except in designated locations in connection with picnics. 
(11) ?Firearms. It shall be unlawful for any person to bring into or have in his possession in any park 
or recreation area: 
a. ?Any pistol or revolver or objects in which loaded or blank cartridges may be used, except 
for official starters at authorized track and field events; 
b. ?Any burglar tools, implements or similar equipment; 
c. ?Any rifle, shotgun, air gun, spring gun, slingshot, bow or other weapon in which the 
propelling force is gunpowder, a spring or compressed air. 
(12) ?Fireworks, explosives, missiles. No one shall ignite, explode, or throw any firework, 
firecracker, rocket, explosive, or other missile without a license from the appropriate authorities 
and a permit from the Recreation Director. 
(13) ?Motor vehicles. No one shall park any vehicle (except baby carriages) including motor 
vehicles of all types, trailers, campers, bicycles, or any horse or horse-drawn conveyance, on 
any park drive or road, or drive at a speed in excess of 15 miles per hour on any park drive or 
road. No one shall operate or park any such vehicle upon the turf, lawns, sidewalks, and 
footpaths, or any other park land, except in such places and at such times as may be 
designated by the Recreation Director. No one shall wash, clean or repair any motor vehicle in 
any park. 
(14) ?Advertisement. No person in a park shall paste, glue, tack or otherwise post any sign, placard, 
advertisement or inscription whatsoever, nor shall any person erect or cause to be erected any 
sign whatsoever on any public lands or highways or roads adjacent to a park. 
(15) ?Tents, etc. No person in a park shall set up tents, shacks, or any other temporary shelter or 
use any camp trailer, camp wagon or other special vehicle for the purpose of overnight camping 
without written permission of the Recreation Commission and/or its Recreation Director. 
(16) ?Selling. No person shall announce, advertise or call the public attention in any way to any 
article or service for sale or hire. 
(17) ?Posted areas. No person in a park shall enter an area posted as "CLOSED TO THE PUBLIC" 
nor shall any person use or abet the use of any area in violation of posted notices. 
(18) ?Public address systems; amplifiers. No person shall use any public address system or 
amplifying the equipment, except as expressly permitted by the Board of Selectmen and/or the 
Recreation Commission. 
(19) ?Soliciting. No person in a park shall solicit alms or contributions for any purpose whether 
public or private. 
(b) ?Penalty for violation. Any person who violates or assists or encourages the violation of any of the 
above rules in any park, playground or other facility under the jurisdiction of the Recreation 
Commission will be charged with a misdemeanor and upon conviction fined not more than $25.00. 
Upon conviction such person(s) shall also be responsible for the costs of injury to persons or 
property caused as a result of such violations. 
(Ord. of 4-23-1990) 


Chapter 15 - PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate peddlers, G.S. §§ 7-148(c)(7)(H)(iv), 21-37. 


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 


Secs. 15-1—15-19. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE II. - PERMITS 


Sec. 15-20. - Permit required. 
(a) ?No person, except those exempted by the Statutes of the State of Connecticut, shall vend or hawk 
upon the public streets, walks, or grounds of the Town any groceries, meats, provisions, fruits, 
goods, wares, or other merchandise at public or private sale or auction, or vend or peddle such 
articles from house to house within the Town, unless such person shall have a permit to do so from 
the First Selectman. 
(b) ?No person over the age of 16 years shall solicit orders of purchase for future delivery of any goods, 
wares, or merchandise, including magazines and other printed matter, from door to door, or by 
telephone from and within the Town, or on any streets, walks, or grounds within the Town, unless 
such person shall have a permit to do so from the First Selectman. 
(Ord. of 4-25-1974, §§ 1, 2) 


Sec. 15-21. - Information required. 
    An applicant for a permit shall complete an application blank provided by the First Selectman which 
shall contain the following information: 
(1) ?The name, home address, and local address, if any, of the applicant; 
(2) ?A physical description of the applicant, setting forth the applicant's age, height, weight, color of 
hair and eyes; 
(3) ?The name and address of the person for whom home orders are to be solicited or filled; 
(4) ?The nature of the goods, wares or merchandise for which orders are to be solicited; 
(5) ?A statement as to whether the applicant has been convicted of any felony or misdemeanor in 
the previous three years and, if so, what; 
(6) ?A statement as to the period during which the applicant intends to solicit orders; 
(7) ?Such other credentials and other evidence of identity, including a photograph to be attached to 
the permit, and good moral character and conduct of the applicant may reasonably be required 
by the First Selectman. 
(Ord. of 4-25-1974, § 3) 


Sec. 15-22. - Good moral character. 
    If the First Selectman shall determine, after reasonable investigation, that the applicant is of good 
moral character and proposes to engage in lawful and legitimate enterprise, he shall then issue the permit 
for a period not to exceed one year. In this section the phrase "good moral character" shall be construed 
to mean the propensity of the person to serve the public in the licensed area in a fair, honest and open 
manner. A judgment of guilt in a criminal prosecution or a judgment in a civil action shall not be used in 
and of itself as proof of a person's lack of good moral character. It may be used as evidence in the 
determination and when so used the person shall be notified and shall be permitted to rebut the evidence 
by showing that: 
(1) ?At the current time he has the ability to, and is likely to, serve the public in a fair, honest and 
open manner; and 
(2) ?He is rehabilitated, or that the substance of the former offense is not reasonable related to the 
occupation or profession for which he seeks a business license or business permit. 
(Ord. of 4-25-1974, § 4) 


Sec. 15-23. - Permit fee. 
    There shall be a permit fee in the amount established by the Town Meeting payable upon the 
issuance of the permit. 
(Ord. of 4-25-1974, § 5) 


Sec. 15-24. - Permit display. 
    A permit shall be nontransferable and shall be carried at all times by the permittee to whom issued, 
when engaged in the activities described in Sections 15-19 and 15-20, and shall be exhibited by any such 
permittee whenever he shall be requested to do so by any Selectman of the Town, police officer or any 
person solicited. 
(Ord. of 4-25-1974, § 6) 


Sec. 15-25. - Permit revocation. 
    Any such permit may be revoked by the First Selectman for any false statement made by the 
applicant in the application for a permit or contained in the credentials or evidence furnished by him to 
secure a permit, for violation by the permittee of any of the ordinances of the Town or any State or federal 
law, or whenever the permittee shall in the judgment of the First Selectman cease to possess the 
character and qualifications required by this article for the issuance of such permit. 
(Ord. of 4-25-1974, § 7) 


Sec. 15-26. - Soliciting. 
    Any person soliciting within the Town whether or not required to secure a permit under the provisions 
of this article shall: 
(1) ?Conduct himself at all times in an orderly and lawful manner; 
(2) ?Give a written receipt for all goods, wares or merchandise, or orders taken for same, which 
receipt shall be signed by the permittee and shall set forth a brief description of the items sold or 
ordered, the total purchase price thereof and the amount of the payment received by the 
permittee from the purchaser. 
(Ord. of 4-25-1974, § 8) 


Sec. 15-27. - Exceptions. 
    This article shall not apply to any salesman selling goods to retail or wholesale stores for resale, nor 
to any person soliciting funds or selling or taking orders for any goods, wares, merchandise for or on 
behalf of any benevolent, educational, philanthropic, humane, patriotic or eleemosynary organization or 
institution. Any person who has or has had for the 12 months preceding the effective date of the 
ordinance from which this article is derived a regular place of business or residence within the Town, and 
any person employed by or soliciting for any person employed by or soliciting for any person that or has 
had for 12 months preceding the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, a 
regular place of business within the Town, and any person required to have a State license for the 
purpose of doing business shall not be required to secure a permit, but all other provisions of this article 
shall apply to such persons. 
(Ord. of 4-25-1974, § 9; Ord. of 5-22-2018) 


Chapter 16 - PLANNING 


Sec. 16-1. - Zoning and Planning Commission. 
(a) ?The provisions of G.S. ch. 124 (zoning), Revision of 1958, as amended, are hereby adopted. 
(b) ?The Planning Commission of the Town of North Stonington is hereby designated as the Zoning and 
Planning Commission of the Town of North Stonington and shall have all the powers and duties of 
both a planning commission and a zoning commission all as provided by G.S. § 8-4a, Revision of 
1958, as amended. 
(c) ?Such Zoning and Planning Commission shall consist of five members, whose method of selection 
and removal for cause and terms of office and the manner of filling of vacancies shall be as 
previously provided except each appointment shall be only until the next regular election. 
(d) ?Members of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall hold no salaried municipal office. 
(e) ?There shall be three alternate members of the Planning and Zoning Commission, who shall be 
electors of the Town of North Stonington, holding no salaried municipal office. Alternate members 
shall be elected at the bi-annual Town election of the Town of North Stonington to serve for a term of 
two years. In the event any alternate member of the Zoning and Planning Commission shall cease to 
be a resident of the Town of North Stonington, his office shall be deemed vacant. A vacancy from 
whatever cause arising in the office of any alternate member of the Zoning and Planning 
Commission shall be filled by the Zoning and Planning Commission for the unexpired portion of the 
term by the appointment of an elector of the Town of North Stonington of the same political party as 
his predecessor. 
(Ord. of 6-3-1963, §§ 1, 2(a)—(c); Ord. of 11-22-1963(1), §§ 1—3; Ord. of 8-20-1970(1), §§ 
1—4; Ord. of 9-25-2006, §§ 1—3; Ord. of 5-22-2018) 
State Law reference— Authority to create planning and zoning commission, G.S. § 8-4a; 
alternate members, G.S. § 8-19a. 


Sec. 16-2. - Zoning Board of Appeals. 
(a) ?There is hereby created a Zoning Board of Appeals consisting of five regular members and three 
alternate members, who all shall be electors of the Town of North Stonington and who shall not be 
members of the Zoning and Planning Commission. If a vacancy occurs for whatever cause it shall be 
filled until the next regular election by an elector of the Town. 
(b) ?Election of regular members. Regular members shall be elected at the biennial election of the Town 
of North Stonington to serve for a term of six years. 
(c) ?Election of alternate members. The alternate members of the Zoning Board of Appeals or panel of 
alternates shall be elected at the biennial election for terms of two years. 
(Ord. of 11-22-1963(1), §§ 4, 6; Ord. of 7-15-1985; Ord. of 12-15-1986(1); Ord. of 9-25-2006, § 
4) 


Sec. 16-3. - Schedule of fees for processing land use applications. 
(a) ?Authorization and purpose: 
(1) ?Provisions of the Connecticut General Statutes allow towns to establish a schedule of fees and 
thereby require applicants to pay the actual expenses accrued for the review, evaluation, and 
processing of applications to the Planning and Zoning Commission, where such expenses are 
directly attributable to each individual application. 
(2) ?To provide adequate review of land use applications in accordance with the size and 
complexity of the proposed land use development; and 
(3) ?To encourage applicants to become familiar with and to review the Town of North Stonington's 
development regulations, to submit applications that comply with the Town's regulations, and to 
submit complete plans and proposals with fewer errors and omissions. 
(b) ?Fee schedule (for consultant technical review): A schedule of fees for the processing of applications 
to the Planning and Zoning Commission is hereby established as follows: 
(1) ?This article is necessary as the Town has seen many land use applications which require a 
consultant's technical review. Such technical review is necessary for the protection of the public 
health, safety, and welfare. 
(2) ?The Planning and Zoning Commission may require an applicant to bear the consultant costs 
associated with additional technical review fees for applications for site plans, special permits, 
amendments to the zoning text, amendments to the zoning map, subdivisions, and re-
subdivisions, if it finds that the nature and intensity of the development may have significant 
impact on the site and surrounding areas, or that staff will not be able to complete a technical 
review of an application in the time period prescribed by State Statute or that staff does not 
have the technical expertise to review aspects of a particular project. 
(3) ?"Consultant" may include, but is not limited to: Town Engineer, Legal Counsel, Consulting 
Planner, Transportation Engineer, Radio-Frequency Engineer, Landscape Architect, Architect, 
Hydrologist, Geologist, etc. "Consultant" does not include the Town Planner, Zoning 
Enforcement Officer, Administrative Assistant, Sanitarian, Building Inspector, Fire Marshal, 
G.I.S. Coordinator, or Public Works Director. 
(4) ?When the Commission determines that a land use application necessitates the hiring of an 
outside consultant(s) to perform a technical review, the anticipated expenses of each such 
outside consultant shall be determined by staff and/or the Commission and promptly reported to 
the applicant. Staff and/or the Commission shall determine the fee for the outside consultant 
technical review of the application by multiplying the preliminary estimate prepared by the 
qualified consultant or expert by 150 percent. The applicant shall establish a fund with the Town 
of North Stonington in an amount not less than 150 percent of the estimated review expenses 
for the total project. 
(5) ?All such applicants shall be required to sign an agreement specifically agreeing to pay the 
aforesaid technical review fees as determined by staff and/or the Commission. Such agreement 
shall state the conditions imposed and the obligations of the applicant. 
(6) ?All applications to the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be accompanied by the 
administrative fee set forth herein. Additionally, technical review fees shall be paid, and the 
above mentioned agreement shall be signed by the applicant within 14 days of the date that 
staff reports the cost of the outside consultant technical review and inspection to the applicant. 
No application will be considered complete until such fee or fees have been paid, and such 
agreement has been submitted. 
(7) ?Prior to the decision of the Planning and Zoning Commission, staff may revise the estimated 
expense of outside consultants and thereupon require the applicant to sign another agreement 
and deposit additional sums to cover such fees. These sums shall be paid by the applicant prior 
to the issuance of any permits. The Zoning Enforcement Officer is hereby prohibited from 
issuing any permits, approvals or sign-offs for an application for which such additional sums 
have not been paid. 
(8) ?Upon completion of technical review and final action on the application by the Town, the Town 
shall determine the costs incurred for the technical review and refund the excess funds to the 
applicant. Documentation of consulting costs incurred shall be provided to the applicant. 
(d) ?Fee schedule (administrative): All applications to the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be 
accompanied by the administrative fee as established by the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
Note: The State of Connecticut General Assembly requires that a municipal agency or legislative body 
collecting designated land use permit fees add a state fee to the established fees. 
(Ord. of 11-22-1963(1), §§ 4, 6, 8; Ord. of 7-15-1985; Memo of 8-1-2005; Ord. of 12-15-
1986(1); Ord. of 11-28-1994; Ord. of 9-8-1997; Amd. of 4-6-2009; Ord. of 5-22-2018) 


Sec. 16-4. - Project monitoring and site inspection fees. 
(1) ?Upon approval of an application for site plans, special permits, subdivisions, and re-
subdivisions, the Town may require the permittee to pay the costs associated with site 
inspection and monitoring compliance with the permit conditions and/or Town orders. No 
building permit, certificate of occupancy or acceptance of any part of the project will be issued if 
the site inspector's fees are not current. 
(2) ?Evaluation of plan to determine need for inspections. Each site plan, special permit, subdivision 
or re-subdivision plan submitted to the Town for final approval will be evaluated by the 
consulting engineer to determine the need for site/subdivision inspection and an estimate as to 
the number of hours required to accomplish the inspection service in a competent, professional 
manner. 
(3) ?Construction schedule. The developer or owner shall supply a detailed construction schedule 
to the land use office indicating the starting date and completion date of all phases of site and 
subdivision construction. Notice to the land use office shall be given by phone 24 hours in 
advance of any schedule changes. If not notified, the Town may charge the developer for the 
travel time of the inspector traveling to and from the site. 
(4) ?Determination of fee. The inspection fee to be charged shall be equal to the actual hourly rate 
of pay of the assigned inspector times the number of hours, including travel time, spent by the 
inspector inspecting each project or site. 
(5) ?Payment of fee. Based on the estimated number of hours required to adequately monitor and 
inspect the site, as provided by the inspector (see paragraph (2)), an estimated total fee will be 
calculated (see paragraph (4)), and the developer or owner will be required to deposit with the 
town finance department, prior to the start of any construction on the site, 150 percent of the 
estimated inspection fee as determined. 
(6) ?Refunding fees. Upon completion of the project construction, the Commission shall determine 
the costs incurred for the monitoring and inspection and refund the excess funds to the 
permittee. Detailed documentation of the inspection expenses will be provided to the applicant. 
(Amd. of 4-6-2009) 
Editor's note— Amend. of Apr. 6, 2009, deleted the former § 16-4, and enacted a new § 16-4 as 
set out herein. The former § 16-4 pertained to fee for review and evaluation of land use 
applications and inspection of land use permit compliance and derived from Ord. of 5-10-2004. 
State Law reference— Fees for municipal land use applications, G.S. § 8-1c. 


Sec. 16-5. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Amendment of Apr. 6, 2009, deleted the former § 16-5 which pertained to costs 
of inspection and derived from Ord. of 5-10-2004. 


Sec. 16-6. - Designation of the Planning and Zoning Commission of the Town as the Aquifer Protection 
Agency. 
(1) ?Designation and membership. 
a. ?In accordance with the provisions of G.S. § 22a-354a, et seq., the Planning and Zoning 
Commission is hereby designated as the Aquifer Protection Agency (hereafter the Agency) of 
the Town of North Stonington. The staff of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall serve as 
the staff of the Agency. 
b. ?Members of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall serve coexisting terms on the Agency. 
The membership requirements of the Agency shall be the same as those of the Planning and 
Zoning including but limited to the number of members terms, method of selection and removal 
of members, and filling of vacancies. 
c. ?At least one member of the Agency or staff of the Agency shall complete the course in 
technical training formulated by the Commissioner of Environmental Protection of the State 
of Connecticut, pursuant to G.S. § 22a-354v. 
(2) ?Regulations to be adopted. 
a. ?The Agency shall adopt regulations in accordance with G.S. § 22a-354p and RCSA § 22a-354i-
3. Said regulations shall provide for: 
1. ?The manner in which boundaries of aquifer protection areas shall be established and 
amended or changed. 
2. ?Procedures for the regulation of activity within the area. 
3. ?The form for an application to conduct regulated activities within the area. 
4. ?Notice and publication requirements 
5. ?Criteria and procedures for the review of application 
6. ?Administration and enforcement 
(3) ?Inventory of land use. 
a. ?In order to carry out the purpose of the Aquifer Protection Program, the Agency will conduct an 
inventory of land use within the area to assess potential contamination sources. 
b. ?Not later than three months after approval by the Commissioner of the aquifers, the Agency will 
inventory land uses overlying the mapped zone of contribution and recharge areas of such 
aquifers in accordance with guidelines established by the Commissioner pursuant to G.S. § 
22a-354f. Such inventory shall be completed not more than one year after authorization of the 
Agency (G.S. § 22a-354e). 
(Ord. of 5-24-2010; Ord. of 5-22-2018) 


Sec. 16-7. - Fees in lieu of open space. 
    In accordance with Connecticut General Statutes, and the Planning and Zoning Regulations of the 
Town of North Stonington we, the taxpayers of the Town of North Stonington, do hereby authorize the 
collection of fees in lieu of open space to be determined by the Town of North Stonington's Planning and 
Zoning regulations and the deposit of those funds into a designated special fund for open space. 
    The funds and interest earned on those funds shall be held until such time as the Town of North 
Stonington's Legislative Body authorizes the expenditure in accordance with Connecticut General 
Statutes. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2006) 


Chapter 17 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Solid waste management, G.S. § 22a-207 et seq.; municipal powers and duties 
relative to solid waste generally, G.S. §§ 22a-220 et seq., 7-148(c)(4)(H). 


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 


Secs. 17-1—17-18. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE II. - LITTERING, DUMPING AND RECYCLING 


Sec. 17-19. - Illegal dumping, littering, mixing of recyclables prohibited. 
(a) ?No person shall engage in any activity which violates: 
(1) ?G.S. § 22a-250(a); 
(2) ?An ordinance adopted pursuant to G.S. 22a-220(f); 
(3) ?G.S. § 22a-220a(f); or 
(4) ?G.S. § 22a-22a(i). 
(b) ?Any activity which violates Subsection (a) of this section is considered to be a nuisance. 
(Ord. of 9-9-1996, § 1) 


Sec. 17-20. - Environmental protection officials, appointment. 
    The chief elected official of the municipality shall appoint one or more persons as environmental 
protection officials to issue littering, dumping and recycling citations and enter orders authorized by this 
article. The environmental protection official shall be appointed in the same manner as members of 
boards and commissions of the municipality. Such officials shall not be persons appointed as hearing 
officers pursuant to Section 17-22. 
(Ord. of 9-9-1996, § 2) 


Sec. 17-21. - Citation, abatement, civil penalty. 
(a) ?The environmental protection official may issue citations for any violation of Section 17-19. Such 
citation shall be on a form as approved by the chief elected official of the municipality. 
(b) ?The environmental protection official may order any person who has violated Section 17-19 to abate 
such violation and may issue a fine in accordance with provisions of Subsection (c) of this section. 
(c) ?Any person who engages in an activity which violates G.S. § 22a-220(f), G.S. § 22a-220a(i) or G.S. 
§ 22a-250(a) shall be assessed a civil penalty for the first offense of up to $250.00 and for a second 
or subsequent offense a civil penalty of up to $1,000.00. 
(Ord. of 9-9-1996, § 3) 
State Law reference— Penalty for violation of municipal ordinances relative to dumping, G.S. 
§ 22a-226d; citations, G.S. § 7-152c. 


Sec. 17-22. - Hearing officers, appointment. 
    The First Selectman shall appoint one or more persons to conduct littering, dumping, and recycling 
violations hearings and enter orders authorized by this article. The hearing officer shall be appointed in 
the same manner as members of the municipal boards and commissions. A hearing officer shall not be 
authorized to issue citations or be employed by the municipality. At any time within 12 months from the 
expiration of the final period for the uncontested payment of fines, penalties, costs or fees for any citation, 
the Town shall send notice to the person cited. Such notice shall inform the person cited: 
(1) ?Of the allegations against him and the amount of the fines, penalties, costs or fees due; 
(2) ?That he may contest his liability before a citation hearing officer by delivering in person or by 
mail written notice within ten days of the date thereof; 
(3) ?That if he does not demand such a hearing, an assessment and judgment shall be entered 
against him; and 
(4) ?That such judgment may issue without further notice. 
(Ord. of 9-9-1996, § 4) 


Sec. 17-23. - Appeal form. 
(a) ?Contents. Any person or persons to whom a citation is mailed or delivered pursuant to the 
provisions of this article shall have the right to file an appeal from any such citation by filing with the 
Town Clerk, within ten days from the date of receipt thereof, a written and dated appeal containing: 
(1) ?A description, or the address, of the premises or location involved in the citation. 
(2) ?The name and mailing address of each person participating in the appeal. 
(3) ?A brief statement setting forth the interest of such person in the premises described in the 
citation, if any. 
(4) ?A brief statement identifying the specific ordinance or statutes under which the appeal is being 
brought, together with any facts supporting the appeal. 
(5) ?A statement of the relief sought, and any reasons why the citation should be reversed, 
modified, or set aside. 
(6) ?A verification by the person or persons participating in the appeal as to the truth of the matters 
set forth in the appeal. 
(b) ?Notification of receipt of appeal; appointment of hearing officer. The Town Clerk shall notify the chief 
elected official of the municipality of the receipt of the appeal. The chief elected official shall appoint 
a hearing officer to hear the appeal. 
(Ord. of 9-9-1996, § 5) 


Sec. 17-24. - Setting hearing date, stay of enforcement. 
(a) ?After receipt of any appeal filed pursuant to Section 17-23, the hearing official shall provide written 
notice of the date, time and place of the hearing by causing copy of such notice to be delivered 
personally to the appellant, or by mailing a copy to the appellant by certified mail, postage prepaid, to 
the address shown on the appeal. The hearing date shall be not less than 15 days nor any more 
than 30 days from the date of the mailing or delivery of such notice, provided the hearing officer shall 
grant, upon good cause shown, any reasonable request by any interested party for postponement or 
continuance. 
(b) ?Enforcement of any citation and abatement order of the environmental protection official shall be 
stayed during the pendency of a timely and properly filed appeal. 
(Ord. of 9-9-1996, § 6) 


Sec. 17-25. - Citation appeal hearing procedure. 
(a) ?Presentation of evidence. A designated Town official, other than the hearing officer, may present 
evidence on behalf of the Town. The hearing officer may accept from such person copies of police 
reports, investigatory and citation reports, and other official documents by mail and may determine 
thereby that the appearance of such person is unnecessary. The hearing officer shall conduct the 
hearing in the order and form and with such methods of proof as he deems fair and appropriate. The 
rules regarding the admissibility of evidence shall not be strictly applied, but all testimony shall be 
given under oath or affirmation. The hearing officer shall announce his decision at the end of the 
hearing. If he determines that the person is not liable, he shall dismiss the matter and enter his 
determination in writing accordingly. If he determines that the person is liable for the violation, he 
shall forthwith enter and assess the fines, penalties, costs or fees against such person. 
(b) ?Rights of appellant. Each appellant may be represented by an attorney. The presence of the 
environmental protection official shall be required at the hearing if the appellant so requests. An 
appellant shall appear at the hearing and may present evidence on his or her behalf. An 
environmental protection official or any municipal official, other than the hearing officer, may present 
evidence on behalf of the Town. If an appellant fails to appear, the hearing officer may enter an 
assessment and order by default upon a finding of proper notice and liability under the applicable 
statutes or ordinances. 
(c) ?Decision by hearing officer. The hearing officer shall render a written decision within ten business 
days of the completion of the hearing and file such decision with the Town Clerk. The decision of the 
hearing officer shall be final and shall serve upon the appellant, either personally or by certified mail, 
postage prepaid, within seven days of the date when such decision is entered. 
(Ord. of 9-9-1996, § 7) 


Sec. 17-26. - Appeal decision. 
(a) ?If it is determined by the hearing officer that an appellant is not in violation of the provisions of this 
article, the matter shall be dismissed as to that appellant and the hearing officer shall enter such 
determination, in writing, and the record of the citation shall indicate such dismissal within ten 
business days of the filing of the decision with the Town Clerk. 
(b) ?If it is determined that one or more appellants are in violation of any of the provisions of this article, 
and the issuance of the citation is proper, the hearing officer shall order each such appellant to pay 
the applicable fine and, if appropriate, shall forthwith order each such applicant to abate the 
described condition within 30 days from the date of such order. The hearing officer shall enter such 
determination in writing, and shall file such order with the Town Clerk. In the event that the 
abatement is not completed within 30 days of date of such order, the hearing officer, upon 
certification from the environmental protection official that the abatement has not been completed, 
shall forthwith enter and assess against each such appellant a fine not to exceed $100.00 for each 
offense. If such assessment is not paid on the date of its entry, the hearing officer shall send by 
certified mail, return receipt requested, a notice of the assessment to the person or persons found 
liable and not less than 30 days nor more than 12 months after such mailing, file a certified copy of 
the notice of assessment with the Town Clerk. 
(Ord. of 9-9-1996, § 8) 


Sec. 17-27. - Enforcement of orders. 
    The chief elected official of North Stonington may take whatever means necessary to enforce the 
orders of the hearing officer. 
(Ord. of 9-9-1996, § 9) 


Sec. 17-28. - Funds deposited in the general fund. 
    Any funds collected pursuant to this article shall be placed in the general fund of the Town of North 
Stonington. 
(Ord. of 9-9-1996, § 10) 


Secs. 17-29—17-59. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE III. - COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL 


Sec. 17-60. - Declaration of policy. 
(a) ?The accumulation, collection, removal and disposal of refuse must be controlled by the municipality 
for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare. It is consequently found and declared that: 
(1) ?This municipality is authorized by law to regulate the disposition of refuse generated within its 
boundaries; and 
(2) ?This municipality is also authorized by G.S. § 22a-220a to designate the area where refuse 
generated within its boundaries shall be disposed; and 
(3) ?This municipality has executed a municipal solid waste management service contract requiring 
it to cause all solid waste generated within its boundaries to be delivered to the Southeastern 
Connecticut Regional Resources Recovery Authority System (SCRRRA System) when such 
system begins operations. 
(b) ?The enactment of this article is in furtherance of this Municipality's approved Solid Waste 
Management Plan. 
(Ord. of 2-24-1992, § 1) 


Sec. 17-61. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed 
to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Bulky wastes means noncombustible debris, street sweepings, and oversized bulky items including, 
but not limited to, discarded appliances, large parts of automobiles, and oversized tree stumps, logs and 
branches. 
    Hazardous wastes means solid and liquid wastes in the following classifications: 
(1) ?Explosives. 
(2) ?Pathogenic or pathological wastes. 
(3) ?Radioactive wastes. 
(4) ?Cleaning fluids, acids, poisons, or other chemical wastes which either create an immediate 
safety hazard to persons disposing of the waste or which by virtue of disposal presents a threat 
to the quality of ground or surface waters. 
(5) ?Hospital operating room wastes. 
    Municipality shall mean the Town of North Stonington. 
    Solid waste means unwanted and discarded solid materials, but does not include: 
(1) ?Liquid wastes including, but not limited to, semi-solid, liquid materials collected in a municipal 
sewage system or a septic system; 
(2) ?Bulky wastes; 
(3) ?Hazardous wastes; or 
(4) ?Any other material which may not be lawfully disposed of in a sanitary landfill or resources 
recovery facility. 
(Ord. of 2-24-1992, § 2) 


Sec. 17-62. - Disposal of solid waste. 
    All solid waste generated in this municipality shall be disposed of at such place or places as the 
Board of Selectmen may from time to time designate. The person delivering solid waste to the designated 
place shall play any applicable disposal charge. 
(Ord. of 2-24-1992, § 3) 


Secs. 17-63—17-82. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE IV. - TOWN TRANSFER STATION AND BULKY WASTE AREA; SOUTHEASTERN CONNECTICUT 
REGIONAL RESOURCE RECOVERY AUTHORITY FACILITY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. of Aug. 10, 2009, §§ 1, 2, §§ III—XV, repealed the former Art. IV, §§ 17-83—17-96, 
and enacted a new Art. IV as set out herein. The former Art. IV pertained to sanitary landfill and derived 
from Ord. of 2-22-1999, § I. 


Sec. 17-83. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning ascribed to 
them in this section. 
    Person shall mean any individual, institution, public or private corporation, partnership, association, 
or any other entity, public or private however organized. 
    Refuse/recyclables shall mean solid wastes generated within the Town, including but not limited to 
newspaper, books, batteries, magazines, scrap paper, catalogs, cardboard, corrugated, bottles, cans, oil, 
ashes, tin, steel, iron, scrap metal, aluminum, building materials, household waste, rubbish, garbage, and 
brush. Refuse/recyclables shall not include wastes that are toxic or hazardous as referenced in section 
17-85 of this article. 
    Town shall mean the Town of North Stonington, located in New London County, State of 
Connecticut. 
    Transfer station and bulky waste area shall mean any area of land owned or leased by the Town 
which is specifically set aside for the handling/ disposal of refuse/ recyclable. 
(Ord. of 8-10-2009, § 1) 


Sec. 17-84. - Disposal. 
    No person shall dispose of refuse/ recyclables at the transfer station, bulky waste area or 
Southeastern Connecticut Regional Resource Recovery Authority or other facilities designated by the 
Town, except those persons who have obtained a permit decal and display said decal on the motor 
vehicle used in transporting refuse/ recyclables for disposal from the Town or other written permissions 
from the Selectmen's Office. To obtain a permit the person must be a resident of the Town and the motor 
vehicle registration shall have a North Stonington Connecticut address or have been authorized by the 
Town. 
(a) ?A resident of the Town or a person having a place of business in the Town, or a member of the 
Armed Services residing in North Stonington may secure a permit from the First Selectmen or 
his agent. Such permit shall be issued upon satisfactory proof to the First Selectmen or his 
agent that the applicant is either a resident of North Stonington or has a place of business in 
North Stonington. The First Selectmen or his Agent shall cause a permit decal to be affixed to 
the applicant's motor vehicle(s) and said permit decal shall not be transferred to any other 
vehicle. The Board of Selectmen may, from time to time, require the renewal of permits issued 
under this subsection under the same procedure and standards as proof as original permits. 
Residents and business owners who have been issued a permit under this subsection may only 
dispose of refuse/ recyclables generated within the Town. 
(b) ?A contractor/contracted hauler who is in the business of collecting refuse/recyclables of 
persons, residences, and businesses of the Town may secure a permit from the First Selectmen 
or his agent. Such permit shall be issued for a period of one year upon satisfactory proof to the 
First Selectmen or his Agent that the collector has adequate equipment, as referenced in 
Sections 17-90 and 17-92, to perform refuse/recyclables collection and that only refuse/ 
recyclables of persons of the Town generated within the Town will be collected for disposal in 
the transfer station, bulky waste area or Southeastern Connecticut Regional Resource 
Recovery Authority facility or other facility designated by the Town. 
(c) ?A person who is a non-resident of the Town whose refuse/ recyclables in a direct result of work, 
operations or business undertaken by him in the Town may secure a temporary permit from the 
First Selectmen or his agent. Such permit shall be issued upon satisfactory proof to the First 
Selectmen or his agent that the refuse/ recyclables will be a direct result or work, operations or 
business conducted within the Town. 
(d) ?The Board of Selectmen may revoke any permit in the event they find after a hearing upon 
reasonable notice to the permittee, that such permittee has violated the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 8-10-2009, § 2) 


Sec. 17-85. - Refuse/recyclables prohibited. 
    The disposal of any refuse/recyclables by any person in the transfer station, bulky waste area or 
Southeastern Connecticut Regional Resource Recovery Authority facility or other facilities designated by 
the Town which is toxic or hazardous within the meaning of the Connecticut General Statutes or 
otherwise hazardous to the public health, welfare or safety, or in the opinion of the Board of Selectmen 
would be prejudicial to the proper operation or substantially shorten the useable life of the transfer station, 
bulky waste area or Southeastern Connecticut Regional Resource Recovery Authority or other facility 
designated by the Town shall be prohibited. Motor vehicles, house trailers, camp trailers commercial 
trailers, oil tank or tree stumps are prohibited. Refrigerators and freezers are prohibited unless all doors 
have been removed. Tires are prohibited except by permit under section 17-94. 
(Ord. of 8-10-2009, § III) 


Sec. 17-86. - Disposal area. 
    Any person disposing of refuse/ recyclables in the transfer station, bulky waste area, or Regional 
Resource Authority facility or other facilities designated by the Town shall dispose of such refuse/ 
recyclables by dumping or otherwise in specific locations designated by, and under the supervision of, the 
custodian of the transfer station, bulky waste area or Southeastern Connecticut Regional Resource 
Recovery Authority facility. 
(Ord. of 8-10-2009, § IV) 


Sec. 17-87. - Hours. 
    Days and hours during which the transfer station, bulky waste area or Southeastern Connecticut 
Regional Resource Recovery Authority facility shall be open for disposal of refuse/recyclables shall be 
established from time to time by the Board of Selectmen. 
(Ord. of 8-10-2009, § V) 


Sec. 17-88. - Scavenging prohibited. 
    Scavenging at the transfer station, bulky waste area or Southeastern Connecticut Regional 
Resource Recovery Authority facility or other facilities designated by the Town is prohibited (with 
exception of the swap shed located in the North Stonington Transfer Station facility). 
(Ord. of 8-10-2009, § VI) 


Sec. 17-89. - Trespassing. 
    No person shall enter or be permitted within the transfer station, bulky waste area or Southeastern 
Connecticut Regional Resource Recovery Authority facility or other facilities designated by the Town 
except with a permit and only during the hours when the area is open to the public/businesses. 
(Ord. of 8-10-2009, § VII) 


Sec. 17-90. - Covered loads. 
    Any vehicle carrying refuse/recyclables to the transfer station, bulky waste area or Southeastern 
Connecticut Regional Resource Recovery Authority or other facilities designated by the Town shall carry 
such refuse/ recyclables either by covering it or some other suitable manner, so that such refuse/ 
recyclables shall not blow or fall off the motor vehicle. 
(Ord. of 8-10-2009, § VIII) 


Sec. 17-91. - Separation and recycling. 
    This article mandates that all persons separate and recycle all refuse/ recyclables delivered to the 
transfer station, bulky waste area or Southeastern Connecticut Regional Resource Recovery Authority 
facility or other facilities designated by the Town. No refuse/ recyclables will be accepted at the transfer 
station, bulky waste area, or Southeastern Connecticut Regional Resource Recovery Authority facility 
unless it has been separated and is deposited in the designated locations. The following items are 
considered recyclables and are to be separated and delivered to specified locations in the transfer 
station, bulky waste area, or Southeastern Connecticut Regional Resource Recovery Authority facility: 
(1) ?Paper. Including newsprint, magazines, corrugated and lightweight cardboard, books (hard/ 
soft cover), stationery, computer paper, scrap paper, mail, and catalogs. No waxed paper, 
corrugated cardboard or plastic bags. No Christmas wrapping or solid colored paper. 
(2) ?Cans including aluminum cans, steel cans, aluminum foil, aluminum trays, and empty paint 
cans (water based). Cans, foil, and trays may have labels and minor product residue. Does not 
include aerosol cans and oil filters. Cans shall be rinsed and residue removed. 
(3) ?Glass. Including unbroken bottles and jars regardless of shape and color. Lids and neck rings 
need not be removed; labels and minor product residue are acceptable. Does not include 
window glass, plate glass, dishes, crockery, ceramics, and mirrors, headlights or light bulbs. 
(4) ?Scrap metal. Including all scrap metal, aluminum, refrigerators, stoves, air conditioners, car 
parts, wheel rims, pots and pans, water tanks, and lawn mowers. 
(5) ?Plastics. All plastic soda and milk bottles with the recycling code of 1 or 2 on the bottom. No 
containers shall be contaminated with oil, antifreeze, spray, etc. 
(6) ?Oil. Motor oils only; does not include hydraulic fluids, cutting oils, mineral spirits, paint thinner, 
gasoline, and vegetable oils. 
(7) ?Brush. Including leaves, and all brush and branches two inches in diameter or less. Does not 
include brush and branches greater than two inches in diameter and tree stumps. See section 
17-96, special regulation and considerations. 
(8) ?Bulky waste. Including all demolition material, lumber and building supplies. Does not include 
tree stumps. All metal must be removed. 
(9) ?Ash. Wood and coal ash only. 
(10) ?Batteries. Automotive or nickel cadmium batteries. 
(11) ?Antifreeze. Automotive antifreeze. 
(12) ?Tires. All tries, refer to North Stonington transfer station/bulky waste area fee schedule. 
All other trash, food spoils, waxed or soiled papers, etc., are to be considered as garbage and are to be 
deposited in the area so marked. 
(Ord. of 8-10-2009, § IX) 


Sec. 17-92. - Packaging, collection and transportation of recyclables. 
(a) ?Packaging. 
(1) ?Papers can be put into paper bags or tied in bundles not to exceed 25 pounds. 
(2) ?Bottles, jars and cans may be combined together in paper or plastic bags. 
(b) ?Collection. 
(1) ?Collection of separated recyclables trash by commercial collectors shall be as arranged by 
commercial collectors. 
(2) ?See section 17-96 for additional considerations. 
(c) ?Transportation. 
(1) ?Transportation of recyclables shall be accomplished so as to eliminate littering. 
(Ord. of 8-10-2009, § X) 


Sec. 17-93. - Inspection. 
    All waste delivered to the transfer station, bulky waste area, or Southeastern Connecticut Regional 
Resource Recovery Authority facility or other facilities designated by the Town will be subject to 
inspection to assure compliance with this article and State of Connecticut regulations/laws and any waste 
found not to be in accordance with this article and State of Connecticut regulations/laws will be subject to 
rejection by facility personnel. 
(Ord. of 8-10-2009, § XI) 


Sec. 17-94. - Fees. 
    The Board of Selectmen are authorized to set fees for dumping at the transfer station/ bulky waste 
area and those fees can be amended/revised or supplemented by the Board of Selectmen. 
(Ord. of 8-10-2009, § XII) 


Sec. 17-95. - Penalties for violations and notice, hearing and appeal process for the transfer station, 
bulky waste area or other area designated in/by the Town. 
(a) ?Violations of any section of this article by any person are subject to the following penalties. 
(1) ?First offense. Written warning. 
(2) ?Second offense. Suspense of the use of the transfer station, bulky waste area designated in/by 
the Town will be imposed for a period of three months and fine of $100.00. 
(3) ?Third offense. Suspension of the use of the transfer station, bulky waste area will be imposed 
for a period of six months and a fine of $250.00. 
(4) ?Fourth offense and each subsequent offense thereafter. A suspension of the use of the transfer 
station, bulky waste area will be imposed for a period of two years and a fine of $500.00. 
If the first offense at the transfer station is of a major nature (i.e. volume, hazardous/toxic substance, or a 
deliberate act), the warning can be disregarded and a suspension of all use of the transfer station, bulky 
waste area, or other facilities designated by the Town will be imposed for a period of three months and a 
fine of $100.00. 
(b) ?Penalties for violations and notice, hearing and appeal process for the Southeastern Connecticut 
Regional Resources Recovery Authority or designated facilities. Violations of a contractor or 
contracted hauler delivering any unauthorized waste or recyclables from a town other than North 
Stonington to any authorized designated facility can be fined for a: 
(1) ?First offense. $1,000.00 and also suspended for one month. 
(2) ?Second offense. $1,000.00 fine and a three-month suspension. 
(3) ?Third offense. Will constitute a $1,000.00 fine and a six-month suspension. 
The Town can also require the violator to remove the unauthorized or unseparated waste from the 
transfer station, bulky waste area, or other facility designated by the Town. If the person refuses to 
remove the subject waste or removal cannot be accomplished in a timely manner, the Town will remove 
the waste at the violator's expense, either by employing the Town manpower and equipment or with the 
services of a private contractor. 
(c) ?The Board of Selectmen may only suspend/fine the privilege of using the transfer station, bulky 
waste area, or Southeastern Connecticut Regional Resource Recovery Authority facility of any 
person who violates this article after reasonable notice and hearing as follows: 
(1) ?Any person whose right to dump at the transfer station, bulky waste area or southeastern 
Connecticut Regional Resource Recovery Authority facility or other facilities designated by the 
Town has been suspended, within five calendar days of the receipt of the written notice of such 
suspension, may apply in writing to the First Selectmen or his agent for reinstatement of the 
right to dump at the transfer station, bulky waste area or Southeastern Connecticut Regional 
Resource Recovery Authority facility. 
(2) ?Filing of such an application will stay the suspension until such time as the Board of Selectmen 
issues a decision under the procedures set forth below. 
(3) ?Within five calendar days of receipt of a filed application, the First Selectman or his agent shall 
set a date for a hearing on the application, which date shall be within ten calendar days of filing 
of the application, to be conducted at the Board of Selectmen's regularly scheduled weekly 
meeting, and shall give written notice of the time and place of hearing to the filer of the 
application. 
(4) ?At such hearing, the resident, business owner or commercial collector may present evidence in 
support of their claim that their right to dump at the transfer station, bulky waste area or 
Southeastern Connecticut Regional Resource Recovery Authority facility or other facilities 
designated by the Town should not be suspended. The person may be represented either by 
counsel or a non-legal agent of their choosing and may present testimony, documentary or 
other evidence in support of their position, and may cross examine any individual testifying 
against them. 
(5) ?If the Board of Selectmen or a majority of them, based on evidence presented at the hearing, 
decides that the resident's, business owner's or commercial collector's right to dump at the 
transfer station, bulky waste area or Southeastern Connecticut Regional Resource Recovery 
Authority facility or other facilities designated by the Town should be reinstated, it should also 
advise the person in writing, whereupon such suspension shall end. If the Board of Selectmen 
or a majority of them, on such evidence decides that [this article] was violated and suspension 
should stand, it shall so advise the person in writing. Notification of the decision shall be sent by 
certified mail within ten calendar days following the date of the hearing and shall become 
effective upon receipt by the resident, business owner or commercial collector. 
(Ord. of 8-10-2009, § XIII) 


Sec. 17-96. - Special regulations and considerations. 
(a) ?No tree stumps, regardless of size, or large pieces of lumber will be allowed at the transfer station, 
bulky waste area or Southeastern Connecticut Regional Resource Recovery Authority facility or 
other facilities designated by the Town. 
(b) ?Failure to properly deposit recyclables in appropriate containers and trash in designated areas of 
the sanitary landfill may result in suspension/fine as described in section 17-95. 
(c) ?An area will be set aside at the sanitary landfill for firewood. 
(Ord. of 8-10-2009, § XIV) 


Sec. 17-97. - Invalidity. 
    If any provision of this article or its application to any person, situation or circumstances is held 
invalid, such invalidity shall not affect any other provision or application of the same. 
(Ord. of 8-10-2009, § XV) 


Chapter 18 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate streets, G.S. § 7-148(c)(6)(C). 


Sec. 18-1. - Construction and acceptance of streets; specifications, etc. 
(a) ?Width. All streets shall have a minimum right-of-way of 50 feet which shall be deeded to the Town of 
North Stonington in fee simple by warranty deed. The roadbed shall be a minimum of 30 feet, which 
shall include shoulders two feet in width. 
(b) ?Dead end streets. All dead end streets shall be limited to 600 feet in length, and have a turn-around 
area at their terminus with a minimum radius of 50 feet. 
(c) ?Trees and brush. No trees or brush shall be left standing within six feet of the shoulders of the 
roadbed unless authorized by the Board of Selectmen. The planting of new trees may be required by 
the Selectmen which shall be planted along the streets, outside of the six-foot cleared area above, at 
intervals of 50 feet or as otherwise directed by the Board of Selectmen. 
(d) ?Grading. All streets shall be located in conformity with the contour of the land with a grade not less 
than 0.5 percent or greater than eight percent. There shall be no abrupt change of grade of such 
streets and all side slopes shall be seeded to grass and have an angle of cut sufficiently shallow to 
permit maintenance. 
(e) ?Drainage. Drainage pipes, culverts, headwalls, catch basins and ditches shall be installed where 
deemed necessary by the Board of Selectmen. All required drainage pipes shall have a diameter of 
not less than 15 inches; such pipes to be of RCP construction. Catch basins shall be located every 
300 feet and at all corners of intersections. All drainage rights and easements which are considered 
necessary in the opinion of the Board of Selectmen shall be procured by the person requesting 
acceptance of any street and conveyed at no cost to the Town of North Stonington by warranty deed 
in fee simple. 
(f) ?Construction of roadbed. All streets shall be constructed so as to have a base or road bed of not less 
than 12 inches of bank run or processed gravel passed through a four-inch sieve; provided, however, 
that if such street is to be constructed on land which the Board of Selectmen considers unstable the 
road bed shall first be excavated until stability is reached and then properly filled. All streets 
constructed on such unstable land shall have a base of such gravel of not less than 24 inches in 
depth. 
(g) ?Rolling. All such roadbeds shall be rolled by a roller of not less than ten-ton weight and the above 
measurements of gravel depth shall be taken after such rolling. 
(h) ?Surfacing. The surface shall consist of two layers of compacted bituminous concrete with a 
minimum thickness of two inches per layer. Bituminous concrete shall meet State standards. 
(i) ?Curbing. Curbing shall be machine-installed with compacted bituminous concrete with either 
standard curbing or cape cod curbing molds. 
(j) ?Drainage outfall. The storm and surface water drainage system required by the Board of Selectmen 
shall be constructed so that it has an outfall to a natural watercourse or adequate existing storm 
drainage system. 
(k) ?Guard rails. Guardrails shall be placed along all streets as deemed necessary by the Board of 
Selectmen and shall consist of such quantity and quality as it shall direct. 
(l) ?Name signs. Clearly legible and durable street name signs mounted in an appropriate manner shall 
be provided for all streets; these streets are to be marked with a standard concrete marker at each 
intersection as shall be required by the Board of Selectmen. 
(m) ?Existing roads. The following provisions apply to existing roads: 
(1) ?Access improvements. Whenever any subdivision is proposed for land accessible only by an 
unpaved street or an existing Town road which does not conform with minimum requirements of 
grade, alignment, width, drainage, and construction set forth in this article, or the subdivision or 
zoning regulations of the Town of North Stonington, and the Board of Selectmen determines 
that the subdivision plan would be contrary to the public safety unless such road was altered or 
improved where it fronts the proposed subdivision or beyond the limits of the proposed 
subdivision, the Board of Selectmen may order the improvement and/or alteration of such 
road(s) by and at the expense of the developer/sub divider. 
(2) ?Frontage improvements. Whenever any subdivision is proposed for land which fronts on an 
existing Town road which does not conform with the minimum requirements of width and 
construction set forth in this article, or the subdivision or zoning regulations of the Town of North 
Stonington, the developer/subdivider shall improve such frontage from the centerline of the road 
to the required frontage road line, in accordance with the requirements of this article, or the 
subdivision or zoning regulations of the Town of North Stonington. Where such improvement 
from the centerline is impractical, the Board of Selectmen may require improvements of 
comparable value to be performed along the existing road frontage of the subdivision or 
adjacent frontage impacted by the subdivision. In the alternative, the Board of Selectmen may 
require that the cost of such improvements shall be paid to the Board of Selectmen, or its 
designated agent, in lieu of the completion of such improvements by the developer/subdivider. 
Such payment shall be held in a separate fund to be used exclusively for the improvements of 
the subject road in ways which directly benefit the future owners of lots in the subdivision. In 
making the determinations set forth in the preceding two paragraphs, the Board of Selectmen 
shall take into account the road's ability to handle the increased volumes of traffic which will be 
generated by the proposed subdivision, the ability of school buses and emergency vehicles to 
travel the road safely, the drainage conditions of the road, and generally the ability of any 
vehicle to use the road safely. 
(3) ?Scenic roads; stone walls. Frontage improvements, as described in the proceeding subsection, 
may be modified by the Board of Selectmen in order to achieve the objectives of the Section 18-
5. In addition, the Board of Selectmen may modify any requirements for improvements 
described in this section in order to preserve existing stone walls or other historic items which 
are a part of the Town's historic character. Any modifications pursuant to this paragraph shall be 
in accordance with the Section 18-5 and planning and zoning regulations. 
(4) ?Specification and detail. All road improvements shall be constructed in accordance with the 
Town road ordinance, which may be amended from time to time. 
(5) ?Watercourses. Where a watercourse separates an existing road from abutting property to be 
subdivided, provisions shall be made at the expense of the developer/subdivider for carrying 
such watercourse by means of culverts or other drainage structures. 
(6) ?School bus accommodations. The Board of Selectmen may require that accommodations be 
provided for school bus stops. These accommodations shall include a paved stopping lane off 
of the travel lane, good sight lines, and sufficient right-of-way to provide safe waiting areas. 
(7) ?Exemption. This Subsection (m) shall not apply to a subdivision which is limited to the creation 
of three or fewer building lots for conveyance to family members of the resident/owner. 
(Ord. of 11-22-1963(2),§ 1—12; Ord. of 9-8-2003(3); Ord. of 5-22-2018) 


Sec. 18-2. - Inspection, control, and drainage of road construction. 
(a) ?General purpose. All road and drainage construction work shall be subject to inspection and 
approval by the Board of Selectmen or its authorized agent; all such inspections and construction of 
roads and drainage systems shall be at the expense of the applicant and accomplished as set out in 
Subsections (b) and (c) below. Said Board or its authorized agent shall have free access to the work 
at all times and shall be deemed authorized to take material samples, cores and other tests as 
deemed necessary to determine compliance with these standards. 
(b) ?Requirements. 
(1) ?Maps and plans. Three copies of all approved subdivisions plans required in the North 
Stonington Planning and Zoning Commission subdivision regulations and as approved by the 
Planning and Zoning Commission, shall be provided to the Board of Selectmen. 
(2) ?Fee. The applicant shall deliver to the Board of Selectmen an inspection fee of seven percent 
of the bonding estimate as designated by the North Stonington Planning and Zoning 
Commission, as set forth in their subdivision regulations, for improvements in the subdivision. 
This fee must be received by the Board of Selectmen before any work may commence. This fee 
may be used to hire an engineer, to be designated by the Selectmen, to inspect road work and 
other improvements as the applicant proceeds, to ensure that the improvements are built 
according to the plan. 
(3) ?Schedule of construction. The applicant shall provide the Board of Selectmen, Planning and 
Zoning Commission and Engineer with a construction schedule and time frame for the project. 
Upon completion of each phase, the applicant shall submit written notice to the Engineer (copy 
to the Board of Selectmen and Planning and Zoning Commission) indicating that the completed 
work is ready for inspection. The applicant shall not proceed with the next phase of the project, 
as listed below, until the Engineer has issued written notice of approval of the completed work 
to the applicant (copy to the Board of Selectmen and Planning and Zoning Commission). The 
phases are as follows: 
a. ?Prior to commencing site clearance and after the construction work has been staked out 
and after installation of sediment and erosion control measures; 
b. ?Prior to commencing excavation of the layout of the street; 
c. ?Prior to commencing installation of drainage and other utilities; 
d. ?Prior to backfilling structures and drainage pipes, facilities and other utilities; 
e. ?Prior to placement of the base course on the subgrade of a street, final grading and 
installation of embankments and curbing; and 
f. ?Prior to commencing construction of the paved surface of a street. 
(c) ?Inspections. The Engineer shall have three business days in which to inspect the work in each of 
the above described stages. No work shall begin on the succeeding stage of construction until the 
required inspection has been made and approved by the Engineer in writing. The Engineer may 
issue a stop work order if in his judgment the construction project or any stage thereof is not being 
carried out in accordance with the applicable plans, or if unforeseen field circumstances are 
encountered for which the approved plans are insufficient; the Engineer shall withdraw such stop 
work order and reinstate work when he determines that here is compliance therewith. The Engineer 
will provide the Board of Selectmen and the Planning and Zoning Commission with written 
notification of such stop work order or withdrawal notices. 
(d) ?Acceptance by the Town. Upon completion of the road construction and Engineer's certification that 
the road meets all requirements, plans, specifications, etc., of the Planning and Zoning Commission 
and the Board of Selectmen, the Board of Selectmen will submit the road to a Town Meeting and 
endorse its acceptance into the Town's road system, providing the road meets the standards set 
forth in the Town's road ordinance and the applicant has complied with the requirements of this 
section. 
(e) ?As-built plans. A set of as built mylar plans, certified by the Engineer and acceptable for recording 
with the Town Clerk, showing the road drainage and other improvements must be provided to the 
Board of Selectman. The mylar plans shall be recorded with the Town within 15 business days of 
receipt by the Board of Selectmen. At the same time, two paper copies of as built plans shall be 
submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission and two paper copies shall be submitted to the 
Board of Selectmen. 
(f) ?Form of conveyances. Conveyances shall describe the land involved and the privileges of the Town 
in a form acceptable to the Board of Selectman and shall be duly executed. Such conveyances shall 
be accompanied by: 
(1) ?A copy of the abstract of title; 
(2) ?A certificate of title; 
(3) ?Waiver of mechanics' liens in form acceptable to the Town Attorney; 
(4) ?A letter signed by the Tax Collector certifying that any taxes due the Town of North Stonington 
have been paid; and 
(5) ?Easements as required for utilities across lots or centered on rear or side lots lines shall be 
provided where necessary and shall be at least 12 feet wide. For drainage easements see 
Subsection (g)(8) of this section. 
(g) ?Drainage design and construction. 
(1) ?Storm drains and designs. Storm drainage for all roads shall be planned and designed in 
accordance with the following standards: 
a. ?Pipes and ditches. Sufficient pipe shall be installed to carry existing water courses in the 
road right-of-way and to drain both the proposed road or roads and extensions thereof or 
other streets which, base on topography will be served by the same drainage system. 
b. ?Open ditches or channels. No open ditches or channels shall be provided in the road right-
of-way except with the express written permission of the Board of Selectmen; and 
adequate provisions are made to maintain the standard cross-section and for protective 
guideposts or rails as may be required to insure the public safety. Road drainage systems 
shall be coordinated with general drainage requirements for the use and development of 
the adjoining land. 
c. ?Storm water. Where feasible, storm water should be directed to enter the nearest open 
stream channel. Storm water shall not be permitted to cross any roadway upon the 
surface, but must be piped underground. 
(2) ?Design storm. Flows for roadways and roadway storm drains shall be designed using a 
minimum of 25-year design storm frequency. Flows developed for drainage areas with no 
established watercourse shall be based on a 25-year design storm frequency. 
(3) ?Drainage basins. Drainage basins with designated water courses shall use a design frequency 
of 50 years for average annual daily stream flows of less that five c.f.s., and 100 years for 
average annual daily stream flows greater than five c.f.s. It shall be the applicant's responsibility 
to adequately demonstrate whether a stream flow is less than or greater than five c.f.s. using 
stream gauging stations, published government documents and other acceptable statistical 
rainfall data as determined by the Town Engineer. 
(4) ?Design methods. The Rational Method may be used for drainage areas of 200 acres or less. 
For areas greater than 200 acres, the SCS method may be used or such other method may be 
used as approved by the Board of Selectman and/or the Town Engineer. 
(5) ?Pipe designs. The minimum size of a storm water pipe shall be 15 inches in diameter. 
Coefficients used in design for reinforced concrete pipe shall be N=0.015. The minimum slopes 
of pipes shall be 0.5 percent. Pipe, except for under drains, shall be laid on straight alignments, 
both horizontally and vertically, with manholes and catch basins providing access at all 
deflection points or at the junction of two or more lines. The open end of any pipe shall be 
provided with an endwell, culvert end or other appropriate device the minimum cover over the 
top of the pipe shall be three feet. Culverts under street shall extend to the edge of the right-of-
way. 
(6) ?Spacing of catch basins. Drainage pipes, culverts, headwalls and catch basins shall be 
connected to a storm water pipe and shall be provided in sufficient number and suitable location 
to properly drain the surface. Catch basins shall be located every 300 feet and at all corners of 
intersections. 
(7) ?Drainage rights and easements. All drainage rights and easements shall be procured by the 
applicant and conveyed at no cost to the Town by warranty deed in fee simple. 
(8) ?Drainage easement width. The Town of North Stonington shall be granted the necessary 
drainage easement as required in the opinion of the Board of Selectmen for flows from the 
roadway storm drain system. Such easements shall be of adequate width (minimum of 12 feet 
width) to conform substantially to the lines of watercourses, drainage, channels or streams and 
to provide for construction, maintenance, or other necessary purposes. 
(9) ?Discharge. The discharge of all storm water shall be into suitable streams or rivers or into Town 
or State drains or ditches or other Town drainage facilities with adequate capacity to carry the 
additional water. Where the discharge shall be into private property adjoining the street, proper 
easements and discharge rights shall be secured by the applicant for the Town before approval 
of the drainage plan. Discharge shall be done in a manner that protects watercourses and 
wetlands from pollution and shall not increase flood hazard due to increase in runoff. 
Editor's note— The date of the Town Meeting from which this section was derived was not 
available at the time of this codification. 


Sec. 18-3. - Excavation permits. 
(a) ?Written approval. No person or corporation shall excavate within the confines of any Town highway 
in the Town of North Stonington without securing the prior written approval of the Selectmen of the 
Town. 
(b) ?Bond required. Before granting such written approval, the Selectmen shall require a bond in an 
amount sufficient to restore the highway to its original condition, with such surety as they deem 
appropriate. 
(Ord. of 8-20-1970(3), §§ 1,2) 


Sec. 18-4. - Driveway permits. 
(a) ?Definitions. For the purpose of this section , the term "Town highway" shall include the untraveled 
portion of the highway right-of-way as well as the traveled portion of the highway and shall include 
any highway or street maintained by the Town of North Stonington. 
(b) ?Permits. No person shall construct a new driveway, relocate an existing driveway or substantially 
alter an existing driveway leading onto a Town Highway without first obtaining a permit from the Land 
Use Department. Driveways shall conform to all applicable Zoning and Subdivision Standards. In 
addition to the approval by the Zoning Official or Planning and Zoning Commission, the application 
shall be reviewed and approved by the Highway Foreman. In determining the advisability of issuing a 
permit, the Highway Foreman shall include in their consideration the location of the driveway with 
respect to its effect on highway drainage, highway safety, the width and character of the highway 
affected, the density of traffic on the highway and the character of the traffic. A $1,500.00 bond shall 
be posted for each permit issued, and will be returned at the time of issuance of the certificate of 
compliance. 
(c) ?Driveway specifications. The Board of Selectmen, in coordination with the Planning and Zoning 
Commission and Highway Department, may establish driveway specifications and other 
requirements to carry out the purpose of this section. 
(d) ?Delegation. The Board of Selectmen may delegate their powers and authority under this section to 
the foreman of the Highway Department of the Town of North Stonington. 
(e) ?Violations. Any person who violates any provisions of this section may be fined not more than 
$25.00 for each offense. Each day that a violation exists shall be a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 8-30-1982(2), §§ 1—4; Ord. of 2-7-2005, §§ 1—4; Ord. of 5-22-2018) 


Sec. 18-5. - Designation of scenic roads. 
(a) ?State highways. The Planning and Zoning Commission may designate accepted and maintained 
Town highways or any portions thereof as scenic roads. No State highway or portion thereof may be 
designated as a scenic road under this section. 
(b) ?Town roads. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall consider designating as a scenic road only 
those Town roads which are free of intensive commercial development and intensive vehicular traffic 
and which meet at least one of the following criteria: 
(1) ?It is unpaved; 
(2) ?It is bordered by mature trees or stone walls; 
(3) ?The traveled portion is no more than 20 feet in width; 
(4) ?It offers scenic views; 
(5) ?It blends naturally into the terrain; or 
(6) ?It parallels or crosses over brooks, streams, lakes or ponds. 
(c) ?Public hearing. When a highway is to be considered for designation as a scenic road, the Planning 
and Zoning Commission shall schedule a public hearing on the proposal. Hearing notices and 
deadlines shall be in accordance with the provisions of G.S. § 8-7d. Notification of the public hearing 
and the proposed designation shall be sent by the Planning and Zoning Commission to the Board of 
Selectmen and the owners of lot frontage abutting to the portion of the highway which is proposed to 
be designated as a scenic road. 
(d) ?Vote. Following the public hearing, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall vote on the proposed 
designation pursuant to the procedures set out in G.S. § 8-7d. The designation shall become 
effective upon such date as the Planning and Zoning Commission shall establish. Any or all of the 
proposed length of highway may be designated as a scenic road, under this section unless the 
owners of a majority of the frontage abutting that designated portion of the highway agree to the 
designation by filing a written statement of approval with the Town Clerk of the Town of North 
Stonington on or before the date on which the designation is to become effective. 
(e) ?Rescinding designation. The scenic road designation may be rescinded by the Planning and Zoning 
Commission using these same procedures; also necessary is the written concurrence of the owners 
of a majority of the road frontage abutting the portion of the highway whose designation as scenic 
road is to be rescinded. 
(f) ?Appeal. Any person aggrieved by a designation of a highway or portion of a highway as a scenic 
road pursuant to this section by the Planning and Zoning Commission may appeal such designation 
in the manner and utilizing the same standards of review provided for appeals from the decisions of 
the Planning and Zoning Commission under G.S. § 8-28. 
(g) ?Petition to alter a scenic road. Any person and/or Town agency may petition the Planning and 
Zoning Commission to alter or improve a scenic road. 
(h) ?Vote on altering or improving scenic road. Any road which has been designated as a scenic road 
under this section may be altered or improved, including but not limited to widening of the right-of-
way or traveled portion of the highway, paving, changing the grade, straightening, removing of stone 
walls or removing of mature trees, only upon a simple majority vote of all members of the Planning 
and Zoning Commission. The Planning and Zoning Commission must state in its minutes the 
reasons for such future alterations and improvements. 
(Ord. of 9-28-1987, §§ 1—4) 
State Law reference— Designation of scenic roads, G.S. § 7-149a. 


Sec. 18-6. - Placing objects on road that obstruct or interfere with the removal, sanding or salting of 
snow or ice on Town roads. 
(a) ?Unlawful. No person shall park or leave stationary on any Town road within the Town of North 
Stonington any motor vehicle, trailer or other object so as to impede, obstruct or interfere with the 
removal, sanding or salting of snow or ice on such Town roads by the Town, its agents or servants. 
(b) ?Removal of vehicle. The Town Selectmen or their agent may remove any motor vehicle, trailer or 
object which impedes, interferes or obstructs the removal, sanding, salting of snow or ice on any 
Town road, and the cost of such removal, including the cost of storage of any motor vehicle, shall be 
borne by the owner of such motor vehicle, trailer or object. 
(c) ?Penalty. The owner or operator of any motor vehicle, trailer or object which is parked so as to 
impede, obstruct or interfere with the removal, sanding or salting of snow or ice on any Town road 
shall be guilty of an offense. 
(Ord. of 2-1-1967) 


Sec. 18-7. - Street naming and property numbering. 
(a) ?Street naming and property numbering ordinance. There shall be a systematic and orderly naming 
and renaming of streets and numbering and renumbering of properties to facilitate the 
implementation and effective operation of the Emergency 911 system which is mandated by the 
State of Connecticut General Statutes. 
(b) ?Designation of street names and property numbers. When used in this section, the term street 
means any street, highway, private road, paper road, pentway, right-of-way and/or thoroughfare. 
When used in this section, the term property number means a number assigned to a property for a 
specific identification of that property. The property numbering placement is the responsibility of the 
property owner. 
(1) ?The North Stonington Assessor's Office shall assign property numbers to all property fronting 
on any street within the Town and may change any and all property numbers. All property 
number changes will be submitted to the Board of Selectmen for their approval. All future 
property number changes will be handled under subsection (b)(7). Whenever possible, existing 
street names and property numbers will be utilized. The town may assign property numbers or 
names on streets which have not been accepted by the Town. However, this will not be 
construed as acceptance of that street and as such, the Town's liability will not change. 
(2) ?One whole number shall be assigned based on the zoning descriptions in the Town's zoning 
and subdivision regulation for roadway. Improved and vacant property on each street will be 
assigned a number when the parcel is approved for development. 
(3) ?Starting from the point of origin, even numbers will be assigned to properties on the right hand 
side of the street and odd numbers will be assigned to properties on the left hand side. 
(4) ?The North Stonington Assessor's Office shall assign property numbers to condominium and 
apartment complexes. As a general rule each property parcel will be assigned one property 
number. Internal units will be assigned with sub-numbers or letters, not individual property 
numbers. 
(5) ?When rear lots exist or are created in a subdivision, special attention will be given to ensure a 
sequential numbering system can be maintained. 
(6) ?New street names in subdivisions shall be proposed by the subdivider, reviewed by the North 
Stonington Land Use Office and when approved, included as part of a final subdivision plan. 
The naming of all new streets must be approved by the North Stonington Land Use Office. 
(7) ?All property numbering systems proposed by the subdivider will be submitted as part of the 
subdivision plan and will be reviewed by the North Stonington Assessor's and Land Use Office. 
The North Stonington Land Use Office will then recommend the numbering system or change to 
the Board of Selectmen/Assessor's Offices for approval. Upon obtaining approval, the North 
Stonington Land Use Office will notify the North Stonington Assessor's Office, who will notify the 
appropriate law enforcement department, fire department, postal office, ambulance provider, 
utility companies, and the 911 numbering database agency. 
(8) ?No duplication of new street names shall be allowed. As safety factors dictate, the name of any 
existing street may be changed to prevent duplication of names. Similar sounding names are 
considered to be duplication regardless of spelling. Street names will be assigned by the North 
Stonington Planning Office and recommended to the board of selectmen for approval. Upon 
obtaining approval, the North Stonington Planning Office will notify the North Stonington 
Assessor's Office, who will notify the appropriate law enforcement department, fire department, 
postal office, ambulance provider, utility companies, and the 911 numbering database agency. 
(9) ?Property numbers on streets will be assigned by the North Stonington Assessor's Office. No 
building permit may be approved until the assessor's office has assigned a property number. 
The North Stonington Assessor's Office, will notify the appropriate law enforcement department, 
fire department, postal office, ambulance provider, utility companies, and the 911 numbering 
database agency. 
(c) ?Affixing of property numbers. Because quickly locating a property is of primary importance during an 
emergency, every property owner of improved property shall purchase and display the assigned 
number before the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. Property which is assigned a number that 
is different than the one in current use shall display the newly assigned number within 30 days of 
receiving notice of the new number. In the case of rental property, the property owner is responsible 
for posting the numbers as well as informing the tenants of their new address. 
(1) ?Property numbers shall be affixed to dwelling units or some object appurtenant thereto so as to 
be visible from and oriented toward the street from which the address is taken. When the 
structure is within 50 feet of the edge of the street, the assigned number shall be displayed on 
the front of the building in the vicinity of the front door or entry and visible from the street. If the 
structure is over 50 feet from the street or if the line of sight is obstructed by plantings or other 
objects, then the number is to be displayed on a post, fence, wall or mailbox at the property line 
adjacent to the driveway entrance. 
(2) ?The numbers shall be Arabic numerals at least three inches high or written in an easily 
readable sign and displayed on a contrasting background. 
(Ord. of 2-23-2015, §§ 1—3; Ord. of 5-22-2018) 


Sec. 18-8. - Maintenance of private easements and rights-of-way. 
(a) ?Residential real property. All residential land and buildings, but does not include property owned by 
the State of Connecticut or the Town of North Stonington. 
(b) ?Benefited property or property that benefits. Includes residential real property burdened by an 
easement or right-of-way, the owner of which residential real property uses such easement or right-
of-way. 
(c) ?Easement or right-of-way. A right to use adjoining property that transfers with the land. 
(d) ?The owner of any residential real property that benefits from an easement or right-of-way, the 
purpose of which is to provide access to such residential real property, shall be responsible for the 
cost of maintaining such easement or right-of-way in good repair and the cost of repairing or 
restoring any damaged portion of such easement or right-of-way. Such maintenance shall include, 
but not be limited to, the removal of snow from such easement or right-or-way. 
(e) ?If more than one residential real property benefits from such easement or right-a-way, the cost of 
maintaining and repairing or restoring such easement or right-of-way shall be shared by each owner 
of a benefited property, pursuant to the terms of any enforceable written agreement entered into for 
such purpose. In the absence of such agreement, the cost of maintaining and repairing or restoring 
such easement or right-of-way shall be shared by each owner of a benefited property in proportion to 
the benefit received by each such property. 
(f) ?Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (d) and (e) of this section, any owner of a benefited 
property who directly or indirectly damages any portion of the easement or right-of-way shall be 
solely responsible for repairing or restoring the portion damaged by such owner. 
(g) ?If any owner of a benefited property refuses to repair or restore a damaged portion of an easement 
or right-of-way in accordance with subsection (f) of this section, or fails, after demand in writing, to 
pay such owner's proportion of the cost of maintaining or repairing or restoring such easement or 
right-of-way in accordance with subsection (e) of this section, an action for specific performance or 
contribution may be brought in the Superior Court against such owner by other owners of benefited 
properties, either jointly or severally. 
(h) ?In the event of any conflict between the provisions of this section and an agreement described in 
subsection (e) of this section, the terms of the agreement shall control. 
(Ord. of 11-28-2016) 


Sec. 18-9. - Private roads approved for Town maintenance. 
(a) ?Private road. A road on privately-owned property open to public passage that has not been given to 
or accepted by a government entity. 
(b) ?This section shall govern the manner in which the Town may provide certain maintenance to private 
roads. 
(c) ?The Board of Selectmen shall perform a level of maintenance for the following private roads 
equivalent to that which was previously provided by the Town of North Stonington Highway 
Department through longstanding past practice, as reflected herein: 
Private Road 
Miles 
Type 
Level of Maintenance 
Armstrong 
Pentway 
0.41 
Unimproved 
Occasionally provide material; plow and sand after all accepted 
roads 
Avery Lane 
0.03 
Improved 
Surface patching/paving; regularly plow and sand 
Billings Road Ext. 
0.11 
Unimproved 
Grading; regularly plow and sand 
Cedars Road 
0.62 
Unimproved 
Regularly plow and sand 
Cranberry Bog Rd. 
0.52 
Unimproved 
Grading; regularly plow and sand 
Patricia Avenue 
0.60 
Unimproved 
Grading; regularly plow and sand 
Princess Lane 
0.31 
Improved 
Surface patching/chip sealing; regularly plow and sand 
Wrights Road 
0.50 
Unimproved 
Grading; regularly plow and sand 
 
(d) ?Maintenance above and beyond the foregoing, including but not necessarily limited to private road 
reconstruction, drainage work, and tree and brush removal, shall not be the responsibility of the 
Town. Owners of property shall continue to be responsible for any maintenance and repairs over and 
above that provided by the Town under this section. 
(e) ?Structural deterioration which may cause the said road to cease to be passable will be the 
responsibility of the owners, and the Town may require that said road be upgraded to passable 
condition before maintenance may continue. 
(f) ?Nothing in this section shall be construed to modify or change any requirements established by the 
Planning and Zoning Commission and/or included in the Town of North Stonington Zoning 
Regulations. 
(Ord. of 11-28-2016) 


Chapter 19 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Taxation, G.S. § 12-1 et seq. 


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 


Sec. 19-1. - Tax abatement program for new and existing businesses—Personal property improvements 
for manufacturing use. 
(a) ?The provisions of this section shall only apply if the personal property improvements are for 
manufacturing use. 
(b) ?Policy #1: If a party is willing to locate a quality manufacturing use on property in the Town of North 
Stonington, or to improve such existing facilities located on property in the Town of North Stonington, 
and in either event the personal property improvements increase the gross taxable assessment of its 
personal property from these improvements by an equal amount to or greater than $3,000,000.00, 
then the Town of North Stonington is willing to offer the following tax abatement incentives to such 
corporations and businesses: 
(1) ?Such tax abatement plan shall in no event exceed seven years in length; 
(2) ?If said corporation or business meets the conditions listed in subsection (b), the Town of North 
Stonington will be willing to enter into a seven-year tax abatement plan with such corporation or 
business, such that personal property taxes on the increase on the gross taxable assessment 
from improvements to personal property will be abated by: 
a. ?70 percent in the first year; 
b. ?60 percent in the second year; 
c. ?50 percent in the third year; 
d. ?40 percent in the fourth year; 
e. ?30 percent in the fifth year; 
f. ?20 percent in the sixth year; 
g. ?10 percent in the final year; 
(c) ?Policy #2: If a party is willing to locate a quality manufacturing use on property in the Town of North 
Stonington, or to improve such existing facilities located on property in the Town of North Stonington, 
and in either event the personal property improvement increase the gross taxable assessment of its 
personal property from these improvements by an amount equal to or greater than $500,000.00 then 
the Town of North Stonington is willing to offer the following tax abatement incentives to such 
corporations or businesses: 
(1) ?Such tax abatement plan shall in no event exceed two years in length; 
(2) ?If said corporation or business meets the conditions listed in subsection (c), the Town of North 
Stonington will be willing to enter into such a two-year tax abatement plan with such corporation 
or business, such that personal property taxes on the increase in gross taxable assessment 
from improvements to personal property will be abated by: 
a. ?70 percent in the first year; 
b. ?30 percent in the second year; 
(d) ?The following provisions shall apply to the above stated policies. 
(1) ?There shall be no abatement of taxation on any real property owned by said corporation or 
business; under this section. 
(2) ?In the event, however, that such corporation or business, within ten years after entering into 
such a tax abatement agreement with the Town of North Stonington: 
a. ?Substantially reduces its operations on its real property in the Town of North Stonington; 
b. ?Attempts to assign its rights under this agreement; or 
c. ?Sells or otherwise transfers the personal property, said corporation or business shall rebate 
to the Town of North Stonington a portion of the tax savings realized under the agreement, 
in accordance with the following schedule: 
1. ?On or before the fifth anniversary: 100 percent; 
2. ?On or before the sixth anniversary: 90 percent; 
3. ?On or before the seventh anniversary: 80 percent; 
4. ?On or before the eighth anniversary: 70 percent; 
5. ?On or before the ninth anniversary: 60 percent; 
6. ?On or before the tenth anniversary: 50 percent; 
(3) ?All tax abatement agreements entered into pursuant to this section shall: 
a. ?Comply with all Connecticut State laws and statutes; and 
b. ?Be reduced to a written agreement; the terms of which shall be agreed upon by the 
corporation or business and the Town of North Stonington, and by an affirmative vote of 
the Board of Selectmen and by an affirmative vote of the legislative body. 
(Ord. of 2-7-2005) 


Sec. 19-2. - Tax abatement program for new and existing businesses—Improvements for manufacturing, 
office or information technology uses. 
(a) ?The provisions of this section shall only apply if the improvements are for at least one of the 
following: 
(1) ?For manufacturing use; 
(2) ?For office use; or 
(3) ?For information technology. 
(b) ?Policy #1: If a party is willing to locate a quality manufacturing use, office use, or information 
technology use on property in the Town of North Stonington, or to improve such existing facilities 
located on property in the Town of North Stonington, and in either event (new construction or 
improvement of existing facilities) is willing to engage in construction or improvements and if this new 
construction or these improvements increase the gross taxable assessment of its real property from 
these improvements by an equal amount to or greater than $500,000.00, then the Town of North 
Stonington is willing to offer the following tax abatement incentives to such corporations and 
businesses: 
(1) ?Such tax abatement plan shall in no event exceed two years in length; 
(2) ?If said corporation or business meets the conditions listed in subsection (b), the Town of North 
Stonington will be willing to enter into a two-year tax abatement plan with such corporation or 
business, such that real estate taxes on the increase on the gross taxable assessment from 
improvements to real property will be abated by: 
a. ?70 percent in the first year; 
b. ?30 percent in the second year; 
(c) ?Policy #2: If a party is willing to locate a quality manufacturing use, office use, or information 
technology use on property in the Town of North Stonington, or to improve such existing facilities 
located on property in the Town of North Stonington, and in either event (new construction or 
improvement of existing facilities) is willing to engage in construction or improvements and if this new 
construction or these improvements increase the gross taxable assessment of its real property from 
these improvements by an amount equal to or greater than $3,000,000.00 then the Town of North 
Stonington is willing to offer the following tax abatement incentives to such corporations or 
businesses: 
(1) ?Such tax abatement plan shall in no event exceed seven years in length; 
(2) ?If said corporation or business meets the conditions listed in subsection (c), the Town of North 
Stonington will be willing to enter into such a seven-year tax abatement plan with such 
corporation or business, such that real estate taxes on the increase in gross taxable 
assessment from improvements to real property will be abated by: 
a. ?70 percent in the first year; 
b. ?60 percent in the second year; 
c. ?50 percent in the third year; 
d. ?40 percent in the fourth year; 
e. ?30 percent in the fifth year; 
f. ?20 percent in the sixth year; 
g. ?10 percent in the final year. 
(d) ?The following provisions shall apply to the above stated policies. 
(1) ?There shall be no abatement of taxation on any personal property owned by said corporation or 
business under this section. 
(2) ?In the event, however, that such corporation or business, within ten years after entering into 
such a tax abatement agreement with the Town of North Stonington: 
a. ?Substantially reduces its operations on its real property in the Town of North Stonington; 
b. ?Attempts to assign its rights under this agreement; or 
c. ?Sells or otherwise transfers the real estate, said corporation or business shall rebate to the 
Town of North Stonington a portion of the Tax Savings realized under the agreement, in 
accordance with the following schedule: 
1. ?On or before the fifth anniversary: 100 percent; 
2. ?On or before the sixth anniversary: 90 percent; 
3. ?On or before the seventh anniversary: 80 percent; 
4. ?On or before the eighth anniversary: 70 percent; 
5. ?On or before the ninth anniversary: 60 percent; 
6. ?On or before the tenth anniversary: 50 percent; 
(3) ?All tax abatement agreements entered into pursuant to this section shall: 
a. ?Comply with all Connecticut State laws and statutes; and 
b. ?Be reduced to a written agreement; the terms of which shall be agreed upon by the 
corporation or business and the Town of North Stonington, and by an affirmative vote of 
the Board of Selectmen and by an affirmative vote of the legislative body. 
(Ord. of 2-7-2005) 


Sec. 19-3. - Tax collector to retain payments. 
    The Town of North Stonington's tax collector is authorized to retain excess payments of taxes as 
long as the amount in excess is less than five dollars in accordance with Connecticut General Statutes. 
(Ord. of 10-20-2014) 


Secs. 19-4—19-18. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE II. - PROPERTY TAXES 


Sec. 19-19. - Single payment. 
    Any property tax due in the Town of North Stonington in an amount not in excess of $100.00 shall be 
due and payable in a single payment. 
(Ord. of 4-5-1982, § 1) 
State Law reference— Authority to so provide, G.S. § 12-144. 
(Ord. of 4-5-1982, § 2) 


Sec. 19-20. - Exemption for solar energy generating systems installed for private residential use. 
(a) ?Any exemption from property tax is authorized for any solar energy generating system (as defined in 
G.S. § 12-81(57)) installed for the generation of electricity for private residential use, provided such 
installation occurs on or after October 1, 1977, and before October 1, 1991. 
(b) ?This exemption shall only apply to the first 15 assessment years following the installation of such 
system. 
(c) ?Application for such exemption must be filed in accordance with State law within 30 days following 
the annual assessment date. 
(Ord. of 10-13-1977(1), §§ 1—3) 
State Law reference— Authority to provide for above exemption, G.S. § 12-81(57). 


Sec. 19-21. - Exemption for solar energy heating or cooling systems. 
(a) ?An exemption from property tax is authorized for a building, the construction of which is commenced 
on or after October 1, 1976, and before October 1, 1991, which is equipped with a solar energy 
heating or cooling system (as defined in G.S. 12-81(56)) or any building to which a solar energy 
heating or cooling system is added on or after October 1, 1976, and before October 1, 1991. 
(b) ?The extent of the exemption is the amount by which the assessment valuation of such real property 
equipped with such a system exceeds the assessed valuation of such real property equipped with 
the conventional portion of the heating or cooling system, exclusive of any portion of such system 
related to solar energy. 
(c) ?This exemption shall only apply to the first 15 assessment years following construction of such 
building or addition of any such system to a building. 
(d) ?Application for such exemption must be filed in accordance with law within 30 days following the 
annual assessment date. 
(Ord. of 10-13-1977(2), §§ 1—4) 
State Law reference— Authority to provide for above exemption, G.S. § 12-81(56). 


Sec. 19-22. - Exemption for specially equipped motor vehicles owned by disabled persons or parents of 
disabled child. 
(a) ?The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings 
ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Adaptive control device shall include, but shall not be limited to, any mechanical or electrical 
devices added to a standard motor vehicle to enable an individual with mobility restrictions to control 
the accelerator, foot brake, turn signals, dimmer switch, steering wheel and/or parking brake. 
    Motor vehicle means a vehicle that has been altered, reconfigured or has undergone 
mechanical or structural changes that permit a person with a disability to safely drive such vehicle or 
ride as a passenger therein. Motor vehicle shall include, but shall not be limited to, vehicles equipped 
with hand controls, hoists, lifts and other adaptive control devices. 
(b) ?Any motor vehicle owned by a person with disabilities or owned by the parent or guardian of such 
person shall be exempt from personal property taxation, provided such person or the parent or 
guardian thereof has filed the proper application with the Assessor's Office by the deadline of 
September 30 of each tax list year. 
(Ord. of 2-20-2001) 
State Law reference— Authority to grant such exemption, G.S. § 12-81c. 


Sec. 19-23. - Exemption for farm machinery and farm buildings. 
    Pursuant to the authority of G.S. § 12-91(b), the Town shall now hereby provide an additional 
exemption from property tax for all farm machinery qualified for exemption under G.S. § 12-91(a) to the 
extent of an additional assessed value of $100,000.00. Any such exemption shall be subject to the same 
limitations as the exemptions provided under G.S. § 12-91(a) and the application and qualification 
process provided in G.S. § 12-91(d). 
    Pursuant to the authority of G.S. § 12-91(c), the Town of North Stonington shall now hereby provide 
an exemption from property taxes for any building to the extent of an assessed value of $100,000.00 
used, actually and exclusively in farming, as defined in G.S. § 1-1. Such exemption shall not apply to any 
residence of such farmer and shall be subject to the application and qualification process provided in G.S. 
§ 12-91(d). 
(Ord. of 6-4-2007) 


Chapter 20 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate traffic, G.S. §§ 7-148(c)(7)(B), 14-162; rules of the road, 
G.S. § 14-212 et seq. 


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 


Sec. 20-1. - Buses prohibited on certain streets. 
(a) ?Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the 
meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different 
meaning: 
    Bus shall include but not be limited to "motor bus" as defined in G.S. § 14-1(28) as any public 
service motor vehicle operated in whole or in part on any street or highway in a manner affording a 
means of transportation by indiscriminately receiving or discharging passengers or running on a 
regular route or over any portion of a regular route or between fixed termini; "service bus" as defined 
in G.S. § 14-1(50) as any vehicle, except a van pool vehicle, designed to carry eight or more persons 
when used in private service for the transportation of persons whether with or without charge to the 
individual; and such motor bus or service bus chartered for the purpose of transporting persons. The 
term "bus" shall not include "school bus" as defined in G.S. § 14-275(a) as any motor bus, painted, 
constructed, equipped and registered in conformance with the Connecticut General Statutes and 
regularly used for transporting school children to and from school or school activities whether or not 
for compensation or under contract to provide such service. 
    Person shall include any individual, corporation, association, co-partnership, company, firm or 
other aggregation of individuals. 
    Specialty vehicles . Vehicles such as trolley buses or mini-buses that are 35 feet in length or 
less and carry 30 or fewer passengers are exempt. 
(b) ?Prohibited streets. No person shall operate any bus in the Town of North Stonington on the 
following roads located in the Town of North Stonington: 
Jeremy Hill Road, North Stonington 
Lantern Hill Road, North Stonington 
North Anguilla Road, North Stonington 
Stoney Brook Road, North Stonington 
Ryder Road 
Babcock Road 
Reutemann Road 
(c) ?Exemption if road is destination of bus. The Selectmen's Office may allow bus traffic on roads 
covered by this section if the destination of the bus is on the designated road and such use still 
allows for public health, safety and welfare. 
(d) ?Exemption in case of emergency. Nothing in this section shall prevent the use of the roads listed in 
Subsection (b) of this section on a temporary basis in a declared emergency. The Police Chief of the 
Town of North Stonington shall have the power to act in an emergency to reroute traffic on any of the 
listed roads on a temporary basis not to exceed 48 hours. The Board of Selectmen shall have the 
power to act in any emergency to reroute traffic on any of the listed roads on a temporary basis not 
to exceed ten days or in a declared emergency, until such time as the said emergency is determined 
by the Board to be over. For the purposes of this section, "emergency" shall mean a natural disaster, 
including a flood, fire, hurricane, or tornado, as well as major traffic accidents. 
(e) ?Transportation for community events. The Board of Selectmen can temporarily suspend this section 
to allow transportation services for community events, including but not limited to any holiday parade 
celebration. 
(f) ?Age Discrimination Act. Nothing in this section is intended to usurp the State and/or federal laws 
regarding transportation requirements mandated under the Age Discrimination Act. 
(g) ?Penalty for violation. Any person violating the terms of this section shall be fined $100.00 for each 
offense to be collected by the Town Clerk and deposited in the General Fund. 
(Ord. of 1-16-2001(2), §§1.1—1.6; Ord. of 8-27-2001(1)) 


Secs. 20-2—20-20. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE II. - PARKING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Parking, G.S. § 14-251 et seq. 


Sec. 20-21. - Municipal non-moving traffic violation ticket; penalties. 
(a) ?The Board of Selectmen is authorized to create a non-moving traffic violation ticket to be issued by 
the Resident State Trooper or his designee for local traffic infractions. The Board of Selectmen is 
authorized to determine fines for such infraction. All fees for such are to be collected by the Town 
Clerk and deposited to the General Fund. 
(b) ?The following list of non-moving traffic violations and penalties for the violations of such shall 
become part of this section: 
(1) ?No parking area, $25.00 each violation. 
(2) ?No parking tow zone, $25.00 each violation. 
(3) ?No parking safety lane, $25.00 each violation. 
(Ord. of 1-16-2001(1)) 


CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
This is a listing of the ordinances of the city used in this Code. Repealed or superseded laws at 
the time of the codification and any omitted materials are not reflected in this table. 
Ordinance  
Number 
?Date 
Section 
?Section  
this Code 
1 
10-?4-1954 
1—3 
13-1 
4 
?4-?7-1958 

2-78 
6 
10-20-1959 
5 
5-1 

?4-26-1962(Ord.) 
1 
12-19 



12-28 


2—9 
12-20—12-27 


11—13 
12-29—12-31 

?1-31-1963(1)(Ord.) 
1-4 
2-54 

?1-31-1963(2)(Ord.) 
1—5 
5-1 

?6-?3-1963(Ord.) 
1 
16-1 


2(a)—(c) 
16-1 

11-22-1963(Ord.) 
1 
16-1  
18-1 


2 
16-1  
18-1 


3 
16-1  
18-1 


4 
16-2, 16-3  
18-1 


5 
18-1 


6 
16-2, 16-3  
18-1 


7 
18-1 


8 
16-3 



18-1 


9—12 
18-1 

?2-?1-1967(Ord.) 

18-6 

12-13-1967(Ord.) 

13-2 

?8-20-1970(1)(Ord.) 
1—4 
16-1 

?8-20-1970(3)(Ord.) 
1, 2 
18-3 

?8-20-1970(Ord.) 
1, 2 
5-2 

?9-10-1970(Ord.) 
1—11 
5-60 


12 
5-3 

?1-31-1972(Ord.) 
1 
5-4 



9-3 


2 
5-4  
9-3 


3 
9-3 

10-?3-1972(Ord.) 
1 
11-46 


2 
11-47, 11-48 


3—5 
11-49—11-51 


6, 7 
11-19, 11-20 


8 
11-52 


9 
11-21 


10 
11-53 


12 
11-22 

?4-25-1974(Ord.) 
1—9 
15-19—15-27 

10-13-1977(1)(Ord.) 
1—3 
19-20 

10-13-1977(2)(Ord.) 
1—4 
19-21 

?3-?2-1978(2)(Ord.) 

2-79 

?3-?2-1978(3)(Ord.) 

2-80 

?3-22-1979(1)(Ord.) 
1—5 
7-19—7-23 

?2-25-1980(Ord.) 
1 
9-3 

?4-?5-1982(Ord.) 
1, 2 
19-19 

?8-30-1982(2)(Ord.) 
1—4 
18-3 

?3-19-1984(Ord.) 
1 
2-54 

?3-19-1984(Res.) 

2-1 

?4-?2-1984(Ord.) 
1.0 
10-20—10-23 


2.0 
10-19 


3.0 
10-24—10-30 


4.0 
10-49—10-53 


5.0 
10-80—10-86 

?7-15-1985(Ord.) 

16-2, 16-3 

12-15-1986(1)(Ord.) 

16-2, 16-3 

12-15-1986(2)(Ord.) 

8-1 

12-15-1986(3)(Ord.) 
1—6 
2-56 

12-15-1986(4)(Ord.) 
1—5 
14-1 

?7-13-1987(Ord.) 

2-54 

?9-28-1987(Ord.) 
1—4 
18-5 

?5-31-1988(Ord.) 
1, 2 
2-23 

?7-17-1989(Ord.) 

2-55 

?4-23-1990(Ord.) 

14-23 

?3-25-1991(Ord.) 
2 
2-57 

?2-24-1992(Ord.) 
1—3 
17-60—17-62 

10-19-1992(Ord.) 

2-58 

11-23-1993(Ord.) 
      Added 
2-2 

11-14-1994(1)(Ord.) 

2-81 

11-14-1994(2)(Ord.) 
1, 2 
5-27 

11-14-1994(3)(Ord.) 
1, 2 
11-48 

11-28-1994(Ord.) 

16-3 

?9-?9-1996(Ord.) 
1—10 
17-19—17-28 

12-23-1996(1)(Ord.) 
1—5 
6-19—6-23 


6—12 
6-50—6-56 


13—19 
6-86—6-92 


20—23 
6-113—6-116 

12-23-1996(2)(Ord.) 
I—IX 
6-146—6-154 

?5-27-1997(Ord.) 
1—3 
2-24 

?9-?8-1997(Ord.) 

16-3 

?2-22-1999(Ord.) 
I 
17-83—17-96 

?9-25-2000(Ord.) 
Arts. I—VI       Rnbd 
9-3 


      as 
9-21 


      Added 
9-22—9-27 

?1-16-2001(1)(Ord.) 

20-21 

?1-16-2001(2)(Ord.) 
1.1—1.6 
20-1 

?2-20-2001(Ord.) 

19-22 

?8-27-2001(1)(Ord.) 

20-1 

?8-27-2001(2)(Ord.) 
1—2 
6-180 

?8-27-2001(3)(Ord.) 

5-28 

?8-27-2001(4)(Ord.) 

2-24 

?8-?5-2002(Ord.) 
I—X 
6-146—6-155 

?9-?9-2002(1)(Ord.) 

4-19 

?9-?9-2002(2)(Ord.) 

2-23 

?9-?8-2003(1)(Ord.) 

9-2 

?9-?8-2003(2)(Ord.) 

9-1 

?9-?8-2003(3)(Ord.) 

18-1 

?5-10-2004(Ord.) 

16-4, 16-5 

?2-?7-2005(Ord.) 
1—4 
18-4 

?2-?7-2005(Ord.) 
1—3       Added 
19-1 

?2-?7-2005(Ord.) 
1—3       Added 
19-2 

?4-10-2005(Ord.) 
1—10       Added 
6-191—6-200 

?8-?1-2005(memo) 

16-3 

?9-25-2006(Ord.) 

2-55 

?9-25-2006(Ord.) 
1—3 
16-1(a)—(c) 


4 
16-2(a) 

?6-?4-2007(Ord.) 
      Added 
19-23 

12-17-2007(1)(Ord.) 
      Added 
6-221—6-225 

12-17-2007(2)(Ord.) 
1, 2       Rpld 
11-91, 11-92 


      Added 
11-91, 11-92 

?6-16-2008(Amd.) 

2-54(c) 

?9-29-2008(Ord.) 
1       Added 
2-56(f) 

?4-?6-2009(Amd.) 

2-54(c)(1) 

?4-?6-2009(Amd.) 

16-3 


      Dltd 
16-4 


      Added 
16-4 


      Dltd 
16-5 

?8-10-2009(Ord.) 
      Rpld 
17-83—17-96 


1, 2       Added 
17-83, 17-84 


III—XV       Added 
17-85—17-97 

?4-?5-2010(Ord.) 
      Added 
2-59 

?5-24-2010(Ord.) 
      Added 
16-6 

?1-24-2011(Ord.) 

3-1 

?1-24-2011(Ord.) 
      Added 
9-28 

?6-13-2011(Ord.) 
      Dltd 
10-19—10-30 



10-49—10-53 



10-80—10-86 



10-116 



10-146—10-150 


      Added 
10-19—10-31 



10-49—10-53 



10-80—10-86 



10-116 



10-146—10-150 

?4-10-2006(Ord.) 
      Added 
16-7 

10-22-2013(Amd.) 

2-54 

10-22-2013(Ord.) 
      Added 
2-60 

?5-12-2014(Ord.) 
1—3 
2-24 

10-20-2014(Ord.) 
      Added 
2-76(b) 

10-20-2014(Ord.) 
      Added 
19-3 

?2-23-2015(Ord.) 
1—3       Added 
18-7 

12-14-2015(Ord.) 
      Added 
2-61 

?3-14-2016(Ord.) 
      Added 
5-29 

11-28-2016(Ord.) 
      Added 
18-8, 18-9 

?4-24-2017(Ord.) 
      Added 
2-23(d) 

?9-18-2017(Ord.) 

9-21(b) 

?5-22-2018(Ord.) 

2-57 



5-1 



5-3 



5-60(c)—(h), (k) 



6-199 



7-20 



9-2(a)—(c) 



9-25(a) 



9-25(b)(2) 



9-26(b)(2) 


      Rpld 
10-19—10-31, 



10-49—10-53, 



10-80—10-86, 



10-116, 



10-146—  
10-150 



12-20 


      Rpld 
12-21—12-23 



12-24 


      Rpld 
12-25—12-28 



12-29 


      Rpld 
12-30, 12-31 



14-22(a), (c) 



15-27 



16-1(a), (e) 



16-3(d) 



16-6(1)c. 



18-1(h), (i) 



18-1(m)(2) 



18-4(b)—(d) 



18-7(b)(6), (7) 
 


CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE TOWN MEETINGS 
This is a listing of the Town Meetings of the town from which provisions used in this Code were 
derived. 
To
wn 
Me
etin
g  
Dat
e 
?
Sec
tion  
this 
Cod
e 
11-?
6-
193
4 
2-
76 
?1-
15-
194
2 
2-
77 
?5-
27-
195
7 
2-1 
?6-?
2-
201
4 
L.A. 
§ 
17 
11-
28-
201
6 
18-
8, 
18-
9 
 


STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of 
references to the General Statutes of Connecticut. 
G.S. 
Sec
tion?  
this 
Cod
e 
1-1 
1-2 

19-
23 
4-
124
i—
4-
124
p 
2-
58 
7-1 
et 
seq
. 
2-1 
7-
19 
2-
23 
7-
34b 
2-
23 
7-
38 
2-
23 
7-
100
k 
2-
26 
7-
129
a 
Ch. 
14 
7-
131
a 
9-1 
7-
136 
2-
54 
7-
148 
Ch. 
13 
7-
148
(c) 
11-
92 
7-
148
(c)(
2)(
B) 
5-
29 
7-
148
(c)(
4)(
B) 
2-
79 
7-
148
(c)(
4)(
D) 
2-
80 
7-
148
(c)(
4)(
H) 
Ch. 
17 
7-
148
(c)(
6)(
A)(i
) 
Ch. 
14 
7-
148
(c)(
6)(
C) 
Ch. 
18 
7-
148
(c)(
7)(ii
i) 
Ch. 
5, 
Art. 
III 
7-
148
(c)(
7)(
A)(i
v) 
Ch. 
12 
7-
148
(c)(
7)(
B) 
Ch. 
20 
7-
148
(c)(
7)(E
) 
6-
221 
7-
148
(c)(
7)(
H)(i
v) 
Ch. 
15 
7-
148
(c)(
7)(
H)(
viii) 
Ch. 
11 
7-
148
(c)(
8) 
6-
221 
7-
148
(c)(
10)(
A) 
1-7, 

6-
116 

6-
221 

17-
95 
7-
148
a 
1-1 
7-
149
a 
18-
5 
7-
152
c 
17-
21 
7-
246 
9-3 

9-
26 
7-
246
(f) 
11-
92 
7-
247 
9-
22 

9-
24 
7-
249 
9-
25 
7-
255 
9-
25 
7-
257 
9-
25 
7-
382 
2-
77 
8-
1c 
16-
4 
8-
4a 
16-
1 
8-
7d 
18-
5 
8-
19a 
16-
1 
8-
28 
18-
5 
9-
167
a 
2-
60 
9-
183
a 
8-1 
9-
185 
2-
23 

2-
24 
9-
187
(a) 
2-
24 
9-
188 
2-
61 
9-
205 
2-
55 
12-
1 et 
seq
. 
Ch. 
19 
12-
81(
56) 
19-
21 
12-
81(
57) 
19-
20 
12-
81c 
19-
22 
12-
91 
19-
23 
12-
117 
Cha
r. § 
16 
12-
144 
19-
19 
12-
289
a(h) 
Ch. 
6, 
Art. 
IV 

6-
179 
14-
1(2
8) 
20-
1 
14-
1(5
0) 
20-
1 
14-
162 
Ch. 
20 
14-
212 
et 
seq
. 
Ch. 
20 
14-
251 
et 
seq
. 
Ch. 
20, 
Art. 
II 
14-
275
(a) 
20-
1 
15-
136 
13-
2 
19a
-1a 
et 
seq
. 
Ch. 
11 
19a
-
36a 
Ch. 
11, 
Art. 
II 

11-
21 
19a
-
200 
et 
seq
. 
Ch. 
11 
19a
-
341 
6-
221 
20-
206
a et 
seq
. 
Ch. 
6, 
Art. 
II,  
Div. 
3 
21-
37 
Ch. 
15 
21-
64 
et 
seq
. 
Ch. 
12 
21-
85 
et 
seq
. 
Ch. 
12 
21a
-13 
et 
seq
. 
Ch. 
11, 
Art. 
II 
21a
-
240 
6-
92 
21a
-
242 
6-
56 

6-
92 
22-
327 
et 
seq
. 
Ch. 
4 
22-
339
d 
4-
19 
22-
a-
42 
9-2 
22a
-
22a
(i) 
17-
19 
22a
-
36
—
22a
-
45a 
9-2 
22a
-
207 
et 
seq
. 
Ch. 
17 
22a
-
220 
et 
seq
. 
Ch. 
17 
22a
-
220
(f) 
17-
19 

17-
21 
22a
-
220
a 
17-
60 
22a
-
220
a(i) 
17-
21 
22a
-
220
a(f) 
17-
19 
22a
-
226
d 
17-
21 
22a
-
250
(a) 
17-
19 

17-
21 
22a
-
354
a et 
seq
. 
16-
6 
22a
-
354
e 
16-
6 
22a
-
354
f 
16-
6 
22a
-
354
v 
16-
6 
22a
-
354
p 
16-
6 
25-
84 
2-
59 
25-
84
—
25-
98 
2-
59 
28-
1 et 
seq
. 
Ch. 
7, 
Art. 
II 

7-
19 
28-
7(a)
,  
28-
7(b
) 
7-
19, 
7-
20 
29-
252 
et 
seq
. 
5-2 
29-
254
a 
5-4 
29-
265
, 
29-
266 
5-1, 
5-2 
29-
401 
et 
seq
. 
5-3 
30-
1 
3-1 
30-
1 et 
seq
. 
Ch. 
3 

3-1 
51-
164
m 
4-
19 
53-
215 
13-
1 
53-
344 
6-
179 
53-
344
a 
6-
179 
ch. 
103 
9-
22 

9-
28 
ch. 
124 
6-
225 
126 
16-
1 
ch. 
184
,  
§ 
10-
397 
2-
52 
ch. 
205 
5-
60 
ch. 
517 
7-
19 
ch. 
541
, pt. 
IV 
5-3 
 
April 2, 2018
Table of Contents
Chapter 1 Purpose and Authority
101 Title
102 Authority
103 Purpose
104 Zoning Districts and Overlay Districts
105 Zoning Map
106 District Boundaries
107 Permits and Applicability
108 Consistency with State and Federal Law
Chapter 2 Interpretation
201 General Provisions Regarding the Application of These Regulations
202 Specifically Prohibited Uses
203 Enforcement
204 Interpretation of Terms
Chapter 3 General Provisions
301 Applicability
302 Aircraft Landing Areas
303 Alcoholic Beverages (Sale of)
304 Cemetery Preservation
305 Non-Conforming Uses, Structures, and Lots
306 Portable Storage Containers/PODS Units
307 Special Flood Hazard Area Requirements
308 Temporary Meteorological Tower
309 Trailer (Construction Office/ Construction Trailer)
310 Unregistered Motor Vehicle Storage and Outdoor Storage of Junk and Debris
311 Yard Sales
312 Signs
313 Driveways
Chapter 4 Dimensional Regulations
401 Minimum Lot Area
402 Minimum Buildable Area (MBA)
403 Minimum Street Frontage
404 Yard (Setback) Requirements
405 Maximum Impervious Surface Coverage
406 Maximum Building Height
Chapter 5 Residential Zoning Districts
500 Residential Zoning Districts
501 Dimensional Requirements
502 Permitted and Special Permit Uses
503 Residential Accessory Uses and Structures
504 Interior Building Lot
505 Cluster Development for Open Space Preservation
Chapter 6 Commercial and Industrial Zoning Districts
600 Commercial and Industrial Districts
601 Dimensional Requirements
602 Permitted and Special Permitted Uses
603 Commercial Accessory Uses/Structures/Activities
603.1 Accessory Apartment, Commercial Caretaker
April 2, 2018
603.2 Drive-Thru Window
603.3 Heliport
603.4 Personal Services, Accessory
603.5 Structured Parking Facility
604 Mixed Use (Residential and Commercial)
605 Mixed Use (Commercial and Industrial)
606 Planned Business Development
Chapter 7 Overlay Areas
701 Overlay Areas
702 Village Preservation Overlay Area
703 Water Supply Protection Overlay Area
704 Seasonal Use Overlay Area
705 Affordable Housing Overlay Area - Meadow Court
Chapter 8 Residential Special Zoning Districts
802 Senior Housing Community
Chapter 9 Business Special Zoning Districts
901 Design Development District (Master Planned Development)
902 Resort Commercial District (Master Planned Development)
Chapter 10 Supplemental Regulations
1001 Agriculture
1002 Special Provisions for Certain Residential Accessory Uses
1002.1 Accessory Apartments
1002.2 Home Occupation
1002.3 Kennel
1002.4 Recreational Vehicles
1002.5 Temporary Mobile Home/Trailer (Residential Use)
1002.6 Bed and Breakfast Establishments
1003 Commercial Services
1004 Country Inn
1005 Day Care/Nursery School
1006 Excavation
1007 Farm Winery
1008 Farm Winery Restaurant
1009 Golf Course Development
1010 Hospital
1011 Hotel
1012 Membership Club
1012.1 Membership Club (Firearms)
1012.2 Membership Club (No-Firearms)
1013 Micro-Assisted Living Facility
1014 Mobile Homes
1015 Public Utility Substation
1016 Recreational Campground
1017 Recreational Facility, Indoor and/or Outdoor Commercial
1018 Recreational Vehicle Park, Luxury
1019 Blank
1020 Veterinary or Animal Hospital
1021 Wind and Solar Energy Facilities
1021.1 Solar Energy Facility Standards
1021.2 Small-scale Wind Energy Facility (System) Standards
1021.3 Large-scale Wind Energy Facility Standards
April 2, 2018
1022 Wireless Communications Towers, Antennas and Facilities
Chapter 11 Site Design Standards
1101 Site Design Standards and Requirements
1102 Sustainable Development
1103 Landscape Design Standards and Requirements
1104 Parking Requirements and Design Standards
1105 Access Management
1106 Refuse Storage
1107 Outdoor Storage
1108 Outdoor Merchandise Display
1109 Architectural Character, and Historic and Landscape Preservation
1110 Outdoor Illumination
1111 Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Requirements
1112 Stormwater Management
1113 Consolidated Parcels
Chapter 12 Permits by Staff
1201 Zoning Permit
1202 Certificate of Zoning Compliance
1203 Change of Business/Commercial or Industrial Use of Buildings and Properties
1204 Property Line Adjustment/Lot Division (“Free Split”)
1205 Soil Erosion and Sediment Control (SE&SC) Plan
1206 Land Disturbance Permit
Chapter 13 Permits by Commission
1301 Preliminary Concept Plan
1302 Site Plan Application
1303 Special Permit Application
1304 Text Amendment Application
1305 Zone Change Application
1306 Procedural Requirements
Chapter 14 Zoning Board of Appeals
1400 Zoning Board of Appeals
Chapter 15 Separability and Effective Date
1501 Separability
1502 Effective Date
Chapter 16 Definitions
1600 Definitions
Appendices
Appendix A Illustrations
Appendix B Road Classifications
Appendix C Plot Plan Check Sheet
Appendix D Site Plan Check Sheet
Appendix E Master Plan Check Sheet
Chapter 1 – Purpose and Authority
1-1
101 TITLE
These Regulations shall be known as the “Zoning Regulations, Town of North Stonington,
Connecticut,” and are referred to herein as “these Regulations.”
102 AUTHORITY
These Regulations have been promulgated by the North Stonington Planning and Zoning
Commission, hereinafter referred to as the Commission, in accordance with and under the authority
prescribed by Chapter 124 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended. The Town’s initial
Zoning Regulations were adopted by the Commission on May 21, 1964.
103 PURPOSE
These Regulations are adopted to further the goals and objectives of the Plan of Conservation and
Development and to lessen congestion in the streets; to secure safety from fire, panic, flood and
other dangers; to promote health and the general welfare; to provide adequate light and air; to
prevent the overcrowding of land; to avoid undue concentration of population; to facilitate the
adequate provision for transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other public
requirements; to preserve the character of the various parts of the Town; to conserve the value of
buildings; to protect historic factors; to control soil erosion and sedimentation; to encourage energy
efficient patterns of development, the use of solar and other renewable forms of energy, and energy
conservation; and to encourage the most appropriate use of land throughout the Town of North
Stonington. In addition, these Regulations are adopted to give consideration to the character of each
area and its peculiar suitability for particular uses; conserve the value of buildings and encourage
the most appropriate use of land throughout North Stonington; protect historic factors and
resources; protect existing and potential public surface and ground drinking water supplies; provide
for the development of housing opportunities, including opportunities for multifamily dwellings,
consistent with soil types, terrain and infrastructure capacity, for all residents of North Stonington
and the planning region; and provide for housing choice and economic diversity in housing,
including housing that will meet identified housing needs. Further, these regulations, and
subsequent amendments thereto, are enacted to carry out the purposes set forth in Chapter 124, and
particularly §8-2, of the Connecticut General Statutes.
104 ZONING DISTRICTS AND OVERLAY AREAS
The Town of North Stonington is divided into the following principal Zoning Districts:
(R40) High Density Residential District
(R60) Medium Density Residential District
(R80) Rural Residential Preservation District
(C) Commercial District
(VC) Village Commercial
(HC) Highway Commercial District
(ED) Economic Development District
(RC) Resort Commercial District
(I) Industrial District
In addition to the foregoing principal zoning districts, the following Overlay Areas have been
established:
(VPO) Village Preservation Overlay Area
(WSPO) Water Supply Protection Overlay Area
(SUO) Seasonal Use Overlay Area
Chapter 1 – Purpose and Authority
1-2
(AHO) Affordable Housing Overlay Area: Meadow Court
105 ZONING MAP
The boundaries of the various Zoning Districts and Overlay Areas are as shown on the “North
Stonington, Connecticut, Zoning Map” which accompanies, and which, with all explanatory
matters thereon, is a part of these Regulations. A copy of the Zoning Map, indicating the latest
amendments, shall be kept up-to-date in the Land Use Office and the Office of the Town Clerk for
the use and benefit of the public.
106 DISTRICT BOUNDARIES
In determining the boundaries of Zoning Districts shown on the Zoning Map, the following rules
shall apply.
106.1 Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following the center lines of
streets, highways, waterways or railroad rights-of-way or such lines extended, such center
lines shall be construed to be the boundaries.
106.2 Where district boundaries are not indicated as approximately following the center lines of
streets, highways, waterways or railroad rights-of-way or such lines extended, the
boundaries shall be determined in accordance with the following rules:
A. where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following the property
lines of parks or other publicly owned lands, such lines shall be construed to be
such boundaries;
B. in all cases where a district boundary line is located not farther than 15 feet away
from a lot line of record, such boundary line shall be construed to coincide with
such lot line; and
C. in all other cases where dimensions are not shown on the map, the location of
boundaries shown on the map shall be determined by the use of the scale appearing
thereon.
D. When a district boundary cannot be determined using the methods described
above, the Commission may use any reasonably available information to establish
the location of the boundary.
106.3 Lot Divided by District Boundary. If a lot is divided by a district boundary, the bulk
regulations for the district having the largest minimum lot area requirement shall be
applicable to the entire lot. For example, if a lot is divided by the boundary between the
R40 and R60 Zoning Districts, the bulk regulations for the R60 Zoning District shall apply
to the whole lot. The buffers required for any lot divided by a district boundary shall be
determined in each part by the buffer requirements for the district in which that part is
located. The uses allowed on any lot divided by a district boundary shall be determined in
each part by the use regulations for the district in which that part is located. This provision,
however, shall not be deemed, on its own, to allow multiple principal uses on a single lot.
For example, if a single-family home is already located on a lot divided by the boundary
between a residential and commercial district, no commercial use may be made of that
portion of the lot lying in the commercial district.
Chapter 1 – Purpose and Authority
1-3
107 PERMITS AND APPLICABILITY
A. No building and/or portion of a building shall be erected, moved or structurally altered; nor
shall any use be established or changed; nor shall any excavation be made for a proposed
building or structure, until a Zoning Permit has been issued by the Zoning Enforcement Officer
or the Commission indicating conformance:
1. with these Regulations; or
2. to a Site Plan or Special Permit approval granted by the Planning and Zoning
Commission; or
3. to a variance granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
B. No building and/or portion of a building shall be erected, moved or structurally altered until a
Building Permit has been issued by the Building Official and in most instances, approval has
given by Ledge Light Health District.
C. No Accessory use/structure shall be established/erected without first establishing/erecting a
principal use/structure except as provided for elsewhere in these regulations.
108 CONSISTENCY WITH STATE AND FEDERAL LAW
These Regulations are intended to comply with all applicable provisions of state and federal law.
In particular, many of the procedural requirements set forth in these Regulations are based solely
on state requirements that were in effect at the time of adoption. In the event that state or federal
law is later modified or is determined by a court to be inconsistent with any provisions of these
Regulations, it is the intention of the Commission that the relevant provisions shall be deemed
superseded by the applicable requirements of state or federal law and that those requirements shall
be applied as though they were expressly incorporated herein.
Chapter 2 – Interpretation
2-1
201 GENERAL PROVISIONS REGARDING THE APPLICATION OF THESE REGULATIONS
201.1 Prohibited if not permitted
Any use of land, buildings or structures not expressly permitted by these Regulations as a
principal use in a particular Zoning District, or allowable as an accessory use to such a
principal use, is prohibited in that District.
201.2 Application of Other Laws
Except as expressly provided herein, these Regulations operate independently from laws
and regulations established by agencies other than the Commission. The fact that a use,
including a building or other structure, may comply with these Regulations does not mean
that it complies with all other applicable laws, regulations or other legal restrictions or
requirements. Therefore, the issuance of any permit or approval by the Commission or its
authorized agent(s) does not necessarily mean that a landowner has obtained all necessary
permits or approvals for the use, or that the use may be lawfully established without such
other permits or approvals. By way of example only, the Commission might issue a permit
for a use that is, nonetheless, not allowable due to private land restrictions or because state
or federal law may restrict such use. The Commission has no legal authority to determine
whether legal restrictions other than those established by these Regulations, or by the North
Stonington Subdivision Regulations, apply to any particular parcel of land. Likewise, the
Commission has no responsibility to alert an applicant or landowner about the possible
application of any other laws, regulations, or similar restrictions that may affect any parcel
of land.
201.3 Conflicting Standards
When two or more differing standards are provided in these Regulations for any use, the
most restrictive provision shall apply.
210.4 References to Statutes and Regulations
Whenever any reference is made in these Regulations to a federal or state statute or
regulation, the reference shall be interpreted to mean the statute or regulation as it may
have been most recently amended, revised or renumbered (i.e., the most current form of
the statute or regulation), unless the context of the reference to the statute or regulation
requires a different interpretation.
202 SPECIFICALLY PROHIBITED USES
Without limiting the generality of the foregoing provisions, the following uses are expressly
prohibited in the Town of North Stonington:
A. landfills, resource recovery facilities, and non-municipal transfer stations, recycling facilities,
junk yards, private dumps, and the dumping or incineration of toxic substances, effluent,
garbage or rubbish;
B. uses that involve any activity, or the use of any material, defined as “obscene” or “obscene as
to minors” pursuant to §53a-193 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended;
C. the mining of trap-rock and/or other quarry-type stone;
D. circuses and amusement parks as principal uses;
Chapter 2 – Interpretation
2-2
E. the distillation of bones, and tanneries;
F. coal or petroleum distillation or derivation of byproducts; blast furnaces or smelting of ores or
metal, manufacture of explosives; manufacture of cement, asphalt, bituminous, lime, gypsum,
or plaster of paris, or chlorine, or carbolic, hydrochloric, nitric, picric or sulphuric acid; fat
rendering in the manufacture of tallow, grease or oil; refining and recovery of products from
fish or animal refuse; composting in excess of one hundred cubic yards per year (unless
associated with a permitted waste to energy facility or other approved biotech facility); fuel
manufacture and storage by other than a public utility company except for on-site use; and
G. the use, for permanent storage outside of a building, of trailers and all other cargo containers
customarily used for road or sea transportation. (See §306 for regulations governing temporary
storage containers).
H. No accessory structure is permitted on a lot until and unless a Principal Use of Land or Principal
Structure has already been established on the lot, except as specifically permitted in §704.1
concerning Storage Sheds in the Seasonal Use Overlay Area.
203 ENFORCEMENT
203.1 Authority
A. These Regulations may be enforced by the Planning & Zoning Commission or by any
person authorized by vote of the Commission to act as a Zoning Enforcement Officer
(ZEO).
B. Except as these Regulations may otherwise provide, a ZEO shall have all of the
enforcement powers set forth in CGS §8-12, including the authority to inspect and
examine any building, structure, place, or premises and to order the remedying of any
condition found to exist there in violation of any provision of these Regulations.
203.2 Violations
If a ZEO shall find that any provision of these Regulations is being violated, he or she shall
promptly notify the Commission of such violation(s). The Commission reserves the right
to specify the manner in which it wishes the ZEO to enforce these Regulations and may
adopt specific policies for enforcement. However, the ZEO shall have the discretion to
initiate an enforcement response without awaiting instruction or comment from the
Commission. Such responses may include, without limitation:
A. An order to discontinue any illegal use of land, buildings, structures, additions,
alterations, or structural changes thereto;
B. An order to discontinue any illegal work being done; and
C. An order to take specific actions to remedy any violations.
203.3 Penalties and Other Remedies
The Commission or a ZEO may seek any penalties or other remedies allowable under state
or federal law for violations of these Regulations.
Chapter 2 – Interpretation
2-3
204 INTERPRETATION OF TERMS
204.1 Interpretation of Specific Terms
For the purposes of these Regulations, certain words and terms shall be interpreted as
follows:
A. When not inconsistent with the context:
1. words in the present tense include the future and vice versa;
2. words in the singular include the plural and vice versa; and
3. words used in the masculine include the feminine and neuter and vice versa.
B. The word “shall” is mandatory and not discretionary.
C. The word “may” is permissive.
D. The words “zone”, “zoning district”, and “district” have the same meaning.
E. The phrase “used for” shall include the phrases “arranged for”, “intended for”,
“maintained for”, and “occupied for”.
F. The word “person” also includes a partnership, association, trust, corporation or other
legal entity.
G. The phrase “these Regulations” shall refer to the entire Zoning Regulations.
H. The words “building,” “structure,” “lot,” “land,” or “premises” shall be construed
as though followed by the words “or any portion thereof.”
204.2 Words and Terms Defined
Words defined in Chapter 16 of these Regulations shall be interpreted as set forth in that
Chapter.
204.3 Words and Terms Not Defined
Words and terms not defined in Chapter 16 of these Regulations shall be interpreted in
accordance with the following hierarchy.
A. If the word or phrase is defined or used in the North Stonington Subdivision
Regulations, it shall be interpreted to be consistent with such definition or usage.
B. If the word or phrase is defined in the Connecticut General Statutes, it shall be
interpreted to be consistent with such definition.
C. A comprehensive general dictionary; e.g., Webster’s Dictionary.
Chapter 3 – General Provisions
3-1
301 APPLICABILITY
This section shall apply to all properties in all zones. Unless another provision of these Regulations
expressly provides otherwise, no building or structure shall be erected, reconstructed, structurally
altered, or enlarged without a Zoning Permit, nor shall any building, structure or land be used or be
designed for any use other than is permitted in the zone in which such building, structure or land is
located. Applications for a Zoning Permit shall be accompanied by a plot plan or site plan
containing adequate information to allow the Zoning Enforcement Officer (ZEO) to determine
compliance with all relevant provisions of these Regulations. The ZEO may require that such plans
be certified or otherwise verified by a licensed surveyor, engineer, or other qualified professional
when necessary to determine such compliance.
302 AIRCRAFT LANDING AREAS
Aircraft landing areas are not authorized as a principal use of property under these Regulations.
However, a Special Permit may be issued for an aircraft landing area as an accessory use in an R80
Zoning District or any Commercial or Industrial Zoning District provided that all the applicable
provisions of Chapter 13 are satisfied, and further provided:
A. Such facilities must be located on lots containing at least 10 acres of land and shall be for the
use of only the owner or lessee of the property or the guests or invitees of such owner.
B. No compensation may be required of guests or invitees for the use of the landing area.
C. Tie-down and maintenance accommodations shall not be made available for more than five
aircraft at one time.
D. No landing area or aircraft parking shall be closer than 100 feet to a property line.
E. Such landing fields shall not be used for:
1. the carrying of products or passengers for hire;
2. student instruction;
3. rental of aircraft or storage space; or
4. air meets or exhibitions.
303 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES (SALE OF)
Alcoholic beverages of all types may be sold in packaged form at licensed package stores and retail
establishments. Beer and wine may be sold in grocery stores. Except as permitted elsewhere in
these Regulations, alcoholic beverages of all types may be sold in restaurants and other hospitality
uses only for consumption on the premises, and only if the restaurant or other hospitality use is the
primary use and the sale or consumption of alcohol an accessory use.
304 CEMETERY PRESERVATION
If, during its review of any Site Plan or Special Permit application, the Commission finds that the
lot or parcel that is the subject of the application contains a burial ground, graveyard, or cemetery,
the Commission may condition any approval of the application on modifying or limiting the
proposed activities in a manner that will prevent disturbance of, limit inappropriate access to, or
facilitate maintenance of the burial ground, graveyard or cemetery.
Chapter 3 – General Provisions
3-2
305 NON-CONFORMING USES, STRUCTURES, AND LOTS
305.1 Non-conforming Uses
A. A non-conforming use shall not be enlarged or expanded except as may be expressly
allowed elsewhere in these Regulations. No non-conforming use of an existing
building shall be extended to occupy land outside such building or space in another
building.
B. A non-conforming use of land shall not be moved to another part of a lot or to an
adjoining lot. No non-conforming use of a building shall be moved or extended to any
part of the building not manifestly arranged and designed for such use at the time the
use became non-conforming. A building containing a non-conforming use shall not be
moved unless the use is changed to a conforming use and all zoning requirements are
met.
C. Except as may be expressly allowed elsewhere in these Regulations, a non-conforming
use of land or of a building shall not be changed to any other non-conforming use. A
non-conforming use once changed to a conforming use shall not thereafter be changed
to a non-conforming use.
D. Normal upkeep, maintenance, and repair in a building occupied by a non-conforming
use is permitted provided that such work does not increase or expand the nonconforming
use or the building that houses the non-conforming use.
E. See §305.3.D of these Regulations regarding the division of lots that have more than
one residence, which is a nonconforming use of a single lot under these Regulations.
305.2 Non-Conforming Buildings and Structures
A. Any nonconforming structure lawfully existing at the time of adoption of these
Regulations, or any amendments hereto, may be continued as a nonconforming
structure.
B. Any non-conforming building or structure that contains a conforming use and that is
damaged by fire, collapse, explosion, neglect, casualty, or act of nature, may be
reconstructed, repaired, or rebuilt in the same location, but only to its previous floor
area and cubical content, and only if (1) such work does not increase the nonconforming
aspect of the structure or complies with other applicable parts of these
Regulations for the specific use and zone; and (2) any such reconstruction or rebuilding
process is commenced within one year of the date of damage.
C. A structure that is non-conforming because it does not comply with current yard or
setback requirements may not be expanded in such a way as to increase the total
volume of the building that does not comply with such requirements; e.g., the structure
may not be expanded vertically or horizontally within a required yard or setback area.
D. Normal maintenance and repair to a non-conforming building or structure are
permitted provided such work does not further violate the requirements of these
Regulations.
Chapter 3 – General Provisions
3-3
305.3 Non-Conforming Lots
A. Except as regulated in the SUOA (§704), nothing in these Regulations shall prevent
the construction of a permitted building or structure, or the establishment of a permitted
use in the relevant zoning district, on a lawfully existing parcel that does not contain
the required minimum area, minimum buildable area, or minimum lot frontage on a
street, provided that: (1) as of the date of initial adoption of these Regulations, and
continuously thereafter, the parcel was owned separately from an adjoining lot, as
evidenced by deed(s) recorded in the land records; and (2) a previously existing lot that
does not have frontage on an accepted street must have access to an accepted street
over a permanent right-of-way or easement.
B. Where two or more nonconforming lots are contiguous, and in one ownership, and
where at least one of the parcels is undeveloped, such parcels shall be combined or
merged to create a conforming lot or a more conforming lot to the extent possible.
C. A non-conforming lot shall not be altered in such a way as to increase the degree of
non-conformity.
D. Any lot that contained more than one residence building at the time of adoption of
these Regulations may be divided and sold as separate lots, provided that (1) each such
lot or lots conforms to the bulk and area requirements of the district in which it or they
are situated, and (2) each resulting lot contains at least one of the previously existing
residence buildings.
305.4 Exceptions
A. Additions may be made to single-family detached or duplex residential dwellings that
have become non-conforming solely as a result of a zone or text amendment change
that eliminated residential uses in the zone in which the relevant lot is now located.
However, all such additions (1) shall be solely for the use of the house as a residence
or for a lawfully permitted Home Occupation (see §504.2), and (2) must comply with
current yard, setback, height and other geometrical requirements of the relevant zone.
For purposes of this §305.4, single-story, accessory attached and/or detached garages
shall be considered residential additions.
B. Where two houses exist on one residential lot, each unit will be considered nonconforming
and each may be expanded in conformance with §305.4.A above.
305.5 Abandonment of Non-Conforming Uses and Characteristics
A. When a non-conforming use of property, or of a building or other structure, has been
abandoned, that use may not subsequently be reestablished except as may be expressly
authorized by these Regulations. The abandonment of a use may be inferred from the
circumstances of its discontinuance or from later circumstances, such as, but not
limited to, the removal of characteristic equipment and/or furnishings involved in the
use, without its replacement by similar equipment or furnishings for an extended period
of time, or the replacement of a non-conforming use or structure by a conforming use
or structure.
B. When a non-conforming characteristic of a building or other structure has been
abandoned, all subsequent modifications of the structure or property shall be required
to conform to these Regulations.
Chapter 3 – General Provisions
3-4
C. When a non-conforming use has ceased for a continuous period of one year, the use
shall be deemed to be abandoned unless, before the end of the one-year period, the
person or persons who were making or carrying out such use record a written notice in
the land records of the Town of North Stonington stating their intention to maintain
and preserve that use and describing, with specificity, the nature of the non-conforming
use they intend to preserve. If the use is not recommended for a continuous period of
one year after any such notice is recorded, the use shall be deemed to be abandoned
unless, before the end of such one-year period, a new notice is recorded on the land
records. The failure to file any such notice as required herein shall be deemed to be
incontrovertible proof of an intention to abandon a non-conforming use.
306 PORTABLE STORAGE CONTAINERS
306.1 Definitions. A portable storage container is any box-like container transported by truck or
trailer to a desired location. Units are designed for the outdoor storage of personal property
of household goods for temporary use only.
For the purposes of this §306, dumpsters, roll-off containers, the trailer portion of a tractortrailer,
or prefabricated sheds, are not included in the definition of portable storage
container .
306.2 No more than one large portable storage container unit
(8’ x 8’ x 20’), or multiple small portable storage
containers, shall be allowed on any lot. The containers
may not exceed 20 feet in actual or combined length.
The applicant must obtain preapproval of the location
by the Zoning Enforcement Officer. Screening shall
be required if the container is readily visible from any
dwelling located within a distance of 500 feet from the container or unit.
306.3 Portable storage containers that are not fully enclosed in a building shall be allowed on a
lot for no longer than three months, except as provided in subsections A, B and C below.
Portable storage containers may remain on any site permanently if fully enclosed in an
approved accessory building.
A. Portable storage containers may be placed outside a building on a lot in any district
during the construction and/or repair of a dwelling on the lot for a period not to exceed
12 months, and only if all necessary permits and approvals for such construction or
repair have been issued. Portable storage containers may be used during construction,
site modification, and/or property renovation in all non-residential districts only after
any required Site Plan or Special Permit, as well as all other permits and approvals
necessary for the proposed use to be lawfully commenced on the property, have been
issued. Storage containers shall not be vertically stacked, and shall not be placed
between the principal structure and any street adjoining the relevant lot. All portable
storage containers shall be placed, to the extent feasible, in locations that minimize
their visibility from nearby residences.
B. Extension of time. The Commission may approve the placement of a portable storage
container in any district for more than three months, provided the property owner has
demonstrated that extenuating circumstances exist to justify the extension. Extenuating
circumstances shall include, but are not limited to, natural disasters, fire or acts of God.
Chapter 3 – General Provisions
3-5
C. Agricultural Exemption. Portable storage containers may be used outside of a
building, with no limitation on time or duration, for the storage of materials used or
generated by an agricultural operation.
306.4 Any portable storage container that is not fully enclosed within a building shall be
maintained in good condition, free from evidence of deterioration, weathering,
discoloration, graffiti, rust, ripping, tearing or other holes or breaks, at all times.
306.5 No portable storage container shall be used to store solid waste, construction debris,
demolition debris, recyclable materials, business inventory, or commercial or other goods
for property other than the property at which the portable storage container is located. A
portable storage container may not be used for business inventory or for retail sales. No
portable storage container shall be used to store illegal or hazardous substances. Upon
reasonable notice to the applicant, the ZEO may inspect the contents of any portable storage
container at any reasonable time to ensure that it is not being used to store materials in
violation of these Regulations.
306.6 Required Permit
A. Prior to the initial delivery of any portable storage container, the applicant or the
supplier shall file an application with the Land Use Office.
B. The application shall contain the name of the applicant to whom the portable storage
container is supplied; an indication whether the person owns, rents, occupies or
controls the property; the address at which the portable storage container will be
placed; the delivery date and anticipated removal date; the active Building Permit
number, if applicable; and a sketch depicting the location and the placement of the
portable storage container.
C. Validity. Permits under this section shall be valid only for the period specified on the
permit and only for the approved location.
307 SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA REQUIREMENTS
307.1 AREAS TO WHICH THIS REGULATION APPLIES
This regulation shall apply to all Special Flood Hazard Areas (SFHA) within the Town of
North Stonington.
A. Basis for Establishing the Special Flood Hazard Areas (SFHA):
The Special Flood Hazard Areas (SFHA) identified by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) in its Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for New London,
dated July 18, 2011, accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM), dated July 18,
2011, and other supporting data applicable to the Town of North Stonington, and any
subsequent revisions thereto, are adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this
regulation. Since mapping is legally adopted by reference into this regulation it must
take precedence when more restrictive until such time as a map amendment or map
revision is obtained from FEMA. The SFHA includes any area shown on the FIRM as
Zones A and AE, including areas designated as a floodway on a FIRM. SFHAs are
determined utilizing the base flood elevations (BFE) provided on the flood profiles in
the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for a community. BFEs provided on Flood Insurance
Rate Map (FIRM) are only approximate (rounded up or down) and should be verified
Chapter 3 – General Provisions
3-6
with the BFEs published in the FIS for a specific location. Also included are areas of
potential, demonstrable or historical flooding, including any area contiguous with but
outside the SFHA identified by FEMA, and where the land surface elevation is lower
than the base flood elevation (BFE) as shown in the FIS, and the area is not protected
from flooding by a natural or man-made feature. The FIRM and FIS are on file in the
Planning and Zoning Department, Town Hall, Town of North Stonington.
B. Structures Already in Compliance: A structure or development already in
compliance with this regulation shall not be made non-compliant by any alteration,
modification, repair, reconstruction or improvement and must also comply with other
applicable local, state, and federal regulations. No structure or land shall hereafter be
located, extended, converted, modified or structurally altered without full compliance
with the terms of this regulation and other applicable regulations.
C. Abrogation and Greater Restrictions: This regulation is not intended to repeal,
abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However,
where this regulation and another ordinance, regulation easement, covenant or deed
restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall
prevail.
D. Interpretation: In the interpretation and application of this regulation, all provisions
shall be: 1) considered as minimum requirements; 2) liberally construed in favor of the
governing body, and; 3) deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted
under State statutes.
E. Warning and Disclaimer of Liability: The degree of flood protection required by
this regulation is considered the minimum reasonable for regulatory purposes and is
based on scientific and engineering consideration and research. Larger floods can and
will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural
causes. This regulation does not imply or guarantee that land outside the Special Flood
Hazard Area or uses permitted in such areas will be free from flooding and flood
damages. This regulation shall not create liability on the part of the Town of North
Stonington or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result
from reliance on this regulation or any administrative decision lawfully made
thereunder. The Town of North Stonington, its officers and employees shall assume
no liability for another person’s reliance on any maps, data or information provided by
the Town of North Stonington.
307.2 ADMINISTRATION
A. Designation of the local administrator: The Planning and Zoning Commission or its
designee is hereby appointed to administer, implement and enforce the provisions of
this regulation.
B. Certification:Where required under this regulation, a registered professional engineer
or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance
with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions of this regulation. Such
certification must be provided to the Planning and Zoning Commission or its designee.
C. Development Permit: The flood management section of the Development Permit
must be completed in conformance with the provisions of this regulation prior to the
commencement of any development activities. Permits issued under this regulation
Chapter 3 – General Provisions
3-7
shall expire if actual construction of a permitted structure does not commence within
one hundred and eighty (180) days of the permit approval date.
D. Permit Application Procedures: A development permit is hereby established for all
construction and other development to be undertaken in Special Flood Hazard Areas
in this community. Prior to any development activities, application for a development
permit shall be made to the Planning and Zoning Commission on forms provided and
may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing, at a
minimum, the property lines and location of the parcel; the nature, location,
dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; limit and extent of the 100-year
floodplain and/or floodway boundary and base flood elevation(s); existing and
proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities and the location of the
foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required to be submitted to the
Planning and Zoning Commission:
1. Application Stage:
The applicant shall provide at least the following information, where applicable.
Additional information may be required on the permit application form.
a. Base flood elevation (BFE) for the site in question as determined in the FEMA
Flood Insurance Study (FIS) or Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). The FIS
flood profiles provide more accurate BFE data than the FIRM. The extent of
the 100- year floodplain and floodway must be depicted with a boundary line
on any site plans and shown in relation to existing and proposed structures or
development;
b. Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the proposed lowest floor, including
basement, of all new construction, substantial improvements or repairs to
structures that have sustained substantial damage;
c. Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-residential new
construction, substantial improvements or repair to structures that have
sustained substantial damage will be dry flood-proofed;
d. Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated
as a result of the proposed development. Computations by a registered
professional engineer must be submitted that demonstrate that the altered or
relocated segment will provide equal or greater conveyance than the original
stream segment. The applicant must submit any maps, computations or other
materials required by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA)
in order to officially amend or revise the Flood Insurance Rate Map. The
applicant must pay any fees or other costs assessed by FEMA for this purpose.
The applicant must also provide assurances that the conveyance capacity of
the altered or relocated stream segment will be maintained;
e. A statement and supporting documentation (all costs of project, market value
of structure, etc.) verifying that the proposed alterations to an existing structure
meets or does not meet the criteria of the substantial improvement and/or
substantial damage definition. If a development meets the definition of
substantial improvement and/or substantial damage, the structure must be
brought into compliance with all floodplain regulations as if it was new
Chapter 3 – General Provisions
3-8
construction
f. Where applicable the following certifications by a registered professional
engineer or architect are required, and must be provided to the Planning and
Zoning Commission. The design and methods of construction must be
certified to be in accordance with accepted standards of practice and with the
provisions of §307.6.
(1) Non-residential flood-proofing must meet the provisions of §307.6(B);
(2) Fully enclosed areas below the base flood elevation (BFE) must meet the
minimum design criteria in §307.6(C);
(3) No (0.00) increase in floodway water surface elevations are allowed. Any
development in a floodway must meet the provisions of §307.6(E).
2. Construction Stage
Upon completion of the applicable portion of construction, the applicant shall provide
verification to the Planning and Zoning Commission of the following as is applicable:
1. Lowest floor elevation shall be verified for:
(a) A structure in Zones A and AE is the top of the lowest floor (including
basement);
(b) A non-residential structure which has been dry flood-proofed is the elevation
to which the flood-proofing is effective (Note: For insurance purposes, a dry
flood-proofed, non-residential structure is rated based on the elevation of its
lowest floor unless it is flood-proofed to one foot above the BFE.
2. Deficiencies detected by the review of the above listed shall be corrected by the
permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being permitted
to proceed. Failure to submit the survey or failure to make said corrections
required hereby, shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project.
307.3 Duties and Responsibilities of the Local Administrator
Duties of the Planning and Zoning Commission or its designee shall include, but not be
limited to:
A. Review all permit applications for completeness, particularly with the requirements of
§307.2.
B. Review all permit applications to determine whether the proposed development and
building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding.
C. Review all development permits to assure that the permit requirements of this
regulation have been satisfied.
D. Review all permit applications to assure that all necessary federal or state permits have
been received. Require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file
with the permit application. Such permits include, but are not limited to, Water
Diversion Permit, Dam Safety Permit, and Army Corps of Engineers 401 and 404
Permits.
E. Notify the regional planning agency and affected municipality at least thirty-five (35)
Chapter 3 – General Provisions
3-9
days prior to a public hearing if any change of regulation or use of a flood zone will
affect an area within five hundred (500) feet of another municipality.
F. Notify the adjacent communities and the Department of Energy and Environmental
Protection (DEEP), Inland Water Resources Division, prior to any alteration or
relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).
G. Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of said
watercourse so that the flood carrying capacity is not diminished.
H. Obtain, record and maintain the elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest
floor (including basement) of all new construction, substantial improvements or repair
to a structure that has sustained substantial damage.
I. Obtain, record and maintain the elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which the
new construction, substantial improvement or repair to a structure that has sustain
substantial damage has been flood-proofed.
J. When flood-proofing is utilized for a particular structure, the Planning and Zoning
Commission or its designee shall obtain certification from a registered professional
engineer or architect, in accordance with §307.6(B).
K. Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the area of
special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a
mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the Planning and Zoning Commission
or its designee shall make necessary interpretation. The person contesting the location
of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as
provided in this regulation.
L. Require the applicant to provide base flood elevation data for all proposed
development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions.
M. When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance
with §307.1, Subpart A and §307.2, Subpart D, the Planning and Zoning Commission
or its designee shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and
floodway data available from a federal, state or other source in order to administer the
provisions of §307.4.
N. All records pertaining to the provisions of this regulation shall be obtained and
maintained in the office of the Planning and Zoning Department.
O. Upon completion of the permitted development and prior to issuance of a Certificate
of Occupancy (CO), necessary as-built surveys (prepared by a Connecticut Licensed
Professional as per Connecticut State Statutes) and engineering and architectural
certifications shall be provided to the Planning and Zoning Commission or its designee
demonstrating compliance with the approved plans and standards set forth in §307.2,
Subpart D.
Chapter 3 – General Provisions
3-10
307.4 Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
307.4.1 General Standards. In all Special Flood Hazard Areas (SFHAs) the following
provisions are required:
A. New construction, substantial improvements, and structures that have
sustained substantial damage shall be constructed using methods and practices
that minimize flood damage.
B. New construction, substantial improvements, and structures that have
sustained substantial damage shall be constructed with materials and utility
equipment resistant to flood damage.
C. New construction, substantial improvements, and repairs to structures that
have sustained substantial damage shall be anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and
hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.
D. New construction, substantial improvements and repair to structures that have
sustained substantial damage cannot be constructed or located entirely or
partially over water unless they are a functionally dependent use or facility.
E. Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment, HVAC
ductwork, and other service facilities, or any machinery or utility equipment
or connections servicing a structure shall be elevated to or above the base flood
elevation (BFE) to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during conditions of flooding. This includes, but is not limited to,
furnaces, oil or propane tanks, air conditioners, heat pumps, hot water heaters,
ventilation ductwork, washer and dryer hook-ups, electrical junction boxes,
and circuit breaker boxes.
F. New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or
eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system.
G. New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize
or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system and discharges from
the system into flood waters.
H. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
I. Above-ground storage tanks (oil, propane, etc.) which are located outside or
inside of the structure must either be elevated one (1) foot above the base flood
elevation (BFE) on a concrete pad, or be securely anchored with tie-down
straps to prevent flotation or lateral movement, have the top of the fill pipe
extended above the BFE, and have a screw fill cap that does not allow for the
infiltration of flood water.
J. In any portion of a watercourse that is altered or relocated, the flood carrying
capacity must be maintained. Notify adjacent communities and the
Connecticut Department of Energy and Environmental Protection (CTDEEP),
Inland Water Resources Division (IWRD) prior to any alteration or relocation
of a watercourse.
Chapter 3 – General Provisions
3-11
K. If any portion of a structure lies within the Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA),
the entire structure is considered to be in the SFHA. The entire structure must
meet the construction requirements of the flood zone. The structure includes
any attached additions, garages, decks, sunrooms, or any other structure
attached to the main structure. Decks or porches that extend into a more
restrictive flood zone will require the entire structure to meet the standards of
the more restrictive zone.
L. If a structure lies within two or more flood zones, the construction standards
of the most restrictive zone apply to the entire structure (i.e., Structure must be
built one (1) foot above highest BFE). The structure includes any attached
additions, garages, decks, sunrooms, or any other structure attached to the
main structure. (Decks or porches that extend into a more restrictive zone will
require the entire structure to meet the requirements of the more restrictive
zone.)
M. Compensatory Storage. The water holding capacity of the floodplain, except
those areas which are tidally influenced, shall not be reduced. Any reduction
caused by filling, new construction or substantial improvements involving an
increase in footprint to the structure, shall be compensated for by deepening
and/or widening of the floodplain. Storage shall be provided on-site, unless
easements have been gained from adjacent property owners; it shall be
provided within the same hydraulic reach and a volume not previously used
for flood storage; it shall be hydraulically comparable and incrementally equal
to the theoretical volume of flood water at each elevation, up to and including
the 100-year flood elevation, which would be displaced by the proposed
project. Such compensatory volume shall have an unrestricted hydraulic
connection to the same waterway or water body. Compensatory storage can
be provided off-site if approved by the municipality.
N. Equal Conveyance. Within the floodplain, except those areas which are
tidally influenced, as designated on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for
the community, encroachments resulting from filling, new construction or
substantial improvements involving an increase in footprint of the structure,
are prohibited unless the applicant provides certification by a registered
professional engineer demonstrating, with supporting hydrologic and
hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering
practice, that such encroachments shall not result in any (0.00 feet) increase in
flood levels (base flood elevation). Work within the floodplain and the land
adjacent to the floodplain, including work to provide compensatory storage
shall not be constructed in such a way so as to cause an increase in flood stage
or flood velocity.
307.5 Standards for Watercourses without Established Base Flood Elevations (unnumbered
A Zones), Adopted Floodways and/or Flood Mapping
A. The Planning and Zoning Commission or its designee shall require base flood elevation
(BFE) data be provided with any application for new construction, substantial
improvement, repair to structures which have sustained substantial damage or other
development in Zone A without a FEMA-published BFE (un-numbered A Zone). The
Chapter 3 – General Provisions
3-12
Planning and Zoning Commission or its designee shall obtain, review and reasonably
utilize any BFE and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source,
including data developed for subdivision proposals, as criteria for requiring that new
construction, substantial improvements, repair to structures which have sustained
substantial damage or other development in un-numbered A Zones on the community’s
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) meet the standards in §307.2(D) and §307.6. If no
BFE can be determined, the lowest floor, including basement, must be elevated to two
(2) feet above the highest adjacent grade next to the structure.
B. When BFEs have been determined within Zones AE on the community’s FIRM but a
regulatory floodway has not been designated, the Planning and Zoning Commission or
its designee must require that no new construction, substantial improvements, repair to
structures which have sustained substantial damage or other development, including
fill, shall be permitted which will increase the water surface elevation of the base flood
more than one (1.0) foot at any point within the community when all existing and
anticipated development is considered cumulatively with the proposed development.
C. The Planning and Zoning Commission or its designee may request floodway data of
an applicant for watercourses without FEMA-published floodways. When such data
is provided by an applicant or whenever such data is available from any other source
(in response to the municipality’s request or not), the community shall adopt a
regulatory floodway based on the principle that the floodway must be able to convey
the waters of the base flood without increasing the water surface elevation more than
one (1.0) foot at any point within the community.
D. The Planning and Zoning Commission or its designee shall obtain, review and
reasonably utilize any BFE and Floodway data available from a federal, state or other
source, as criteria for requiring that new construction, substantial improvements, repair
to structures which have sustained substantial damage or other development in any
area of potential, demonstrable or historical flooding within the community meet the
standards in §307.2, Subpart D and 307.6.
E. Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter 1, §65.12, of the National Flood Insurance
Program regulations, a community may approve certain development in Zones AE and
AH, on the community’s FIRM which increases the water surface elevation of the base
flood by more than one (1.0) foot, provided that the community first completes all of
the provisions required by §65.12.
307.6 Specific Standards: Construction Standards in Special Flood Hazard Areas (SFHA) -
Zones A and AE.
A. Residential Construction. All new construction, substantial improvements, and repair
to structures that have sustained substantial damage which are residential structures
shall have the bottom of the lowest floor, including basement, elevated one foot (1’)
above the base flood elevation (BFE). Electrical, plumbing, machinery or other utility
equipment that service the structure must be elevated one foot (1’) above the BFE.
B. Non-Residential Construction. All new construction, substantial improvements, and
repair to structures that have sustained substantial damage which are commercial,
industrial or non-residential structures shall:
1. Have the bottom of the lowest floor, including basement, elevated one (1) foot
Chapter 3 – General Provisions
3-13
above the base flood elevation (BFE); or
2. In lieu of being elevated, non-residential structures may be dry flood-proofed to
one (1) foot above the BFE provided that together with all attendant utilities and
sanitary facilities the areas of the structure below the required elevation are
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and
provided that such structures are composed of structural components having the
capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of
buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall review and/or
develop structural design specifications and plans for the construction, and shall
certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with
acceptable standards of practice for meeting the provisions of this section. Such
certification shall be provided to the Planning and Zoning Commission on the
FEMA Flood proofing Certificate, Form 81-65.
3. Electrical, plumbing, machinery or other utility equipment that service the
structure must be elevated one (1) foot above the BFE.
C. Fully Enclosed Areas Below The Base Flood Elevation of Elevated Buildings. All
new construction, substantial improvements, or repair of substantial damage to
residential or non-residential structures that include fully enclosed areas formed by a
foundation and other exterior walls below the lowest floor (below base flood elevation)
of an elevated building, shall be designed to preclude finished living space and be
designed to allow for the entry and exit of flood waters to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls (wet flood-proofing). Designs for complying
with this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect, or meet the following minimum criteria listed in sections (1)-(7) below:
1. Provide a minimum of two (2) openings (hydraulic flood vents) having a total net
area of not less than one square inch for every one square foot of enclosed area
subject to flooding. These hydraulic openings must be located on at least two
different walls. Only the area (square footage) that lies below the BFE can be used
in the calculation of net area of vents required. If the structure has more than one
enclosed area, openings must be installed in the exterior walls of each enclosed
area so that flood waters can enter directly from the outside;
2. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above grade. At
least one side of the structure’s fully enclosed area must be at or above grade. Fill
placed around the foundation walls must be graded so that the elevation inside the
enclosed area is equal to or higher than the adjacent outside elevation on at least
one side of the building. The finished floor of the enclosed area shall be no lower
than the bottom of the foundation openings. The foundation slab of a residential
structure, including the slab of a crawlspace, must be set equal to the outside
finished grade on at least one side of the building;
3. The openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or
devices provided they permit the automatic entry and exit of flood waters in both
directions without any external influence or control such as human intervention,
including the use of electrical and other non-automatic mechanical means. Other
coverings may be designed and certified by a registered professional engineer or
Chapter 3 – General Provisions
3-14
approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission;
4. The area cannot be used as finished living space. Use of the enclosed area shall be
the minimum necessary and shall only be used for the parking of vehicles, building
access or limited storage. Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum
necessary to allow for the parking of vehicles (garage door) or limited storage of
maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises (standard exterior
door) or entry to the living area (stairway or elevator). The enclosed area shall not
be used for human habitation or partitioned into separate rooms;
5. All interior walls, floor, and ceiling materials located below the BFE shall be
unfinished and resistant to flood damage;
6. Electrical, plumbing, HVAC ductwork, machinery or other utility equipment and
connections that service the structure (including, but not limited to, furnaces, oil
or propane tanks, air conditioners, heat pumps, hot water heaters, ventilation,
washers, dryers, electrical junction boxes, circuit breaker boxes and food freezers)
are prohibited in the fully enclosed area below the BFE. Utilities or service
equipment located in this enclosed area, even if elevated above the BFE in the
space, will subject the structure to increased flood insurance rates.
7. A residential building with a structurally attached garage having the floor slab
below the BFE is considered an enclosed area below the BFE and must meet the
standards of sections (1)-(6) listed above. A garage attached to a residential
structure, constructed with the garage floor slab below the BFE, must be designed
to allow for the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters in both directions. Flood
openings or vents are required in the exterior walls of the garage or in the garage
doors. The human intervention necessary to open garage doors when flooding
occurs is not an acceptable means of meeting the openings requirements. In
addition to the automatic entry of floodwaters, the areas of the garage below BFE
must be constructed with flood resistant materials. Garages attached to nonresidential
structures must also meet the aforementioned requirements or be dry
flood proofed as per the requirements of §307.6(B).
D. Manufactured (Mobile) Homes and Recreational Vehicles (RVs).
1. In all Special Flood Hazard Areas (SFHA), any manufactured (mobile) homes to
be newly placed, undergoing a substantial improvement or repaired as a result of
substantial damage, shall be elevated so that the bottom of the lowest floor is at or
above the base flood elevation (BFE). The manufactured home must also meet all
the construction standards per §307.6. This includes SFHAs outside a
manufactured home park or subdivision, in a new manufactured home park or
subdivision, in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, in an
expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, or on a site in an
existing park which a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as a
result of a flood.
Chapter 3 – General Provisions
3-15
2. All manufactured (mobile) homes within a SFHA shall be placed on a permanent
foundation which itself is securely anchored and to which the structure is securely
anchored so that it will resist flotation, lateral movement and hydrostatic pressures.
Anchoring may include, but not be limited to, the use of over-the-top or frame ties
to ground anchors.
3. All manufactured (mobile) homes within a SFHA shall be installed using methods
and practices which minimize flood damage. Adequate access and drainage should
be provided. Elevation construction standards include piling foundations placed
no more than ten (10) feet apart, and reinforcement is provided for piers more than
six (6) feet above ground level.
4. Recreational vehicles placed on sites within a SFHA shall either (i) be on the site
for fewer than 180 consecutive days, and (ii) be fully licensed and ready for
highway use, OR (iii) meet all the general standards of §307.4.1 and the elevation
and anchoring requirement listed above for a manufactured home in §307.6(D). A
recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system,
is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices,
and has no permanently attached additions.
E. Floodways Located within Special Flood Hazard Areas (SFHA) are areas designated
as floodways on the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM). Since the
floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters which
carry debris, potential projectiles and has erosion potential, no encroachments,
including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, repairs to substantially
damaged structures and other developments shall be permitted unless certification,
with supporting technical data, by a registered professional engineer is provided
demonstrating, through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance
with standard engineering practice, that encroachments shall not result in any (0.00
feet) increase in flood levels during occurrence of the base flood discharge. Fences in
the floodway must be aligned with the flow and be of an open design. A permit may
be given which allows encroachments resulting in increases in base flood elevations
provided the community first obtains a conditional floodway revision by meeting the
requirements of C.F.R. 44, Chapter 1, §§65.12.
308 TEMPORARY METEOROLOGICAL TOWER
308.1 Temporary wind monitoring or meteorological towers shall be permitted in all zoning
districts for a period of no more than 180 consecutive days, subject to issuance of a Zoning
Permit by the Zoning Enforcement Officer.
308.2 The standards applicable to such towers shall be the same as those for towers associated
with small wind energy facilities pursuant to §1019.2 of these Regulations.
309 TRAILER (CONSTRUCTION OFFICE/ CONSTRUCTION TRAILER )
One or more mobile office/storage trailers may be parked on a construction site temporarily (as set
forth below) provided the location of the trailers are shown on a Site Plan or Plot Plan approved by
the Commission, and the trailers are used exclusively for temporary office or storage space related
directly to construction activities on the same site. Under no condition shall a temporary
construction trailer be used as a residence, or remain on-site as a permanent structure for storage or
office use. A temporary construction trailer must be:
Chapter 3 – General Provisions
3-16
A. maintained in good, safe and secure condition;
B. removed from the site within 90 days if construction work on the site has not begun;
C. removed from the site within 30 days after construction work at the site is discontinued; or
D. removed from the site within 30 days after completion of all work on the site.
The Commission may grant up to a 60-day extension for extenuating circumstances, for any
deadline specified above.
310 UNREGISTERED MOTOR VEHICLE STORAGE AND OUTDOOR STORAGE OF JUNK AND DEBRIS
310.1 Temporary storage of unregistered motor vehicles shall be allowed as follows:
A. On all properties used for single-family or two-family residential purposes, one or two
unregistered or inoperable motor vehicles may be stored outside a building provided
that:
1. unregistered vehicles are stored in the side or rear yard and must not be visible
from the street;
2. the vehicles must be capable of being restored to running condition (i.e., a
condition suitable for use on public highways) within six months of the date on
which they were placed outside of a building on the lot; and
3. such storage shall be for a period of no longer than 180 days.
B. In all non-residential zones, storage of unregistered vehicles shall be allowed as an
accessory use only to businesses having the appropriate Department of Motor Vehicles
license.
310.2 Junk and Debris. Except as provided above, no waste or scrap material, debris, motor
vehicles that are partially or wholly dismantled, motor vehicle parts, abandoned machinery,
junk or similar unsightly material (see definition of junk in Chapter 16) shall be stored or
allowed to accumulate in any open space or in anything other than a completely enclosed
building on any lot in any district other than as may be permitted in an Industrial district.
This provision shall not apply to the temporary storage of waste material from a
construction operation being legally executed on the same premises.
311 YARD SALES
Yard Sales, garage sales, tag sales, and the like are permitted in any district provided there are no
more than three on the same lot in any calendar year and provided each such sale lasts no longer
than three consecutive days.
312 SIGNS
312.1 Purposes. These Sign Regulations are intended to:
A. preserve the public health and public safety by controlling the size, location and height
of signs so they will not confuse, distract, mislead or obstruct the vision necessary for
traffic safety; and
B. preserve the general welfare by controlling the physical condition of signs in order to
protect the character of each zone; mitigate any negative impacts on adjoining
properties; assist in achieving a more desirable environment in order to maintain
Chapter 3 – General Provisions
3-17
property values; encourage economic growth; and avoid negatively altering the
essential characteristics of the area.
312.2 Sign Area Measurement. The sign area shall be the smallest area that encompasses all
letters, designs, symbols, and logos, including the advertising surface. The sign area shall
include any background material if such material is designed to be an integral part of the
sign because of its texture, color or building material.
A. For a sign painted on or applied to a building, the area shall be considered to include
all lettering, wording and accompanying designs or symbols, together with any
background of a color different from the natural color or finish material of the building.
B. For a sign consisting of individual letters or symbols attached to or painted on a surface,
building, wall or window, the area shall be considered to be that of the smallest
rectangle, triangle or circle that encompasses all the letters and symbols.
C. The area of any supporting framework (for example, brackets, posts, etc.) shall not be
included in the area, provided such framework is incidental to the display and contains
no advertising material or informational material other than a street name and number.
D. When a sign has two or more faces, the cumulative area of all faces shall be included
in determining the area, except where two faces are placed back to back and are at no
point more than two feet from each other. In that case, the sign area shall be taken as
the area of the larger of the two faces, or of one face if the two faces are equal in area.
E. The height of a sign shall be measured from the ground surface directly below the sign
up to the highest point of the display area of the sign or the supporting structure of the
sign. If the top of the sign and the top of the supporting structure are of unequal height,
the higher measurement shall determine the height.
312.3 Sign Illumination. Signs may be illuminated either externally or internally provided they
comply with the outdoor illumination standards in Chapter 11 and the limitations set forth
below.
A. Signs may not have flashing or intermittent lights, lighting of varying intensity, or
exposed neon lights. Internally lit LED and/or digital change copy signs are permitted
only in commercial and industrial zones, or for non-residential uses legally existing in
a residential zone.
B. No illuminated sign shall have exposed electrical wires.
C. No sign shall be illuminated between the hours of 11 p.m. and 6 a.m. unless the
premises on which it is located is open for business at that time. This prohibition does
not apply if the illumination occurs as a consequence of lighting provided for public
safety purposes.
312.4 Sign Motion. No sign or any part thereof shall be moving, whether by mechanical or other
means.
312.5 Sign Location. The following general conditions apply to sign location:
A. no sign shall extend into a vehicular public way (unless associated with a drive-through
use) or be lower than eight feet above a pedestrian way;
Chapter 3 – General Provisions
3-18
B. no sign shall obstruct free entrance or exit from a required door, window, or fire escape;
or be located or constructed in a manner that interferes with access by fire or emergency
personnel;
C. no sign shall be constructed or located in a manner that obstructs light or air into a
building or otherwise interferes with the proper functioning of a building; and
D. no sign shall be placed in such a location as to confuse or obstruct the view or
effectiveness of any traffic sign or signal or in any way result in a hazard to the safe
and efficient flow of vehicular traffic.
312.6 Prohibited Signs
The following signs are prohibited in all zoning districts.
A. Roof signs are prohibited.
B. Signs containing moving parts are prohibited.
C. Signs containing reflective elements that sparkle or twinkle in sunlight or artificial
light, or use the words "stop," "caution," or "danger," or incorporate red, amber, or
green lights resembling traffic signals, or resemble "stop" or "yield" signs in shape or
color are prohibited. Excepted from this prohibition are traffic, regulatory, or
informational signs required and approved by governmental agencies.
D. Portable or wheeled signs are prohibited. This is not intended to prohibit bumper
stickers or lettering on registered motor vehicles; however, vehicles or trailers having
such advertising shall not be used primarily for advertising, as opposed to
transportation. Portable signs of any type judged by the Commission to circumvent
these regulations are prohibited. For the purposes of these Regulations Portable Signs
do not include “Sandwich Board” or “A-frame” Signs.
E. Non-weatherproof signs, including signs made of cardboard, paper, or other
impermanent material, except for temporary signs not to exceed two days.
F. Beacons, used with the intent to advertise, announce, or call attention to any business,
product, service, or other commercial activity, are prohibited.
G. Billboard Signs, Bag Signs, “life-like” plastic or inflatable decorations (or similar
moving, fluttering devices), Banner Signs, Flag Signs, Bunting Signs, Streamer
Signs, Pennant Signs, Ribbon Signs, Spinner Signs, or other similar device shall not
be constructed, posted, or erected in any district except as provided for in Section ___
above.
H. Mailbox Signs are prohibited.
I. Off-Site Advertising. No sign shall advertise a product, service, or activity other than
one that is offered on the premises upon which the sign is situated. Off-site signage
includes, but is not limited to, signs on telephone poles, light poles or other similar
utility structures, traffic sign posts or any other location within the right-of-way of any
street.
312.7 Signs Allowed Without a Permit. The following signs are authorized without a zoning
permit, provided there is no illumination and that all such signs are set back at least ten feet
from any property line.
Chapter 3 – General Provisions
3-19
A. Signs lawfully installed on public property.
B. Signs designating land having restricted or prohibited access (e.g., “No Trespassing”
signs). Such signs shall be no more than two square feet in area and shall be spaced a
minimum of 50 feet apart.
C. One sign in the nature of a bulletin board on any lot containing a use allowing public
assembly (e.g., church, museum, library, school). Such signs shall not exceed 20
square feet in area.
D. Temporary signs not exceeding a total of 32 square feet in Residential districts and 65
square feet in other districts. A temporary sign may not be displayed on any lot for a
period of more than 90 days in any calendar year. The height of such sign shall not
exceed six feet in Residential districts and ten feet in other districts.
E. Signs used to guide traffic to or from a use or destination. No such sign shall be greater
than two square feet in area. No more than two such signs are allowed on any one lot,
and no more than four such signs are allowed with regard to any particular use or
destination.
F. Temporary signs located on property on which building construction is occurring. The
total area of such signs shall not be more than six square feet in Residential districts
and 32 square feet in other districts. The height of a construction sign shall not exceed
four feet in Residential districts and eight feet in other districts, except that, in
residential subdivisions under construction, the height of the construction sign for the
subdivision as a whole may be up to eight feet in height. Such signs must be removed
within 30 days after the completion of the construction.
G. One or two temporary signs located on property for sale or lease. This provision shall
not apply to premises upon which the principal use is the sale, rent, or lease of units or
space within the structure(s) located upon the premises (e.g., hotels, motels,
condominiums, boarding houses, etc). The total area of such signs on any one lot shall
not be more than six square feet in Residential districts and 32 square feet in other
districts. The height of such signs shall not exceed four feet in Residential districts and
ten feet in other districts. In residential subdivisions in which building lots are for sale,
in addition to individual lot signs, one sign not exceeding an area of 32 square feet and
a height of six feet shall be permitted for the subdivision as a whole. Such signs must
be removed within 30 days after the sale or lease.
H. One flag sign, not exceeding 15 square feet in area.
I. Flags, bunting, streamers, and ribbons that contain no advertising are permitted during
the period of seven days before to seven days after the following holidays:
Independence Day, Memorial Day, Veteran’s Day, Flag Day, and President’s Day.
J. Temporary banners used in connection with charitable or civic events lasting no more
than 30 days may be installed up to 30 days before the beginning of the event and must
be removed within seven days following the termination of the event. No more than
four such banners may be placed on any one lot.
312.8 Signs Requiring a Zoning Permit. In addition to the signs allowed under § 312.7, the
following signs are authorized upon the issuance of a zoning permit.
Chapter 3 – General Provisions
3-20
A. One wall sign, not to exceed three square feet.
B. Signs temporarily attached or temporarily painted on a door, or to the inside of a
window, provided they do not exceed ten percent of the area of the door or window.
Such signs may be permitted for a period of not more than 30 days.
C. Up to two freestanding or banner signs may be installed on property on which a
temporary event (an event lasting no more than 30 days), such as a business “grand
opening,” will be held. Such signs shall not be erected earlier than 15 days before the
event and shall be removed within seven days following the event. The total area of all
such signs shall not exceed 24 square feet in Residential districts and 48 square feet in
other districts. The height of such signs shall not exceed six feet in Residential districts
and ten feet in other districts. Such signs shall not be illuminated.
D. Flags of nations, states, or local governments, mounted on a flag pole, may be located
in all zoning districts. Flag poles shall be located at least 15 feet from the front property
line or within the side or rear setback. No more than three flag poles are permitted per
premises. The maximum height for a flag pole is 30 feet, and the maximum size of the
flag shall be 24 square feet.
E. One freestanding sign may be installed on nature preserves. No illumination of such
signs is allowed. All such signs must be located at least ten feet from any road.
F. Freestanding signs in accordance with the following table. All such signs must be
located at least ten feet from any road.
1For buildings on lots fronting two roads, and for developments with more than one principal
business, an additional freestanding sign is permitted provided the total area for both signs does not
exceed 1.5x the maximum sign area.
3For legally existing non-residential uses within the Residential zones (e.g., bed and breakfasts,
country inns, churches, day care, farm winery, kennel, etc.), the maximum area may be increased
to nine square feet and the signs may be illuminated with gallery lighting; provided, however, that
the use of any such sign shall be in lieu of the use of any sign otherwise permitted under § 312.7.I.
Zoning District Maximum
Number1,2 Area (SqFt)2,3 Height (Ft) Internal Illumination3
R40, R60, R80 1 3 10 N
C 1 45 10 Y
HC 1 60 15 Y
ED 1 48 10 Y
RC 1 90 10 Y
I 1 60 10 Y
Chapter 3 – General Provisions
3-21
G. Additional signs in accordance with the following table:
1. Wall Signs
2. Awning Signs
Such signs shall be painted on or attached flat against the surface of the awning, and
shall not extend beyond the valence or be attached to the underside;
3. Canopy Signs (e.g., Gas Canopy)
The canopy cannot be attached to the primary structure;
4. Suspended Sign and/or Projecting Sign
5. Window Sign.
Window signs shall not:
a. exceed, in combined total area, 10% of the area of any window in which they are
located;
b. exceed 20 square feet in combined total area for all window signs located in all
windows of any principal use and all accessory uses associated with such principal
use; or
c. be included in the measurement of the total sign area permitted on any premises.
6. Portable “Sandwich Board” or “A-Frame” Signs. These signs are permitted in all
Commercial districts (C, HC, RC and ED) and shall not exceed three feet in width and
four feet in height. The total Sign Area of said Sign shall not exceed 12 square feet.
Said Sign may be double-faced and, for the purpose of area computation, only one Sign
Face shall be counted in determining conformity with the area requirements of this
paragraph.
a. Only one Portable “Sandwich Board” or “A-Frame” Sign shall be allowed per Lot,
except that if the Lot has more than 400 feet of Street frontage in the District, then
one (1) additional Portable Sign shall be permitted. In the case of a Planned
Business Development or a multiple Use Commercial Development, where two
(2) portable “sandwich” or “A-frame” signs may be permitted, the development
Zoning District
Total Area of all
additional signs
(SqFt)
Clearance over
pedestrian walkway
(Ft)
Clearance over
Roadway/Alley (Ft)
R40, R60, R80 N/A N/A N/A
C 45 8 13
HC 60 8 20
ED 48 8 13
RC 90 8 20
I 60 8 20
Chapter 3 – General Provisions
3-22
association (if applicable) or business owners involved shall determine the rotation
schedule for participating businesses.
b. Sign shall not be attached to the ground and shall not extend into the Street Line
or sidewalk. The Sign shall be located so as to not impede sight lines or ingress
and egress to the Lot.
c. Portable “Sandwich Board” or “A-Frame” Signs must be removed at the close of
each business day.
d. The area of such sign shall not be included in the measurement of the total sign
area permitted on the premises.
313 DRIVEWAYS
313.1 Residential Driveways. The following residential driveway design standards shall apply
to all driveways used for access to single-family and two-family homes. Driveways to
residential buildings containing three or more dwelling units must comply with the Town’s
standards for road construction.
A. Spacing of Driveways. Driveway openings shall be separated by at least 30 feet, as
measured from curve return to curve return.
B. Shared Driveways
1. No more than two parcels shall share a residential driveway. A driveway serving
more than two single-family, duplex, or multi-family residences (or any
combination thereof) must comply with the Town’s standards for road
construction.
2. The boundaries of the shared driveway must be defined by, and the rights and
duties of the respective users must be set forth in, a proper document or documents
(for example, an easement) filed in the Town land records. Such document(s)
must provide, at a minimum, a clear allocation of responsibility for maintenance
and repair of the driveway between or among the respective users.
3. The shared portion of any driveway must be an undivided part of one of the lots
it services.
C. Driveway Location. The proposed frontage must be capable of accommodating a
driveway for access to the main part of the lot (i.e., the portion of the lot containing the
principal use or structure) and meeting these Regulations’ minimum driveway
standards. A right-of-way and/or a portion of a right-of-way shall not be considered
part of the required frontage. The land on which the driveway is proposed to be located
to access the parcel must be an undivided part of the parcel being developed (i.e., it
must be owned in fee by the same person or persons who owns the remainder of the
lot) unless a shared driveway meeting the standards of §313.1.B is used.
D. Driveway Width. The dimensions of driveway widths, openings, and centerline curve
radii shall be as shown in the following table:
Chapter 3 – General Provisions
3-23
DrivewayWidths
Type of Residential Use
Minimum
Driveway
Width
Opening Width
(including flares)
Minimum
Centerline
Radius of
Minimum Maximum Curvature
Serving Residential, Single-family
200 feet or less in length 12 feet 18 feet 24 feet N/A
More than 200 feet in
length
14 feet 18 feet 24 feet 40 feet
Serving more than one Residential Unit
200 feet or less in length 14 feet 20 feet 24 feet N/A
More than 200 feet in
length
14 feet 20 feet 24 feet 40 feet
F. Turnarounds and Turnouts. All driveways shall be designed with a vehicle
turnaround to avoid vehicles having to back onto the roadway when exiting the relevant
parcels. Turnouts shall also be provided as follows:
Turnout Spacing
Length Turnouts
Less than 400 feet None
400-800 feet One turnout within 150 feet of the dwelling unit.
More than 800 feet Every 400 feet
G. Driveway Grades. Driveways shall have a maximum grade of 12 percent for singlefamily
and duplex residences. When any portion of a driveway has a grade exceeding
8 percent, all abutting portions of the driveway having a grade greater than 6 percent
shall be paved. Driveways shall provide a reasonable transition in terms of grade
between the driveway and the gutter line.
H. Surface. Driveways serving single-family residences shall have an all-weather
surface capable of vehicle loading to an AASHTO H-20 rating of 32,000 lbs.
(14,500kgs.) per axle. A driveway detail shall be provided on Site Plan/Plot Plan
demonstrating compliance with this provision.
I. Drainage. Driveway design shall make adequate provision for drainage and
prevention of erosion. Drainage from driveways shall be diverted to roadside swales
or other appropriate drainage ways. Drainage from driveways shall not flow onto
Chapter 3 – General Provisions
3-24
roads. When necessary to handle roadside drainage, driveways shall use culverts,
drainage swales or other devices suitable for the conveyance of roadside drainage.
The design, composition, and installation of any proposed culverts must be approved
by the Town Engineer.
J. Sightline Distance. Driveways shall be designed and located to provide, at all points
fifteen feet back from the edge of the paved surface of the intersecting road, a
minimum sight distance clear of all obstructions, natural or man-made, for at least
250 feet in either direction on Secondary Roads, 325 feet on Primary Roads, and 375
feet on Primary and Secondary arterial roads (or as otherwise specified by the DOT
where applicable). It is responsibility of the property owner to maintain this sight
line triangle.
K Snowstack Space. Snow storage for any driveway shall be provided on the lot(s) on
which the driveway is located.
L. Connection to Roads. The portion of any driveway through the road right-of-way
connecting the property with the physical roadway shall be the shortest perpendicular
distance possible. Any grading, filling, or drainage design in the right-of-way shall
require the approval of the Town.
313.2 Driveways for Non-Residential Uses
Driveways for non-residential uses shall comply with the provisions of §1105 of these
Regulations (Access Management).
Chapter 4 – Dimensional Requirements
4-1
401 MINIMUM LOT AREA
DISTRICT
R40 High Density Residential District 
R60 Medium Density Residential District 
R80 Rural Residential Preservation District

Minimum lot area R40 R60 R80 40,000 sq. ft. 60,000 sq. ft. 80,000 sq. ft.


The area of any portion of a lot that is subject to an access easement for an adjoining lot shall not
apply towards the minimum lot area requirement.

AHO Affordable Housing Overlay-Meadow Court Maximum density - 12 Units/Acre

402 MINIMUM BUILDABLE AREA (MBA)
402.1 Definition. The term “minimum buildable area” shall mean a contiguous area that, at the
time of application for a proposed use, excludes the following categories of land:
A. wetlands or watercourses;
B. areas within the “A” or “AE” flood zone as depicted on the current Flood Hazard
Boundary Map or Flood Insurance Rate Map; and
C. areas subject to easements or permanent restrictions that preclude building or other
development.
402.2 Minimum Buildable Area Requirements
The intent of the minimum buildable area requirement is to assure to assure that a suitable
area of buildable land exists to accommodate all proposed or required structures, utilities,
open spaces, wells, septic systems, driveways, yards and other improvements; to ensure
the ability of on-site septic systems to function indefinitely; and to facilitate appropriate
development.

Other minimum lot areas 
C Commercial District 40,000
VC Village Commercial 60,000
HC Highway Commercial District 60,000
ED Economic Development District 200,000
RC Resort Commercial District 200,000
I Industrial District 80,000
SUO Seasonal Use Overlay District 20,000

ZONING DISTRICT/OVERLAY AREA MINIMUM BUILDABLE AREA (sq.ft.)
R40 High Density Residential 25,600
R60 Medium Density Residential 32,400
R80 Rural Residential Preservation 40,000
C Commercial N/A
VC Village Commercial N/A
HC Highway Commercial N/A
ED Economic Development N/A
RC Resort Commercial N/A
I Industrial N/A
SUO Seasonal Use Overlay Area N/A
Chapter 4 – Dimensional Requirements
4-2
Except as may be provided elsewhere in these Regulations, the minimum buildable area
requirements above shall apply only to lots on which an on-site sewage disposal system
(e.g., septic system) will be needed to accommodate the proposed use(s). The requirements
are to be applied per each dwelling unit, other than accessory apartments, requiring the use
of a septic system.
402.3 Shape and Location
Lots requiring a minimum buildable area must accommodate the following dimensions
within the designated buildable area:
403 MINIMUM STREET FRONTAGE
The following minimum frontage dimensions must be met on an accepted Town or State road:
ZONING DISTRICT/OVERLAY AREA
MINIMUM
DIMENSION
(feet)*
R40 High Density Residential 150
R60 Medium Density Residential 200
R80 Rural Residential Preservation 250
C Commercial 150
VC Village Commercial 150
HC Highway Commercial 200
ED Economic Development 200
RC Resort Commercial 250
I Industrial 250
SUO Seasonal Use Overlay Area 100
AHO Affordable Housing Overlay-Meadow Court 600
* Applicable for newly created lots.
403.1 Except as expressly provided for certain non-conforming lots under these Regulations, no
lot shall be built upon unless it has continuous frontage meeting applicable Zoning District
requirements on a public road.
403.2 When only one side of a corner lot meets the minimum street frontage requirement, that
side shall be considered the lot front. Compliance with the lot width and front yard setback
requirements shall be determined as along that side of the lot. When the street frontage on
DISTRICT
MINIMUM
BUILDABLE AREA
(MBA)
(Sq.ft. per Lot)
MINIMUM DIMENSION
OF SIDE OF MBA IF
SQUARE
(feet)
MINIMUM
DIMENSION OF SIDE
OF MBA IF
RECTANGLE
(feet)
R40 25,600 160 120
R60 32,400 180 140
R80 40,000 200 160
Chapter 4 – Dimensional Requirements
4-3
two or more sides of a corner lot complies with the minimum street frontage requirements,
the landowner may choose which street line shall be deemed to be the front lot line.
403.3 The minimum lot frontage requirement shall be reduced to 50 feet for any lot fronting on
the circular turn-around at the end of a cul-de-sac street, provided that the required lot
frontage minimum dimension must be achieved at the building line.
403.4 Minimum lot frontage requirements may be reduced for interior building lots, as provided
in §504 of these Regulations.
403.5 The proposed frontage must be capable of accommodating a driveway for access to the
main part of the lot (i.e., the portion of the lot containing the principal use or structure) and
meeting these Regulations’ minimum driveway standards. A right-of-way and/or a portion
of a right-of-way shall not be considered part of the required frontage. The land on which
the driveway is proposed to be located to access the parcel must be an undivided part of
the parcel being developed (i.e., it must be owned in fee by the same person or persons
who owns the remainder of the lot) unless a shared driveway meeting the standards of
§313.1.B is used.
404 YARD (SETBACK) REQUIREMENTS
No building, structure, or use shall be located within the following required yard areas, except as
may be expressly provided elsewhere in these Regulations (e.g. Master Plan Development or
Planned Business Development):
404.1 Setback Dimensions
ZONING DISTRICT/OVERLAY AREA
MINIMUM DIMENSION (FEET)
FRONT
YARD
SIDE
YARD
REAR
YARD
R40 High Density Residential 30 15 15
R60 Medium Density Residential 40 20 20
R80 Rural Residential Preservation 50 25 25
C Commercial 35 20 20
VC Village Commercial 35 20 20
HC Highway Commercial 35 20 20
ED Economic Development 35 20 20
RC Resort Commercial 50 25 25
I Industrial 50 25 35
SUO Seasonal Use Overlay Area 20 10 15
AHO Affordable Housing Overlay – Meadow Court 50 15-80* 50
* See Section 705.4
A. Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, if a lot is abutted on both sides by lots
containing a principal structure that is 200 feet or less from the center lot, and closer
to the front boundary than the front setback allows, the minimum front yard setback
for the center lot may be reduced to the average of the actual front yard setbacks of the
existing, adjacent, non-conforming principal structures.
B. In Commercial and Industrial Zoning Districts, parking areas, parking spaces, and
internal access drives may be located within half of the required front yard setback
Chapter 4 – Dimensional Requirements
4-4
area, when screened from the street and abutting property by landscape materials,
including trees, shrubs and/or earthen berms.
404.2 If a non-conforming residential lot contains less than 40,000 square feet of land, additions
and accessory structures (e.g., deck or shed) may be located no less than ten feet from the
side and rear lot lines.
404.3 Projection into required yards
No projections from structures shall be permitted in any required setback except as follows:
A. minor projections of structures, such as pilasters, belt courses, sills, cornices,
marquees, canopies, awnings, eaves, chimneys, bay windows, and similar architectural
features may project not more than three feet into any required yard;
B. open steps/stoops less than four feet in height and open fire escapes may project not
more than five feet into any required yard; and
C. ramps for handicapped access may be constructed within required yard areas, provided;
(i) the ramp cannot reasonably be located in any area that is not within the required
yard; and (ii) the proposed intrusion into the required yard is the minimum reasonably
necessary to accomplish the desired access objectives.
404.4 Fences and Walls: The required setback distances shall not apply to fences or walls
(including retaining walls) six feet or less in height or to wire livestock fences through
which there is at least 80 percent visibility. No such fence or wall shall be located within
the right-of-way of any street.
404.5 Terrace or Patio
A paved terrace or patio shall not extend more than five (5) feet into any required front, rear,
or side yard. Sun shading in the form of table umbrellas is permitted.
405 MAXIMUM IMPERVIOUS SURFACE COVERAGE
405.1 Impervious Surface Coverage
The following is the maximum portion of the lot that may be covered by impervious
surfaces, including buildings:
ZONING DISTRICT/OVERLAY AREA MAXIMUM %
R40 High Density Residential 20
R60 Medium Density Residential 20
R80 Rural Residential Preservation 15
C Commercial 60
VC Village Commercial 60
HC Highway Commercial 60
ED Economic Development 70
RC Resort Commercial 70
I Industrial 70
SUO Seasonal Use Overlay Area 20
AHO Affordable Housing Overlay – Meadow Court 35
Chapter 4 – Dimensional Requirements
4-5
405.2 Greenhouse Exemption. The impervious surface coverage restrictions shall not apply to
Commercial Greenhouses located on a commercial farm or in the Industrial Zoning District,
provided all other Site Plan and site development standards are met (in particular, stormwater
management regulations).
405.3 Terrace or Patio
A paved terrace or patio shall not be counted as part of impervious surface coverage, provided that
such terrace or patio is unroofed and without walls, parapets, or other forms of enclosure greater
than four feet in height.
406 MAXIMUM BUILDING HEIGHT
No building shall exceed the height specified for its zoning district, as follows:
406.1 Principal (and Accessory) Building/Structure
A. Building height shall be measured from the average level of the highest and lowest
point of that portion of a lot covered by the building to the topmost point of the roof.
Chimneys, vents, or utility service structures shall not be included in the measurement
of vertical dimensions.
B. In the ED, HC, and I Zoning Districts, a maximum of three stories is permitted except
on sloped lots where one side may be four stories and a maximum of 65 feet in height
where the bottom story is at “walk-out” level.
C. Building height standards shall not apply to the following appurtenant structures,
provided that the Commission may limit the height of any such structures if it finds
such restriction necessary to satisfy Site Plan review or Special Permit criteria: farm
accessory buildings such as silos, church spires, smokestacks, monuments, flag poles,
home radio, television and other wireless or telecommunications antennas, solar
collectors, temporary test equipment for wind facilities, wind turbines, chimneys or
parapet walls, and fire towers, provided the height of the structure is approved by the
Commission.
ZONING DISTRICT/OVERLAY AREA
MAXIMUM
(feet)
MAXIMUM
(Stories)
R40 High Density Residential 40 2.5
R60 Medium Density Residential 40 3.0
R80 Rural Residential Preservation 40 3.0
C Commercial 35 3.0
VC Village Commercial 35 2.5
HC Highway Commercial 35 3.0
ED Economic Development 50 3.0
RC Resort Commercial 50 4.0
I Industrial 50 3.0
SUO Seasonal Use Overlay Area 30 2.0
AHO Affordable Housing Overlay – Meadow Court 35 2.0
Chapter 4 – Dimensional Requirements
4-6
Chapter 5 – Residential Zoning Districts
5-1
500 RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS
500.1 Purpose
These Residential Zoning Districts are established to provide for residential neighborhoods
that are in harmony with the natural features of the land and the needs of present and future
North Stonington residents.
500.2 Limitation of Principal Uses
A. Only one principal use shall be permitted on a residential lot, except that agricultural
uses may be permitted, subject to the requirements of Chapter 10, in addition to a
principal residential use or other agricultural uses on the same lot.
B. See §305.3.D of these Regulations regarding the possibility of dividing lots that are
currently nonconforming solely because they have more than one residential building.
500.3 Designation of Districts
[R-40] This Zoning District focuses on the village area and contains most of the Town’s
higher residential densities, as well as most of the municipal facilities and
services. It is intended that residential growth be encouraged to locate in the
southern part of the Town, and particularly in this district, rather than in the
northern area that is remote from facilities and services.
[R-60] This area of the Town, together with the High-Density Residential Zoning
District, should attract the major part of the Town’s expected growth. It, too, is
confined to the southern part of Town and has excellent road access.
[R-80] This Zoning District extends throughout the northern three quarters of the Town,
and it includes most of the Town’s reserved open space, agriculture, and
numerous scenic and rugged topographic features worthy of preservation in their
natural state. The majority of this area is particularly remote from municipal
facilities and services and is very lightly developed at present. The major
objectives of these Regulations with regard to this district are to maintain the low
density of development in this area, encourage a continuation of agricultural
activities, and preserve the remote feel and rural character.
[SUOA] The Seasonal Use Overlay Area (SUOA) is designed to provide flexibility to
seasonal residential uses on small lots that were created before May 21, 1964.
501 DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS (See Chapter 4 for full details)
The following dimensional requirements shall apply to lots within the specified Zoning Districts,
except as may be otherwise expressly provided in these Regulations. The lot frontage requirements
specified below shall be applicable to all lots created after the specified frontage requirement was
enacted. However, no reduction may be made in the road frontage of any lot having less than the
frontage specified below.
Chapter 5 – Residential Zoning Districts
5-2
* These standards apply only to the seasonal uses allowed in the SUOA district, as specified in § 704. Year-round uses in the SUOA
district must comply with the dimensional standards of the underlying zoning district.
502 PERMITTED AND SPECIAL PERMIT USES:
The following are permitted uses in the Residential Zoning Districts:
(Note: In the VPOA, no principal building or use shall be established or changed to another use without a Special Permit.)
Residential Principal Uses R-40 R-60 R-80
Single Family Residence: (Only one SF dwelling is permitted per lot, except in the case of
permitted accessory apartments. Quonset huts, Nissen huts, tents, camper trailers, and other
potentially movable shelters, whether or not affixed to a permanent (non-movable)
foundation, shall not be considered single-family dwellings for these purposes nor
permitted as a dwelling unit.
ZP ZP ZP
Duplex Residence (only one duplex permitted per lot) ZP ZP ZP
Temporary Trailer (Residential) (§ 1002.5) ZP ZP ZP
Mobile Home *(§ 1014 ) ZP ZP ZP
Micro Assisted Living Facility *(§ 1013 ) (** Min. Lot Size of 80,000sf required) SPP** SPP** SPP
Residential Accessory Uses R-40 R-60 R-80
Accessory Apartment, Residential*(Accessory to SFR) (§ 1002.1) ZP ZP ZP
Aircraft Landing Area (§ 302) SPP
Home Occupation* (Accessory to SFR/DPLX) (§ 1002.2) ZP ZP ZP
Commercial Kennel* (§ 1002.3) SPP SPP SPP
Other Accessory Structures ZP ZP ZP
Misc. Non-residential Uses R-40 R-60 R-80
Camp SPL SPL SPL
Cemetery*(§ 304) SPL SPL SPL
Church SPP SPP SPP
Membership Club (firearms) *(§ 1012) SPP SPP SPP
Membership Club (no firearms) *(§ 1012) SPL SPL SPL
Post Office SPL SPL SPL
Municipal Building/Facilities SPL SPL SPL
Public Utility Distribution/Substation*(§ 1015) SPL SPL SPL
Recreation (Passive) SPL SPL SPL
Transfer Stations - - SPP
Zoning
District
Minimum Maximum
Lot
Area
(sf)
Road
Frontage
(ft)
Buildable
Area (sf)
Front Yard
Setback
(ft)
Side Yard
Setback
(ft)
Rear Yard
Setback
(ft)
Impervious
Coverage
(%)
Building
Height
(ft)
R-40 40,000 150 25,600 30 15 15 20 35
R-60 60,000 200 32,400 40 20 20 20 40
R-80 80,000 250 40,000 50 25 25 15 40
SUOA* 20,000 100 N/A 20 10 20 20 30
AHOA 200,000 600 12 UNITS/AC 50 VARIES 50 35 35
Chapter 5 – Residential Zoning Districts
5-3
Agricultural Uses R-40 R-60 R-80
Agricultural*(§ 1001) ZP/SPL ZP/SPL ZP/SPL
Farm Winery*(§ 1007) SPL SPL SPL
Farm Winery Restaurant*(§ 1008) SPP SPP SPP
Specialized Agricultural Building*(§ 1001.6) SPP SPP SPP
Commercial Uses R-40 R-60 R-80
Bed and Breakfast* (§ 1002.6) SPL SPL SPL
Country Inn*(§ 1004) SPP SPP SPL
Day Care/Nursery School*(§ 1005) SPL SPL SPL
Golf Course Development*(§ 1009) - SPL SPL
Wireless Communication Facility*(§ 1020) SPP SPP SPP
Veterinary Hospital*(§ 1018) SPL SPL SPL
Industrial Uses R40 R60 R80
Excavation and Fill*(§ 1006) EXP EXP EXP
Solar Energy System*(§ 1019.1) SPP SPP SPP
Wind Energy System, Small-scale*(§ 1019.2) SPL SPL SPL
Wind Energy System, Large-scale*(§ 1019.3) - - SPP
ZP = Zoning Permit SPL = Site Plan SPP = Special Permit EXP = Excavation Permit
* = See Supplemental Regulations for additional criteria/requirements
503 RESIDENTIAL ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES
A. The residential accessory uses listed in §502 shall require the permits specified in that section.
A Zoning Permit shall not be needed for all other residential accessory uses that do not require
an additional structure or a modification to an existing structure. All accessory structures or
modifications to existing structures require a Zoning Permit.
B. The parking or storage of large machinery not associated with a home occupation shall be
considered an accessory use, but may be located only in the side or rear yard. This restriction
shall not apply to farm equipment associated with a legally permitted agricultural use.
504 INTERIOR BUILDING LOT
Establishment of a building lot lacking the amount of frontage specified in §501 is permitted in all
Residential Zoning Districts, provided the following conditions are met.
A. The proposed Interior Building Lot must lie wholly within a Residential Zoning District, and
the principal use of the lot shall be limited to one single-family dwelling or one duplex dwelling
(and proper accessory uses).
B. Only one Interior Building Lot may be established through a division from the original tract.
Such original tract must be one that was separately described on the Town’s land records as of
May 21, 1964. Following any such division, the remainder of the tract must be in conformance
with the dimensional requirements of the relevant zoning district.
C. Dimensions. Interior Building Lots shall have an area at least twice as large as that prescribed
in Chapter 4 for the zoning district. The front building line shall be at least fifty feet from the
Chapter 5 – Residential Zoning Districts
5-4
corridor entry to the lot. The area contained in the frontage corridor shall not be considered in
the minimum area requirement.
D. Frontage Corridor. An Interior Building Lot shall have access to a public road via a land
corridor having a minimum width of 30 feet along its entire length. The frontage corridor shall
be an indivisible part of the Interior Building Lot.
E. Application. A Site Plan Application in conformance with all requirements set forth in Chapter
13 shall be required for the creation of any proposed Interior Building Lot. In addition to any
other requirements in that chapter, the applicant must submit one or more plans, maps, or other
information sufficient to demonstrate compliance with all provisions of this §504.
505 CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT FOR OPEN SPACE PRESERVATION
505.1 The Commission may, by Special Permit, approve the subdivision of a parcel of land under
a cluster development plan, within the meaning of Conn. Gen. Stat. §§8-2 and 8-18, when
at least one-third of the parcel would be permanently preserved as open space. The
application for a Special Permit for cluster development must include a proposed
subdivision plan demonstrating that cluster development of the parcel would meet all
applicable criteria for such Special Permit.
505.2 In addition to the criteria set forth in Chapter 13 for the issuance of a Special Permit, the
approval of a Special Permit for a cluster development shall require the Commission to
find:
a. that there will be a significant community benefit resulting from the additional open
space that is being preserved in perpetuity, such as protection of important natural,
scenic, agricultural, and historic resources; preservation of a sizable area of open space;
preservation of areas along Town or State roads that will protect rural appearance or
character; establishment of an open space corridor or greenway or interconnection of
existing open spaces; and/or provision for public access; and
b. that there will be an appropriate visual buffer or separation to adjacent existing
residential development; and
c. that the open space will not result in small or fragmented open space parcels that do
not provide community benefits.
505.3 When a Special Permit is approved for a cluster development, the dimensional
requirements of §501 shall be reduced as follows:
a. the minimum lot size requirement shall be decreased by the open space surplus
percentage, as defined in Chapter 16;
b. the minimum lot width and frontage shall be decreased by the open space surplus
percentage, provided that in no event shall a frontage lot in a residential subdivision
have less than 100 feet of frontage except as may be permissible under §504;
c. the maximum permissible lot coverage shall be increased by the open space surplus
percentage, provided that in no event shall the maximum land coverage for lots in a
cluster development exceed 20 percent;
d. the minimum setback and yard dimensions may be reduced by the open space surplus
percentage, provided that in no event shall the minimum setback and yard dimensions
be reduced by more than 30 percent; and
Chapter 5 – Residential Zoning Districts
5-5
e. the minimum buildable area requirement shall be decreased by the open space surplus
percentage, provided that in no event shall such minimum be reduced below 25,600
square feet.
505.4 Any lot created by cluster development may be used solely for one single-family residence
or for one duplex residence (and proper accessory uses).
Chapter 5 – Residential Zoning Districts
5-6
Chapter 6 – Commercial and Industrial Zoning Districts
6 - 1
600 COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL ZONING DISTRICTS
600.1 PURPOSE
C Commercial Zoning District – The intent of the Commercial district is to encourage
and provide community scale commercial uses to serve the daily needs of Town
residents; /for goods and services convenient to the motoring public, while
encouraging high quality site design that enhances the Route 2 corridor through
North Stonington.
HC Highway Commercial Zoning District – The intent of the Highway Commercial
district is to encourage and provide more intensive commercial uses, facilities, and
services catering to the needs of the traveling public and residents of North
Stonington.
ED Economic Development Zoning District - The intent of the Economic
Development district is to encourage commercial and mixed use development that
respects the New England character of North Stonington. The Economic
Development district is designed to provide flexibility in uses and site design,
maximizing development potential while ensuring aesthetically pleasing commercial
and mixed use development. This district focuses on Route 2, between I-95 and just
north of the rotary and Route 184 between Route 49 and the rotary.
RC Resort Commercial Zoning District – The resort commercial district is a gateway,
welcoming people to the historic countryside of North Stonington, that also serves
as a transition to and from Foxwoods. The RC district will be a coordinated area of
luxury accommodations and amenities that promotes the enjoyment of the area's
natural features and harmonizes with the existing residential uses.
VC Village Commercial Zoning District – The Village Commercial District is intended
to bring the existing non-conforming commercial uses into conformity with the
regulations and to allow improvements to and/or expansion of these uses in a manner
that is compatible in scale with the quieter surroundings of the Historic Village and
abutting residential neighborhood.
I Industrial Zoning District – The intent of the Industrial district is to encourage and
provide for industrial development, including research and design.
601 DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS (See Chapter 4 for full details)
601.1 General Application. The dimensional requirements for lots in the Commercial and
Industrial Zoning Districts are summarized in the table below. Further explanations of
these requirements are set forth in Chapter 4 of these Regulations.
Chapter 6 – Commercial and Industrial Zoning Districts
6 - 2
602 PERMITTED AND SPECIAL PERMITTED USES
The following are permitted and specially permitted uses by zoning district.
602.1 RESIDENTIAL C HC VC ED RC I
Home Occupation* (accessory to existing SFR) (§ 1002.2) ZP ZP - ZP ZP -
Bed and Breakfast* (§ 1002.6) - - - - SPL -
Condominiums and Time Share Units - - - - SPL -
Micro Assisted Living Facility (§ 1013) * (permitted in legally
existing single-family or duplex residences only)
- SPP SPP
602.2 AGRICULTURAL C HC VC ED RC I
Agricultural* (§ 1001) - - SPL SPL SPP ZP/SPL
Farm Winery* (§ 1007) - - - SPL SPL SPL
Farm Winery Restaurant* (§ 1008) - - - SPL SPL SPL
Commercial Kennel* (§ 1002.3) - - - - SPP SPP
Specialized Agricultural Building* (§ 1001.6) - - - - - SPP
Veterinary Hospital* (§ 1020) SPL SPL - SPL - SPL
602.3 COMMERCIAL C HC VC ED RC I
Commercial and Retail, General SPL SPL SPL SPL - -
Commercial Services * (§ 1003) SPL SPL SPL SPL SPL SPL
Community/Culture (e.g., bike path, park, botanical
garden, gallery)
SPL SPL SPL SPL SPL SPL
Country Inn* (§ 1004) SPL SPL - SPL SPL -
Day Care/Nursery School* (§ 1005) SPL SPL - SPL SPL -
Financial Institution SPL SPL SPL SPL SPL SPL
Funeral Home SPL SPL - SPL - SPL
Hospitality (Restaurants, Hotel, Spa, etc.) SPL SPL SPP SPL SPL SPP
Institutional - - - SPL - -
Medical Facilities SPL SPL SPL SPL - SPL
Zoning
District
Minimum Maximum
Lot Area
(sf)
Road
Frontage
(ft)
Buildable
Area (sf)
Front
Yard
Setback
(ft)
Side
Yard
Setback
(ft)
Rear
Yard
Setback
(ft)
Impervious
coverage
(%)
Building
Height
(ft)
C 40,000 150 N/A 35 20 20 60 35
HC 60,000 200 N/A 35 20 20 60 35
ED 200,000 200 N/A 35 20 20 70 50
RC 200,000 250 N/A 50 25 25 70 50
VC 60,000 150 N/A 35 20 20 60 35
I 80,000 250 N/A 50 25 35 70 50
Chapter 6 – Commercial and Industrial Zoning Districts
6 - 3
602.3 COMMERCIAL (CONT.) C HC VC ED RC I
Mixed Use (Residential & Commercial)* (§ 604) SPL SPL - SPL SPL -
Mixed Use (Commercial and Industrial)* (§ 605) - - - SPL SPL SPL
Motor Vehicle Dealership - SPL - - - SPL
Office Facility, General SPL SPL SPL SPL SPL SPL
Personal Services SPL SPL SPL SPL - -
Planned Business Development* (§ 606) SPL SPL - SPL SPL SPL
Professional Services SPL SPL SPL SPL SPL SPL
Recreational Campground*(§ 1016) - - - - - SPL
Recreation Facility, Indoor* (§ 1017) - SPP - SPP SPP SPP
Recreation Facility, Outdoor * (§ 1017) - - - - SPP -
Recreational Vehicle Park, Luxury * (§ 1018) - - - - SPP -
Repair Shop (Vehicle/Non-Vehicular) SPL SPL - SPL - SPL
Self-Storage - SPL - - - SPL
Transportation Services (e.g., rest stop, gas station, truck
terminal)
- SPP SPP SPP - SPP
602.4 INDUSTRIAL C HC VC ED RC I
Excavation (Removal & Filling of Earth Materials)*
(§1006)
- -
-
- - EXP
Film & Television Studios for Production - SPP - SPP SPP SPL
Warehousing/Distribution - SPL - SPL SPP SPL
Light Manufacturing and R & D SPL SPL - SPL - SPL
Heavy Manufacturing - - - SPP - SPP
Solar Energy System (Utility)*( § 1021.1) - - - - - SPL
Special Agriculture (Greenhouses) - SPL SPP SPL SPL SPL
Wireless Communications Tower* (§ 1022) - - - - - SPP
Wind Energy System, Small-scale* (§ 1021.2) SPL SPL - SPL SPL SPL
602.5 ACCESSORY USES
(Unless otherwise specified the following uses are permitted as
accessory to Commercial and Industrial Uses listed in §602.3 &
§602.4 Only)
C HC VC ED RC I
Accessory structures (Permitted for all uses listed in §602) ZP ZP ZP ZP ZP ZP
Aircraft Landing Area* (§ 302) SPP SPP - SPP SPP SPP
Commercial and Retail, General SPL SPL
Drive-through Window* (§ 603.2) SPL SPL SPL SPL SPL SPL
Heliport* ( § 603.3) - - - SPL SPL SPL
Personal Services, Accessory* (§ 603.4) - - - - SPP -
Structured Parking Facility* (§ 603.5) - - - SPL SPL -
Commercial Caretaker Apartment * (§ 603.1) ZP ZP - ZP ZP -
602.6 MISC. FACILITIES C HC VC ED RC I
Emergency Services - SPL - - - SPL
Membership Club (firearms) * (§ 1012) - - - - - SPP
Chapter 6 – Commercial and Industrial Zoning Districts
6 - 4
Membership Club (no firearms)* (§ 1012) SPL SPL - SPL SPL SPL
Post Office SPL SPL - SPL - SPL
Municipal Building/Facilities SPL SPL SPL SPL - SPL
Public Utility Distribution/Substation* (§ 1015) - SPL - SPL SPL SPL
ZP = Zoning Permit SPL = Site Plan SPP = Special Permit MPL = Master Plan
EXP = Excavation Permit
* = Specific use regulations exist in sections indicated.
603 COMMERCIAL ACCESSORY USES/STRUCTURES/ACTIVITIES
603.1 ACCESSORY APARTMENT, COMMERCIAL CARETAKER. In C, HC, ED and RC Zoning
Districts, one dwelling unit may be permitted as an accessory use, either attached to or
detached from the permitted, non-residential principal use.
A. General provisions
1. Only one accessory Commercial Caretaker apartment shall be allowed on property.
2. The occupant must be employed as an overseer or caretaker (i.e., manager,
groundskeeper, or security guard) by the permitted non-residential principal use.
3. Accessory structures (e.g., sheds, carports, etc.) to the Commercial Caretaker
accessory apartment are prohibited.
B. Design of Commercial Caretaker Accessory Apartment
1. The minimum principal dwelling section floor area of the Commercial Caretaker
accessory apartment shall be no less than 400 square feet and no greater than 900
square feet
2. The external architecture of the accessory apartment shall be consistent with that
of the permitted non-residential principal use with which it is associated.
3. Two parking spaces shall be provided for a Commercial Caretaker accessory
apartment in addition to those required for the principal non-residential use.
603.2 DRIVE-THROUGH WINDOW
The purpose of this §603.2 is to promote good access management and to protect the rural
character of the Town by regulating
the location and design of drivethrough
windows. The requirements
for drive-through windows are as
follows.
A. Off-street stacking for waiting
automobiles between the drivethrough
entrance and drivethrough
windows (“dedicated
stacking lane”) shall be provided
based on the following ratios:
1. fast food/drive-through
restaurant w/drive-through
service window: ten stacking
spaces;
Chapter 6 – Commercial and Industrial Zoning Districts
6 - 5
2. drive-through financial institutions/drive-through ATM: eight stacking spaces;
four stacking spaces per service window if more than one service window is
provided;
3. pharmacies: four stacking spaces;
and
4. all other drive-through service
windows shall have ten stacking
spaces.
B. Stacking provision shall also be made
for at least one exiting automobile
between the service window and the
drive-through exit. Such stacking
space shall be no less than 20 feet long
and no less than ten feet wide (12 feet
wide if adjacent to building), and shall
be designed not to interrupt the smooth
flow of traffic within the subject site.
C. Dedicated stacking lanes shall be
provided separately from any other
drive aisle.
D. All stacking lanes shall minimize conflict with pedestrian traffic through the use of
pavement markings and signage, and may include internal walkways and speed bumps
in stacking lanes.
E. The minimum distance between the street and the drive-through entrance, and the
distance between the drive-through exit and the street line, shall be greater than the
minimum setback required for the zone.
F. No exit or entrance for such facilities shall be within 100 feet of an intersection.
603.3 HELIPORT
A. Any heliport allowed under § 602 must be (1) a private heliport for non-scheduled
periodic landing and takeoff of rotor-craft, (2) accessory and incidental to another
permitted use on the lot, and (3) in compliance with all applicable regulations of State
and Federal agencies having jurisdiction over aircraft landing and takeoff facilities and
use of airspace.
B. The number of inbound and outbound flights shall be limited to five each per day.
603.4 PERSONAL SERVICES, ACCESSORY
A. In the RC Zoning District, Personal Services, as defined in these regulations, may only
be permitted as accessory to another principal use.
603.5 STRUCTURED PARKING FACILITY
A. Structured Parking Facilities are not considered to be principal structures or primary
uses for any parcel, and must be accessory to permitted commercial uses in the RC and
Chapter 6 – Commercial and Industrial Zoning Districts
6 - 6
ED Zoning Districts. A structure that is accessory to a single-family or duplex
residence is a garage and is not included as structured parking.
604 MIXED USE (RESIDENTIAL & COMMERCIAL/INDUSTRIAL USES)
604.1 Definition. A single building containing more than one type of land use, or a single
development of more than one mixed-use structure, where the different types of land uses
are in close proximity, planned as a unified complementary whole, and functionally
integrated to the use of shared vehicular and pedestrian access and parking areas.
604.2 The mixture of uses shall include residential uses, and any non-residential uses currently
allowed in the Zone.
604.3 No individual building associated with a mixed residential and commercial use shall have
residential uses allowed on or beneath the first floor, except that residential storage shall
be permitted in a basement.
A. Commercially Zoned properties with an existing single-family residence as of
November 17, 2017 and proposed new commercial construction may maintain the
residential use of the entire structure where the commercial activity takes place in a
separate building. Note: With the exception of properties within the VPOA, residential
properties that have converted to Mixed-use and may not convert back to Single-family
or Duplex residential status.
604.4 Each residential dwelling unit shall contain its own designated kitchen and bath facilities.
604.5 The square footage in residential use shall not exceed the square footage of commercial
use. The square footage of any basement, cellar, attic, accessory use or accessory building
shall not be included in the computation.
604.6 There is no minimum number of dwelling units.
604.7 For all new Mixed Use developments, the applicant is encouraged to meet with the
Building Official and Fire Marshal to discuss the proposed mixed-occupancy and the
required separation of uses and means of fire suppression prior to Commission Approval.
605 MIXED USE (COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL USES)
605.1 Definition. A single building containing more than one type of commercial and/or
industrial land use, or a single development of more than one mixed-use structure, where
the different types of land uses are in close proximity, planned as a unified complementary
whole, and functionally integrated to the use of shared vehicular and pedestrian access and
parking areas.
605.2 The mixture of uses may include any commercial and industrial uses currently permitted
in the zone. There shall be no residential use allowed.
605.3 For all new Mixed Use developments, the applicant is encouraged to discuss the proposed
mixed-occupancy and the required separation of uses and means of fire suppression prior
to Commission Approval.
Chapter 6 – Commercial and Industrial Zoning Districts
6 - 7
606 PLANNED BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT
A site that is commonly owned or leased or that has been consolidated according to §1113 and
consists of at least five contiguous acres may be developed for more than one use in a project
consisting of one or more buildings. The intent is to group compatible activities in a development
that is conceived of as a single project for purposes of architectural design, parking, and site access,
loading, landscaping, and buffers.
606.1 Use
A. The Site Plan for a Planned Business Development shall show the use of the site and
building or buildings. Any change in use shall comply with the provisions of §1203.
B. Allowable uses in a Planned Business Development shall include only those uses
allowed in the underlying zone.
606.2 Timing and Phasing Projects
A. Because of the potential size and complexity of projects developed under this section,
additional time may be needed to complete construction. The applicant shall submit a
development schedule indicating:
1. approximate date that site preparation will begin;
2. approximate date that construction of the first building will begin; and
3. approximate date that site work and building construction will be completed.
B. If the project is to be constructed in phases, the first phase shall be at least 50 percent
of the maximum square footage of the buildings allowable in the total project. A
definitive description of the extent of each phase and expected dates of completion
shall accompany an application for phased construction.
C. Initial construction shall begin within one year of approval. The Commission may
extend this period if requested by the applicant, but not for longer than five years after
the date of approval.
Chapter 6 – Commercial and Industrial Zoning Districts
6 - 8
Chapter 7 – Overlay Areas
7 - 1
701 OVERLAY AREAS
A. Nature of Overlay Area. An Overlay Area is an area, delineated by an overlay or other special
marking on the Zoning Map, that may incorporate portions of one or more underlying Zoning
Districts, and that generally includes special regulations that differ from those in the underlying
District(s). Except as may otherwise be expressly provided in the regulations applicable to an
Overlay Area, the regulations pertaining to the underlying District(s) shall apply within the
Overlay Area.
B. List of Existing Overlay Areas. The Town of North Stonington contains the following
existing Overlay Areas as depicted on the Town’s Zoning Map.
1. Village Preservation Overlay Area
2. Water Supply Protection Overlay Area
3. Seasonal Use Overlay Area
4. Affordable Housing Overlay Area: Meadow Court
702 VILLAGE PRESERVATION OVERLAY AREA (VPOA)
This Overlay Area focuses on the grouping of historically and architecturally significant buildings
in the Village of North Stonington. It overlays the residential district and is intended to protect and
preserve the appearance and character of the Village and its individual buildings, regardless of the
type of land uses involved. The purpose of this Overlay Area is to recognize and preserve the
unique historical character of the Village area.
702.1 Any new permitted uses in the Village Preservation Overlay Area are limited solely to
those listed under the R40 Zoning District residential uses listed in §502 except that the
following additional uses may be permitted:
• Professional Services
• Personal Services
• Office Facility, General
• Hospitality (excluding chain and/or franchise establishments)
• Boutique Retail
• Mixed Use (Residential/Commercial) (as limited to the specific commercial uses
allowed under the R40 Zoning District residential uses listed in §502 and those
identified in this Section 702.1)
The intent is to preclude any building, structure, or use that would be inconsistent or
harmful to the historic charm and character of the Village because of size, location, design,
or use.
702.2 No principal building or use shall be established or changed to another use without a
Special Permit.
702.3 Existing building line setbacks shall be maintained for principal and accessory buildings.
702.4 The preservation and restoration of derelict structures and reconstruction on documented
sites shall be permitted when it can be demonstrated to the Commission that the structure
is significant under the criteria of the National Register of Historic Places.
Chapter 7 – Overlay Areas
7 - 2
702.5 Reconstructing or rebuilding after a fire or other casualty to buildings or features on
documented historic sites within the Village Preservation Overlay Area shall be permitted
if it can be demonstrated that the building or feature is significant under the criteria of the
National Register of Historic Places.
703 WATER SUPPLY PROTECTION OVERLAY DISTRICT
703.1 Purpose. It is the purpose and intent of the Water Supply Protection Overlay Area
(WSPOA) to:
A. protect existing and potential public surface water supply watershed areas from sources
of contamination;
B. protect areas of high groundwater availability from sources of contamination;
C. promote public health and the general welfare of the community; and
D. promote environmental protection.
703.2 Use Regulations. In addition to other provisions of these Regulations, the provisions of
this §703 shall apply for all lots or portions of lots located within the designated WSPOA.
703.3 Conditional Uses
The following uses are allowed only if permitted in the underlying Zoning District and
only if they meet the following additional criteria:
A. Agricultural uses, provided they:
1. adhere to manufacturer’s recommendations and Best Management Practices
(BMP’s) for the storage or application of chemical fertilizers, pesticides,
herbicides, fungicides, or other chemicals associated with agricultural operations;
and
2. adhere to BMP’s for the storage or application of manure. These BMP’s are
available from the U.S. Department of Agriculture Natural Resources
Conservation Service (NRCS). In addition, new or expanded manure storage areas
shall conform to NRCS design requirements.
B. Accessory maintenance, washing, servicing, or repair of site-owned commercial,
industrial, or fleet motor vehicles or equipment, providing such activities are
performed on an impervious surface designed to collect, contain, and properly dispose
of fuels, lubricants, fluids and other potential groundwater contaminants.
C. Manufacture, use, storage, or disposal of hazardous materials, provided that a spill
prevention, control, and countermeasure (SPCC) plan has been approved by the
Commission and any other agency having jurisdiction.
D. Gasoline station, auto repair, and auto body shop, provided that a spill prevention,
control, and countermeasure (SPCC) plan has been approved by the Commission and
any other agency having jurisdiction.
703.4 Prohibited Uses
A. Sanitary landfill, septage lagoon, or wastewater treatment facility for municipal or
industrial wastes.
B. Junkyard, salvage yard.
Chapter 7 – Overlay Areas
7 - 3
C. Truck terminal or bus parking facility with ten or more parking spaces.
D. Bulk storage of road salt for commercial or municipal purposes.
703.5 Any parking area within the WSPOA containing ten or more parking spaces shall, when
constructed or reconstructed, have a treatment system designed, installed, and maintained
to retain spills and renovate stormwater.
703.6 Any development within the WSPOA shall provide an acceptable means of pretreatment
of runoff.
703.7 For the purposes of this subsection, acceptable pretreatment measures will be evaluated in
terms of their compliance with current best management practices as may have been
established by Federal and/or State agencies.
703.8 The provisions of §703shall not apply to:
A. single family dwellings on individual lots;
B. access ways or driveways serving fewer than three dwellings; or
C. home landscaping or maintenance activities.
703.9 Any stormwater management system, utilities installation, environmental enhancements,
or other structures shall be designed, installed and maintained so as to minimize any
detrimental effect on ground water and/or surface water quality.
703.10 Excavation, filling and grading are prohibited on slopes greater than 25%, unless the
Commission finds that erosion control measures provided with the plan are adequate to
meet the purpose and intent of these Regulations and to protect public health, safety and
welfare.
703.11 Environmental Analysis
A. An environmental analysis shall be submitted with any application for a Special
Permit, subdivision, Site Plan, or Excavation Permit involving lots or portions of lots
located within a WSPOA.
B. The environmental analysis shall be prepared and certified by a qualified soils scientist
or licensed engineer and shall contain at least the following information.
1. Impact of the project upon ground and surface water quality and ground water
recharge based on applicable water quality standards and including the estimated
phosphate and nitrate loading on ground water and surface water from new streets,
driveways, septic tanks, lawn fertilizer, and other activities within the
development.
2. Capability of soils, vegetative cover, and proposed erosion control measures to
support the proposed development and to prevent erosion, silting or other
instability.
3. Certification that the development shall not cause a diversion of existing drainage
water from a reservoir where such diversion would result in a net decrease of
volume over what now enters such reservoir.
703.12 Plan Notation. All Plans submitted for permitted uses by Special Permit, Master Plan
and/or Site Plan; all Excavation Permits; and all plot plans submitted for the issuance of
Chapter 7 – Overlay Areas
7 - 4
a Zoning Permit, shall note that the proposed development is subject to all the applicable
requirements of the Zoning Regulations pertaining to the Water Supply Protection
Overlay Area.
704 SEASONAL USE OVERLAY AREA (SUAO)
Notwithstanding the provisions of §305.3, the use of non-conforming lots in the Seasonal Use
Overlay Area shall be limited as provided in this §704. Seasonal residential use is permitted for
non-conforming lots that were created on or before May 21, 1964, as evidenced by deeds filed in
the land records of the Town of North Stonington, provided such lots meet the dimensional
requirements set forth in §501 and the floor area of the seasonal residence is no less than 500 square
feet. For purposes of this §704, “seasonal residential use” means a residential occupancy that is
limited to a maximum of six months in any one year. The use of other lots within the SUOA must
comply with all requirements for the underlying Zoning District.
704.1 On a vacant, non-conforming lot within a Seasonal Use Overlay Area, one Storage Shed
may be installed without a principal building or principal use first being established, with
the following conditions:
A. The shed shall meet the requirements of Chapter 4. Lot frontage on a State Highway
or Town accepted road is not required.
B. The shed shall be used for storage only. The shed shall not be used for human
occupancy.
C. The shed shall not be used for any commercial activities.
D. The shed shall be no larger than 168 square feet in size, and no more than 12 feet in
height.
E. No utilities (water, septic, gas, etc.) shall be installed in or connected to the shed, nor
shall any heating system be installed.
F. A Zoning Permit is required for installation of the shed.
705 AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY AREA-MEADOWCOURT
705.1 Intent. The intent is to provide a mix of affordable and market rate housing units on the
designated area. The mix of permitted uses may exist within one or more buildings. An
Initial Conceptual Site Plan and Affordability Plan consistent with CGS §8-30g and
approved by the Commission shall contain provisions that shall supersede the development
standards of the underlying Zoning District and other sections of these Regulations as
indicated in the approved Conceptual and Affordability Plans.
705.2 Affordable Housing Development (“AHD”) Definition. A proposed housing
development in which, for at least 40 years after the initial occupancy of units within the
proposed development, (1) not less than fifteen percent (15%) of all the dwelling units will
be conveyed by deeds containing covenants or restrictions which shall require that such
dwelling units be sold or rented at, or below, prices which will preserve the units as
affordable housing, as defined in CGS § 8-30g, for persons or families whose income is
less than or equal to eighty percent of the area median income or the statewide median
income, whichever is less; and (2) not less than fifteen percent (15%) of all the dwelling
Chapter 7 – Overlay Areas
7 - 5
units shall be conveyed in the same manner to persons or families whose income is less
than or equal to sixty percent (60%) of the area median income or the statewide median
income, whichever is less.
705.3 Permitted Uses
A. Single Family Residence
B. Duplex Residence
C. Multi-family dwellings not to exceed eight units per building
D. Home Occupations (by Special Permit Only)
E. Facilities for active and passive recreation
F. Public utility and infrastructure uses
All uses and activities (proposed and/or future) shall adhere to the Water Supply Protection
Overlay Area Regulations as set forth in § 703, including without limitation, requirements
for a Special Permit.
705.4 Bulk and Density
* Side yard Setback may be reduced to 15ft if abutting a commercial use
A. Building height shall be measured from the average finished ground level at the
building wall to the highest point on the roof. Building height may be increased as
determined by the Commission when such increase adds to the overall architectural
character, detail and vernacular style of the structure (referral to and review by the
Town’s Fire Chief required) so long as the increase in height does not allow additional
habitable space.
Minimum Lot Size 5 acres
Maximum Density 12 units per acre
Maximum Building Coverage 15%
Maximum Impervious Surface Coverage 35%
Minimum Residential Floor Area per Unit
Studio – 350sf
1 Bedroom – 500sf
2 Bedroom = 700sf
Maximum Building Height 35 ft (max 2 stories)
Minimum Lot Frontage 600 ft.
Minimum Building Separation 10 ft.
Minimum Setbacks
Front & Rear - 50ft.
Side – 80ft.*
Minimum Buffers to Residential 50ft.
Minimum Buffers to Commercial 10ft.
Chapter 7 – Overlay Areas
7 - 6
705.5 Parking
Parking for residential units shall be calculated as follows:
Studio Unit– 1 space/unit
1 Bedroom Unit – 1.5 spaces/unit
2 Bedroom Unit – 2.0 spaces/unit
Handicap spaces shall be provided in accordance with the Americans with Disabilities Act
(ADA) requirements.
705.6 Signage. One sign per driveway entrance shall be permitted for a maximum total square
footage of 32 square feet.
705.7 Landscaping. Landscaping of the site, including all buffer areas, shall be designed so as
to protect and enhance the rural character of the Town of North Stonington and shall
include a mix of evergreen trees, shrubs, deciduous trees, and ground cover.
705.8 Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be provided in suitable locations to provide for safe pedestrian
travel; however, sidewalks shall not be required on both sides of the street.
705.9 Utilities. All utilities including without limitation, electric, telephone, and cable lines, shall
be located underground.
705.10 Water and Sewer. Locations and descriptions of proposed water supply
source/distribution system and sewage disposal facilities, together with initial percolation
and test pit data shall be provided.
705.11 Initial Conceptual Site Plan Requirements
A. Key Map at 1” = 1000’ scale.
B. Approval blocks
C. Title block, north point, scale, location map, legend, and names of the engineer,
architect, landscape architect, or surveyor preparing the plan. Live signature and seals
shall be placed on all plans submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission for all
professionals who assisted in the preparation of the plans.
D. The following site information shall be provided at scale no greater than 1” = 40”.
1. Property Survey and Existing Conditions (Conforming to A2 standards)
2. General Site Layout
3. Grading, Drainage, Erosion and Sediment Control Measures
4. Utility Plan
5. Landscaping Plan
6. Lighting Plan
7. Conceptual Water Supply and Sewage Disposal Plan
8. Wetlands and floodplains shall be delineated.
9. Existing and proposed roads, driveways, and parking areas and spaces.
Chapter 7 – Overlay Areas
7 - 7
10. Sightline information at proposed driveway cuts
11. Location of all existing and proposed buildings and structures. Building setback
lines shall be shown.
E. Floor Plans and Elevations (Scale 1/8”=1’)
705.12 Additional Requirements for an Affordable Housing Development
A. Accessory structures such as carports or storage sheds shall not be permitted.
B. Burial of underground petroleum liquid, diesel fuel, and gasoline storage tanks shall
be prohibited. Any fuel tanks located above ground shall comply with the Water
Supply Protection Overlay Area regulations (§703) and shall be appropriately
screened.
C. Affordable Housing Units shall be of a construction quality that is comparable to
market-rate units within the development. The conceptual site plan shall identify the
locations within the Affordable Housing Development of affordable Units.
D. If the development is to be built in phases, the Affordable Units shall be built on a pro
rata basis as construction proceeds.
E. Housing Opportunity Units* shall be occupied only as a tenant’s or purchaser’s
principal residence except as provided herein. Subletting of Housing Opportunity Units
shall be prohibited unless the tenant is eligible under §8-30g to rent and sublet an
affordable unit.
*”Housing Opportunity Unit” means a dwelling unit within an Affordable Housing
Development that is subject to long-term price restrictions that comply with §8-30g of
the General Statutes as amended.
F. Preliminary Traffic Study. Applicant must submit a conceptual traffic impact analysis
prepared by a licensed engineer. This preliminary traffic study shall include the
following data (without limitation): estimations of traffic generated by proposed
development; Route 2 traffic conditions and site access; site driveway intersection and
site distance; and on-site circulation and parking. The proposed development will
require review by the Connecticut Department of Transportation/State Traffic
Commission as outlined in §705.13 below.
G. Preliminary Stormwater Management Plan. Applicant must submit a preliminary
Stormwater management plan prepared by a Connecticut licensed engineer, and
reviewed by the Town Engineer. The Final Site Plan must show conformance with CT
Stormwater Quality Manual guidelines and the Town of North Stonington Zoning
Regulations regarding Stormwater Management as outlined in §705.13 below.
H. Affordability Plan. In conjunction with an application for approval of the initial
Conceptual Site Plan for an AHD, the applicant shall submit an “Affordability Plan,”
in accordance with CGS §8-30g, which shall describe how the regulations regarding
affordability will be administered. The Affordability Plan shall include provisions for
administration of and compliance with the provision of this section, notice procedures
to the general public of the availability of affordable units, identification of those units
which are to be designated affordable, procedures for verification and periodic
confirmation of unit occupancy income, and compliance with affordability
Chapter 7 – Overlay Areas
7 - 8
requirements. Such Plan shall also include drafts of documents that will be used in the
administration of the affordability restrictions and any explanations which will be
provided to the unit occupants concerning such restrictions.
705.13 Application Procedure
In taking action on the proposed Affordable Housing Development Overlay Area-
Meadowcourt application, the Commission shall act upon each of the following parts of
the application:
A. Application for Zone Change to create the Affordable Housing Development Overlay
Area - Meadowcourt.
B. Application for Text Amendment that includes Conceptual Site Plan and Affordability
Plan in accordance with CGS §8-30g which shall substantially determine/fix the basic
parameters of the Affordable Housing Development (including general site layout, site
characteristics, and general architectural scheme).
C. The Site Plan submitted in conformance with Chapter 13 of these Regulations, except
those regulations expressly altered or superseded by the text of the Affordable Housing
Development Overlay Area - Meadowcourt. No Building Permits shall be issued until
a Site Plan has been submitted and subsequently approved by the Commission. It is
recognized that the final design configuration within these basic parameters may
change to some extent between the time when the preliminary approvals are granted
and all Building Permits are issued (due in part to Coordinating Agency review and
approvals). The procedure for Site Plan modification is detailed in §705.14 below.
Evidence of conformance with the following requirements is to be either included with
the Site Plan to be submitted and approved by the Commission or may be a condition
of approval of a Site Plan application:
1. Conformance with CT Stormwater Quality Manual guidelines and §1112 of these
Zoning Regulations regarding Stormwater Management.
2. Conformance with CT Public Health Code §19-13-B104 (for design flows greater
than 5000 GPD) (Sewage disposal);
3. Conformance with standards and requirements of Southeastern CT Water
Authority; CT Department of Public Health and CT Department of Public Utility
Control (Water supply);
4. Conformance with CT General Statutes §14-311 (Major Traffic Generator
Certificate) and CT Department of Transportation Encroachment Permit
procedures; and
5. Conformance with recommendations from the North Stonington Fire Chief,
including compliance with NFPA guidelines.
All necessary legal agreements and/or permit approvals required for final Site Plan
Approval (to include without limitation: permits and approvals associated with site
access, fire suppression, the construction, installation, operation, maintenance, and/or
repair of any on-site sewage disposal system(s); and/or the extension and provision of
a public water supply to the site) must be approved beyond any available legal appeal
before any Building Permits may be issued.
Chapter 7 – Overlay Areas
7 - 9
D. Once a Site Plan has been approved, no Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued until
all work has been completed in strict accordance with such plan except as provided in
§705.14 below.
705.14 Revisions, Extensions, and Modifications
It is recognized that because of the complexity of Affordable Housing Development
projects, certain changes might occur in the development plan between that time when
Conceptual Site Plans are submitted and that time when all permits for construction are
granted. Therefore, the following provisions shall govern how revisions, extensions, and
modifications of approved plans shall be treated.
A. After approval is granted to those elements of the Affordable Housing Development
Overlay Zone approval described in §§ 705.13A & B herein, any revision, extension,
enlargement, movement or other change in the development of the site which results
in (1) increasing or decreasing land area; (2) increasing the number of units or
bedrooms; (3) increasing the non-residential building area; (4) decreasing buffer areas
by more than 10%; (5) and/or decreasing the percentage of Affordable Units (unless
applicant can demonstrate that the reduction was warranted due to unexpected site
conditions or other circumstances beyond their control), shall require the submission
of a new Affordable Housing Development Overlay Zone Application.
B. The Site Plan as described in §705.13C herein shall clearly indicate all changes
proposed subsequent to the approval of the Conceptual Site Plan. Commission
approval of a Site Plan shall act to establish those conditions shown thereon as the
required conditions, which must be met prior to the issuance of any Building Permits.
However, in no case shall the extent of the development exceed the limitations
established within §§705.3 through 705.10 herein, except in those cases where
modifications of these requirements are permitted as part of the Affordable Housing
Development Overlay Zone approval under the provisions of §§ 05.13C and 705.14
herein.
C. Once a Site Plan has been approved, any revision, extension, enlargement, movement
or other change in the development of the site which is proposed hereafter, and which
does not exceed the limitations established within §§705.3 through 705.10 herein, shall
require the submission of a revised Site Plan which shall be acted upon in accordance
with the provisions of Chapter 13 of these regulations. Such proposed modifications
may be permitted only if approved by the Commission. Any revised Site Plan shall
clearly indicate all changes proposed subsequent to the approval of the existing Site
Plan and approval by the Commission of a revised Site Plan shall act to establish the
conditions shown thereon as the required conditions, which must be met prior to the
issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy.
705.15 Enforcement. A violation of the Regulations contained in this §705 shall not result in a
forfeiture or reversion of title, but the Commission shall otherwise retain all enforcement
powers granted by the Connecticut General Statutes, including the authority under §8-12
to issue notices of violation, to impose fines, and to seek injunctive relief.
Chapter 7 – Overlay Areas
7 - 10
Chapter 8 - Residential Special Zoning Districts
8 - 1
801 List of Residential Special Zoning Districts. The following districts are special zoning districts;
i.e., districts for which regulations have been established herein but which, as of the time of
adoption of these Regulations, had not yet been established on any specific land within the Town.
A. Senior Housing Community
802 SENIOR HOUSING COMMUNITY (SHC)
802.1 Purpose. A Senior Housing Community may be approved as an overlay district in the R-
40, R-60, C, HC and ED Zoning Districts. An application for a Senior Housing Community
shall be processed in the same manner, and subject to the same standards, as a Design
Development Overlay district. The purpose of the Senior Housing Community (SHC)
regulations is to provide residential dwellings at a greater density than otherwise permitted
for residential use in the underlying zoning district(s) for persons aged 55 years and older,
with access to medical and/or healthcare facilities and services. Adequate restrictions must
be placed on the property to limit occupancy as described in §802.6.
802.2 Application Requirements. Applications for a Senior Housing Community shall be
submitted in accordance with the Design Development District (Master Planned
Development) requirements (§901).
802.3 Bulk and Area Requirements. It is the purpose of this section to permit variations in
height, bulk, density, and residential use types in order to meet the special needs of the
elderly and handicapped, and to permit flexible site design so that development may be
constructed in harmony with and preserve natural site features.
A. Minimum Parcel Size: 5 acres.
B. Maximum Building Height: 40 feet or three stories, whichever is less.
802.4 Maintenance. The applicant shall present sufficient information to the Commission to
demonstrate that adequate provisions have been made for the sustained maintenance of the
development in general and also for the sustained maintenance of the roads and open space.
802.5 Fire Protection. An applicant shall be required to provide an automatic fire suppression
system in all projects where more than one dwelling unit is contained within the same
building.
802.6 Age Restrictions
A. Each dwelling unit may be occupied only by:
1. persons who are 55 years of age or older;
2. a spouse of, or a person joined in a civil union (“civil union partner”) to, a person
who is 55 years of age or older and who lives in the same unit;
3. an occupant who survives a spouse or civil union partner who resided at the same
unit immediately prior to his or her death;
4. an occupant whose spouse or civil union partner resided in the same unit
immediately before entering into a long-term continuing care facility;
5. children 21 years of age or older of a parent residing in the same unit; or
6. a paid caregiver of a person who is 55 years of age or older and who lives in the
same unit.
Chapter 8 - Residential Special Zoning Districts
8 - 2
B. In no event may a dwelling unit be occupied by more than four residents.
C. The proposed development shall be a Common Interest Ownership Community as
defined in Chapter 828 of the Connecticut General Statutes.
Chapter 9 - Business Special Zoning Districts
9-1
900 List of Business Special Zoning Districts. The following districts are special Zoning Districts;
i.e., Districts for which regulations have been established herein but which, as of the time of
adoption of these Regulations, had not yet been established on any specific land within the Town.
A. Design Development District (Master Planned Development)
B. Vacation Resort District (Master Planned Development)
901 DESIGN DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT (MASTER PLANNED DEVELOPMENT)
901.1 Intent. To encourage commercial and mixed use development that reflects the vision of
the Town with respect to attracting quality development and that respects the New England
character of North Stonington, while allowing for creative design that maximizes the
economic viability and flexibility for future reuse. A Design Development District may be
approved only in the C, ED and HC Zoning Districts, except that, if any portion of a current,
legally existing lot is located within the ED, a DDD may incorporate the entire lot.
901.2 The purposes of a Design Development District are:
A. to provide flexibility in uses and site design, maximizing development potential while
ensuring aesthetically pleasing commercial and mixed use development;
B. to extend greater opportunities for traditional community living, working, housing, and
recreation to all residents of the Town;
C. to encourage a more efficient use of land and public services by promoting compact
development in appropriate locations; and
D. to provide a mix of uses, including residential, commercial, civic and open space uses.
901.3 The goal of this § 901 is to provide a process by which developers and Commission
members can collaborate on the design of a site and arrive at a final project that is both
successful for the developer and sustainable for the Town. The permitting process will
consist of three steps.
A. Informal workshop to discuss initial concepts and ideas. Some basic concept plans
should be provided to aid the discussion.
B. Approval of Master Plan and Zoning Map amendment.
C. Site Plan/Special Permit Approval (depending on the proposed uses).
901.4 Relationship to Zoning Regulations
A. Unless provided otherwise in this § 901, uses within the Design Development District
(Master Planned Development) shall be subject to all provisions and definitions of
these Regulations. However, because the intent of the DDD is to provide flexibility in
design standards in order to achieve important design objectives as described herein,
in cases of conflict with other provisions of these Regulations including the zoning
definitions, the provisions of this § 901 shall prevail.
B. As part of a Master Plan, the applicant may propose one or more modifications of any
of these Regulations that would otherwise be applicable to the underlying Zoning
District. A list of such proposed modifications must accompany the application. If the
Commission decides to approve the application to establish the DDD, it may accept,
modify and accept, or deny any of the proposed modifications. Any modifications
Chapter 9 - Business Special Zoning Districts
9-2
approved by the Commission in establishing a DDD shall be deemed to be the
regulations applicable to the DDD and shall supersede any contrary regulations for the
underlying Zoning District(s). The regulations for the underlying zoning districts shall
continue to apply to the DDD except as so modified.
C. For the purposes of this § 901, the term “Master Plan” shall include all elements of the
“Application Requirements” contained herein: i.e., the “Master Plan”,
“Comprehensive Traffic Study”, “Comprehensive Stormwater Management Study”,
“Documentation of the Availability of Potable Water and Sanitary Sewer Service”, and
the “Design Guidelines,” including the “Pattern Book”.
D. The foregoing notwithstanding, nothing in this § 901.4 shall be construed to prevent
review under the requirements and criteria of Chapter 13 of these Regulations for any
Special Permit application pursuant to § 901 that addresses a level of detail for that
Special Permit application that was not addressed in the approval of the Master Plan
and its accompanying studies. Similarly, nothing in this section shall be construed to
prevent such review for any elements of the Special Permit that differ from the
approved Master Plan. The intent of this section is that any compliance issues that can
be addressed at the level of detail afforded by the Master Plan shall not be revisited in
the individual Special Permit applications filed in compliance with such Master Plan,
while not precluding the Commission from examining the more detailed plans of the
Special Permit application in conformance with the criteria of these Regulations that
are appropriate to such detailed level of review.
901.5 Permitted Uses (SPL). Office, retail, general commercial, hospitality, personal and
professional services, manufacturing, civic, open space, and residential uses may all be
permitted in a DDD as part of a well-designed, mixed-use development that provides a
reasonable mix and balance of such uses.
901.6 Conditional Uses (SPP)
The following uses in a DDD shall require a Special Permit:
a. single-family detached housing units;
b. any commercial office or research and development use that utilizes, processes, or
manufactures chemicals or any hazardous materials;
c. drive-through windows;
d. commercial greenhouses and similar agriculturally related commercial businesses; and
e. any use in the underlying zoning district(s) that requires a Special Permit.
901.7 Design
The following regulations apply to all DDDs.
A. All uses shall employ Sustainable Development practices in accordance with § 1102
of the Zoning Regulations, including but not limited to low impact development
techniques.
B. Site design shall aim to maintain as much of the natural topography and vegetation
and, wherever possible, developments shall be internalized with no front-yard parking.
C. All utilities shall be located underground.
D. Shared and on-street parking is encouraged for residential units.
Chapter 9 - Business Special Zoning Districts
9-3
E. Total size of such a development shall be regulated by the ability to provide adequate
water and wastewater disposal in accordance with the public health code.
F. The maximum building height in any DDD shall be 50 feet or three stories, whichever
is less, except where the Commission finds that a greater height would add to the
overall architectural character, detail and vernacular style of a proposed structure. Any
proposal for such increased height must be referred to the Town’s Fire Chief for review
and comment. No increase in height shall be permitted to provide additional habitable
space.
G. A Connecticut Licensed Landscape Architect shall be required to design, certify, and
sign the site development plans in association with the other necessary design
professionals. The burden of proof shall be on the applicant to demonstrate to the
Commission that the site design requirements have been met or exceeded.
901.8 Application Elements
The following application elements must be prepared, and all graphical plans signed and
sealed, by a professional engineer licensed in the State of Connecticut.
A. Master Plan for the area to be developed, including the elements included on the
“Master Plan Check Sheet” found in Appendix E.
B. Comprehensive Parking Study (“Master Parking Study”) for the area to be
developed. The following information should be included in the Master Parking Study:
1. overall analysis of parking demand for the area to be developed, including shared
use analysis if applicable;
2. types, approximate locations and number of parking spaces to be provided; and,
3. comparison of parking demand and parking to be provided.
C. Comprehensive Traffic Study (“Master Traffic Study”) for the area to be developed.
The following information should be included:
1. existing and projected background traffic counts on major streets located in and
adjacent to the area to be developed;
2. analysis of anticipated traffic to be generated by the land uses proposed for the area
to be developed, including projected levels of service and queuing at key
intersections;
3. description of improvements for vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
4. public transit improvements, to mitigate traffic impacts; and
5. anticipated phasing of traffic improvements within project area.
D. Comprehensive Stormwater Drainage Study (“Master Stormwater Drainage
Study”). The following information should be included:
1. an analysis of existing and proposed peak rates of stormwater discharge from the
property for 2, 10, 25, 50 and 100-year storm events;
2. a description of stormwater drainage improvements to be constructed, including
phasing based on 50 and 100-year storm events; and
Chapter 9 - Business Special Zoning Districts
9-4
3. a preliminary description of stormwater quality measures to be incorporated into
the area to be developed.
E. Documentation of the Availability of Potable Water and Sanitary Sewer service.
1. This documentation shall include but not be limited to engineering feasibility
studies of the proposed water supply (such as well data from existing wells on or
near the site) and sewage disposal facilities, including test pit data and suitability
for on-site disposal; or, for public sewers, the capacity of the treatment plant, the
general route of sewer trunk lines, and other preliminary feasibility information.
Final engineering design, final governmental approvals, or physical construction
of water or effluent disposal facilities shall not be required at the Master Plan
approval stage, but shall be required prior to the issuance of any Site Plan approval
and/or Special Permit.
2. Documentation submitted shall establish the feasibility of providing potable water
of adequate quantity and quality, and of providing effluent disposal either on-site
or via public sanitary sewers, and shall indicate that requisite State and local
approvals are reasonably probable under existing laws and regulations. The
Commission may accept in satisfaction of this section an engineering feasibility
study showing that adequate capacity exists in a sewage treatment plant which has
a pipe connection within three miles of the DDD, in combination with the
applicant’s commitment to make connection to such pipe at no expense to Town
taxpayers. Final engineering design, final governmental approvals, or physical
construction of water or effluent disposal facilities shall not be required at the
Master Plan approval stage, but shall be required prior to the issuance of any Site
Plan approval and/or Special Permit.
F. Design Guidelines. The applicant shall submit proposed Design Guidelines for the
DDD, including information on the following.
1. Design intent and project vision
2. A “Pattern Book” that shall establish the building design standards, including,
but not limited to, dimensional requirements; setbacks; architecture, including the
exterior materials and finishes to be used, roof lines and materials, fenestration,
color palette; building and site illumination; signs, street furniture, and such other
design and architectural details as will allow the Commission to ensure that the
individual components of the Master Plan will be clear and enforceable after
approval of the DDD. All new buildings and all subsequent alterations to those
buildings shall meet the following minimum architectural design standards:
a. Architectural Variety. A variety of architectural features and building
materials is encouraged to give each building or group of buildings a distinct
character.
b. Scale. The scale of new construction, including the arrangement of windows,
doors and other openings within the façade, shall be compatible with the
rural/historic character of the Town.
Chapter 9 - Business Special Zoning Districts
9-5
c. Accessory Structures. All accessory structures, screen walls and exposed
areas of retaining walls shall be of a similar type, quality and appearance as
the associated principal structure(s).
3. Site Circulation to include:
a. pedestrian circulation, including materials to be used for walkways and the
location thereof;
b. bicycle trails, and the location and construction method thereof;
c. public transit access, including the design of bus shelters and the location
thereof; and
d. motor vehicles, including the hierarchy of road widths and specifications and
the width of each type of roadway; the location of parking areas and the
methods of screening or buffering them from public areas, and the methods of
illuminating them so as to avoid glare on adjoining parcels.
4. Streetscape and landscaping standards, including materials, street furniture,
illumination, cross walks, and preservation of existing specimen trees.
5. Lighting and signage standards, including an overall sign plan, with size,
location, and method of illumination specified; and overall lighting standards
indicating the methods of lighting various types of areas, such as driveways,
parking lots, walkways, and building entrances
6. Waste disposal facilities such as dumpster areas and the screening or enclosure
thereof.
7. Treatment of service areas, loading and delivery areas and above-ground utilities
such as transformer boxes.
8. Statement of Proposed Modifications to Regulations. The statement must
include a list of all regulations that would otherwise be applicable to the underlying
zoning districts but that the applicant proposes to modify for the DDD.
901.9 Approval Considerations
As an exercise of its legislative authority, the Commission may approve, approve with
modifications, or deny any application for a DDD. The Commission may also require that
certain amenities, such as improved or natural open space areas or community facilities, be
allocated to particular phases of the development so as to ensure that such amenities
proceed apace with the other components of the development. The Commission may also
require that each phase contain a minimum number or type of uses to assure that the initial
phases, standing alone, will further the purposes of the DDD as set forth in § 901; and may
require that certain buildings or certain uses within a phase receive Building Permits and
be under construction before future phases may commence construction. In considering
any application for a DDD, the Commission shall make a finding that the Master Plan,
including Master Stormwater Drainage Study, Master Parking Study, Phasing Plan, Master
Traffic Study and Design Guidelines, is consistent with the standards and purposes of a
DDD set forth in this section; and, in addition, with those criteria set forth in § 1102
(Sustainable Development) and § 1303 (Special Permit) of these Regulations that are
applicable to the Master Plan level of detail per § 901.4.D This reference to § 1303 shall
Chapter 9 - Business Special Zoning Districts
9-6
not be construed to require plans or other materials at that level of detail required for a
Special Permit application at the Master Plan approval stage.
901.10 Filing of Approved Master Plan and Zoning Map Amendment. Following approval of
a DDD, the Master Plan, together with the approved Master Parking Study, Master Traffic
Study, Phasing Plan, Master Stormwater Drainage Study, and Design Guidelines, shall be
filed in the office of the clerk of the Town of North Stonington.
901.11 Modification of Approved Master Plan. Approved DDD Master Plans may be modified
by the Commission in accordance with procedures pertinent to the nature of the proposed
modification. For instance, applications to modify the applicable regulations shall be
reviewed pursuant to § 1304; applications to modify any use requiring a Special Permit
shall be reviewed pursuant to § 1303; and so forth.
901.12 Expiration of DDO District. Site Plan and/or Special Permit approval for at least the first
phase of an approved DDDmust be obtained no later than five years following the approval
of the DDD Master Plan or, in the event of an appeal of such approval, within five years
following the final adjudication of the appeal that the DDD is valid (“final approval”). All
components of the DDD shall be completed no later than ten years after final approval of
the DDD, provided that the Commission may grant extensions of time where the developer
demonstrates that it is making a good faith effort to complete the development and there
are no outstanding violations of these Regulations or the Inland Wetlands and
Watercourses Regulations with respect to the DDD. Any failure to meet these deadlines
shall result in the expiration of the Master Plan, which shall become null and void. The
Commission shall place a notice of any such expiration, on the land records of the Town.
901.13 Special Permit Review. Following approval of a DDD Master Plan, all applications for
Site Plan and/or Special Permit approval for the structures and other improvements within
such Plan shall be filed with the Commission pursuant to the following process:
A. Informal Review. All applicants are encouraged to review all Site Plan and/or Special
Permit applications with Commission staff on an informal basis prior to the filing of
any application.
B. Application Process
1. Applications for Special Permit approval in a DDD must be filed with the
Commission and conform to § 1303 of these Regulations, except as provided
otherwise in this § 901 (see especially subsection C, below). Each proposed use,
Site Plan, building or structure, and other component of the application shall
include all structures and other improvements within the entire Master Plan or
within a project phase as approved by the Commission as part of its approval of
the Master Plan, and shall substantially conform to such Master Plan.
2. The Commission shall conduct a public hearing on any application for Special
Permit approval in accordance with the provisions of §§ 1303 and 1306.
C. Application Requirements. All applicants for Site Plan or Special Permit approval
shall provide the application materials required by §1302 and § 1303 respectively. The
following additional information shall also be submitted.
1. Statement of Consistency with Plans, Studies and Guidelines. A statement
shall be provided demonstrating reasonable consistency with the following
Chapter 9 - Business Special Zoning Districts
9-7
documents that were approved as part of the DDD application, and identifying any
deviations from the Master Plan and the reasons for such deviations:
a. Master Plan
b. Master Parking Study
c. Master Traffic Study
d. Master Stormwater Draining Study
e. Design Guidelines
If the Commission determines that changes have been made to the Master Plan,
including without limitation the size, density, mix of uses, site layout, appearance,
and/or design of the development that affect the application’s fulfillment of the
objectives of the DDD, the application may be denied as being not reasonably
consistent with the Master Plan. In such instance, the applicant may file a revised
Special Permit application or an application to amend the Master Plan.
2. The applicant shall submit a Permanent Maintenance Plan that establishes a
yearly schedule of maintenance activities to ensure the aesthetic quality and
cleanliness of the site. The maintenance plan shall include, but not be limited to,
a timetable for all maintenance activities with respect to private storm drainage
systems, utilities and other infrastructure including, but not limited to, landscaping
and screening, roads, parking areas, sidewalks, trails and berms, lighting, signage,
storage, refuse and litter control, snow removal and other site amenities proposed
in the plans. If the development is intended to be a common interest ownership
community pursuant to the Common Interest Ownership Act (the “Act”), the
applicant shall submit proposed language to be included in the Declaration of the
community under the Act, binding each unit owner and the unit owners’
association to the requirements of the approved maintenance plan. If the
development is intended to be something other than a common interest ownership
community, the applicant shall submit a document legally sufficient to assure
future maintenance of the DDD infrastructure, as described above.
902 VACATION RESORT DISTRICT (VRD)
902.1 Intent: To facilitate a coordinated area of luxury accommodations and amenities that
promote the enjoyment of the area's natural features and harmonize with the existing
residential uses, and to allow for creative design that maximizes the economic viability and
flexibility for future reuse. A Vacation Resort District may be approved only in the RC
zoning district.
902.2 The goal of this § 902 is to provide a process by which developers and Commission
members can collaborate on the design of a site and arrive at a final project that is both
successful for the developer and sustainable for the Town. The permitting process will
consist of three steps.
A. Informal workshop to discuss initial concepts and ideas. Some basic concept plans
should be provided to aid the discussion.
B. Approval of Master Plan and Zoning Map amendment.
C. Site Plan/Special Permit Approval (depending on the proposed uses).
Chapter 9 - Business Special Zoning Districts
9-8
902.3 Permitted Uses. All uses permitted in the RC Zone shall be permitted in a VRD as part of
a well-designed, mixed-use development that shall be identified as a Vacation Resort
Complex. The Complex may be owned and managed by one person or family, partnership,
or corporation, including condominium ownership, and shall contain a reasonable mix and
balance of dwelling units and/or guest rooms and recreational activities intended for the
primary use of its guests, administrative facilities, and maintenance and storage facilities.
A resort may also furnish services which may cater to other guests not staying at the resort
such as retail, restaurant, cocktail lounge, and convention facilities.
902.4 Minimum Lot size shall be twice that of the underlying RC Zoning District.
902.5 Application Procedure and Relationship to Zoning Regulations. With the exception of
Sections 901.1-901.3, 901.5- 901.6, and 901.7F, all requirements and procedures outlined
in Section 901 applicable to a DDO shall also apply to a Vacation Resort District.
Chapter 10 – Supplemental Regulations
10 - 1
The following regulations are supplemental to uses identified with an * listed in Chapters 5 and 6.
1001 AGRICULTURE
Preserving the Town’s existing farms and encouraging new farming activities are strong goals of
the Town. North Stonington’s farms are central to the community’s rural image and overall value
by providing many obvious benefits such as providing tax revenue with little demand on Town
services; providing wildlife habitats and tracts of open space, essential to maintaining the high
quality of life enjoyed by Town residents; and by providing local produce, meat and dairy products
year round. The purpose of these regulations is to clearly define agriculture and to promote the
economic and operational viability of existing agricultural operations while facilitating and
promoting new operations.
Agriculture is permitted in the R40, R60, R80 and I Zoning Districts as a principal use or in
addition to any existing permitted principal use.
1001.1 Definitions
See Chapter 16 under “Agriculture” for various definitions relating to agriculture and
farming. All such terms are considered agricultural uses and may require permits.
1001.2 Application Requirements
The following activities/uses require a Zoning Permit and/or Commission review:
A. the establishment of a new agricultural principal use as defined in §1600;
B. the expansion or modification of an existing farm/agricultural operation;
C. Special Agricultural Buildings (see §1001.6);
D. the excavation of farm ponds (see §1006);
E. the construction of any new structures on a property;
F. accessory uses and activities specifically identified in §§1001.3 (A – E); and
G. any other use/activity specifically identified as requiring a permit.
1001.3 Accessory uses (Ag-tivities, tourism, retail). The following activities are considered to
be accessory to an established agriculture operation. For accessory uses and activities that
may currently or in the future involve outdoor events, retail sales, and/ or potential trafficgenerating
activities, a Zoning Permit and/or Commission review is required.
A. Agricultural Tourism. The opening to the public of a working farm or any
agricultural, horticultural or agribusiness operation for the purpose of enjoyment,
education, or active involvement in the activities of the farm or operation. A Site Plan
review (SPL) shall be required when agricultural tourism is to be conducted on any
parcel six or more times in any calendar year, or when any agricultural tourism event
may reasonably be expected to require parking on any single day for ten or more motor
vehicles used by agricultural tourists. Otherwise, agricultural tourism requires only a
Zoning Permit (ZP).
B. Ag-tivities. Events of limited duration on a farm that are incidental to agricultural uses,
including (but not limited to) hayrides, corn mazes, festivals and other similar
activities; on-farm sales such as farm stands and pick-your-own operations, retailing
farm and farm-related products (farm store); recreational and/or competitive equine
enterprises, and on-farm processing operations provided they comply with all
applicable state and municipal health codes. A Site Plan review (SPL) shall be required
Chapter 10 – Supplemental Regulations
10 - 2
when Ag-tivities are to be conducted on any parcel six or more times in any calendar
year, or when any Ag-tivities may reasonably be expected to require parking on any
single day for ten or more motor vehicles used by visitors to the farm. Otherwise, Agtivities
require only a Zoning Permit (ZP). Note: A temporary event permit may also
be required from the Board of Selectmen.
C. Non-agriculturally Related Uses. Activities that are part of an agricultural
operation’s overall offerings, but are not incidental to agriculture, or tied to agricultural
buildings, structures, equipment, and/or fields. Such uses may include, but are not
limited to, fee-based outdoor recreation such as bird watching, snow-shoeing, and other
passive recreational activities. A Site Plan review (SPL) shall be required when such
uses may reasonably be expected to require parking for ten or more motor vehicles
used by visitors to the farm. Otherwise, such uses require only a Zoning Permit (ZP).
Small Event Barns for (but not limited to) retreats, weddings, workshops, classes (i.e.
yoga, canning, wool dying etc.) are permitted by SPL, but no outdoor events or
amplified music are permitted and adequate parking must be available on site to
accommodate all expected motor vehicles.
Event Barns to be used for large-scale events, or any events in which the use of
amplified music is planned or anticipated, require a Special Permit. In order to satisfy
the conditions of a Special Permit with respect to noise, the Commission may limit the
number of events per year and/or prohibit the use of amplified music outdoors. The
Commission may impose additional restrictions on the use if it determines, after a
hearing for which the owner of the farm is given written notice that the noise levels are
causing a nuisance to nearby properties.
D. Farm-Brewery (SPL)
A Farm Brewery shall be considered to be accessory to an established agricultural
operation if the farmer makes and sells beer (including hard cider) from ingredients
primarily grown on the farm. A Farm Brewery is permitted wherever agriculture is
permitted [Note: A “Brew Pub” would fall under Hospitality Uses, permitted in nonresidential
Zones per §602]. In addition to the requirements of Site Plan approval, the
following additional regulations shall apply.
1. The brewery shall be considered a “Pilot” or “Nano” brewery if it has production
capabilities of no more than 15,000 barrels a year. However, in the I Zoning
District, the manufacturing of greater quantities of beer and full-scale distribution
operations may also be permitted as part of Site Plan approval.
2. The brewery must be clearly subordinate to a primary residence that is owneroccupied
(or that houses a full-time caretaker/manager)
3. Accessory uses to the Farm Brewery may include a test kitchen, tasting room, retail
farm store selling local produce, value-added products, and sealed bottles or other
sealed containers of beer produced on site for consumption off the premises.
Accessory structures such as sheds and barns incidental to the brewery are also
permitted.
4. Hours of operation for the tasting room and retail store shall be 12:00 p.m. to 8:00
p.m. (year-round, 7 days a week).
Chapter 10 – Supplemental Regulations
10 - 3
E. Seasonal Roadside Stand and Farm Stores (ZP)
1. Roadside stands are permitted in all districts and require a Zoning Permit if greater
than 50 square feet. No roadside stand shall have a gross floor area greater than
200 square feet.
2. Farm Stores of any size require Site Plan approval.
F. General Requirements
1. Parking. Parking for all permitted agricultural accessory uses shall, to the
maximum extent possible, be located in areas on the site where they will be the
least visible from access roads and adjoining properties, but must allow for
adequate sightlines for drivers traveling on the adjacent road and entering and
exiting such spaces for such road. Setback requirements apply to all parking areas.
Due consideration shall be given to the posted speed limit and other pertinent
factors. The ZEO and/or Commission may require additional buffering to meet the
intent of the parking and landscaping regulations.
2. Location and Noise. The location of outdoor events and activities associated with
Agri-tourism and/or Ag-tivities on the farm shall take into consideration the
current use of surrounding properties. The Commission and/or ZEO may require a
specific separating distance and/or an appropriate buffer strip that screens any such
activity from adjacent properties.
If the proposed activity or agricultural use regularly employs the use of an
amplified sound system, there shall be a sound-absorption plan in place that
confirms compliance with the State of Connecticut DEEP noise standards (§22a-
69-1 through §22a 69-7-4) as amended. The Commission may impose additional
restrictions on the use if it determines, after a hearing for which the owner of the
farm is given written notice that the noise levels are causing a nuisance to nearby
properties.
1001.4 Animals and Fowl
This §1001.4 is intended to promote, protect, and encourage keeping livestock in an
appropriate and responsible manner within the Town. The keeping of animals,
subject to the following limitations, is permitted in all Residential and Industrial
Zoning Districts regardless of farm status.
A. Definitions:
Large Animals include but are not limited to a horses, ponies, donkies, cows, bison,
and/or other similar animals whose mature weight exceed 400 pounds. Pigs shall be
considered large animals regardless of their mature weight.
Medium Animals include but are not limited to sheep, goats, miniature horses, and/or
animals whose mature weight is between 30 and 400 pounds.
Small Animals include but are not limited to fowl and/or animals whose mature weight
is less than 30 pounds
B. The keeping of any one (1) large animal or three (3) of any medium animals (other
than domestic cats or dogs) as defined in Subsection A above or the keeping of a flock
Chapter 10 – Supplemental Regulations
10 - 4
of more than ten (10) in the aggregate of any fowl, or ten (10) in the aggregate of any
other small animal (other than domestic cats or dogs) as defined in Subsection A above,
whose mature weight is less than 30 pounds, shall require a parcel of land containing
no less than 40,000 square feet of contiguous area.
Except as provided in Subsection C, for each one (1) additional large animal OR three
(3) additional medium animals, OR for each additional flock of fowl or group of ten
(10) small animals, the parcel must contain an additional 20,000 square feet of
contiguous area. Limits do not apply to un-weaned animals less than six months in age.
C. A flock of six (6) or fewer fowl or a group of any six (6) or fewer small animals, as
defined in Subsection A above, may be kept on lots having less than 40,000 square feet
of contiguous area (except that no roosters shall be permitted).
D. There is no limit on the number of animals that may be kept on farms having ten (10)
acres or more, provided all other applicable provisions of these Regulations are met.
For properties containing less than ten (10) acres, animal densities beyond those set
forth in Subsection A above may be permitted if the additional animals will be housed
solely indoors.
E. Animal Waste- Storage and Disposal Best Management Practices
1. The keeping of animals and fowl and all plans for the storage and disposal of their
associated wastes, shall conform to all applicable local, state and federal health, air
and water pollution regulations (Note: these may be available through the U.S.
Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation Service, or the
UCONN Cooperative Extension Service).
2. The living quarters of livestock, poultry, and similar animals, and the handling and
disposal of solid and liquid wastes must not create a public health hazard or
nuisance, or have an adverse effect on the environmental quality of the surrounding
area and the community in general.
3. All animals shall be suitably and adequately confined or controlled at all times.
4. Animal-keeping areas shall not be permitted directly over land containing an onsite
sewage disposal system.
5. Proper drainage shall be provided to avoid collection of water. Water shall be
diverted from animal keeping areas; however, such water shall not be allowed to
pollute surface or subsurface water supplies.
6. Enforcement. § 1001.4.D applies to the keeping of all animals permitted in
§1001.4. The ZEO shall have the power to determine Best Management Practices
after consulting with appropriate State and/or Local Agencies.
1001.5 Signage
In addition to the signs allowed pursuant to §312 of these Regulations, a farm may have:
A. Agricultural Sign. One permanent free-standing or attached sign with an area no
larger than 16 square feet per side, limited to two sides (no size limit applies to “signs”
painted on a barn).
Chapter 10 – Supplemental Regulations
10 - 5
Agricultural signs must comply with all other applicable standards specified in § 312.
B. Seasonal Agricultural Sign. One temporary free-standing or attached sign associated
with a farm stand, seasonal farm stand, or agriculturally related use. Such signs shall
not have an area larger than 16 square feet per side, with a maximum of two sides.
One seasonal agricultural sign per farm stand, seasonal farm stand, and/or
agriculturally related use is allowed. One additional seasonal agricultural sign per
every 300 feet of frontage on a public right-of-way on a farm parcel is also allowed.
At no time, however, shall any farm have more than six seasonal agricultural signs.
Seasonal agricultural signs shall meet all other applicable standards specified in §312.
1001.6 Specialized Agricultural Building
A. In deciding on any application for a Special Permit for a specialized agricultural
building, the Commission shall seek to minimize the impact of any such use on nearby
established residential, commercial, and institutional uses by requiring appropriate
separation distances, buffers, and access route locations.
B. No such building or any associated waste storage or treatment area shall be located
closer than 225 feet from a street centerline or closer than 300 feet from any other
property line or from a watercourse, except that the distance to a property line may be
reduced to 100 feet when the adjoining property is permanently preserved open space.
1002 SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR CERTAIN RESIDENTIAL ACCESSORY USES
1002.1 ACCESSORY APARTMENTS
The construction and use of one accessory apartment associated with a single-family
dwelling is permitted as follows:
A. General Provisions
1. Only one accessory apartment shall be allowed on any lot.
2. No accessory apartment shall be approved as an accessory to a duplex residential
or multi-family residential use.
3. The property shall be and shall remain owner-occupied.
4. The floor area of the (residential) accessory apartment shall not exceed 35% of the
total floor area of the primary dwelling unit (not including finished basements,
decks or detached accessory structures) with an overall maximum of 1,200 square
feet, except for primary dwellings with a floor area less than or equal to 1200sf,
the residential accessory apartment may be increased to a maximum of 420sf.
5. A residential accessory apartment may occupy the total area of any one-story
attached or detached garage, or the total area of the second story of any two-story
attached or detached garage but shall not exceed 1,200 square feet in size.
6. The accessory apartment may be either attached or detached; however, the
following additional criteria shall apply to attached accessory apartments.
a. The space devoted to the accessory apartment within the principal residence,
or non-residential building in the case of a commercial caretaker apartment,
Chapter 10 – Supplemental Regulations
10 - 6
must contain a separate, above-grade, exterior entrance, which shall not be
located on any wall facing any street.
b. The space devoted to the accessory apartment within a single-family dwelling
or non-residential building must be interconnected by at least one doorway to
the remainder of the dwelling, so that a person could gain access to the
apartment from an interior doorway serving the remainder of the house
(business), and vice versa.
c. At least one side of the accessory apartment shall be at or above grade, with
any additional egress being at or above grade.
d. The accessory apartment shall have its own independent bathroom and kitchen
facilities.
e. The minimum lot size shall be that of the underlying zone in which the
property is located; i.e., even if the parcel is located within an overlay zone
that allows smaller lot sizes, a lot with an accessory apartment must meet the
larger lot-size requirements of the underlying zone.
f. The building, upon establishment of the accessory apartment, shall have any
secondary entrance incorporated into the principal residence (or principal nonresidential
unit) to reflect the architectural style of a single-family unit (or
existing non-residential unit for a commercial caretaker apartment).
B. Access and Parking
1. No additional curb cuts shall be created to serve the accessory apartment. Access
from the public right-of-way shall serve both the principal dwelling unit and
accessory apartment.
2. A total of at least four off-street parking spaces (which may include garage and
driveway spaces) shall be provided on the lot. Such parking shall not be located in
the required front, side, or rear yard setback.
1002.2 HOME OCCUPATION
A. Definition. Home occupations are defined as the use of a portion of a dwelling or
out-building(s) for business purposes by the resident occupants when clearly
incidental and secondary to the residential use of the dwelling. Uses such as
hospitality, funeral homes, dancing schools, kennels, and animal hospitals are not
considered incidental and accessory to a residential use and shall not be deemed a
home occupation.
B. General Provisions
1. Activity associated with the home occupation shall not result in conditions or
impacts inconsistent with, or detrimental to the residential character of, the
premises and the neighborhood. There shall be no heavy manufacturing
permitted.
2. The proposed use shall not create any objectionable noise, odor, vibration, or
unsightly condition noticeable from any property line. The Commission may
impose additional restrictions on the use if it determines, after a hearing for
Chapter 10 – Supplemental Regulations
10 - 7
which the owner of the home is given written notice that the noise levels are
causing a nuisance to nearby properties.
3. No permanent dedication of the residential structure to non-residential uses shall
result from such accessory use.
4. No more than one non-resident shall be engaged in the activity (or parked) at the
site.
5. No more than 20% of the floor area of the principal dwelling or garage shall be
used for a home occupation, except that vehicles and equipment associated with
the permitted home occupation may be parked or stored within the garage or a
completely enclosed permanent accessory structure.
6. There shall be no outdoor storage of small equipment, parts or any other
material related to the home occupation.
7. Large commercial vehicles or excavation-type equipment shall not be visible
from any property line and must be registered and operational.
C. Commercial Services (off site) (e.g., Landscaping and Contractors)
1. There shall be no more than one non-resident vehicle parked on site.
2. No more than four trips shall be generated per day from the site.
3. There shall be no more than three vehicles in excess of 26,000 pounds of gross
vehicle weight.
4. All vehicles and equipment, regardless of gross vehicle weight shall be
registered and operational and shall be stored out of sight from all property lines.
5. Commercial services home occupations shall not be permitted on a parcel with
a shared driveway.
1002.3 KENNEL
A. Hobby Kennels. No permit is required for a hobby kennel, but the best management
practices described in subsection C below shall apply.
B. Commercial Kennels
1. A commercial kennel must have all licenses and permits required by state law,
as, for example, by CGS §22-344, and must meet the following additional
conditions.
a. The primary use of the property must be residential or agricultural. If the
property contains a residence, the external architecture of the kennel shall be
consistent with that of the residence.
b. The minimum lot area shall be ten acres for a commercial kennel.
c. Open exercise areas and buildings containing animals shall be a minimum
of 100 feet from any property line.
d. The applicant must demonstrate how any adjacent or nearby properties that
are zoned or used for residential purposes will be protected from the noise
generated by the kennel. The Commission may impose additional
Chapter 10 – Supplemental Regulations
10 - 8
restrictions on the use if it determines, after a hearing for which the owner
of the kennel is given written notice that the noise levels are causing a
nuisance to nearby properties.
C. Best Management Practices. The user must install and maintain a system that will
collect, store, and properly dispose of or treat all waste products generated by the
kennel. Applicants for commercial kennels must submit plans for such facilities that
conform to all applicable local, state and federal health, air and water pollution
regulations.
1002.4 RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
A. A recreational vehicle may be parked or stored on a residential lot provided it is not
used for living, sleeping, or housekeeping purposes; and, if it is parked or stored
outside of a garage, it shall be parked or stored to the rear of the front building line of
the lot.
B. Recreational Vehicles (RV), including Park Model RVs (PMRVs) are permitted in
Recreational Campgrounds, and RV Parks. In Approved regular or Luxury RV Parks,
the RV or PMRV may be owned by the RV Park and rented to guests or they may be
brought in and used exclusively by their owners on a site rented or leased from the RV
Park. RVs parked in an approved RV Park are intended for recreational use only and
may not be permanently affixed to the property and may not be used as permanent
residences.
1002.5 TEMPORARY MOBILE HOME/TRAILER (RESIDENTIAL USE)
A temporary mobile home/trailer, or other temporary residential unit may be used on a lot
by the lot owner only during construction or repair of a dwelling (Building Permit must be
issued for construction of dwelling), for a period not to exceed twelve months. A new
application may be submitted for an extension not to exceed one additional year. Such
temporary units must be removed from the lot within seven days of the issuance of a
Certificate of Occupancy (CO) for the permanent dwelling. The maximum permit approval
is limited to a two-year period and cannot be extended beyond two years.
1002.6 BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENTS
A. Minimum lot size shall be two times that of the underlying zone.
B. The owner of the business must reside on the subject property.
C. The operation shall not alter the residential nature of the neighborhood and/or the
character of the dwelling as a residence.
D. No more than eight bedrooms shall be used for overnight guests.
E. Occupancy by any one guest shall not exceed 14 consecutive nights.
F. A Special Permit shall be required if the B&B will host special events in excess of 15
guests. No such special event may exceed 50 guests. Any Special Permit issued for
such events shall specify, and may limit and restrict, the date(s) and time(s) during
which the events shall be permitted, as well as the specific locations and areas of the
property to be used for such events.
Chapter 10 – Supplemental Regulations
10 - 9
1003 COMMERCIAL SERVICES
Commercial services may be provided either on the customer’s site (e.g., landscaping, construction,
excavation, custom building, painting, and plumbing) or on the provider’s site (e.g., copy shops,
self-service laundry, photo processing, appliance repair, pet grooming/training, and package and
postal services). Commercial vehicles associated with any commercial service and stored on the
property must be registered and operational (see additional regulations in §1002.2 if associated
with a Home Occupation).
1004 COUNTRY INN
1004.1 Intent. To provide for the short term rental of no more than 20 guest rooms, with the
serving of meals. It is the intent of this section to allow for these rentals while still keeping
the rural character of the Town intact. The adaptive re-use of buildings with unique
structural or historical characteristics, and/or site characteristics that lend themselves to a
Country Inn setting, are encouraged.
In an R80 Zoning District, access to a Country Inn shall be only from a primary arterial,
secondary arterial, or primary road, as listed in Appendix B.
1004.2 General Provisions
A. Country Inns shall be occupied by the owner or manager.
B. A Country Inn shall consist of no more than 20 guest rooms.
C. There shall be a maximum of four guests per room.
D. Maximum length of stay shall be 30 days. In order to assure compliance with this
requirement, the owner/manager of the country inn shall maintain a guest book
(electronic or otherwise) and make the “book” available to the Town, at the request
of the ZEO, within ten days of written receipt of request. The guest book shall record
the names of the individuals staying at the Country Inn and the length of stay.
E. For new construction, complete bathrooms shall be provided at a rate of one per guest
room.
F. Access to each guest room shall be via a main entrance or foyer within the residence.
Except as provided in this subsection or as may be required by fire or building code,
no guest room(s) shall have a separate exterior access. The Commission may allow
other access points if it finds that such accesses will not detract from the overall
character of the structure as a country inn and that the size and appearance of the
facility will not impair the character of the neighborhood or the use of nearby
properties.
G. Minimum lot size shall be three times that of the underlying zone.
H. Adequate on-site parking shall be provided.
I. No facilities shall be allowed for cooking in rooms, but meals may be served by the
owner to guests.
J. Food service may be offered to the general public as an accessory use.
Chapter 10 – Supplemental Regulations
10 - 10
K. Review shall include but not be limited to appropriateness to the neighborhood,
architectural character, and historic preservation. The proposed Site Plan shall, to the
extent practicable, incorporate any structural, historical, or natural features that will
enhance the unique characteristics of the site.
L. A Special Permit shall be required if the Country Inn intends to host special events,
in excess of 20 guests. No such special event may exceed 100 guests. Any Special
Permit issued for such events shall specify, and may limit and restrict, the date(s) and
time(s) during which the events shall be permitted, as well as the specific locations
and areas of the property to be used for such events.
1005 DAY CARE/NURSERY SCHOOL
A. Minimum lot size shall be three acres.
B. A single-family residence may coexist on the same lot or in the same building as the day
care/nursery school.
C. Parking areas and driveways must accommodate all vehicles dropping off or picking up
children at any one time. There must be no in-street drop-off or waiting.
D. A minimum 25-foot buffer area must be established around the perimeter of the lot. No
building, parking lot, driveway (except for the entrance of the driveway onto the street), play
area, or any other use is permitted in this buffer area.
1006 EXCAVATION (Removal and Filling of Earth Materials)
1006.1 Purpose. The purpose of this section is to manage excavation or other removal or filling
of earth materials (including, but not limited to, sand, gravel, clay, loam, peat, stone,
including stone walls, etc.) so as to minimize environmental damage, disruption of traffic
flow, potential disruption of drainage patterns, and disturbance of the surrounding
neighborhood, and to ensure adequate restoration of the site for future use when the activity
is completed. The mining of trap-rock and/or quarry- type stone as a principal use is
prohibited.
1006.2 Applicability
A. No contours of any land in the Town of North Stonington shall be altered by the
excavation, removal or relocation of earth, loam, topsoil, sand, gravel, clay, stone or
minerals or by the depositing of any material, natural or otherwise, except as provided
in this §1006.
B. Any person or persons carrying on excavating, filling or earth removal operations in
conformance with a valid permit may continue such operations until the termination
date of the permit.
C. Any person or persons carrying on excavating, filling or earth removal operations
which, except for their status as a valid nonconforming use, would be invalid under
these Regulations may continue such use only within the area that was manifestly
reserved or dedicated to such use at the time the provisions of these Regulations
requiring a permit for excavation became effective. Any excavation beyond such area
shall require a permit in accordance with this §1006.
Chapter 10 – Supplemental Regulations
10 - 11
D. Partial Exemptions. The following activities are exempt from the Excavation Permit
(EXP) requirements of these Regulations, but shall be allowed only after the approval
and granting of a Land Disturbance Permit by the ZEO. Such permit is required
regardless of intended use, except where the activity is for building construction and a
Zoning Permit has been issued in conjunction with a Building Permit. Before
approving a Land Disturbance Permit, the ZEO must be provided with sufficient
information to demonstrate that the activity will have no detrimental effect on
surrounding activities or land uses; will not result in harmful environmental effects,
such as soil erosion, watercourse sedimentation, or dust contamination; and that the
applicant will return the site to a stable, natural condition when the activity is complete.
1. Excavation operations or filling within the legal highway rights-of-way conducted
by either the State of Connecticut or the Town.
2. Operations approved by the Commission as a part of an approved subdivision, Site
Plan, Special Permit or Master Plan.
3. Municipal improvement projects.
4. Excavations or filling as a result of bona-fide landscaping, agricultural or
construction operations, provided that no such activity results in the removal of
more than 500 cubic yards of earth products or filling more than 500 cubic yards
of earth products for each parcel per year beginning on the permit issuance date.
An applicant may receive subsequent Land Disturbance Permits for the next year
after the ZEO conducts an inspection of the property and issues a Certificate of
Completion to verify that the activity was conducted in conformance with the
Zoning Permit. This shall apply to all land disturbance activity in any district.
E. Full Exemptions. The following activities do not require any permit (neither Special
Permit, EXP, Land Disturbance, nor Zoning Permit)
1. Filling, stockpiling, or storage of earthen materials on a property in any amount
less than 100 cubic yards.
2. Excavations of farm ponds approved by the Inland Wetlands Commission,
provided they do not exceed 120,000 square feet in surface area and that spoils are
not removed from the premises.
1006.3 Excavation Application. Except as provided in § 1006.2, an Excavation Permit from the
Commission shall be required for any excavation. An Excavation Permit shall be available
only in the R40, R60, R80, and I Zoning Districts. Applications shall include information
as required in § 1303 (Special Permits) of these Regulations as well as the information
included below; however, the intent is to provide only the information relevant to the
proposed Excavation Use and that is deemed necessary to determine compliance with these
Regulations, and not to require duplicate information. Therefore, any information typically
provided for Site Plan approval that is clearly not applicable to the excavation use shall not
be required. The requirements set forth in subsection B below shall supersede any similar
requirements for a standard Site Plan as set forth in §1303.2 of these Regulations.
A. Location Map. Minimum scale 1 inch = 200 feet, certified by a Connecticut licensed
surveyor, showing the following:
Chapter 10 – Supplemental Regulations
10 - 12
1. topography of all land within 500 feet of the proposed excavation; two-foot
contours shall be shown within 100 feet of the activity and ten-foot contours
between 100 feet and 500 feet of such area;
2. existing land and water uses on the premises and within 500 feet of the premises,
including sewage disposal features and water supplies to the extent these can be
determined;
3. watercourses, wetlands, soil types and flood boundaries on and within 200 feet of
the premises to the extent that these can be determined;
4. public and private roads providing access to the property;
5. all utilities and easements on the premises; and
6. boundaries and acreage of the premises.
B. Detailed Site Map. Minimum scale 1 inch = 100 feet, certified by a Connecticut
licensed surveyor, showing:
1. topography at two-foot contour intervals: existing, any interim stages that would
exist for 90 days or more, and final grades;
2. location of all proposed roads, utilities, structures, fixed equipment, processing
areas;
3. wetlands and watercourses (flagged by a certified soil scientist);
4. delineation of areas of disturbance and of active operations and their acreage,
showing any planned phasing;
5. typical cross-sections of the area to be excavated, showing both existing and
proposed grades and bank faces;
6. locations of stockpiles, including stripped topsoil, overburden, and reserve stock
materials;
7. a sediment-and-erosion-control plan for use throughout the duration of the
operation; and
8. other information as requested by the Commission to determine compliance (e.g.,
how and where the trucks will be stored, parked and serviced, a review by the U.S.
Natural Resources Conservation Service, etc.).
C. Other Information, provided in narrative form:
1. total amount of earth materials to be removed or placed, measured in cubic yards;
where phasing is proposed, amounts should be given per phase;
2. plans for debris disposal;
3. estimate of the number and type of trucks and equipment to be kept and used on
the site;
4. estimate of the number of loads per day and week leaving site;
5. proposed future use of the property following completion of operations;
6. boring data, prepared by an appropriate professional, taken to four feet beyond the
depth of the proposed excavation, indicating the depths, compositions and type of
earth materials, and the depth to water table; and
Chapter 10 – Supplemental Regulations
10 - 13
7. such other information as may be requested by the Commission to determine
compliance.
D. Restoration Plan. Such plan to include:
1. final grades at two-foot contour intervals;
2. final drainage patterns and plans;
3. source and type of cover material to be used, to six-inch depth;
4. detailed specifications for plantings, including species, sowing rates/planting
distances, and the timing of such re-vegetation; and
5. a schedule for such restoration through monitoring of re-vegetation over the first
two years following final re-vegetation.
E. Surety Requirement
1. Before an EXP authorizing the activity provided for under this section is signed
and delivered to the applicant, the applicant shall deliver to the Commission, or its
delegated representative, a surety in an amount satisfactory to the Commission,
and in form satisfactory to Town counsel, assuring the completion of all restoration
activities and elements shown on the plan and provided for in the EXP.
2. The applicant shall provide an estimate of the costs of the proposed restoration,
with a separate inflation factor for the estimated duration of the restoration. The
Commission may refer such estimate to its own engineer for his or her own
estimate of costs, and the amount of the final cost estimate as determined solely by
the Commission shall be amount of the surety.
1006.4 General Considerations. Applications for all excavation permits shall be evaluated
according to the following criteria, in addition to the criteria set forth in § 1302 (as
applicable) of these Regulations.
A. Appropriateness of Location. The compatibility of the proposed activity with the
Town’s Plan of Conservation and Development; the compatibility of the proposed
activity with current and potential uses of surrounding land; the impact of the activity
on the use and quality of adjacent watercourses; and the creation of potential nuisances
such as noise, traffic, odors, dust, visual blight, degradation of natural resources,
erosion and sedimentation, and flooding.
B. Conformance. Whether, based upon information received from the appropriate
officials or agencies having jurisdiction, the proposed activity would conform with
building and health codes, wetlands regulations, and any applicable Town ordinances
and regulations in addition to these Zoning Regulations.
C. Public Health and Safety. Accessibility by emergency vehicles, impact on Town
roads and infrastructure, potential for groundwater contamination, increased fire
hazards, and creation of hazardous grades.
D. Protection of Resources. Potential for detriment to historic, cultural, scenic or natural
resources in the surrounding neighborhood and the Town as a whole.
1006.5 Permit Standards. The following are minimum standards to be applied to permits for
excavation and filling of earth materials.
Chapter 10 – Supplemental Regulations
10 - 14
A. Site Size. No excavation operation shall encompass more than five acres of active
operations at any one time. Operations of more than five acres must be phased, with a
comprehensive plan for phasing and restoration submitted and approved as part of the
application.
B. Buffer. No feature of the operation shall take place within 20 feet of the property
boundary, any watercourse, or any public road, except that excavation may occur to
the property line when the finished grade will be the same as the grade of the adjoining
property along the property line. Native vegetation shall be maintained on this buffer.
If such vegetation is inadequate for screening, the Commission may impose additional
screening requirements. Clearly visible boundary markers shall be maintained
throughout the operation. The boundaries of excavation of any farm pond shall be
wholly within the building setback line of the relevant lot.
C. Access Road. A non-erodible, dustless access road shall be provided for a distance of
100 feet from any public road. Such road shall have a functioning anti-tracking surface
for a distance of 50 feet from the road.
D. Traffic Issues.
1. Truck access shall be so arranged to minimize danger to traffic on adjacent roads
and nuisances to surrounding properties.
2. Truck loads shall be covered with an approved device and shall be so trimmed as
to minimize danger to traffic on adjacent roads and nuisances to surrounding
properties.
3. At the point of truck access on a Town road, there shall be an adequate sight line
clearance in all directions.
4. The applicants shall be responsible for cleaning and repairing any state, city, Town
or private roads that have been damaged, or upon which earth materials have been
deposited, because of the activities of the applicant or his agent.
5. The applicant shall provide, at its expense, all necessary special police or traffic
control measures deemed necessary by the Commission.
E. Building, Structures, Machinery and Equipment. No structures or fixed machinery
or equipment shall be stored within 100 feet of any residential property line. No
processing equipment, such as a screener and/or grader, shall be located within 1,000
feet of any residential structure. Stone-crushing equipment shall not be located within
1,000 feet of an existing residence on any other lot or within 1,000 feet of a residential
district boundary.
F. Material Processing. On-site screening, sifting, washing, crushing or other processing
of earth materials may be permitted by the Commission by Special Permit, provided:
1. the lot is five acres or larger in size;
2. the applicant has demonstrated that on-site processing of earth materials will result
in a reduction of site-generated truck traffic;
3. any such processing activity is located per § 1006.8E above;
Chapter 10 – Supplemental Regulations
10 - 15
4. such activity is limited to on-site earth materials only and there shall be no
importation or exportation of materials from the site except as specifically
approved by the Commission; and
5. all processing equipment shall use noise reduction or mitigating materials or
procedures and engine muffler systems. The Commission may impose additional
restrictions on the use if it determines, after a hearing for which the owner of the
facility is given written notice that the noise levels are causing a nuisance to nearby
properties.
G. Blasting. Any proposed blasting shall be performed in conformance with all applicable
State and Federal Laws. There shall be no blasting permitted within 150 feet of any
occupied dwelling, unless the Commission is provided with a report from a licensed
professional engineer indicating that such blasting can be conducted without damage
to such dwelling.
H. Phased Operations. Work on a subsequent phase shall not commence prior to
reclamation of the previous phase according to the approved plan and approval of such
reclamation by the Commission. Prior to commencement of activity on any subsequent
phase, the surety shall be adjusted to ensure performance of that phase. The surety
shall not be fully released for any phase until that phase has been completed.
I. Operating hours. Earth-moving activities, including the loading and movement of
trucks on Town roads or State highways, shall be conducted only between 7:00 a.m.
and 7:00 p.m. in the I District and between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. in all other districts,
and shall not be permitted on legal holidays and Sundays. Operating hours for
processing shall be limited to Monday through Friday, 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. No
activities generating noise that is perceptible outside of the premises shall be allowed
during any other hours. Municipal operations shall be exempt from these hours.
J. Erosion and Sedimentation. Erosion by wind and water shall be controlled at all
stages of operation throughout the disturbed area. Provision for proper drainage shall
be made for the duration of the operation to prevent erosion of slopes, stream scour,
and sedimentation, both on and off site, at all times.
K. Separating Distance from Water Table. Unless otherwise provided within these
Regulations, no excavation shall remove earth materials within four feet of the spring
high water table. This distance shall be maintained throughout the excavation.
L. Impact on Wetlands, Watercourses, and Drainage. No excavation or filling shall
be allowed that will cause standing water to accumulate except as required for
approved retention and detention basins.
M. Topsoil and Overburden Stockpiling. All topsoil, defined herein as A and B
horizons, shall be stripped from the operation area and stockpiled for use in restoration
of the site. No topsoil shall be removed from the site. Topsoil and overburden
stockpiles shall be maintained separately and such locations shall be shown on the site
map.
N. Dust. Measures shall be taken to minimize dust blowing onto neighboring properties
from any part of the excavation or filling operation.
Chapter 10 – Supplemental Regulations
10 - 16
O. Safety. A permanent gate must be maintained at all access ways to the site. Fencing
of hazardous areas may be required for protection of pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
P. Fencing. During the period of activity, barricades, fencing, and gates shall be erected
as deemed necessary by the Commission and/or ZEO to ensure public safety.
1006.9 Restoration Standards
A. Final Grades. Within 30 days of the depletion of an area of one acre or more, final
grading shall occur, with such grades no steeper than three feet horizontal to one foot
vertical rise.
B. Final Surface Treatment. All stockpiled topsoil (A and B horizons, as defined by the
U.S.D.A. Natural Resources Conservation Service) shall be spread evenly over the
surface of the disturbed area. Minimum depth of topsoil shall be six inches.
C. Re-vegetation. A re-vegetation plan shall be provided that will produce permanent,
maintenance-free vegetation cover. Species selected shall be those most appropriate to
site conditions. The submitted plan shall include a chronology of re-vegetation that
includes proper documentation to the Town regarding seeding/planting sources and
quantities, chronology of installation, and inspection and maintenance until permanent
stabilization is achieved. Any area inactive for more than 12 months shall be graded
and re-vegetated.
D. Debris Disposal. Debris such as boulders and stumps shall be disposed of without
causing environmental degradation or visual blight. Plans for disposal shall be a part
of the application.
1006.10 Completion of Operations. If no renewal request has been received, the request has
been denied, the operation has been abandoned for more than 12 months, or the permit
has been revoked, the Commission may, following a hearing, act to declare the operation
complete. Upon such action, site restoration shall commence. Final grading and revegetation
shall be completed within 180 days. An As-built Plan, showing final grading
and depth to groundwater, as prepared and certified by a professional engineer, shall be
submitted.
1006.11 Permit Duration. An Excavation Permit shall be valid for no more than three years
from the date of approval.
1006.12 Permit Renewal. An application for renewal of the excavation/fill permit must be
received at least 60 days prior to expiration of the permit. The renewal application shall
contain information as required in these Regulations and shall show the nature and extent
of excavation/filling and restoration work that has been completed. No permit shall be
renewed if it is determined that there are substantial, outstanding violations of any
condition of the permit for which the renewal is sought. Renewals may not be granted
in more than three-year increments. The Commission may require that a professionally
prepared certification of compliance of the operation with the approved plan be submitted
as a part of the renewal application. The surety amount may be adjusted by the
Commission, based on an itemized cost estimate of permit compliance and site
restoration submitted by the applicant and reviewed by Town staff, as a condition of
approval of a permit renewal.
Chapter 10 – Supplemental Regulations
10 - 17
1006.13 Conformance, Inspection, and Revocation
A. Conformance with Permit. Premises shall be excavated, filled or graded only in
conformity with the permit as approved by the Commission. Any deviation from the
plan shall be cause for the Commission to revoke the permit.
B. Right of Inspection. As necessary for inspection purposes, any authorized agent of
the Commission shall have the right of access to all operations for which excavation
or fill permits have been issued or applied for.
C. Compliance Hearing. If there are reasonable grounds for the Commission to find
that any of the conditions of this § 1006 have been or are being violated, the
Commission may at any time:
1. halt the excavation or filling operation until it receives an updated site plan map,
including contours and cross sections, completed by and certified by an engineer
or land surveyor licensed to practice in the State of Connecticut; and
2. call a hearing upon five days’ notice to the holder of an excavation or fill permit.
D. Findings and Revocation. If the Commission finds, based on a site inspection, an
updated site plan, or a hearing, that there is or has been a violation of the permit, the
Commission may immediately revoke such excavation or fill permit and order
operations suspended.
1007 FARM WINERY
Access to a farm winery shall be only from a primary arterial, secondary arterial or primary road,
as listed in Appendix B of these Regulations.
1007.1 General Requirements: A farm winery shall be permitted only on a farm consisting of
at least ten acres, with at least five acres dedicated to vineyards, or to the growing of other
fruits used on site for creating wine, and only if it meets all State permit requirements for
such facilities (including, but not limited to, § 30-16(5) of the Connecticut General
Statutes).
1007.2 A farm winery permit issued pursuant hereto shall authorize the permittee:
A. to sell wine in bulk from the premises where the wine is manufactured pursuant to
such permit;
B. to sell wine manufactured on the farm winery premises to a retailer in original sealed
containers of not more than 18 gallons per container;
C. to offer free samples of such wine to visitors and prospective retail customers for
tasting and consumption on the premises;
D. to sell at retail from the premises sealed bottles or other sealed containers of such
wine for consumption off the premises; and
E. to sell at retail from the premises wine by the glass and bottle to visitors for
consumption on the premises. No farm winery permitted hereunder may sell any such
wine not manufactured in such winery.
1007.3 Appropriately scaled special events may be considered as an accessory use to a farm
winery.
Chapter 10 – Supplemental Regulations
10 - 18
1007.4 The farm winery permittee shall produce within the state an average crop of fruit equal to
not less than 25% of the fruit used in the manufacture of the farm winery permittee’s wine.
1008 FARM WINERY RESTAURANT
1008.1 Intent. To allow the sale and service of food prepared and consumed at a farm winery, as
well as the accommodation of special group events, such as weddings, to be held at a farm
winery. Such activities must be incidental to the farm winery use.
1008.2 Definition. A farm winery restaurant shall be a use incidental, complementary, and
secondary to a farm winery permitted by, or legally existing prior to, the adoption of § 1007
of these Regulations. A farm winery restaurant shall be conducted in a permanent building
in which hot and cold food can be prepared and served to members of the public seated
indoors and/or on a patio area adjoining the building. A farm winery restaurant shall
accommodate a maximum of 100 persons seated or standing indoors and 100 persons
seated or standing outdoors on a patio area at any one time (for a total of 200 persons seated
or standing).
A farm winery restaurant may also conduct special events, such as dinners, luncheons,
weddings, corporate parties and/or teas, provided that the service of food and/or wine at
such special events shall occur solely on the indoor and/or outdoor seating area described
herein. The restaurant (both the indoors and the patio portion) shall be closed to the general
public while any such special event is going on.
1008.3 General Provisions
A. The farm winery restaurant must be located on a single parcel of land on which the
farm winery is also located, and the parcel must be a minimum of 25 acres.
B. The maximum hours of operation of a farm winery restaurant shall be 10:00 a.m. to
10:30 p.m.
C. No more than three special events may be held per week.
D. The structure in which food is prepared and served shall not exceed 2,500 square feet,
including space for entrances, egress, storage, and cooking facilities. The associated
outdoor patio space shall not exceed an additional 1,200 square feet. Any such patio
shall be designed as an integral part of the indoor restaurant space and it shall be
consistent in appearance with the indoor structures and facilities. Such a patio may
have an overhead covering, such as an awning, provided the covering is shown as part
of the permit application approved by the Commission.
E. To the maximum extent possible consistent with good planning for the use of the site,
parking lots shall be located in areas on the site where they will be the least visible
from access roads and adjoining properties.
F. There shall be one parking space per two restaurant seats, in addition to such other
spaces as may be required for the principal uses.
G. Sound systems to be used at special outdoor or indoor events shall comply with the
State of Connecticut DEEP noise standards with regard to maximum decibel output
(55db daytime/45db night time). The Commission may impose additional restrictions
on the use if it determines, after a hearing for which the owner of the farm winery
Chapter 10 – Supplemental Regulations
10 - 19
restaurant is given written notice that the noise levels are causing a nuisance to nearby
properties.
H. Outdoor events and activities shall take place at a minimum of two hundred feet from
any property line. There shall be an appropriate buffer strip that screens any such
activity from the adjacent properties.
1009 GOLF COURSE DEVELOPMENT
1009.1 The purpose of this § 1009 is to provide for the development of well-planned and
environmentally sensitive, public and private golf courses and related accessory uses that:
A. are designed, constructed and operated to be in harmony with North Stonington’s rural
character and residential neighborhoods;
B. preserve and protect North Stonington’s historic resources, such as historic sites,
stonewalls and abandoned roadways;
C. protect natural resources such as prominent geological features, scenic views,
wetlands, watercourses, aquifers, and important habitat including wildlife species of
critical federal, state and/or regional concern;
D. provide local recreational opportunities; and
E. contribute to the economic development of the Town.
1009.2 Customary Accessory Uses may be constructed as part of the Golf Course Development
property provided they are designed, maintained, and operated in accordance with these
Regulations; and provided the Golf Course Development property also contains at least
one fully constructed and fully operational 18-hole golf course that is a minimum of 6,800
yards and par 70 as measured by the Professional Golf Association (PGA). The following
accessory uses are permitted:
A. A clubhouse that may include:
1. a restaurant and/or snack bar with sale of alcoholic beverages;
2. a pro shop with retail sales of items associated with the recreational activities of
the Golf Course Development;
3. a health facility, other than a massage establishment, for use by golf course patrons,
that may include health therapy programs, cardiovascular and strength training
equipment, and sport conditioning facilities;
B. a driving range, and
D. golf villas, provided that they are used only to accommodate members of the Golf
Course Development property and their guests. Guest villas must be located and
constructed so as to be buffered from adjacent lots containing single-family residential
homes.
1009.3 Land Requirements. The Golf Course Development property shall comply with the
following requirements.
A. Property Size. The minimum contiguous acreage of a Golf Course Development
property shall be 200 acres for each 18-hole golf course. The acreage shall be
Chapter 10 – Supplemental Regulations
10 - 20
considered to be contiguous even if separated by a public road (i.e., public roads may
pass through a Golf Course Development property).
B. Clearing. Clearing for golf course greens, fairways, and roughs, and vista pruning over
wetland resource areas and tees shall not exceed sixty-five percent of the Golf Course
Development property. Total clearing on the property shall not exceed 75% of the
parcel.
C. Impervious Surface. Total impervious surfaces shall not exceed 10% percent of the
land area of the Golf Course Development property.
1009.4 Environmental Management Report. An Environmental Management Report (EMR)
prepared, signed and sealed by a Connecticut Licensed Landscape Architect and
Connecticut Licensed Civil Engineer, shall be submitted as part of the application for a
Golf Course Development. This report shall address the Golf Course Development
property and the surrounding land characteristics that influence and are influenced by the
site on which the development would be built. The EMR shall describe the planning and
design process, construction methods, and management of the entire Golf Course
Development property. The EMR shall define specific planned actions to be taken by the
applicant to achieve the purposes of these Regulations.
The EMR shall be published in three separate volumes. They are Site Assessment, Site
Development, and Site Management.
A. Site Assessment. The applicant shall employ appropriate professionals to prepare a
detailed site assessment of the Golf Course Development property and regional
systems that impact the property. The following studies, at a minimum, shall be
conducted and reported as Volume 1 of the Environmental Management Report.
1. Slope Analysis; Soils Analysis; Wetlands and Watercourses Resources;
Vegetation Inventory; and Wildlife and Habitat Inventory with specific
reference to endangered and threatened species and species of special concern; for
use by the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission.
2. Public and Private Utilities Inventory; Cultural and Historic Resources
Inventory; Delineation of Special Site Features such as prominent ledge
outcroppings, stone walls and stands of or individual specimen trees; and View
sheds to and from the Golf Course Development property.
3. Traffic Analysis that includes existing and future traffic volumes, area traffic
accident history, existing geometric conditions at the facility entrance, and
improvements necessary to provide for safe access onto and off of any public road.
Such analysis shall reference the Highway Access Management Plan if one exists.
B. Site Development. The applicant shall employ appropriate professionals to prepare
plans and performance standards for the Golf Course Development that are in sufficient
detail for the Commission to determine that the development will comply with these
Regulations. In addition to the requirements of Site Plan and Special Permit, the
following documents, at a minimum, shall be submitted as Volume 2 of the
Environmental Management Report.
1. Unbuilt Environment Plan that includes a map or aerial photograph of the Golf
Course Development property showing its pre-development condition without
Chapter 10 – Supplemental Regulations
10 - 21
leaves, at sufficient resolution or graphically enhanced to reveal significant
features such as existing structures, foundations, stone walls, prominent trees,
ledge outcroppings, watercourses, roads and trails. Pre-development groundwater
and surface water monitoring shall include analysis for the same elements that will
be monitored post-development. Both existing and proposed property boundary
lines and infrastructure shall be shown on this plan.
2. Overall Development Master Plan at a scale of one inch equals one hundred feet
that defines all phases and future intentions proposed for the Golf Course
Development property. This plan shall show the proposed golf course routing,
specifically delineating where and how any prominent features shown on the
Unbuilt Environment Plan will be removed, altered or mitigated.
3. Phasing Plan that describes the various phases of the project and their schedule.
4. Construction Sequencing Plan that includes a timeline showing the entire
construction schedules.
5. Integrated Turf Management Plan for all golf course and grounds maintenance
including specific lists of chemical usage and organically derived products, and
the protocol for regular review of their use to minimize adverse environmental
impacts.
6. Water Budget/Management Plan for all groundwater withdrawal needs on the
Golf Course Development property. This shall include the submission of all
information provided to the Connecticut Department of Energy and Environmental
Protection, including any application for a Water Diversion Permit for the site.
a. Identification of the quantities of potable water to be used for clubhouse
facilities, maintenance facilities and any other outbuildings using water; and
identification of the source of such potable water.
b. Description of irrigation water requirements under normal precipitation
conditions and under drought conditions, and identification of the sources of
the irrigation water supply.
c. Identification of proposed locations of water wells and ponds, lakes or
watercourses to be modified or developed for use as the potable water and/or
irrigation supplies.
d. A comprehensive water budget analysis to demonstrate the quantitative impact
on aquifers, wells, watercourses and other surface water bodies.
e. Plan for addressing potential adverse effects of drawdown on neighboring
wells.
f. The relationship of the irrigation plan to the Stormwater Management Plan
where on-site ponds or lakes are to be used or created as part of the irrigation
water supply.
C. Site Management. The following documents, at a minimum, shall be submitted as
Volume 3 of the Environmental Management Report.
1. Groundwater Quality Monitoring Plan shall propose locations of monitoring
wells and other testing stations, the testing frequency and the protocol for testing,
including tests for specific chemicals that are used on the Golf Course
Development property.
Chapter 10 – Supplemental Regulations
10 - 22
2. Action plans for meeting the planning goal for nitrogen/nitrate loading of five ppm
for the entire Golf Course Development and actions to be taken by the applicant if
water quality goals are not met.
3. Surface Water Quality Monitoring Plan shall propose the location and protocol
of instrument testing of water levels and water quality on all wetlands and
watercourses located immediately down-gradient of the Golf Course Development
and of the grounds maintenance activities described in the Integrated Turf
Management Plan.
4. Habitat/Vegetation Enhancement Monitoring Plan shall propose the specific
task commitments, frequency of site visits and action activities, such as
biodiversity monitoring, to meet permitted goals and/or conditions.
1010 HOSPITAL
Hospitals are subject to the following additional conditions:
A. all ingress and egress from such site shall have direct access to a state or federal highway, or
Town-owned road; and
B. where any off-street parking, ambulance, or delivery areas that abut any residential district,
screening shall be provided as per §§1103 and 1104.
1011 HOTEL
These Regulations are intended to establish large, high-quality, temporary accommodations for the
traveling public that are compatible with the natural appearance and rural character of North
Stonington, and that are located and operated to minimize their impact on local traffic, the
environment, and community services and utilities; and to ensure that surrounding property values
are maintained. The nature of activities associated with hotels such as the accommodation of large
numbers of guests for sleeping, eating, and entertainment; and their frequent late arrival and early
departure dictates that requirements be imposed to ensure that guests’ needs, safety, and welfare
are met and that the impact of the activities on surrounding properties is minimized.
1011.1 General Requirements. Hotel use shall be subject to the following standards:
A. the minimum size of the use shall be 80 units; and
B. no structures or parking shall be located within the required side or required rear
setback areas; and required side and rear setback areas shall contain only landscaping,
required buffers, permitted signs, driveways, and sidewalks.
1011.2 Unit Size. Units shall have either (1) a minimum unit floor area of 325 square feet per unit,
or (2) a mix of 50% units having a minimum floor area of 275 square feet each and 50%
units having a minimum floor area of 375 square feet.
1011.3 Occupancy. The duration of stay of any guest in a hotel shall be not more than 30
consecutive days. In no case shall a hotel unit be used as a permanent residence.
1011.4 Accessory Uses. If a site is used for a hotel, the site and all structures on the site shall be
limited to accessory uses incidental to the operation of the hotel. All accessory uses for the
hotel shall be of the same general appearance and character, shall be planned as an integral
part of, and shall be located on the same site with the hotel. Such accessory uses shall be
limited to the following:
Chapter 10 – Supplemental Regulations
10 - 23
A. one apartment with kitchen facilities for accommodation by the hotel manager or
caretaker;
B. restaurants and other hospitality uses for serving hotel guests and the general public;
C. theaters, auditoriums, convention centers, ballrooms, exhibition halls, conference
suites, or other similar facilities serving hotel guests and the general public;
D. recreation and health facilities for use by hotel guests;
E. retail shops and service establishments that are supportive of, but supplemental to, the
principal hotel use;
F. an outdoor patio, terrace, veranda, gallery, portico, or similar structure for leisure use
by patrons for the consumption of food or drink;
G. a lobby or lobbies, registration desk, manager’s office, and public or patron
accommodation facilities; and
H. off-street parking lot or parking garage for the use of hotel guests, patrons, and
employees.
1011.5 Accessory Use Access. All normal access to hotel accessory uses, except recreation and
banquet facilities, shall be from within the hotel through a lobby or foyer.
1012 MEMBERSHIP CLUB
1012.1 MEMBERSHIP CLUB (FIREARMS): This §1012.1 deals with membership clubs that focus
on sporting activities and allow the use or handling of firearms on the premises in
connection with such activities. General Provisions:
A. The membership club must be a registered or incorporated non-profit establishment
(under CGS §501(c) (7)).
B. The minimum acreage required for a membership club (firearms) shall be 100 acres.
C. The use of the membership club facilities and grounds shall be restricted to members
of the club and their guests. Any and all non-members shall be accompanied by a
regular member at all times.
D. With the exception of living quarters for use by a facilities caretaker, there shall be no
other dwelling units or overnight accommodations provided in association with, or
located on the property of, the membership club; except that overnight camping may
be permitted for members.
E. Food service may be provided to members and their guests. Alcoholic beverages may
not be sold for consumption on the premises.
F. The Commission may impose additional restrictions on the use if it determines, after a
hearing for which the owner of the facility is given written notice that the noise levels
are causing a nuisance to nearby properties.
G. Accessory Uses: Accessory uses to a membership club (firearms) include, but are not
limited to, the following:
a. hunting;
b. fishing;
c. overnight camping (e.g., tent camping);
d. hiking and nature walks;
Chapter 10 – Supplemental Regulations
10 - 24
e. keeping of game birds;
f. organized shooting and archery competitions;
g. safety courses and training events;
h. special events such as club dinners, holiday parties, fundraisers, and field day
events that may include basic food service; and/or
i. gun ranges, provided the club submits satisfactory evidence to the Commission
that such ranges may be used safely and that sufficient measures will be used to
protect all nearby properties from danger and harm.
1012.2 MEMBERSHIP CLUB (NO-FIREARMS) This §1013 deals with membership clubs other than
those described in §1012 (i.e. Elks Club, VFW). General Provisions
A. The minimum acreage required for a membership club (no-firearms) shall be that of
the underlying zone.
B. The use of the membership club facilities and grounds shall be restricted to members
of the club and their guests. Any and all non-members shall be accompanied by a
regular member at all times.
C. With the exception of living quarters for use by a facilities caretaker, there shall be no
other dwelling units or overnight accommodations provided in association with, or
located on the property of the membership club (no-firearms).
D. Food service may be provided to members and their guests. The sale of alcoholic
beverages to be consumed on the premises is permitted in conjunction with normal
food service operations only.
E. Accessory Uses: Accessory uses to a membership club (no-firearms) include, but are
not limited to, special events such as club dinners, banquets, fundraisers, community
events and picnics.
1013 MICRO-ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY (MALF)
1013.1 General Provisions:
A. Micro-Assisted Living Facilities shall be permitted by Special Permit in all Residential Zones
on parcels with approved access from a primary road (as listed in Appendix B), and in existing
single-family or duplex residents in the EDD or RC Zone.
B. Minimum Lot Size shall be 80,000 sf.
C. Maximum Number of Residents shall be 16.
D. The Special Permit application shall be accompanied by a Site Plan except that where an
existing residence is proposed to be converted to a MALF, and a Certified A-2 Survey prepared
after 1996 exists on the land records, Applicants may submit a detailed Plot Plan drawn to scale
showing compliance with the following provisions of the Zoning Regulations and those
provided in this Section 1013, and need not submit any of the additional information or
materials noted in the “Site Plan Check Sheet” found in Appendix D of these Regulations,
except as may be needed for the Commission to evaluate the Special Permit criteria:
1. §1103 (Landscaping)
2. §1104 (Parking)
Chapter 10 – Supplemental Regulations
10 - 25
3. §1105 (Access Management) except that existing gravel driveways are permitted provided
they meet the width and maximum grade requirements and have a surface capable of H20
loading.
4. §1106 (Refuse Storage)
5. §1110 (Outdoor Illumination)
6. §1111(SE&SC) and §1112 (Stormwater Management) as applicable
The Commission may require the submission of additional materials or information from the
“Site Plan Check Sheet” if it finds that the application materials provided are inadequate to
evaluate the application or if the proposed Special Permit use may require modifications to the
previously approved Site Plan or Recorded Approved As-built Plan for a residence.
E. Facilities must be fully compliant with applicable Building, Health, and Fire Codes (as
amended) and must be fully handicapped accessible (including elevators if greater than 1 story).
F. Residents shall be capable of self-preservation.
G. Applicants must provide documentation of adequate water supply and septic system to
accommodate the proposed number of residents.
H. The proposed facility must be fully accessible to all emergency vehicles. Adequate turn-out
areas or circular driveways shall be provided.
I. Applicants shall show compliance with the Special Permit Criteria provided in §1303.4
1014 MOBILE HOMES
1014.1 Mobile Home Locations. No mobile home shall be moved, whether on the same lot or
elsewhere in the Town of North Stonington, except to achieve greater conformity with
these Regulations. Except as provided in §1014.3, mobile homes brought into the Town of
North Stonington shall be parked or stored only in an approved mobile home park. Note:
Construction trailers/offices as part of an approved Site Plan (non-residential use) and
temporary mobile homes/trailers/units to be used during the construction of a residence are
not considered mobile homes for the purposes of this §1014.
1014.2 Mobile Home Attachments. No permanent additions of any kind, other than decks and
porches, shall be built onto (permanently attached) or become part of a mobile home, nor
shall the mobile home be attached permanently to the ground.
1014.3 Mobile Home Wheels. The wheels of a mobile home shall not be removed, except
temporarily when necessary for repairs. Jacks or stabilizers may be placed under the frame
of the coach to prevent movement of the springs while the mobile home is parked and
occupied.
1014.4 Mobile Home Occupancy during Construction of Dwelling. A permit to occupy a
mobile home may be approved by the Zoning Enforcement Officer for one year under the
following conditions:
A. such permit shall be issued to the owner of a parcel on which his or her private dwelling
is to be constructed, altered, or reconstructed;
B. the mobile home shall not be moved onto the property until a Building Permit has been
issued for such building construction and proof of contractual commitment has been
Chapter 10 – Supplemental Regulations
10 - 26
established with the ZEO; except that when the mobile home is to be used as a
temporary residence in place of a dwelling that was destroyed or declared
uninhabitable, such Building Permit and proof of contractual commitment shall not be
required and the ZEOmay approve immediate installation and occupancy of the mobile
home. In either case, all other parts of §1014.3 shall apply;
C. before occupancy, the mobile home shall be connected to the permanent water supply
and sewage disposal system that will serve the completed dwelling;
D. such permit may be issued for not more than one year, and may be renewed only
provided the foundation, first floor, and first floor walls and ceilings of the permanent
home shall have been constructed before the renewal is granted. The renewal of such
permit shall be for a period not to exceed one year;
E. the Plot Plan filed with the application for the dwelling Building Permit shall show, in
addition to information required for building construction, the proposed location of the
mobile home, water supply, and sewage disposal system, and such Plot Plan shall
become a part of the application for a permit; and
F. the mobile home shall not be occupied after the permanent dwelling is occupied, and
the failure to remove the mobile home from the premises within 60 days after
occupancy of the dwelling shall be considered a violation of these Regulations.
1014.5 Mobile Home Replacement
A. Conditions for Replacement. The owner of a permitted mobile home shall be entitled
to replace the same, provided that the location of the replacement mobile home does
not increase any non-conformity with respect to the bulk requirements of the
underlying zoning district. The applicant must apply for a Zoning Permit and prove
that the existing mobile home sought to be replaced was upon the lot and occupied as
a dwelling on May 21, 1964.
B. Expiration of Permit for Replacement. Any permit for mobile home replacement
granted under the provisions of this §1014.5 shall expire and terminate 90 days
following its issuance if the replacement is not installed.
C. Removal of Original Mobile Home. An existing mobile home must be removed from
the lot on which it was placed within seven days of the placement of the replacement
mobile home.
D. Septic System Approval. The applicant must obtain written confirmation from the
Town Health Office that the on-site sewage disposal system has been inspected and
final hook-up of the mobile home to the system is authorized.
1015 PUBLIC UTILITY SUBSTATION
A public utility substation or telephone equipment building located in any Residential Zoning
District shall conform to the following special standards.
A. Any building in connection with the use shall have a design that is in harmony with residential
architecture in the neighborhood.
Chapter 10 – Supplemental Regulations
10 - 27
B. Any equipment or utility facilities not located in a building shall be enclosed on all sides by
evergreen shrubs or trees, or by buildings, fences, walls or embankments so as to be screened
from view from any other lot or from any street.
C. There shall not be any rotating equipment, storage of materials, trucks or repair facilities,
housing of repair crews, or offices.
1016 RECREATIONAL CAMPGROUND
1016.1 Design. The design of any recreational campground shall conform to the following
standards:
A. The campground shall be located on a well-drained site that is properly graded to
ensure drainage and freedom from stagnant pools of water.
B. Each recreational vehicle space shall be at least 1,000 square feet and the total number
of spaces shall not exceed 15 per acre of campground. No campground shall be
permitted on a site of less than 25 acres.
C. All recreational vehicle spaces shall abut a driveway not less than 12 feet wide for oneway
traffic or less than 25 feet wide for two-way traffic. No RV or tent space shall be
closer than 30 feet to any property or street line bounding the campground, or less than
100 feet from any existing residence. Spaces and driveways shall be identified by a
letter, number, or combination thereof.
D. Under no conditions shall anyone be permitted to park in a roadway or driveway. These
must be kept open for use by emergency vehicles.
E. Except as provided elsewhere, there shall be a minimum 25-foot buffer strip between
the recreational campground and property boundary. The strip shall contain a screen
of shrubbery or trees not less than four feet above the ground level at the time of
occupancy and shall thereafter be suitably and neatly maintained. The screen shall
consist of at least 50% evergreens to maintain a dense screen at all seasons of the year.
There shall be a fence on the property line between the campground and any highway,
street, or abutting property.
1016.2 Recreational facilities shall be provided in recreational campgrounds in accordance with
the following standards:
A. A minimum of 500 square feet per recreational vehicle space shall be developed for
recreational or playground uses. Mechanical outdoor amusement rides are expressly
prohibited.
B. Playgrounds shall be protected from main highways and parking areas.
C. Recreational facilities shall be designed and maintained to promote maximum safety
for the users, adjacent property owners, and the general public.
D. A responsible attendant or caretaker shall be in charge at all times to keep the
recreational campground, including facilities and equipment in a clean, orderly, and
sanitary condition.
E. Recreational campgrounds shall provide the following supporting facilities:
Chapter 10 – Supplemental Regulations
10 - 28
1. Sanitary facilities, consisting of flush toilets, lavatories, and showers with hot and
cold running water shall be provided at all recreational campgrounds in numbers
specified by the State Public Health Code.
2. Each recreational campground shall have a lobby or office with a registration clerk.
3. Off-street parking spaces shall be provided for visitors and employees. Minimum
parking spaces shall be six for any campground, plus one additional parking space
for every 25 recreational vehicle spaces or fraction thereof.
4. Campgrounds accommodating recreational vehicles with holding tanks shall
provide facilities for the dumping and disposal of wastes from such holding tanks
in accordance with the State Public Health Code.
F. Recreational campgrounds may provide the following additional supporting facilities:
1. A recreational campground may maintain a store and coin-operated laundry for the
convenience of its campers. Free access to any such facility shall be provided for
delivery trucks.
2. Ice, soft drinks, candy, and similar concessions may be provided.
1016.3 Occupancy Limitations
A. Main Season. A recreational campground may accommodate travel, vacation, and
recreational camping equipment and vehicles for any length of time during the period
from May 15th to October 15th in any calendar year.
B. Off Season. From October 16th in any calendar year to May 14th of the following
calendar year, recreational campgrounds may accommodate travel, vacation, and
recreational camping equipment and vehicles for a period of no more than 30 days per
registered visitor, in a designated portion of the recreational campground that will
remain accessible by emergency vehicles during the winter months. Recreational
camping vehicles and equipment may be stored, unoccupied, at an approved
recreational campground for the off season.
C. Other Limitations. Occupancy at the campground shall not be construed as
qualification for residency in the Town of North Stonington and no recreational
campground may accommodate or rent space to anyone for more than 180 days in any
calendar year.
1017 RECREATIONAL FACILITY, INDOOR AND/OR OUTDOOR
A. All applications for either an Indoor or Outdoor Commercial Recreational Use shall include a
Use Management Plan describing steps taken to ensure that all commercial recreational uses
are designed to prevent any glare from night lighting into residential areas, and that the hours
of operation for potentially noisy uses are limited so as to not disrupt any abutting or nearby
residential areas.
B. All applications for Indoor and/or Outdoor Recreational Facilities shall include a
Comprehensive Traffic Study that demonstrates that the proposed use(s) would not cause traffic
congestion or undue traffic generation that would have a deleterious effect on the welfare or
the safety of the motoring public and existing residential properties.
Chapter 10 – Supplemental Regulations
10 - 29
C. Per §1302.2(G), the Commission may require the submission of additional information as
deemed necessary to make a reasonable review of the application.
D. Minimum Lot size for an Indoor and/or Outdoor Recreational Facility shall be that of the
underlying Zoning District.
E. Required buffer areas along property boundaries between an Indoor and/or Outdoor
Recreational Facility and an abutting Residential Zoning District shall be increased to 50 feet.
This distance may be increased but cannot be reduced even if the recreational use is part of a
Master Plan approval (per §902).
1018 RECREATIONAL VEHICLES PARK, LUXURY
A. Applications for a Luxury RV Park must conform to the provisions of Recreational
Campground found in §1016 except that the following additional Accessory Uses customarily
found at a Luxury RV Park may be permitted:
1. One (1) spa and/or fitness center
2. One (1) Clubhouse not to exceed 5,000sf for movies or events (provided there is no
amplified music at events).
3. Community fire pit(s)
4. Indoor and Outdoor Sports Facilities such as tennis and basketball courts
5. Recreational Activities such as a Putting Green, Bocce Court, Disc Golf, etc.
5. Indoor or Outdoor Swimming Pool and Hot Tubs
6. Hospitality Uses not to exceed 5,000sf
7. On-site Retail
8. The Commission may consider other amenities not listed in this Subsection if shown to be
customary and accessory to a Luxury RV Park.
B. The Buffer provisions outlined in Section 1016.1E (Recreational Campgrounds) shall apply
except that the required buffer strip between permitted accessory uses listed in Subsection A
above and any property line abutting a Residential Zoning District shall be a minimum of 50
feet. This minimum buffer strip width cannot be reduced even if the Luxury RV Park is part of
a Master Plan approval (per Section 902)
1019 THIS SECTION LEFT BLANK
1020 VETERINARY OR ANIMAL HOSPITAL
Veterinary or animal hospitals are subject to the following standards:
A. The minimum lot area shall be as required for the underlying district in Commercial and
Industrial Zoning Districts. In Residential Zoning Districts, minimum lot area shall be that
required for the underlying Zone or 60,000 square feet, whichever is greater.
B. All activities shall be conducted either within an enclosed building that shall be sufficiently
soundproof, or in such other manner as not to create a nuisance to adjoining property owners
or the general public. Any open areas for animals shall be a minimum of 100 feet from any
property line. The Commission may impose additional restrictions on the use if it determines,
Chapter 10 – Supplemental Regulations
10 - 30
after a hearing for which the owner of the facility is given written notice that the noise levels
are causing a nuisance to nearby properties.
C. There shall be no boarding except as required for medical treatment. Said boarding shall be
accessory to the principal veterinary outpatient use.
D. The applicant shall provide plans describing the design, installation, and maintenance of a
system that will collect, store, and subsequently dispose of or treat all waste products other than
domestic sewage. All plans for the storage and disposal of wastes shall conform to all
applicable local, state and federal health, air and water pollution regulations so as to not create
a public health hazard or nuisance, or have an adverse effect on the environmental quality of
the surrounding area and the community in general.
1021 WIND AND SOLAR ENERGY FACILITIES
1021.1 Solar Energy Facility Standards
A. Lighting and Signage
1. Lighting. Lighting of the solar energy facility, such as appurtenant structures, shall
be limited to that required for safety and operational purposes, shall be designed
to minimize glare on abutting properties and shall be directed downward with full
cut-off fixtures to reduce light pollution.
2. Advertising. Solar energy facilities shall not be used for displaying any
advertising.
B. Utility Connections. Utility connections from the solar energy facility shall be located
underground when feasible. Applicants who wish to use above-ground
interconnections must demonstrate why underground utilities are infeasible (e.g., due
to soil conditions, shape, or topography of the site or to specific requirements of the
utility provider).
C. Safety. The applicant shall provide a copy of a project narrative/summary and Site
Plan to the local emergency services entity, as designated by the Commission. The
applicant shall cooperate with any request of such local emergency service entity(ies)
to develop an emergency response plan.
D. Clearing of Vegetation. Clearing of natural vegetation shall be limited to that which
is necessary for the construction, operation and maintenance of the solar energy facility
or is otherwise required by applicable laws, regulations and ordinances.
E. Unauthorized Access. Solar energy panels or other structures that are part of a solar
energy facility shall be designed to prevent unauthorized access. The Commission may
require fencing to ensure public safety.
F. Monitoring and Maintenance. The solar energy facility shall be maintained in a neat,
clean operating condition. All maintenance shall be performed in a timely manner.
Maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, structural repairs and integrity of
security measures. Reasonable site access shall be maintained for review by authorized
officials, such as, but not limited to, the Fire Chief, and for emergency medical
services.
Chapter 10 – Supplemental Regulations
10 - 31
1021.2 Small-Scale Wind Energy Facility (System) Standards
This §1021.2 shall apply to wind energy conversion systems that (1) consist of a horizontal
access or vertical access wind turbine, a stationary tower, control or conversion electronics,
and associated accessory structures; (2) are intended primarily to reduce on-site
consumption of utility power; and (3) have a rated capacity of not more than 60kW. Such
systems do not include utility-scale wind facilities, where the primary use is electrical
generation to be sold on the wholesale electricity market.
A. Special Application Requirements. Special Permit applications for Small-scale
Wind Energy Facilities shall include a Plot Plan (in place of required Site Plan of the
subject property), drawn to a scale of not less than one inch equals 40 feet horizontal
on sheets 24 inches x 36 inches in size. The Plot Plan shall be drawn upon a drawing
base that uses the existing Town GIS data for the information required in the
application check sheet in Appendix C. The application shall include profile drawings
showing the tower and all appurtenances, minimum and maximum height above the
ground of turbine blade tips, footings, and guy wires or other structural supports. The
applicant shall provide a report containing a description of the tower with technical
supporting documentation establishing its structural integrity and need for accessory
structures.
B. Limitation of Structures. In all Zoning Districts, a maximum of one turbine and one
tower is permitted per three acres of land.
C. Facility Height. The height above natural grade of the wind turbine hub plus the
distance to the tip of the longest attached blade shall not exceed 100 feet. The height
of the blade shall not be less than 15 feet from the ground.
D. Appearance. The tower and accessory structures shall, to the extent possible, use
materials, colors, textures, screening and landscaping that will blend the facility into
the natural setting and built environment.
E. Setbacks. A fall circle with a radius equal to 1.1 times the Small-scale Wind Energy
Facility (System) height shall be provided within the parcel upon which the tower is
located. The distance may be increased by the Commission if it finds that special local
conditions require an additional setback for public safety, protection of neighborhood
character or aesthetics, or other reasons. Guy wire anchors and accessory facilities may
extend no closer to property lines than the minimum Zoning District setback
requirements for accessory structures.
F. Wetlands and watercourses. Small-scale Wind Energy Facilities (Systems) shall not
be located within any inland wetlands and watercourses, tidal wetlands, or coastal
resources as defined in Title 22a of the Connecticut General Statutes.
G. Noise. Small-scale Wind Energy Facilities (Systems) shall not exceed noise and
vibration standards as set forth in the State of Connecticut DEEP Noise Standards. The
applicant shall submit any available information regarding the noise generated by the
proposed facility. The Commission may impose additional restrictions on the use if it
determines, after a hearing for which the owner of the facility is given written notice
that the noise levels are causing a nuisance to nearby properties.
Chapter 10 – Supplemental Regulations
10 - 32
H. Signs. Advertising signage, communication devices, cellular dishes or the like shall
not be attached to a tower.
I. FAA Requirements and Lighting. Small-scale Wind Energy Facilities (Systems)
shall comply with applicable FAA regulations (e.g., 14 CFR Part 77, entitled “Objects
Affecting Navigable Airspace”). Towers shall not be artificially lighted unless
required by the FAA. If lighting is required, the Commission shall review available
lighting alternatives and approve a design that will cause the least disturbance to
surrounding views.
J. Fencing. The Commission may require fencing to ensure public safety.
1021.3 Large-Scale Wind Energy Facility Standards
This §1021.3 shall apply to all wind energy systems that do not meet the criteria set forth
in §1021.2 for Small-scale Wind Energy Facility (System).
A. Facility Height (as measured from natural grade to the top of the tower plus distance
to tip of the longest blade). Wind Energy Facilities shall be no higher than 400 feet
unless the applicant demonstrates that such height reflects current industry standards
for a similarly sited Wind Energy Facility.
B. Setbacks. Wind turbines shall be set back from any abutting property line a distance
no less than a distance equal to 1.1 times the Wind Energy Facility height (see
§1021.3.A). The distance may be increased by the Commission if it finds that special
local conditions require an additional setback for public safety, protection of
neighborhood character or aesthetics, or other reasons.
C. Color and Finish. The turbine and tower colors must be reasonably designed to blend
with the surrounding environment.
D. Lighting and Signage
1. Lighting. Wind turbines shall be lighted only if required by the Federal Aviation
Administration. Lighting of other parts of the Wind Energy Facility, such as
appurtenant structures, shall be limited to that required for safety and operational
purposes, and shall be reasonably shielded from abutting properties.
2. Advertising. Wind turbines shall not be used for displaying any advertising.
E. Utility Connections. Utility connections from the Wind Energy Facility shall be
located underground when feasible. Applicants who wish to use above-ground
interconnections must demonstrate why underground utilities are infeasible (e.g., due
to soil conditions, shape, or topography of the site or to specific requirements of the
utility provider).
F. Support Towers. Monopole towers are the preferred type of support for Wind Energy
Facilities.
G. Emergency Services. The applicant shall provide a copy of the project summary and
Site Plan to the local emergency services entity, as designated by the Commission. The
applicant shall cooperate with any request of such local emergency service entity(ies)
to develop an emergency response plan.
Chapter 10 – Supplemental Regulations
10 - 33
H. Shadow/Flicker. Wind Energy Facilities shall be sited in a manner that minimizes
shadowing or flicker impacts. The applicant shall provide a shadow flicker and blade
glint model for any proposed Wind Energy Facility.
I. Noise. Audible sound from a Wind Energy Facility shall not exceed 50 dBA as
measured at the property line of any abutter. Methods for measuring and reporting
acoustic emissions from wind turbines and the Wind Energy Facility shall be equal to
or exceed the minimum standards for precision described in AWEA Standard 2.1-1989
titled Procedures for the Measurement and reporting of Acoustic Emissions from Wind
Turbine Generation Systems Volume I: First Tier.
1. The applicant shall provide a noise study that includes baseline and preconstruction
ambient noise levels, as well as the potential noise of the facility,
including low frequency, audible and inaudible, infrasound, and any other noise.
2. The applicant shall have the burden to prove that the noise generated by the facility
will not have adverse impacts on persons or property reasonably likely to be
affected by the property. The Commission may impose additional restrictions on
the use if it determines, after a hearing for which the owner of the facility is given
written notice that the noise levels are causing a nuisance to nearby properties.
J. Land Clearing. Clearing of natural vegetation shall be limited to that which is
necessary for the construction, operation and maintenance of the Wind Energy Facility
or as otherwise required by applicable laws, regulations, and ordinances.
K. Unauthorized Access.Wind turbines or other structures that are part of a Wind Energy
Facility shall be designed to prevent unauthorized access. The Commission may
require fencing to ensure public safety.
L. Ice Throw Calculations. The applicant shall submit a report from a professional
engineer that calculates the maximum distance that the ice from the turbine blades
could be thrown. The basis for the calculation and all assumptions must be disclosed.
M. Avian and Wildlife Impact. The applicant shall conduct an analysis to identify and
assess any potential impacts on wildlife and endangered species. The applicant shall
take appropriate measures to minimize, eliminate or mitigate adverse impacts
identified in the analysis. The applicant shall identify and evaluate the significance of
any net effects or concerns that will remain after mitigation efforts.
N. Electromagnetic Interference
1. No individual tower facility shall be installed in any location along the major axis
of an existing microwave communications link where its operation is likely to
produce electromagnetic interference in the link’s operation.
2. No individual tower facility shall be installed in any location where its proximity
with fixed broadcast, retransmission or reception antenna for radio, television or
wireless phone or other personal communications systems would produce
electromagnetic interference with signal transmission or reception.
O. Monitoring and Maintenance. The applicant shall maintain the Wind Energy Facility
in good condition. All maintenance shall be performed in a timely manner.
Chapter 10 – Supplemental Regulations
10 - 34
Maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, painting, structural repairs, and
integrity of security measures.
P. Additional Site Plan Information. In addition to any information needed to satisfy
the requirements for Site Plan or Special Permit approval, an application for approval
of a Wind Energy Facility must include the following information:
1. Location Map. Copy of a portion of the most recent USGS Quadrangle Map, at a
scale of 1:25,000, showing the proposed facility site, including turbine sites, and
the area within at least two miles from the facility. Zoning District designation for
the subject parcel should be included; however, a copy of a zoning map with the
parcel identified is acceptable.
2. Area Plan. A 200 scale plan of the proposed Wind Energy Facility site, with
contour intervals of no more than ten feet, showing the following:
a. property lines for the site parcel and adjacent parcels within 300 feet;
b. outline of all existing buildings, including purpose (e.g., residence, garage) on
the site parcel and on all other parcels within 2,000 feet of the site; include
distances from the Wind Energy Facility to each building shown;
c. location of all roads, public and private on the site and on all parcels within
500 feet of the site, and proposed roads or driveways, either temporary or
permanent;
d. existing areas of tree cover, including average height of trees, on the site and
on all parcels within 500 feet of the site;
e. proposed location and design of the Wind Energy Facility, including all
turbines, ground equipment, appurtenant structures, transmission
infrastructure, access, fencing, exterior lighting, etc.;
f. location of viewpoints referenced below in § 1021.3.P.3;
g. location of wildlife protection areas within 2,500 feet of proposed Wind
Energy Facility; and
h. the area that could potentially be impacted by ice or blade throw.
3. Visualizations. The Commission shall select a minimum of four sight lines,
including from the nearest building with a view of the Wind Energy Facility, for
pre- and post-construction view representations. Sites for the view representations
shall be selected from populated areas or public ways within a two-mile radius of
the Wind Energy Facility. View representations shall have the following
characteristics:
a. all shall be in color and shall include actual pre-construction photographs and
accurate post-construction simulations of the height and breadth of the Wind
Energy Facility (e.g., superimpositions of the Wind Energy Facility onto
photographs of existing views);
b. all shall include existing, and proposed, buildings or tree coverage; and
Chapter 10 – Supplemental Regulations
10 - 35
c. all shall include a description of the technical procedures followed in
producing the visualization (distances, angles, lens, etc.).
1022 WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS TOWERS, ANTENNAS AND FACILITIES
1022.1 Intent. These regulations are specifically intended to:
A. maximize use of existing and approved towers and other structures to accommodate
new antennas and transmitters in order to reduce the number of towers needed to serve
the community;
B. encourage providers to co-locate their facilities on a single tower;
C. locate facilities below visually prominent ridge lines;
D. minimize the location of facilities in visually sensitive areas;
E. encourage creative design measures to camouflage facilities;
F. protect historic and residential areas from potential adverse impacts of communication
towers; and
G. avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failure through engineering
and careful siting of tower structures.
1022.2 Siting Preferences. The locations for siting the equipment involved in or associated with
wireless telecommunication services are listed below in order of preference.
A. On existing structures such as buildings, water towers and utility poles.
B. On existing or approved towers.
C. On new towers less than 60 feet in height located in Commercial or Industrial Zoning
Districts.
D. On new towers less than 60 feet in height located in Residential Zoning Districts.
E. On new towers 60 feet or greater in height located in Commercial and Industrial Zoning
Districts.
F. On new towers 60 feet or greater in height located in Residential Zoning Districts.
1022.3 Area and Height Requirements
A. Lot Size. Sites used for a freestanding tower shall comply with the minimum lot-size
requirements for the Zoning District in which they are located.
B. Height. No tower, including the antenna and all other appurtenances, shall exceed 200
feet in height above ground level. The maximum height of any rooftop-mounted
equipment building or box shall be 15 feet above the roof surface.
C. Setbacks. All freestanding monopole towers shall be set back at least one foot from
any property line for each foot of vertical height.
1022.4 General Requirements
A. No Wireless Telecommunication Facility shall be located within 200 feet of an existing
or proposed residence.
Chapter 10 – Supplemental Regulations
10 - 36
B. No lights shall be mounted on proposed towers unless otherwise required by the FAA.
C. Towers not requiring special FAA painting or markings shall be painted a noncontrasting
blue or grey.
D. Towers may not be used to exhibit any signage or other advertising.
E. Any proposed tower shall be designed in all respects to accommodate both the
applicant’s antennas and comparable antennas for at least two additional users if the
tower is over 100 feet in height or for at least one additional comparable antenna if the
tower is between 50 feet and 100 feet in height. The Commission may require the tower
to be of such design as to allow for future rearrangement of antennas upon the tower
and to accommodate antennas mounted at varying heights.
F. Antennas or equipment buildings/boxes mounted to or on buildings or structures shall,
to the greatest degree possible, blend with the color and design of such building.
G. No proposed Wireless Telecommunication Facility shall be designed, located or
operated as to interfere with existing or proposed public safety communications.
H. The design of all Wireless Telecommunication Facilities shall comply with the
standards promulgated by the Federal Communications Commission for non-ionizing
electromagnetic emissions.
I. All utilities proposed to serve a Wireless Telecommunication Facility shall be installed
underground unless the Commission determines that such installation would be
infeasible or extraordinarily costly in comparison with other alternatives.
J. All generators installed in conjunction with any Wireless Telecommunication Facility
shall comply with State and local noise regulations. The Commission may impose
additional restrictions on the use if it determines, after a hearing for which the owner
of the facility is given written notice that the noise levels are causing a nuisance to
nearby properties.
Chapter 11 – Site Design Requirements
11 - 1
1101 SITE DESIGN STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS
1101.1 Application. All of the Site Design Requirements in Chapter 11 of these Regulations shall
be applicable to any use that requires a Site Plan, Special Permit or Master Plan. The
parking requirements in §1104 and the outdoor lighting requirements in §1110 shall be
applicable to all uses, regardless of whether a Site Plan application must be filed.
1101.2 Intent. The Site Design Requirements are intended to protect public health, safety, welfare,
property values, and natural resources; to encourage site design and development that is
efficient, effective and consistent with the general character of the community,
neighborhood, and surrounding properties; to ensure aesthetically pleasing development
and site design; and to enhance and maintain the rural New England character of North
Stonington.
1102 SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT
1102.1 Energy Efficient Design. The Commission encourages all applicants to provide energyefficient
site designs and patterns of development, including but not limited to:
1. passive solar energy techniques that maximize solar heat gain and minimize heat loss
during the various seasons;
2. renewable energy sources for heating, cooling, and electricity; and
3. appropriate building orientation, street and lot layout, vegetation, natural and manmade
topographical features, and solar access.
1102.2 Low Impact Development (and Design). In order to minimize the negative impacts of
development on the environment, all proposed developments, including municipal
developments, should, where feasible, implement Low Impact Development (LID)
practices and techniques. The Commission may deny a Site Plan if the Commission
determines that it does not incorporate reasonably available LID techniques.
1102.3 Performance Standards. Uses that are subject to Chapter 11 of these Regulations shall be
designed to minimize any injury or nuisance to nearby premises by reason of noise,
vibration, radiation, fire and explosive hazard, electromagnetic interference, humidity,
heat, glare, and other physical impacts that may be caused by the use. The Commission
may require the modification of proposed Site Plans if it finds such modifications
appropriate or necessary to minimize or reduce any such impacts. The Commission may
also impose additional restrictions on the use if it determines, after a hearing for which the
owner of the facility is given written notice that the physical impacts of the use are causing
a nuisance to nearby properties.
1102.4 Infrastructure and Utilities. Internal roads and travel ways must be designed to
accommodate all projected traffic flows. All utilities shall be located underground.
1102.5 Environmental Protection. In accordance with CGS §22a-19, uses that are subject to
Chapter 11 of these Regulations shall be designed in such a manner as to avoid any
unreasonable pollution, impairment or destruction of the air, water and other natural
resources of the state.
Chapter 11 – Site Design Requirements
11 - 2
1103 LANDSCAPE DESIGN STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS
1103.1 Purpose. In addition to the purposes set forth in §1101.2 of these Regulations, these
landscaping design standards are intended to provide privacy from visual intrusion, light,
dirt, and noise; prevent the erosion of soil; provide water recharge areas; and preserve or
improve the quality of the environment and attractiveness of the Town of North Stonington.
1103.2 General Requirements. All landscape designs shall be sensitive to the character of the
surrounding properties and area and shall use native species. Invasive species shall be
prohibited as part of any landscape plan.
1103.3 Perimeter Landscape Area Requirements. Any use subject to Site Plan review shall
provide an ornamental landscaped area along the perimeter of the property, excluding areas
specifically reserved for vehicular or pedestrian access or for other accessory uses
designated on the proposed Site Plan. The landscaped areas shall be a minimum of ten feet
in width and shall be designed with a combination of grass, shrubs, flower, shade trees and
other vegetative materials skillfully designed to provide a visual landscaped buffer between
adjacent properties and to enhance the aesthetic appearance of the district.
1103.4 Landscape Buffer Requirements. When a Site Plan or Special Permit application is
submitted for the establishment of a new use, and the parcel is abutted either (1) by any
Residential Zoning District or (2) by any existing use that would be allowable as of right
or with Site Plan review in a Residential district, a landscaped buffer no less than 25 feet
in width shall be provided along all such abutting portions of the perimeter. Such buffers
shall be designed to provide appropriate screening to minimize any potential negative
impacts of noise, light, dust, vibrations, hours of operation, and substantially dissimilar
aesthetics. Due consideration should be given to the character of existing districts and uses
in determining the density and intensity of techniques and materials needed to provide
adequate, aesthetically pleasing, year-round screening. In the RC Zoning District, buffers
shall be increased to 50 feet for all Commercial Recreational facilities along any property
line that abuts a residential district. In the case of a Master Plan Approval per Section 902,
the Commission may increase but cannot decrease the 50-foot buffer requirement.
1103.5 Completion of Landscaping. All landscaping shown on the approved Site Plan shall be
completed before issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy unless the landowner provides
surety, in a form and amount satisfactory to the Commission, assuring completion within
a specific time, not to exceed one year. Such surety shall be forfeited if the work shall not
have been completed within such time limit.
1104 PARKING REQUIREMENTS AND DESIGN STANDARDS
1104.1 Application and Scope. For any use hereafter established, off-street parking and loading
shall be provided in accordance with this §1104.
1104.2 Maintenance Required. All spaces required to be provided per this §1104 shall be
permanently maintained and made available for occupancy in connection with, and for the
full duration of, the use of land or structure(s) for which such spaces are required.
1104.3 Change of Use. Any change of use or the addition of one or more uses to an existing use
shall require that the aggregate off-street parking specified in this §1104 be provided. If
such changes are proposed in connection with an existing use that is already nonChapter
11 – Site Design Requirements
11 - 3
conforming with respect to parking requirements, such existing use(s) shall also be brought
into compliance at such time.
1104.4 Number and Size of Parking and Loading Spaces and Berths. Plans for all existing
and proposed uses shall provide sufficient on-site parking to accommodate the motor
vehicles of all occupants and visitors that may reasonably be expected at any one time, and
sufficient loading berths to accommodate the anticipated needs of all planned uses. The
standards set forth in §1104.5, §1104.7, §1104.8, and §1104.9 shall be deemed to specify
the necessary and appropriate number and size of parking and loading spaces, berths and
areas in the absence of any contrary evidence. However, as part of a proposed Site Plan,
an applicant may submit evidence that the same or similar uses can be reasonably
accommodated with fewer or smaller spaces or berths, or that more or larger spaces or
berths will be needed. The Commission shall weigh the credibility of any such evidence in
deciding whether the proposed parking and loading plans are adequate.
1104.5 Parking Ratios. The following off-street parking ratios shall apply to all uses and
combinations of uses in the absence of any contrary evidence provided in accordance with
§1104.4. If the proposed number of parking spaces is greater than ten percent (10%) above
the minimum number of spaces required by this §1104.5, and any such spaces are located
outside of a parking garage, the applicant must demonstrate, in accordance with §1104.4,
why so many spaces would be necessary or desirable. For purposes of the following ratios,
the term “maximum shift” means the time or times during which the greatest number of
workers (including management, staff, and all other persons employed by the relevant
business) are located at the site on a regular (but not necessarily daily) basis. When the
calculation results in a fraction, the number shall be rounded to the next highest whole
number. The abbreviation “GFA” means gross floor area.
A. Motor Vehicle Sales/Service. One space per employee on the maximum shift, plus
one space per 500 square feet of internal display area, plus one space per 2,000 square
feet of outdoor display area, plus two spaces per service bay.
B. Financial Institution. One space per employee on the maximum shift, plus one space
per 200 square feet of floor area accessible to the general public.
C. Bed and Breakfast. Two spaces, plus one space per guest bedroom, plus one space
per employee at maximum shift, in addition to resident parking.
D. Drive-through Restaurant (Fast Food). One space per two permanent seats, plus one
space per employee on the maximum shift, plus one space per 50 square feet of floor
area devoted to customer service.
E. School. Two spaces per classroom, plus one space per four seats in any auditorium or
gymnasium.
F. Funeral Home. One space per 50 square feet of public area.
G. Home occupation. Two spaces for the dwelling unit, plus one space per 250 square
feet of area devoted to the home occupation, plus one space for each non-resident
employee.
H. Hospital. One space per five beds, plus one per full-time employee.
I. Hotel. One and one quarter (1.25) spaces per guest room, plus additional spaces as
required by the Commission, plus one space per major shift employee. See also
§1104.9.
Chapter 11 – Site Design Requirements
11 - 4
J. Library. One space per 500 square feet.
K. Lumber Yard/Building Material Sales/Construction Supply Sales/Service. One
space per employee on the maximum shift, plus one space per 250 square feet of floor
area accessible to the general public.
L. Heavy Manufacturing Facility. One space per 500 square feet of GFA.
M. Light Manufacturing/ Warehousing/Distribution Facility. One space per employee
on the maximum shift, plus one space per fleet vehicle.
N. Medical Office/Clinic/Outpatient Care. One space per employee (including doctors)
on the maximum shift, plus three and one-half (3.5) spaces per treatment room.
O. Micro Assisted Living Facility. One space per employee on the maximum shift, plus
1.25 spaces per bedroom.
P. Mixed - use Commercial or Commercial/Industrial Development. Four spaces per
use, plus one space per 250 square feet of GFA of commercial uses, plus one space per
One space per employee on the maximum shift, for industrial uses.
Q. Multiple-use Commercial Developments with Gas Station. Ten spaces for gas
station, plus four spaces per use, plus one space per 250 square feet of GFA of
commercial uses.
R. Day Care/Nursery School. One and one-half (1.5) spaces per employee on the
maximum shift, plus four spaces, plus adequate drop-off and pick-up areas for children
attending the day-care facility or nursery school.
S. Office or Professional Building. One space per 300 square feet of GFA.
T. Residential Dwellings. Two spaces per dwelling unit.
U. Restaurant. One space per employee on the maximum shift, plus one space per three
seats.
V. Retail Stores. One space per 250 square feet of GFA, but no fewer than four spaces.
W. Places of Public Assembly (including places of worship). One space per three singleperson,
fixed seats or, where capacity is not determined by the number of singleperson,
fixed seats, one space per 60 square feet of floor area available to patrons.
1104.6 Uses Not Listed
The minimum number of parking spaces required for certain uses not listed above are set
forth elsewhere in these Regulations. If no minimum number of parking spaces has been
established in these Regulations for a particular use, the minimum number shall be
determined by the Commission based on such evidence as may be provided or available in
the record. An applicant for any such use must submit sufficient information to the
Commission to allow it to estimate the number of motor vehicles of all occupants and
visitors that may reasonably be expected at any one time. Such information may include,
without limitation, evidence regarding the nature, intensity, and mix of the proposed use;
projected attendance figures; the number of anticipated employees, visitors or customers;
and the experience of similar facilities elsewhere. The Commission may deny an
application that fails to provide sufficient, credible information to enable the Commission
reasonably to determine the number of parking spaces likely to be required. The
Commission may, alternatively, require the applicant to designate an overflow-parking
area in the event the parking plan results in insufficient spaces.
Chapter 11 – Site Design Requirements
11 - 5
1104.7 Off-Street Loading Requirements
A. Size. Except as provided in §1104.4, each required loading berth shall be at least 12
feet wide, 50 feet long and 15 feet high. Such berths shall be in addition to an access
driveway and required parking spaces.
B. Location. All permitted or required berths shall be on the same lot as the use to which
they are accessory. No entrance or exit for any off-street loading area shall be located
within 50 feet of any street intersection. Such loading berths may be enclosed or
outside, but in no case shall they be located in a front yard.
C. Access. Unobstructed access, at least 12 feet wide, to and from a street shall be
provided. Such access may be combined with access to a parking lot.
D. Number. For every structure used for commercial or industrial purposes, or for public
institutions and facilities, loading berth requirements shall be as set forth below, except
as provided in §1104.4.
1104.8 Size of Parking Facilities
Except as provided in §1104.4, the standards for parking facilities shall be as indicated in
the chart below.
A. The dimensions for parking spaces and drive aisles shall conform to the following
table.
Angle to Drive Aisle
90o 60 o 45 o
A) Double parking bay 60 ft. 58 ft. 53 ft.
B) Depth of bay 18 ft. 20 ft. 19 ft.
C) Aisle width 24 ft.* 18 ft. 15 ft.
D) Width of space 9 ft. 9 ft. 9 ft.
E) Depth of space 18 ft. 18 ft. 18 ft.
*Aisles for single-loaded parking bays may be 22 ft. wide.
B. Aisles for 90-degree parking are for two-way circulation, and aisles for 60-degree and
45-degree parking are for one-way circulation.
C. Other Standards
1. The outside radius of parking lot end islands shall be ten feet minimum.
2. All other radii shall be five feet minimum.
3. All interior landscaped islands shall be a minimum width of 18 feet.
Floor area # of Berths
10,000 - 25,000 sq. ft 1 Berth
25,000 - 40,000 sq. ft 2 Berths
40,000 -150,000 sq. ft 3 Berths
Each additional 50,000 sq. ft 1 Additional Berth
Chapter 11 – Site Design Requirements
11 - 6
D. Where parking spaces abut a concrete or bituminous walk (minimum six feet in width),
the depth of the parking space may be reduced by two feet.
E. Reduction in parking facilities
1. Permanent shared use reduction. The Commission may permit a reduction of up
to 25% of the required parking spaces due to shared use of parking facilities when
the parking needs of the uses occur at different hours of the day.
2. Permanent compact space reduction. In parking lots in excess of 50 spaces, the
Commission may allow the installation of compact spaces, not to exceed 25% of
the total number of spaces installed, at 8 feet x 16 feet. These spaces shall be clearly
designated as compact-car parking.
F. Parking Lot and Driveway Design
1. In order to protect the public safety, where traffic volumes, patterns or street
geometry warrants, the Commission may require that only one driveway serve any
lot, regardless of the length of street frontage, and may designate the location of
any driveway. In the case of corner lots, driveways shall be located not less than
150 feet from the intersection of the street lines of the lot. In the case of a corner
lot having frontage of less than 150 feet, the driveway shall be as far from the
intersection as is practical. Driveways entering streets at a curve or near the crest
of a hill shall be located to provide the maximum sight distances possible.
2. Driveways shall be designed to be as perpendicular to the street line as possible,
and in no case may the angle between the street line and the driveway centerline
be less than 60 degrees.
3. Parking lots designed for 90-degree parking are encouraged and may be required
by the Commission. However, where a one-way circulation pattern is desired due
to traffic safety considerations, the Commission may require angle parking.
4. Parking lot aisles longer than 45 feet may not be dead-ended and must provide
continuous circulation unless the Commission finds that sufficient turnaround
areas and adequate overall site circulation has been provided.
5. For any use requiring Site Plan approval, the applicant must consider the use of
pervious material for surfacing all external parking areas. The Commission may
Chapter 11 – Site Design Requirements
11 - 7
require the use of pervious materials if it determines that such materials would be
desirable for groundwater recharge or stormwater management.
6. No parking area or driveways shall be closer than ten feet from any portion of a
building other than its garage entrance or loading area apron. This ten-foot area
may be used for walkways and/or landscaping.
7. See §1105 for additional requirements for non-residential uses.
1104.9 Parking for Buses and other Large Vehicles
A. In addition to the required automobile parking, a minimum of one bus parking space
shall be provided for every 40 units in a hotel and for every 80 seats in a restaurant,
except that, if a restaurant is an accessory use to a hotel, the number of bus parking
spaces shall be determined by the greater of the two requirements.
B. Minimum bus parking space dimensions shall be 10 feet wide x 40 feet long.
C. The Commission may require additional parking spaces that can accommodate larger
vehicles that include, but are not limited to, shuttle vans or limousines that may be
typically associated with the proposed use, or expected to be parked on site.
1104.10 Parking Lot Landscaping Requirements. Any lot that contains parking facilities for
more than ten cars shall provide landscaped end islands and landscaped center islands
within the parking area. Such islands shall be designed and located to maximize the
attractiveness of parking lots by providing ornamental landscaped areas and shade. The
design of such islands must assure adequate circulation, aesthetic appeal, shade, and
capacity for snow storage as a result of plowing.
1105 ACCESS MANAGEMENT
1105.1 Purpose. This section is intended to control the number, size, and location of driveways
and access points for business uses in order to promote overall traffic control and promote
public safety and welfare.
1105.2 Commercial Access
A. Commercial access is defined as an access way providing a vehicular connection from
a public or private roadway to a parking area serving commercial, recreational,
institutional, office, multi-family, mixed use, or industrial land uses.
B. Commercial access shall be designed to be as perpendicular to the street line as
possible, and in no case may the angle between the street line and the access-way
centerline be less than 60 degrees.
C. No commercial access shall be located within 100 feet of the rotary (curve radius) of
Route 184 and Route 2.
D. Sightline Distance. Access shall be designed and located to provide a minimum sight
distance, clear of all obstructions, natural or man-made, of 250 feet in either direction
on secondary roads, 325 feet on primary roads, and 375 feet on primary and secondary
arterial roads, as listed in Appendix B.
E. Connection to Roads. The portion of driveway through the right-of-way connecting
the property with the physical roadway shall be the shortest perpendicular distance
Chapter 11 – Site Design Requirements
11 - 8
possible. Any grading, filling, or drainage design in the right-of-way shall require a
Zoning Permit (unless the access is part of a road approved as part of a subdivision)
and the approval of the Town.
F. Commercial access shall be placed so the following minimum distances are
maintained to any street intersection, including a T-intersection on the opposite side of
the street from a property where access is proposed.
1. Local access or low volume road: a minimum distance of 50 feet shall be
maintained from the driveway curve return to the edge of the right-of-way at the
intersection.
2. Primary road or larger road: a minimum distance consisting of the left turn
stacking distance (described below) plus 20 feet, as measured from the intersection
curve return to the driveway curve return, shall be maintained.
3. The left turn stacking distance shall be calculated using the following formula
(or based on a traffic study, if available or required).
a. Peak Hour Traffic = Average daily traffic/10
b. Peak hour left turns = 1/6 of peak hour traffic for 4-way intersections
c. Peak hour left turns = ¼ of peak hour traffic for T-intersections
d. Driveway to intersection spacing = [1.5 x peak hour left turns x 20 feet] + 20
feet.
4. Intersection Spacing:
1105.3 Frontage Requirements. The project’s frontage may be traversed by not more than one
driveway, unless the Commission finds that more than one driveway is desirable for safety
reasons. Applicants are encouraged to arrange common accesses with adjoining properties,
and the Commission may approve temporary access designs when a more desirable
permanent access serving more than one property appears achievable in the future.
1105.4 Traffic and Access. Access to the lot and internal circulation shall be designed so as to
promote the safety of pedestrian and vehicular traffic, both on the lot and off site. The Site
Plan shall be evaluated on the following basis:
A. the effect of the development on traffic on adjacent streets;
B. circulation pattern of vehicular and pedestrian traffic on the site;
Chapter 11 – Site Design Requirements
11 - 9
C. provision for parking and loading;
D. adequacy of sight lines;
E. relationship of the proposed circulation to circulation on adjacent property, for both
vehicles and pedestrians, with special attention to promoting pedestrian traffic among
adjacent parcels; and
F. emergency vehicle access.
1105.5 Access Driveway Design.
A. Driveway Widths. Unobstructed access to and from a street shall be provided. Oneway
driveways, access ways, thoroughfares, entrances, and exits for nonresidential use
shall have a minimum width of 12 feet. Two-way driveways, access ways,
thoroughfares, entrances, and exits for nonresidential use shall have a minimum width
of 24 feet. An access way may be configured as a boulevard so long as each entrance
and exit lane is a minimum width of 15 feet, and the median design is appropriately
landscaped.
B. Driveways shall not be located within ten feet of a side or rear property line abutting a
lot that is in a Residential Zoning District or that is used for single-family or two-family
residential purposes.
C. In Commercial and Industrial Zoning Districts, parking areas, parking spaces, and
internal access drives may be located within half of the required front yard setback
area, when screened from the street and abutting property by landscape materials,
including trees, shrubs and/or earthen berms.
D. Curbing. The front or primary driveway, entrance, and exit shall be lined, for its entire
length on both sides, with curbing of granite or Portland cement concrete unless the
Stormwater Management Plan demonstrates that stormwater will be properly
controlled without such curbing.
E. Surface treatment. All parking spaces, loading facilities, and access roadways shall
have at least six inches of process stone and 2½ inches of bituminous concrete as
surface treatment unless the applicant can demonstrate that an alternate treatment
would provide an adequate all-weather surface consistent with LID techniques.
F. Grade. Driveways serving commercial or industrial uses shall have a maximum grade
of six percent (6%). Driveways shall provide a reasonable transition in terms of grade
between the driveway and the gutter line. The driveway shall maintain a grade equal
to or less than the crown slope of the road from the point where the driveway meets
the road right-of-way to where the driveway crosses the gutter line. This transition is
needed to eliminate plows catching their blades on driveways with abrupt grade
changes in the vicinity.
Access DrivewayWidths
Type of Use Minimum Access
Driveway Width
Opening Width (including
flares)
Minimum
Centerline Radius
Minimum Maximum of Curvature
Non-Residential 12 feet (one-way)
24 Feet (two-way) 24 feet TBD at SPL
Review 65 feet
Chapter 11 – Site Design Requirements
11 - 10
G. Handicapped Access. Parking spaces and general access designed and designated for
handicapped persons shall be provided in all parking lots in accordance with all
applicable state and federal laws and regulations.
H. Modification of Site Plans. The Commission may require the modification of any Site
Plan if it finds such modifications necessary to satisfy the requirements of these
Regulations. Such modifications may include, but are not limited to, the following:
1. closing existing curb cuts, limiting proposed curb cuts, or closing temporary curb
cuts when alternative access points become available;
2. limiting turning movements to right turns in or out of curb cuts;
3. aligning access drives or roads with opposing access drives or roads wherever
practical;
4. limiting direct access to Route 2 when a parcel has frontage on an adjacent street
or highway.
1106 REFUSE STORAGE
1106.1 Purpose. This section is intended to control the number, size, location, and screening of
refuse storage areas in order to protect the public health, safety and general welfare.
1106.2 Requirements.
A. Refuse storage facilities shall be located in such a manner as to be inconspicuous to
the general public and neighboring properties.
B. Refuse storage areas shall be designed on an eight-inch thick concrete pad and shall be
enclosed and screened from view with fencing, wall, hedge/shrubs, or other suitable
means.
C. Refuse storage areas shall be easily accessible for service vehicles and building
occupants and shall not interfere with required parking spaces or circulation on and off
the site.
D. No refuse storage area shall be located in the required front yard or within ten feet of
any property line.
1107 OUTDOOR STORAGE
All uses requiring Site Plan approval may store materials and equipment outside of a building only
if such storage is a customary accessory use of the principal use and only under the following
conditions:
1107.1 Materials
A. All outdoor bulk storage items, including recyclable materials, shall be fully enclosed
within approved storage containers.
B. No outside-storage materials shall be permitted that will attract animals or insects.
C. No perishable merchandise shall be stored outdoors.
1107.2 Location
A. The location of all structures to be utilized for outdoor storage must be designated on
an approved Site Plan as outdoor storage.
Chapter 11 – Site Design Requirements
11 - 11
B. No outdoor storage shall be allowed in the required front, side, or rear yard setbacks,
or required buffer areas, and all outdoor storage shall be screened so as not to be visible
from any street.
C. No outdoor storage shall be allowed in areas required for parking on the site.
D. Maximum height of stored material and storage structures shall be six feet.
1107.3 Industrial Zones
A. All areas for outdoor storage of equipment (including vehicles) or materials shall be
located to the rear of the principal building and shall be screened so as not to be visible
from any street. Box trailers are permitted.
B. Vehicles (or box trailers) shall not be stacked and storage of materials shall not exceed
a maximum height of 25 feet.
1108 OUTDOOR MERCHANDISE DISPLAY
All uses requiring Site Plan approval may display merchandise for sale outside of a building only
under the conditions listed below.
1108.1 Merchandise
A. No perishable items shall be displayed outside, except as permitted for farm stands.
B. No merchandise shall be displayed outdoors that will attract animals or insects.
C. No goods that are leaking or have broken packaging shall be displayed.
1108.2 Location
A. The location of any area to be used for outdoor merchandise display must be designated
on an approved Site Plan.
B. No merchandise display shall be allowed in areas required for parking on the site.
C. Displayed merchandise shall not be stacked higher than six feet from the ground.
Individual display items that are not stacked may exceed six feet (for example, a kayak
leaned against the building of an outdoor recreation store).
D. Outdoor merchandise display shall be screened from adjacent residential properties, as
required in §1103.
E. No outdoor merchandise display shall be allowed within the front yard setback with
the following exceptions:
1. as part of a permitted roadside stand or farm store; or
2. if the display is located within 10 feet of the principal structure and does not block
any sidewalks, parking spaces, or entrances. The total area of any such display may
not exceed 200 square feet.
1109 ARCHITECTURAL CHARACTER, AND HISTORIC AND LANDSCAPE PRESERVATION
1109.1 General Provisions. The overall character of the proposed site layout and the architectural
character of proposed structures shall be designed, to the extent feasible, to protect property
values in the neighborhood and the Town; preserve the existing historic character in terms
of scale, density, architecture, and materials used in construction of all site features; protect
Chapter 11 – Site Design Requirements
11 - 12
the existing historic patterns of arrangement of structural and natural features, including
circulation patterns; and preserve public access to scenic views and vistas and to water
courses.
1109.2 Architectural Characteristics
In the interest of general welfare and to stabilize and protect property values, applicants are
encouraged to respect the New England character of North Stonington. Architectural styles
typical in the Town of North Stonington include the following.
1. Early colonial
2. Georgian
3. Federal
4. Jeffersonian (commercial or public building only)
5. Greek Revival
6. Gothic Revival
7. Italianate
8. Stick Style
9. Shingle Style
10. Bungalows
11. Period houses
12. International Style
1109.3 Encouraged Materials and Practices
A. Materials, texture, and color used on the exterior walls and roof should emphasize the
use of natural materials or should be those associated with traditional New England
architecture. Preferred façade materials are brick, stone, and wood, including narrowwidth
siding, clapboards, wood shingles, or a reasonable equivalent. Metal, unfinished
concrete, and concrete block, as well as asphalt siding, are discouraged. Roofing
materials, where visible, should be cedar shake, slate, copper, or a reasonable
equivalent. Tarpaper, sheet metal, plastic, or fiberglass surfaces are strongly
discouraged.
B. Architectural details characteristic of the particular style and period proposed should
be incorporated into the design for new construction and should relate harmoniously
to adjacent buildings. Architectural details of a period need not be duplicated precisely,
but they should suggest the extent, nature, and scale of the period.
C. Large structures should have well-articulated façades to reduce the appearance of
significant bulk. Provision shall be made to coordinate site architecture with the
character of the district. Rooflines should be varied to provide architectural interest.
1109.4 Resort Commercial District Design Objectives
A. When feasible, cluster new commercial buildings and parking areas on the most
developable land within the district and retain significant contiguous land areas in a
natural or landscaped condition.
B. Assure that the design of new structures, parking, access ways and landscaping
is compatible with the natural features and topography of the area.
C. Limit and control access for new development from public roads so that traffic safety
is maintained and a sense of the rural landscape is retained and enhanced.
Chapter 11 – Site Design Requirements
11 - 13
D. Discourage uncoordinated strip commercial development consisting of
small, individual, unrelated uses varying unpredictably in type, size, style, access
arrangements and environmental impact.
1110 OUTDOOR ILLUMINATION
1110.1 Purpose. The purpose of this §1110 is to encourage lighting practices and systems that
minimize the degradation of the night-time visual environment, thereby maintaining nighttime
safety and security while preventing glare, light trespass and light pollution.
1110.2 Exempt Light. The term “outdoor lighting” includes all exterior lighting systems except
those associated with the following:
A. airports;
B. emergency lighting, provided such lighting is temporary and is disconnected, or
otherwise ceases, immediately upon termination of the emergency condition;
C. fossil fuel lamps; and
D. temporary residential holiday lighting, provided it is illuminated for fewer than ninety
days per year.
1110.3 Lighting Design Requirements
A. All exterior lighting systems shall be designed, installed and maintained in such a
manner as to minimize or substantially reduce disability glare at any location on or off
the property; and to minimize or substantially reduce light trespass beyond the property
lot line, minimize sky illumination, and present an overall appearance that is
compatible with North Stonington’s rural character. All searchlights are prohibited
unless expressly allowed elsewhere in these Regulations. Photometric Plans shall be
required for all site plans that contain proposed lighting and shall include a description
of the proposed lighting fixtures and shall demonstrate that the maximum foot candle
does not exceed 3.0 at any property line.
B. Poles and standards used for outdoor lighting shall not exceed 20 feet in height (the
Commission encourages 12-foot to 15-foot light poles).
C. Lighting fixtures shall be full cut-off with low glare and directed lighting.
D. All non-essential lighting for security purposes shall be turned off after hours.
E. Area illuminators for parking lots, driveways, pedestrian walkways, and yards shall be
pole-mounted or building-mounted. Flood lighting shall be avoided except for loading
areas. Building-mounted floodlights may be installed where full cut-off luminaires are
impractical, provided top and side shields are attached and maintained to prevent light
emission above a vertical cut-off angle of forty-five degrees.
F. Fixtures shall be designed and mounted such that neither the light source nor the lens
are visible from above a height of five feet at the property lot line. Luminaires with sag
lens or drop lens shall be shielded.
G. Recessed low intensity up-lights, well lights, louvered lights, and cone lights may be
used for landscaping purposes only.
Chapter 11 – Site Design Requirements
11 - 14
H. The Commission may approve a height greater than 20 feet for sports area luminaires
and other commercial, outdoor recreational uses provided the luminaires are designed,
located and directed to prevent glare and light trespass.
I. Temporary events shall be exempt from the luminaire height and cut-off requirements
of these Regulations, provided a Zoning Permit has been granted for the event and the
illumination system will be used only during the temporary event.
J. The ZEO may approve temporary floodlights higher than 20 feet at a construction site
for which a Zoning Permit has been issued, provided the luminaires are designed,
located and directed to prevent glare and light trespass.
1111 SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL REQUIREMENTS
A. A soil erosion and sediment control plan (SE&SC) that presents, in mapped and narrative form,
the measures to be taken to control erosion and sedimentation both during and after
construction, shall be submitted when required pursuant to §1205 of these Regulations. The
SE&SC Plan shall be based on “Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment
Control,” available from the Natural Resources Center of the Connecticut Department of
Energy and Environmental Protection.
B. The SE&SC Plan shall include the following information:
1. A description of the project and a schedule of the major activities to be constructed on the
land.
2. Location of wetlands and watercourses.
3. Locations of areas to be stripped of vegetation.
4. Locations of areas to be regraded and contour data indicating existing and proposed grades.
5. A schedule of operations, including the sequence of major improvement phases such as
clearing, grading, paving, installation of drainage features, and the like.
6. Seeding, sodding, or re-vegetation plans and specifications for all unprotected or
unvegetated areas.
7. Location, design, and timing of structural control measures, such as diversions, waterways,
grade stabilization structures, debris basins, and the like; the narrative shall indicate design
criteria used in the design of control measures.
8. A description of procedures to be followed to maintain sediment control measures.
9. The plan map shall show the words: “Erosion and Sediment Control Plan Certified by the
North Stonington Planning and Zoning Commission on (date),” and a space for the
signature of the Chairman or Secretary of the Commission.
C. If the Commission finds that the SE&SC Plan is adequate for its intended purposes, it shall
certify that the plan is in compliance with these Regulations.
D. The Commission, through its members, agents, and consultants, shall periodically inspect
construction projects for which SE&SC Plans have been certified to verify that erosion and
sediment controls are consistent with the certified plan.
E. The Commission shall require a surety sufficient to assure the completion and proper
maintenance of all required and approved SE&SC measures.
Chapter 11 – Site Design Requirements
11 - 15
1112 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT (Revised 10/16/09)
1112.1 Purpose and Authority. Increased development without proper consideration of
stormwater impacts is a significant source of pollution to surface water and ground water.
These water resources are valuable natural, economic, recreational, cultural, and aesthetic
resources, and their protection and preservation is in the public interest and essential to the
health, welfare, and safety of the citizens of the Town. Stormwater management systems
shall be designed to manage site runoff to minimize or eliminate surface and groundwater
pollution, prevent flooding, control peak discharges and provide pollutant renovation.
Design of a stormwater management system shall be in accordance with the Connecticut
Department of Energy and Environmental Protection “Connecticut Stormwater Quality
Manual” (CSQM) and the Connecticut Department of Transportation Drainage Manual.
All applicants should meet with the Town Engineer prior to submitting the formal
application if possible.
1112.2 Applicability. A stormwater management plan is required for any development requiring
a Site Plan or for a subdivision/resubdivision that involves the disruption, clearing or
removal of ground cover or soil material, or the creation of impervious surfaces in an area
greater than one acre, or one-half acre if located in the Seasonal Use or Watershed
Protection Overlay Area. The stormwater management plan is to be designed to be
consistent with the CSQM as amended. The Commission shall use the standards and
criteria for decision outlined in the CSQM when reviewing the stormwater management
plan unless it finds, based on information submitted in connection with the application and
reviewed by the Town Engineer, that alternative standards or criteria should or may
reasonably be used and that such alternative standards and criteria will be equally or more
protective of the environment.
1112.3 Design Criteria
A. Sedimentation. The system shall remove 80% of the annual solid pollutant loading.
CSQM guidelines shall be used in such calculations except as specified in §1112.2.
B. Stormwater Flow. Individual watershed stormwater flows across the site boundary
(property line) must be equal to or less than the pre-existing conditions. In other words,
flows may not be increased within any watershed after development, unless the
applicant demonstrates, after review by the Town Engineer, that there would be no
resulting onsite or downstream negative effects. Flows shall be provided for the 2, 10,
25 and 100-year, 24- hour rainfall events. The plan must include pre-development and
post-development flow calculations for each sub-catchment drainage area.
C. Stormwater Volume. For each of the design rainfall events (above), the volume of
stormwater leaving the site shall be equal to the volume of stormwater leaving the site
in its pre-existing condition to the maximum extent practical, unless the applicant
demonstrates, after review by the Town Engineer, that there would be no resulting
onsite or downstream negative effects.
D. Groundwater Recharge Volume (GRV). The GRV shall be calculated and managed
in accordance with the procedures and recommendations of the CSQM except as
specified in §1112.2.
Chapter 11 – Site Design Requirements
11 - 16
E. Water Quality Volume (WQV). The WQV shall be calculated and managed in
accordance with the procedures and recommendations of the CSQM except as
specified in §1112.2.
In granting the plan approval, the Commission may consider the recommendations of the
Town Engineer to make modifications or impose such conditions that may be deemed
necessary to ensure compliance with the CSQM or other applicable standards and criteria.
1112.4 Permitting. A Zoning Permit shall not be issued for any development requiring a Site
Plan or a Subdivision/Re-subdivision that involves the disruption, clearing or removal of
ground cover or soil material, or the creation of impervious surfaces in an area greater than
one acre, or one-half acre if located in the Seasonal Use Overlay or Water Supply
Protection Overlay Area, unless the Commission has approved a stormwater management
plan. Where appropriate, the Commission may require, as a prerequisite to the issuance of
a Zoning Permit:
A. recorded easements for the stormwater management facility and
easements to provide adequate access for inspection and maintenance from a public
right-of-way;
B. a recorded stormwater management maintenance agreement;
C. surety; and
D. easements from adjacent property owners as necessary.
1112.5 Suspension and Revocation. Any Zoning Permit may be suspended or revoked after
written notice is given to the permittee for any of the following reasons:
A. any violation(s) of the conditions of the stormwater management plan approval;
B. changes in site runoff characteristics upon which an approval was granted;
C. construction is not in accordance with the approved plan;
D. noncompliance with correction notice(s) or stop work order(s) issued for the
construction of the stormwater management facility; and/or
E. an immediate danger exists in a downstream area.
1112.6 Surety. A surety shall be required prior to the issuance of any Zoning Permit for the
construction of a stormwater management facility. The amount of the security shall not be
less than the total estimated construction cost of the stormwater management facility. The
surety required in this section shall include provisions relative to forfeiture for failure to
complete work specified in the approved stormwater management plan and other
applicable laws and regulations, and any time limitations established in the stormwater
management plan. The surety shall not be fully released without a final inspection of the
completed work by a licensed engineer and the Zoning Enforcement Officer, submission
of “as-built” plans, and certification of completion by a licensed engineer and the Zoning
Enforcement Officer that the stormwater management facilities comply with the approved
plan and the provisions of these Regulations.
1112.7 Inspection
A. The Commission shall designate a professional engineer licensed in the State to
conduct inspections as may be necessary or appropriate. Written inspection reports
Chapter 11 – Site Design Requirements
11 - 17
shall be made of the periodic inspections carried out during construction of stormwater
management systems to ensure compliance with the approved plan.
B. The developer shall notify the engineer responsible for inspections at least forty-eight
(48) hours before commencing any work in conjunction with the stormwater
management plan, and upon completion of the project to set up a final inspection.
C. Written inspection reports shall be provided to the developer and the Commission and
shall include:
1. the date and location of the inspection;
2. whether construction was in compliance with the approved stormwater
management plan;
3. any variations from the approved construction specifications; and
4. any violations that exist.
D. The owner and/or developer and, as necessary, the on-site personnel shall be notified
in writing when violations are observed. Written notification shall describe the nature
of the violation and the required corrective action.
E. The inspector shall provide the owner and/or developer and the Commission with the
inspection reports as soon as possible after completion of each required inspection.
Upon issuance of a Notice of Violation, or an unsatisfactory inspection report, all work
shall cease until corrective measures are taken and approved by a licensed engineer
and the ZEO.
1112.8 Maintenance and Inspection
A. Procedures
1. The applicant shall execute an inspection and maintenance agreement binding the
property owner and all subsequent owners. Such agreement shall provide for
access at reasonable times for regular inspections by the Commission, or its
authorized representative, to ensure that the stormwater facilities are maintained in
proper working condition to meet design standards.
2. The applicant and/or owner shall record the Agreement in the land records of the
Town.
3. The Agreement shall provide that, if after notice by the Commission to correct a
violation requiring maintenance work, satisfactory corrections are not made by the
owner(s) within 30 days, the Commission shall have the right, but not the
obligation, to perform all necessary work to place the facility in proper work
condition. The owner(s) of the facility shall be assessed the cost of the work and
any penalties. Charges shall become a special assessment against the property
(e.g., a lien). Nothing herein shall make or be construed to make the Commission,
the Town, and/or Town officials, employees, representatives, or agents, legally
liable or in any way responsible for the cost, inspection, maintenance, and/or
operation of approved stormwater management facilities.
B. Responsibility
1. The owner of the property, and any other person or agent in control of such
property, shall maintain in good condition, and promptly repair and restore, all
Chapter 11 – Site Design Requirements
11 - 18
grade surfaces, walls, drains, dams and structures, vegetation, erosion and
sediment control measures, and other protective devices. Such repairs, or
restoration and maintenance shall be in accordance with the approved stormwater
management plan.
2. A maintenance and reporting schedule shall be developed for the life of any
stormwater management facility and shall state the maintenance to be completed,
the time period for completion, and who shall perform the maintenance. This
maintenance and reporting schedule shall be developed as part of the approved
stormwater management plan.
C. Terms and Conditions. The agreement shall also provide that the applicant/developer
and/or owner and each of their respective representatives, heirs, successors and assigns,
shall hold the Town of North Stonington and its officials, employees, representatives,
agents, boards, agencies and commissions and each of their respective representatives,
heirs, successors and assigns, harmless and indemnify them from and against any
claims, damages, losses, costs and expenses (including attorney’s fees) from any
personal injury (including death) and property damage resulting from any act or
omission of said applicant/developer and/or owner in the design, construction,
inspection, maintenance and operation of stormwater management facilities approved
pursuant to this section of these Regulations, and from any acts or omissions, including
without limitation, negligent acts or omissions of said Town, and/or its officials,
employees, representatives, agents, boards, agencies and commissions and each of
their respective representatives, heirs, successors and assigns in the approval and
inspection of said facilities or the performance of any activities pursuant to
§1112.8.A.3 of these Regulations.
D. Any agreement shall apply to the owners and/or lessees of the property in question and
shall run with the land.
1113 CONSOLIDATED PARCELS
1113.1 Purpose and Applicability
A. This §1113 encourages the consolidated development of parcels located in the nonresidential
zoning districts to preserve the capacity and safety of existing arterial
roadways; to provide flexibility in meeting bulk requirements; to facilitate integrated
development of large areas of land; to reduce parking requirements through shared
parking; and, to facilitate consolidation of stormwater management systems among
smaller parcels.
B. Any number of contiguous parcels may be consolidated for the purposes of
development regardless of ownership, and the consolidated parcel shall be considered
to be one lot for the purposes of meeting the requirements of these Regulations.
C. Consolidated parcels shall be permitted only in the C, HC, ED, RC and I Zoning
Districts.
1113.2 Basic Requirements. The consolidated parcel must be developed with an integrated plan
for access, buildings, parking, loading, landscaping, and signage. Applicants for
consolidated parcels shall be required to:
A. provide for shared access to abutting properties through common driveways, parking
lots, service roads and/or cross-easements (whether existing or future);
Chapter 11 – Site Design Requirements
11 - 19
B. construct all or a portion of a shared driveway or service road in order to provide for
shared access, where appropriate; and
C. file easements on the land records, acceptable to the Commission and Town Attorney,
in favor of the abutting properties and/or the Town to allow for their future
interconnection.
1113.3 Additional Requirements
A. Unless the Commission determines that buffers are needed between incompatible uses
within a consolidated parcel, the yard, buffer, parking, and building setback
requirements shall not apply to individual lots within a consolidated parcel, but shall
instead apply to the consolidated parcel as a whole.
B. The Commission may limit direct highway access to individual parcels within a
consolidated parcel in accordance with the access management requirements of
§1105.1.
Chapter 11 – Site Design Requirements
11 - 20
Chapter 12 – Permits by Staff
12 - 1
The following requirements/procedures pertain to all uses and activities that do not require a Site
Plan or Special Permit, and therefore may be approved by staff.
1201 Zoning Permits
A. Applicability. No building and/or portion of a building shall be constructed, reconstructed,
altered, excavated for, moved or structurally altered in whole or in part for any purpose, nor
shall any use be established or changed in the Town of North Stonington, without a Zoning
Permit from the Zoning Enforcement Officer or the Commission, issued in conformance with:
1. the provisions of these Regulations; or
2. an approval granted by the Commission; or
3. a variance granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals; or
4. Any combination of the above.
B. A Zoning Permit may not be issued for buildings or structures or for uses of land, buildings, or
structures not clearly permitted by these Regulations in the various districts.
C. A Zoning Permit is not required for repairs or alterations to existing buildings or structures,
provided that such work does not increase the floor area of any building or structure and does
not change the use thereof.
D. Contents of Application. All applications shall set forth such information as may be required
in order to allow the ZEO or the Commission to determine the conformance of any proposed
buildings, structures or uses, or any proposed changes thereto, with these Regulations. The
ZEO or Commission may require submission of additional information, including any
information that might be required for a Site Plan (e.g., soils data, topography, drainage
computations, etc.), and a plot plan prepared, signed, and sealed by a licensed land surveyor,
to insure compliance with these Regulations. The ZEO or the Commission may further require
that location markers for the building foundation be set by a Connecticut licensed land surveyor
in accordance with the plot plan prior to the issuance of a Zoning Permit. For new dwellings
and for commercial/business and industrial construction, the ZEO or Commission may require
the submission of a survey with Class A-2 level of accuracy in order to determine zoning
compliance and shall require that such plans be prepared by a Connecticut licensed engineer
and/or land surveyor.
E. Application Procedures
1. An application for a Zoning Permit shall be accompanied by plans and/or other information
that comply with applicable requirements in the Appendix of these Regulations.
2. If all requirements of these Regulations are met, the Zoning Permit shall be issued within
30 days unless the applicant agrees, in writing, to extend the time for decision; otherwise,
the application shall be denied and the reasons for denial shall be stated by the ZEO.
3. In the event that any Zoning Permit is issued based on incorrect information or the specific
conditions of approval are not adhered to strictly, the Commission may declare such
Zoning Permit null and void, provided no such decision may be made until after the
Commission has provided the permit-holder an opportunity for a hearing.
Chapter 12 – Permits by Staff
12 - 2
F. Expiration of Zoning Permits. Zoning Permits issued by the ZEO for construction, erection
or alteration of a building or structure are valid until a Certification of Zoning Compliance is
issued, or until applicable time limits described herein expire. A Zoning Permit issued by the
ZEO that is not associated with any other Commission approved site work (e.g., Site Plan,
Special Permit) shall expire after one year if no work has commenced or if the site work has
ceased for a period of one year. The ZEO may grant one extension of one additional year to
allow the applicant to commence or continue approved work.
G. Building Permits. No Building Permit shall be issued by the Building Official for a building,
use or structure subject to these Regulations without certification in writing from the ZEO that
such building, use or structure is in conformity with these Regulations or is a valid nonconforming
use under these Regulations. A Zoning Permit shall constitute the required
certification of zoning compliance for purposes of issuing a Building Permit.
1202 Post –Development Certifications of Zoning Compliance
A. Applicability. It shall be unlawful for any newly erected building or any structural addition
and/or use for which a Zoning Permit has been issued to be occupied or used, or for any
building, lot, or premises or part thereof to be converted or changed from one type of use or
occupancy to another, until a post-development Certification of Zoning Compliance has been
issued by the ZEO (see also §1203, Change of Use). The ZEO may require an as-built Site
Plan to facilitate this review. In the absence of the ZEO, the Chairman or other designated
agent of the Commission may issue a Certification of Zoning Compliance. A Certification of
Compliance shall remain valid only so long as the building, structure, lot, or use thereof or the
use of the land remains in full conformity with these Regulations or any relevant amendments
thereto. The Certification of Zoning Compliance shall be issued within thirty business days
after a written request is made to the ZEO, provided that:
1. any building, structure or alteration and/or use of property for which the Certification is
sought has been properly completed and is fully in compliance with these Regulations and
that all pertinent conditions of any Zoning Permit or approval for such building, structure
or use have been fulfilled; and
2. that the Health Officer or Sanitarian (Deputy Health Officer) or responsible regulatory
agency (regional/state/federal) has inspected the premises and has given written approval
of the installation of the sewage disposal facility and water supply system.
B. Application Procedures
1. A request for a Certification of Zoning Compliance shall be accompanied by plans and/or
other information that demonstrate compliance with applicable regulations and approvals.
2. Within 15 days of such application, the ZEO or other authorized official shall inspect the
premises.
3. If all requirements of these Regulations are met, including requirements of approved site
and plot plans, the Certification shall be issued within 15 days; otherwise, the Certification
shall be denied for stated reasons.
4. In the event that any permit or certificate is issued based on incorrect information or the
specific conditions of approval are not adhered to strictly, the Commission may declare
such permit or certification null and void, provided no such decision may be made until
Chapter 12 – Permits by Staff
12 - 3
after the Commission has provided the permit- or certificate-holder an opportunity for a
hearing.
5. A Certification of Zoning Compliance shall remain in effect as long as the specified uses
and conditional requirements are properly maintained but shall cease whenever such
conditions and uses are terminated or no longer maintained.
C. Notice Provisions
1. In accordance with CGS §8-3(f), the recipient of a Zoning Permit or Certification of Zoning
Compliance may publish notice of issuance of the Zoning Permit or Certification in order
to establish the appeal period per CGS §8-7.
2. Any such notice to be published by the recipient shall contain:
a. a description of the building, use or structure and its location;
b. the identity of the applicant; and
c. a statement that an aggrieved person may appeal to the Zoning Board of Appeals in
accordance with the provisions of CGS §8-7.
D. Certificate of Occupancy. No Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued by the Building
Official for a building, use or structure subject to these Regulations without certification in
writing from the ZEO that such building, use or structure is in conformity with these
Regulations or is a valid non-conforming use under these Regulations
1203 Change of Non-Residential Use of Buildings and Properties
A. When any change of ownership occurs to an existing non-residential use, a Change of User
form must be submitted to update the Land Use file for the property.
B. Any proposed change to a permitted non-residential use that does not involve any enlargement
or modification to, or reconfiguration of, existing building/structure footprint, parking (lot size
or number of spaces), access drives, or overall site lay-out, shall require completion of a Change
of Use Application and subsequent review and approval by the ZEO.
C. Any proposed change in use of a non-residential use that involves any enlargement or
modification to, or reconfiguration of existing buildings/structures, parking (lot size or number
of spaces), access drives, or overall site lay-out, shall require completion of a Change of Use
Application and review by the Commission. If the Commission finds that the proposed change
of use and any related modification to existing buildings/structures and/or site lay-out would
not be considered significant, it may, at its discretion, direct the ZEO to issue a Zoning Permit.
D. All other proposed changes shall be deemed to require Site Plan or Special Permit review and
approval by the Commission per these Regulations (See Chapter 13).
E. All changes to uses existing at the time of adoption of these regulations that require a Site Plan
or Special Permit will require upgrading of signs, landscaping, lighting, access ways, common
design elements and other standards of the district to the extent possible.
1204 Property Line Adjustment/ Lot Division (“Free Split”)
Any and all property line adjustments or lot divisions (splits) within the Town of North Stonington
shall require a review by the ZEO to determine compliance with the Zoning and Subdivision
Regulations.
Chapter 12 – Permits by Staff
12 - 4
A. A property line adjustment is any change in the location of an existing property line that does
not create an additional lot, does not result in a lot or condition that violates the Zoning
Regulations, and does not increase any existing lot nonconformities with respect to the
dimensional requirements of the Zoning Regulations. Such property line adjustment shall not
be considered a subdivision or resubdivision so long as it does not create a lot or affect a street
layout shown on an approved subdivision or resubdivision map, and does not affect any area
reserved for public use or established as open space on an approved subdivision plan.
B. A “Free Split” is a one-time division of land permitted on a parcel that has remained undivided,
and in the same configuration as it was on or before 10/18/1963. Any subsequent division of
land requires subdivision approval.
C. The ZEO may require one or more of the following if he/she deems it necessary to determine
whether a proposed property line adjustment or lot division is consistent with these
Regulations:
1. deeds;
2. a certified title search;
3. a property history map; and/or
4. a survey with Class A-2 level of accuracy.
D. The applicant shall record the approved survey in the office of the Town Clerk of North
Stonington, and any survey not so recorded within ninety (90) days following its approval, shall
become null and void. The applicant may request two (2) additional ninety (90) day extensions.
The request for an extension must come before the expiration for the initial time period. A signed
copy of the approved survey shall be provided by the applicant to the Zoning Enforcement Officer
and to the office of the Town Assessor.
1205 Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plan (SE&SC)
A soil erosion and sediment control plan shall be submitted pursuant to §1111 of these Regulations
with any application for development, or before the commencement or continuance of any activity,
in which the disturbed area of such development or activity is or would be cumulatively more than
one-half acre (21,780 sq. ft.) For purposes of this section, the term “disturbed area” shall mean an
area on which the ground cover is removed or destroyed, leaving the land subject to accelerated
erosion. A soil erosion and sediment control plan may be required for the construction or alteration
of a single-family dwelling that is not part of a subdivision of land as determined by the ZEO. The
ZEO may issue an order to correct or remediate any conditions that are found to be causing, or
likely to cause, unreasonable erosion or sedimentation.
1206 Land Disturbance Permit
As set forth in §1006.2.D, and subject to the exemptions in §1006.2.E, of these Regulations, a Land
Disturbance Permit may be required prior to any disturbance of land not related to an active Zoning
Permit or Building Permit or as part of an approved subdivision plan in order to determine the
location and size of the area to be disturbed, the nature of the activity, and the need for additional
review or approval (such as an excavation permit, or an SE&SC Plan).
Chapter 13 – Permits by Commission
13 - 1
The following requirements/procedures pertain to all uses and activities that require a Site Plan or
Special Permit, and therefore review and approval by the Commission. All applications for Site Plan
approval must show conformance with Chapter 11 (Site Design Requirements).
1301 PRELIMINARY CONCEPT PLAN
A. Applicability. If an application is of such size or nature that providing a Site Plan or other
application may be a significant expense, the applicant may submit a Concept Plan for informal
presentation to the Commission.
B. Concept Plan Review
1. A Concept Plan shall be submitted to the Planning and Zoning Office and shall be
accompanied by plans and sufficient information so that the Commission may informally
review the plan for general conformance with these Regulations.
3. A Concept Plan shall be considered only informational and advisory in nature and no
development rights shall attach to the review or consideration of any Concept Plan. The
Commission shall make no decision on the plan, and its review shall not be binding on the
applicant or the Commission.
4. A Concept Plan shall be placed on file in the Commission’s office for continuing reference
purposes for any subsequent application.
1302 SITE PLAN APPLICATION
1302.1 Applicability
A. Except as may be expressly provided elsewhere in these Regulations, a Site Plan
application shall be submitted:
1. for any proposed new use designated in the Regulations as requiring Site Plan or
Special Permit approval. In the event that a proposed Site Plan is being submitted
in connection with a Special Permit application, the Commission’s review of the
Site Plan application shall be deemed to be an integral component of the Special
Permit review;
2. in a Residential zone, for any construction, development, expansion, or major
alteration of any non-residential use; and/or
3. for any expansion or other alteration of any existing use designated in the
Regulations as requiring Site Plan or Special Permit approval if such change would
affect the layout of any structure, facility, parking or loading area, or other physical
feature shown on a previously approved Site Plan or, if no previous Site Plan was
approved for such use, if such physical feature(s) would have been required to be
shown on a Site Plan for a new use under any other provision of these Regulations.
As used in this §1302, the term “expansion” includes, but is not limited to, any
change that does or is likely to increase the number of parking spaces required by
§1104 of these Regulations.
B. A new or revised Site Plan shall not be required for:
1. interior remodeling work;
2. changes in exterior mechanical equipment, dumpsters or storage structures that
Chapter 13 – Permits by Commission
13 - 2
occupy less than 200 square feet of floor area; or
3. changes in the location of existing fences, or new fence locations.
1302.2 Submission Requirements
A. A Site Plan application (original & fifteen (15) copies) shall be submitted to the
Planning and Zoning Office and shall include a completed application form and the
appropriate fee.
B. A Site Plan (fifteen (15) copies application shall be accompanied by detailed plans,
signed and sealed by one or more appropriate professionals. Generally, in order to
determine the compliance of a Site Plan with the applicable provisions of these
Regulations, the Commission will require the applicant to provide all information
specified in the “Site Plan Check Sheet” in Appendix D of these Regulations.
However, the Commission may approve or modify and approve a Site Plan application
that does not include all such information if it finds that such information is not needed
to assure that the proposed use or uses will be in compliance with the substantive
provisions of these Regulations.
C. A Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plan (fifteen (15) copies) in accordance with
the requirements of §1205 shall be submitted when the disturbed area of any
development is more than 1/2 acre.
D. A Stormwater Management Plan (fifteen (15) copies) in accordance with the
requirements of §1112 shall be submitted when the disturbed area of any development
is more than one acre, or more than 1/2 acre if the parcel falls within a Water Supply
Protection Overlay Area .
E. A Utilities Plan (fifteen (15) copies) shall be submitted to demonstrate the adequacy
of on-site water supply and sewage disposal facilities to serve the needs of all proposed
uses. The Utilities Plan should also include comment on the availability of water for
any fire-fighting needs that may arise in connection with the proposed uses. The
applicant must submit a copy of the Utilities Plan to the Town’s Director of Health and
Fire Marshal no later than the date the application is filed with the Commission.
F. A Landscape Plan (fifteen (15) copies) shall be submitted with any applications for
new construction, or alterations to the size of existing buildings, parking, loading, and
driveway areas, or a change in use that will expand the size of the building or parking,
loading, and driveway areas. Landscape plans and designs shall include a planting list,
with plant names, quantities, size at planting, and size when mature. Typical sections
may be shown. Existing plantings shall be identified on the plan. All landscape designs
shall be sensitive to the character of the surrounding properties and area and shall use
native species. Invasive species shall be prohibited as part of any landscape plan.
G. The Commission may require the submission of additional information as deemed
necessary to make a reasonable review of the application.
1302.3 Proceedings
A. An incomplete Site Plan application may be denied in accordance with §§1306.C.
B. If a Site Plan application involves an activity regulated pursuant to CGS §22a-36 to
§22a-45, inclusive, the applicant shall submit an application for a permit to the Inland
Chapter 13 – Permits by Commission
13 - 3
Wetlands Commission not later than the day such application is filed with the Planning
and Zoning Commission.
C. If the Commission finds that any proposed new construction or other activity is
significant, the Commission:
1. may hold a public hearing on the application; and
2. if such hearing is to be held, shall require that the applicant give notice to property
owners in accordance with the requirements of §§1306.G of these Regulations.
D. Notification to adjoining municipalities may be required in accordance with the
requirements of §§1306.H.
E. Whenever a Site Plan application is required in conjunction with another application
requiring a public hearing by the Commission (such as a Special Permit application or
a Zone Change application), the time period for acting on the Site Plan application
shall coincide with the time period for acting on the related application.
F. Whenever approval of a Site Plan is the only approval required, a decision on the
application shall be rendered within 65 days after the date of receipt of such Site Plan
application, regardless of whether the Commission holds a public hearing on the
application, except that the applicant may consent to one or more extensions of such
period, provided the total period of any such extension or extensions shall not exceed
an additional 65 days.
G. Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, if an application involves an activity
regulated pursuant to CGS §22a-36 to § 22a-45, inclusive and the time for a decision
by the Commission would elapse prior to the 35th day after a decision by the Inland
Wetlands Commission (“IWC”), the time period for a decision shall be extended to 35
days after the decision of the IWC.
H. Approval of a site plan shall be presumed unless a decision to deny or modify it is
rendered within the applicable time period specified above (approval as a result of
failure of the Commission to act).
I. The applicant may, at any time prior to action by the Commission, withdraw such
application.
1302.4 Considerations
A. On a Site Plan application involving an activity regulated pursuant to CGS §22a-36 to
§ 22a-45, inclusive, the Commission shall:
1. wait to render its decision until the Inland Wetlands Commission has submitted a
report with its final decision; and
2. give due consideration to any report of the Inland Wetlands Commission when
making its decision.
B. On a Site Plan application involving notice to adjoining municipalities, the
Commission shall give due consideration to any report or testimony received from such
municipalities.
Chapter 13 – Permits by Commission
13 - 4
C. No Site Plan application shall be approved unless it is materially in conformance with
all applicable provisions of these Regulations, including, but not limited to, the Site
Design Requirements in Chapter 11.
D. The Commission may modify and approve any proposed Site Plan if it determines such
modifications are needed to satisfy the applicable requirements of these Regulations.
E. The Commission may, as a condition of approval of a site plan or modified site plan,
require a financial guarantee in the form of a bond, a bond with surety or similar
instrument to ensure (A) the timely and adequate completion of any site improvements
that will be conveyed to or controlled by the municipality, and (B) the implementation
of any erosion and sediment controls required during construction activities. The
amount of such financial guarantee shall be calculated so as not to exceed the
anticipated actual costs for the completion of such site improvements or the
implementation of such erosion and sediment controls plus a contingency amount not
to exceed ten per cent of such costs.
F. The Commission shall not approve any Site Plan for any property on which there exists
a zoning violation, unless the implementation of such Site Plan would remedy such
violation.
G. The submission of any application for Site Plan approval shall be deemed to represent
a certification by the applicant and property owner that the proposed use will comply
with the performance standards of §1102.3 of these Regulations, and an
acknowledgment that any approval of the Site Plan by the Commission will be made
in reliance on that certification. If the use, as actually established and operating, fails
to meet those performance standards, the Commission’s approval of the Site Plan shall
not prevent the issuance of a zoning enforcement order to remediate such
noncompliance, even if such order may require a revision of the approved Site Plan.
1302.5 Action Documentation
A. Whenever it modifies or denies a Site Plan application, the Commission shall state
upon its record the reason(s) for its decision.
B. The Commission shall send, by certified mail, a copy of any decision to the applicant
within 15 days after such decision is rendered.
C. The Commission shall cause notice of the approval or denial of Site Plans to be
published in a newspaper having a substantial circulation in North Stonington within
15 days after such decision is rendered.
D. In any case in which such notice is not published within the 15-day period after a
decision has been rendered, the person who submitted such plan may provide for the
publication of such notice within ten days thereafter.
E. On any application for which the period for approval has expired and on which no
action has been taken, the Commission shall send a letter of approval to the applicant
within 15 days of the date on which the period for approval expired and such letter of
approval shall state the date on which the five-year completion period expires.
1302.6 Following Approval
A. Following approval of a Site Plan application, one fixed-line mylar copy and three
Chapter 13 – Permits by Commission
13 - 5
paper copies of the approved plan(s) shall be submitted to the Planning and Zoning
Office:
1. bearing the raised seal and signature of the appropriate professionals who prepared
the drawing(s);
2. bearing a copy of the decision letter of the Commission and any other Town
regulatory agencies authorizing the activity; and
3. containing a signature block where the Chairman of the Commission can indicate
the approval of the Commission.
B. Following signature by the Chairman, the applicant shall record the Site Plan in the office of
the Town Clerk of North Stonington, and any plan not so recorded within ninety (90) days
following its approval, or within ninety (90) days of the date upon which said plan is taken as
approved by reason of the failure of the Commission to act, shall become null and void. The
applicant may request two (2) additional ninety (90) day extensions. The request for an extension
must come before the expiration for the initial time period. A signed copy of the approved plan
shall be provided by the applicant to the Zoning Enforcement Officer and to the office of the
Town Assessor.
1302.7 Expiration and Completion
A. Any Site Plan approval under which the construction of any proposed building has not
been commenced within 12 months from the date of such approval, shall expire unless
the Commission, upon a showing of good cause for the delay, allows a longer time
period, not to exceed 24 months from the date of approval. For the purposes of this
section, the construction of a building will be deemed to have commenced when
foundation or exterior walls have begun to be emplaced or built.
B. Except as may be provided by state law, all work in connection with a Site Plan shall
be completed within five years after the date of approval of the plan. Failure to
complete all work within such five-year or other required period shall result in
automatic expiration of the approval of such Site Plan unless the Commission, upon a
showing of good cause for the delay, grants an extension of the time to complete work
in connection with such Site Plan.
C. The Commission may grant one or more extensions of the time to complete all or part
of the work in connection with the Site Plan, provided the total extension or extensions
shall not exceed ten years from the date of approval of such Site Plan, unless otherwise
provided or allowed by state law.
D. The Commission may condition the approval of such extension on a determination of
the adequacy of any bond or other surety.
1303 SPECIAL PERMIT APPLICATION
1303.1 Applicability
A. A Special Permit application shall be submitted for any activity designated in the
Regulations as requiring Special Permit approval.
B. Notwithstanding the above, a Special Permit application shall not be required for any
modifications to a previously approved Special Permit use if such modifications would
Chapter 13 – Permits by Commission
13 - 6
not change the essential character of the use and would not require the submission of
a new or modified Site Plan pursuant to §1302.1 of these Regulations.
1303.2 Submission Requirements
A. A Special Permit application (original & fifteen (15) copies) shall be submitted to the
Planning and Zoning Office and shall include a completed application form and the
appropriate fee.
B. Each application for a Special Permit shall be accompanied by a Site Plan application.
If the applicant believes that the proposed use will not require any changes in a
previously approved Site Plan, he or she may submit a copy of the previously approved
Site Plan and need not submit any of the additional information or materials noted in
the “Site Plan Check Sheet” found in Appendix D of these Regulations, except as may
be needed for the Commission to evaluate the Special Permit criteria. However, the
Commission may require the submission of additional materials or information from
the “Site Plan Check Sheet” if it finds that the application materials are inadequate to
evaluate the application or if the proposed Special Permit uses may require
modifications to the previously approved Site Plan.
C. The Commission may require the submission of any additional information it may
deem necessary to determine compliance with any applicable provisions of these
Regulations.
1303.3 Proceedings
A. An incomplete Special Permit application may be denied in accordance with §1306.C.
B. If a Special Permit application involves an activity regulated pursuant to CGS §22a-36
to § 22a-45, inclusive, the applicant shall submit an application for a permit to the
Inland Wetlands Commission not later than the day such application is filed with the
Planning and Zoning Commission.
C. The Commission shall hold a public hearing on the Special Permit application and:
1. publish a legal notice in accordance with the requirements of §1306.F of these
Regulations, and
2. require that the applicant give notice to property owners in accordance with the
requirements of §1306.G of these Regulations.
D. Notification to adjoining municipalities may be required in accordance with §1306.H.
E. The Commission shall process the Special Permit application and any accompanying
Site Plan application within the period of time specified in §1306.D.
F. Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, if an application involves an activity
regulated pursuant to CGS §22a-36 to §22a-45, inclusive and the time for a decision
by the Commission would elapse prior to the 35th day after a decision by the Inland
Wetlands Commission (“IWC”), the time period for a decision shall be extended to 35
days after the decision of the IWC.
G. The applicant may, at any time prior to action by the Commission, withdraw such
application.
1303.4 Special Permit Criteria. In considering an application for a Special Permit, the
Chapter 13 – Permits by Commission
13 - 7
Commission shall evaluate the merits of the application with respect to all of the following
criteria that the Commission may determine are relevant to the application. To the extent
the Commission finds such criteria applicable, the applicant shall have the burden to prove:
A. that the application is materially in conformance with all applicable provisions of these
Regulations, including, but not limited to, the Site Design Requirements in Chapter 11,
and that the standards for approval of any accompanying Site Plan application have
been met;
B. that transportation services would be adequate and that the uses would not cause traffic
congestion or undue traffic generation that would have a deleterious effect on the
welfare or the safety of the motoring public;
C. that the proposed uses and structures would be in harmony with the appropriate and
orderly development of the Zoning District in which they are proposed to be situated,
and that the use(s) would not be noxious, offensive, or detrimental to the area by reason
of odors, fumes, dust, noise, vibrations, appearance, or other similar reasons;
D. that no adverse effect would result to the character of the district, property values, or
historic features of the immediate neighborhood;
E. that the character of the immediate neighborhood would be preserved in terms of scale,
density, intensity of use and architectural design;
F. In accordance with CGS §22a-19, that the proposed uses would not cause any
unreasonable pollution, impairment or destruction of the air, water and other natural
resources of the state; and
G. that all proposed uses and structures would be consistent with future development as
identified and envisioned in these Regulations and the North Stonington Plan of
Conservation and Development.
1303.5 Decision Considerations
A. Before the Commission may approve a Special Permit application, it must determine
that the application satisfies:
1. the Special Permit criteria in §1303.4 of these Regulations; and
2. all other applicable provisions of these Regulations.
B. On a Special Permit application involving an activity regulated pursuant to CGS §22a-
36 to §22a-45, inclusive, the Commission shall:
1. wait to render its decision until the Inland Wetlands Commission has submitted a
report with its final decision; and
2. give due consideration to any report of the Inland Wetlands Commission when
making its decision.
C. On a Special Permit application involving notice to adjoining municipalities under
§1306.H, the Commission shall give due consideration to any report or testimony
received from such municipalities.
D. The Commission may approve an application for a Special Permit, deny the
application, or approve the application subject to such conditions as it may deem
Chapter 13 – Permits by Commission
13 - 8
necessary to protect the public health, safety, welfare, property values, and natural
resources of the state. The Commission may also require that some or all conditions of
approval be met prior to the issuance of the Zoning Permit by the Zoning Enforcement
Officer.
E. The approval of any Special Permit for any property on which there exists a zoning
violation shall be deemed conditioned, whether expressly specified in the decision or
not, upon the remediation of such violation, and no Zoning Permit or Certification of
Zoning Compliance may be issued for such Special Permit uses until any such violation
has been remediated.
F. The submission of any application for Special Permit approval shall be deemed to
represent a certification by the applicant and property owner that the proposed use will
comply with the performance standards of §1102.3 of these Regulations, and an
acknowledgment that any approval of the Special Permit by the Commission will be
made in reliance on that certification and that such approval is conditioned on
continuing conformance with those standards, whether or not such condition is
expressly stated on the record. If the use, as actually established and operating, fails to
meet those performance standards, the Commission’s approval of the Special Permit
shall not prevent the issuance of a zoning enforcement order to remediate such
noncompliance, even if such order may require a revision of the approved Special
Permit.
1303.6 Action Documentation
A. Whenever it acts on a Special Permit application, the Commission shall state upon its
record the reason(s) for its decision.
B. The decision to grant a Special Permit shall:
1. state the name of the owner of record;
2. contain a description of the premises to which it relates;
3. identify the section and/or § of the Regulations under which the Special Permit
was granted or denied; and
4. specify the nature of the Special Permit.
C. The Commission shall send, by certified mail, a copy of any decision on a Special
Permit application to the applicant within 15 days after such decision is rendered.
D. The Commission shall cause notice of the approval, approval with conditions, or denial
of the Special Permit application to be published in a newspaper having a substantial
circulation in North Stonington within 15 days after such decision is rendered.
E. In any case in which such notice is not published within the 15-day period after a
decision has been rendered, the person who submitted such application may provide
for the publication of such notice within ten days thereafter.
1303.7 Following Approval
A. Within ninety (90) days after the Commission’s approval of a Special Permit and Site
Plan, the applicant shall submit to the Land Use Office two (2) sets of final plans, one
on mylar and one (1) on paper. Such plans shall be identical to those approved by the
Chapter 13 – Permits by Commission
13 - 9
Commission, except that they shall incorporate any conditions or modifications
required in the Commission’s approval. Such plans shall be signed and sealed by the
surveyor, engineer or other professional who has participated in the preparation of such
plans.
If such plans are found to be in accordance with the final approval, the Chairman of
the Commission shall endorse such plans. The endorsed mylar plans shall be filed by
the applicant in the land records no later than ninety (90) days after the approval by the
Commission, except that the Commission may act to extend this filing period for an
additional ninety (90) day period upon the request of the applicant.
A Special Permit granted by the Commission shall become effective only upon the
filing of a copy of the Special Permit, certified by the Commission, in the land records
of the Town, in accordance with the provisions of CGS §8-3d.
B. A Special Permit shall authorize only the particular use or uses specified in the
Commission’s approval.
C. Failure to strictly adhere to the documents, plans, terms, conditions and/or safeguards
approved by the Commission shall be a violation of these Regulations and the
Commission shall have the authority to revoke the Special Permit at any time the
operation is found to be in noncompliance with the original permit, provided, however,
that no such revocation shall be ordered unless the Commission or its agent provides
written notice of the violations to the current landowner and the Commission provides
the landowner with an opportunity for a hearing on the violations.
D. A Special Permit may be amended or modified in like manner as provided above for
the granting of a Special Permit, except that amendments the Commission finds to be
of a minor nature, that result in no significant change in the use or its intensity, and that
do not materially alter the Special Permit, may be authorized with Commission
approval only, without another public hearing.
1304 TEXT AMENDMENT APPLICATION
A. Applicability. A Text Amendment application shall be submitted for any proposal to amend,
change, or repeal any provisions of these Regulations.
B. Submission Requirements
1. A Text Amendment application shall be submitted to the Planning and Zoning Office and
shall include a completed application form and the appropriate fee.
2. A Text Amendment application shall be accompanied by fifteen (15) copies of the precise
wording of the existing and proposed text and any other supporting information, including
reasons for the proposed amendment.
3. The Commission may require the submission of additional information as deemed
necessary to make a reasonable review of the application.
4. The Commission may, but shall not be required to, hear any petition or petitions relating
to the same text changes, or substantially the same text changes, more than once in a period
of 12 months.
C. Proceedings
Chapter 13 – Permits by Commission
13 - 10
1. The date of receipt for the Text Amendment application shall be determined in accordance
with §1306.B.
2. An incomplete Text Amendment application may be denied in accordance with §1306.C.
3. The Commission shall hold a public hearing on the Text Amendment application and shall
cause a legal notice to be published in accordance with the requirements of §1306.F of
these Regulations.
4. The Commission shall give written notice to the Southeastern Connecticut Council of
Governments (SCCOG) when any portion of the land affected by a regulation change
affecting the use of a zone is located within 500 feet of the boundary of another Connecticut
municipality. Such notice shall be made by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by
electronic mail to the electronic mail address designated by SCCOG on its Internet web
site for receipt of such notice, not later than 30 days before the public hearing to be held
on the Text Amendment application. If such notice is sent by electronic mail and the
Commission does not receive an electronic mail message from SCCOG confirming receipt
of such notice, then, not later than 25 days before the public hearing, the Commission shall
also send such notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, to SCCOG. SCCOG may
submit its advisory findings and recommendations to the Commission at or before the
hearing, but if such report is not submitted, the Commission shall presume that SCCOG
does not disapprove of the proposal.
5. Notification to adjoining municipalities may be required in accordance with §1306.H.
6. Notification to water companies may be required in accordance with §1306.I.
7. A copy of the proposed Text Amendment shall be filed by the applicant in the office of the
Town Clerk for public inspection at least ten days before the public hearing.
8. The Commission shall process the Text Amendment application within the period of time
specified in §1306.D.
9. The applicant may, at any time prior to action by the Commission, withdraw such
application.
D. Decision Considerations
1. The Commission may approve, modify and approve, or deny the changes requested in such
Text Amendment application.
2. Zoning regulations shall be established, changed or repealed only by a majority vote of all
the members of the Commission except that, if a protest against a proposed change is filed
at or before a hearing with the Commission, signed by the owners of 20% or more of the
area of the lots affected by such proposed change or of the lots within 500 feet in all
directions of the property affected by the proposed change, such change shall not be
adopted except by a vote of two-thirds of all the members of the Commission
3. On a Text Amendment application involving notice to adjoining municipalities, water
companies, or SCCOG:
a. any report received from those agencies shall be made a part of the record of such
hearing; and
b. the Commission shall give due consideration to any report or testimony received.
Chapter 13 – Permits by Commission
13 - 11
4. In making its decision the Commission shall:
a. consider whether the Text Amendment would be in accordance with a comprehensive
plan; and
b. take into consideration the Plan of Conservation and Development, prepared pursuant
to CGS §8-23.
5. In accordance with CGS §8-3a(a), the Commission shall state on the record its findings on
consistency of a proposed zoning regulation or text change with the Plan of Conservation
and Development, as may be amended.
E. Action Documentation
1. Whenever the Commission acts upon a Text Amendment application, it shall state upon
the record the reasons for its decision.
2. In making its decision, the Commission shall state upon the record its findings on
consistency of the proposed establishment, change or repeal of such Regulations with the
Plan of Conservation and Development, as amended.
3. The Commission shall establish an effective date for any Text Amendment. A notice of the
decision of the Commission must be published before such effective date in a newspaper
having a substantial circulation in North Stonington. A copy of the Text Amendment, as
approved, must also be filed in the office of the Town Clerk before the effective date. If
the Commission has not specified an effective date, the effective date shall be deemed to
be the day immediately following the date of publication of the notice or the date of filing
of the Text Amendment in the Town Clerk’s office, whichever is later.
4. The Commission shall send, by certified mail, a copy of any decision on a Text Amendment
application to the applicant within 15 days after such decision is rendered.
5. The Commission shall cause notice of the approval or denial of the Text Amendment
application to be published in a newspaper having a substantial circulation in North
Stonington within 15 days after such decision is rendered.
6. In any case in which such notice is not published within the 15-day period after a decision
has been rendered, the person who submitted such application may provide for the
publication of such notice within ten days thereafter.
1305 ZONE CHANGE APPLICATION
A. Applicability. A Zone Change application shall be submitted for any proposal to alter the
zoning designation of any parcel(s) of land or part thereof.
B. Submission Requirements
1. A Zone Change application shall be submitted to the Planning and Zoning Office and shall
include a completed application form and the appropriate fee.
2. A Zone Change application shall be accompanied by fifteen (15) copies of a map showing
the location and boundaries of all lots, or portions of lots, proposed to be rezoned. If, and
to the extent that, the zone change does not follow established lot lines, the proposed new
zone boundaries must be shown on a map signed and sealed by a land surveyor licensed in
the State of Connecticut.
Chapter 13 – Permits by Commission
13 - 12
3. The Commission may require the submission of additional information as deemed
necessary to make a reasonable review of the application.
4. A Zone Change application may be submitted only by:
a. an owner of the real property proposed for the zone change; or
b. persons who submit evidence of a substantial legal interest in the property proposed
for the zone change.
The Commission also may propose and consider a Zone Change on its own initiative.
5. The Commission may, but shall not be required to, hear a Zone Change application that
has been rejected for a period of one year after the date of rejection.
C. Proceedings
1. The date of receipt for the Zone Change application shall be determined in accordance with
§1306.B.
2. An incomplete Zone Change application may be denied in accordance with §1306.C.
3. The Commission shall hold a public hearing on the Zone Change application and shall:
a. publish a legal notice in accordance with the requirements of §1306.F of these
Regulations; and
b. require that the applicant give notice to property owners in accordance with the
requirements of §1306.G of these Regulations.
4. The Commission shall give written notice to the Southeastern Connecticut Council of
Governments (SCCOG) when any portion of the land affected by a proposed Zone Change
is located within 500 feet of the boundary of another Connecticut municipality. Such notice
shall be made by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by electronic mail to the
electronic mail address designated by SCCOG on its Internet web site for receipt of such
notice, not later than 30 days before the public hearing to be held on the Zone Change
application. If such notice is sent by electronic mail and the Commission does not receive
an electronic mail message from SCCOG confirming receipt of such notice, then not later
than 25 days before the public hearing, the Commission shall also send such notice by
certified mail, return receipt requested, to SCCOG. SCCOG may submit its advisory
findings and recommendations to the Commission at or before the hearing, but if such
report is not submitted, the Commission shall presume that SCCOG does not disapprove
of the proposal.
5. Notification to adjoining municipalities may be required in accordance with §1306.H.
6. Notification to water companies may be required in accordance with §1306.I.
7. The Commission may refer any Zone Change application to any Town department or other
agency the Commission deems appropriate and may request any such department or agency
to submit a report to the Commission on matters that are of concern to it in connection with
its own responsibility.
8. A copy of the proposed zoning map change shall be filed by the applicant in the office of
the Town Clerk for public inspection at least ten days before the public hearing.
9. The Commission shall conduct the public hearing within the period of time specified in
Chapter 13 – Permits by Commission
13 - 13
§1306.D.
10. The applicant may, at any time prior to action by the Commission, withdraw such
application.
D. Decision Considerations
1. The Commission may approve, modify and approve, or deny the changes requested in such
Zone Change application.
2. On a Zone Change application involving notice to adjoining municipalities, water
companies, or SCCOG:
a. any report received from those agencies shall be made a part of the record of such
hearing; and
b. the Commission shall give due consideration to any report or testimony received.
3. Changes in Zone District boundaries should be:
a. in harmony with the Plan of Conservation and Development for the Town of North
Stonington, as amended;
b. consistent with a comprehensive plan;
c. where possible, constitute logical extensions of like or compatible districts; and
d. where appropriate, along property lines or easily distinguishable geophysical features.
4. In making its decision the Commission shall take into consideration the Plan of
Conservation and Development, prepared pursuant to CGS §8-23.
5. In accordance with CGS §8-3a(a), the Commission shall state on the record its findings on
consistency of a proposed Zone Change with the Plan of Conservation and Development.
6. Zone boundaries shall be established, changed or repealed only by a majority vote of all
the members of the Commission except that, if a protest against a proposed change is filed
at or before a hearing with the Commission, signed by the owners of 20% or more of the
area of the lots affected by such proposed change or of the lots within 500 feet in all
directions of the property included in the proposed change, such change shall not be
adopted except by a vote of two-thirds of all the members of the Commission.
E. Action Documentation
1. Whenever the Commission acts upon a Zone Change application, it shall state upon the
record:
a. the reasons for its decision; and
b. its findings on consistency of the proposed zone change with the Plan of Conservation
and Development, as amended.
2. The Commission shall establish an effective date for any Zone Change. A notice of the
decision of the Commission must be published before such effective date in a newspaper
having a substantial circulation in North Stonington, and a copy of the Zone Change must
be filed in the office of the Town Clerk before the effective date. If the Commission has
not specified an effective date, the effective date shall be deemed to be the day immediately
following the date of publication of the notice or the date of filing of the Zone Change in
the Town Clerk’s office, whichever is later.
Chapter 13 – Permits by Commission
13 - 14
3. The Commission shall send, by certified mail, a copy of any decision on a Zone Change
application to the applicant within 15 days after such decision is rendered.
4. The Commission shall cause notice of the approval or denial of the Zone Change
application to be published, within 15 days after such decision is rendered, in a newspaper
having a substantial circulation in North Stonington.
5. In any case in which such notice is not published within the 15-day period after a decision
has been rendered, the person who submitted such application may provide for the
publication of such notice within ten days thereafter.
1306 PROCEDURAL REQUIREMENTS
A. Application Submittal Requirements
1. Applications to the Commission shall be submitted to the Planning and Zoning Office.
2. Applications shall be submitted on forms obtained from the Planning and Zoning Office
for the type of application being submitted.
3. Applications shall be accompanied by the appropriate fee(s) except that the Commission
or the Town shall be exempt from any application fee.
4. Applications shall be submitted with such supporting plans, materials, and other
information as required by these Regulations.
5. Applications shall be signed by the applicant.
6. Applications shall also be signed by an owner of the property affected unless the
application is for a text change or is a map change initiated by the Commission.
B. Date of Receipt. For the purposes of calculating statutory timeframes for processing
applications, the date of receipt of an application to the Commission shall be:
1. the day of the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Commission immediately following
the day of submission of the application to the Planning and Zoning Office; or
2. 35 days after submission, whichever is sooner.
C. Incomplete Applications
1. The Planning and Zoning Office shall review each application and shall advise the
Commission whether such Office believes the application is substantially complete and, if
not, what information or materials it believes are missing. The Commission shall have the
final discretion to determine whether an application is substantially complete.
2. It is the responsibility of the applicant to provide a complete application, and failure to
do so is grounds for denial of the application. The Commission may deny an incomplete
application or an application submitted without the requisite fee.
D. Hearings. Where a proposed development or activity requires multiple applications, the
Commission may conduct any public hearings simultaneously or in the order it deems
appropriate. Whenever a public hearing is required on an application described in this Chapter
13, the Commission shall process the application within the period of time permitted under
CGS §8-7d, as follows:
a. the public hearing shall commence within 65 days after the official date of receipt of
Chapter 13 – Permits by Commission
13 - 15
the application;
b. the public hearing shall be completed within 35 days after such hearing commences;
c. all decisions shall be rendered within 65 days after completion of such hearing;
d. the applicant may consent to one or more extensions of any period specified herein
provided the total extension of all such periods shall not be for longer than 65 days;
and
e. the provisions of Sections (a) through (d) shall not apply to any action initiated by the
Commission.
E. Consultations
1. On any application, the Commission may seek the advice and opinion of other officials,
boards, or commissions to assist it in evaluating applications.
2. On any application, the Commission may retain an engineer, architect, landscape architect,
professional land use planner, or other consultant to review, comment, and guide its
deliberations on any application.
F. Notice by Newspaper
1. When a public hearing is required by these Regulations or scheduled by the Commission,
the Planning and Zoning Office shall cause notice of the hearing to be published in a
newspaper having a substantial circulation in North Stonington.
2. Such notice shall be published at least twice at intervals of not less than two days, the first
not more than 15 days, nor less than ten days, before the date of the hearing, and the last
not less than two days before the date of the hearing.
G. Notification to Property Owners
1. When required by these Regulations, the applicant (other than the Commission) shall notify
owners of property within 100 feet of the subject property (including owners of all
condominium units both on and adjacent to the subject property), whether inside or outside
North Stonington, of a pending application by mailing a notice at least 15 days prior to the
first scheduled hearing.
2. At a minimum, such notice shall consist of:
a. a description of the proposed activity;
b. notification of the date, time, and place of the first scheduled hearing; and
c. a copy of the application form submitted to the Commission.
3. The applicant shall prove such mailing by submitting, at or prior to the first scheduled
hearing regarding the application:
a. a copy of the complete package of information sent to abutters;
b. a list of the abutters to whom the notices were sent; and
c. certificates of mailing from the U.S Postal Service, provided that the Commission may
accept other proof of mailing or delivery that it deems equivalent to such certificates.
4. The most recent Assessor’s records on file in the North Stonington Assessor’s Office shall
Chapter 13 – Permits by Commission
13 - 16
be utilized to determine the owner of each property for the purpose of this mailing.
H. Notification to Abutting Municipalities
1. As required by CGS §8-7d(f), the Commission shall notify the clerk of an adjoining
municipality of any application concerning any project on any site in which:
a. any portion of the property affected by a decision is within 500 feet of the boundary of
the adjoining municipality;
b. a significant portion of the traffic to the completed project would use streets within the
adjoining municipality to enter or exit the site;
c. a significant portion of the sewer or water drainage from the project would flow
through and significantly impact the drainage or sewerage system within the adjoining
municipality; or
d. water runoff from the improved site would impact streets or other municipal or private
property within the adjoining municipality.
2. Such notice shall be made by certified mail, return receipt requested and shall be mailed
within seven days of the day of the submission to the Planning and Zoning Office of the
application, petition, request or plan.
3. No hearing shall be conducted on any such application unless the adjoining municipality
has received the notice required under this section.
4. Such adjoining municipality may, through a representative, appear and be heard at any
hearing on any such application, petition, request or plan.
I. Notification to Water Companies
1. As required by CGS §8-3i, an applicant shall provide written notice to a water company
and the Commissioner of Public Health when an application is filed with the Commission
concerning any project on any site that is within:
a. an aquifer protection area, provided such area has been delineated in accordance with
CGS §22a-354c; or
b. the watershed of a water company, provided such water company or said commissioner
has filed a map with the Commission and on the North Stonington land records
showing the boundaries of the watershed.
2. Such notice shall be made by certified mail, return receipt requested and shall be mailed
not later than seven days after the date of the day of the submission to the Planning and
Zoning Office.
3. Prior to the scheduled meeting regarding the application, the applicant shall submit the
following to the Planning and Zoning Office or the application may be considered
incomplete:
a. a copy of the complete package of information; and
b. proof of mailing.
4. Such water company and the Commissioner of Public Health may, through a
representative, appear and be heard at any hearing on any such application, petition, request
Chapter 13 – Permits by Commission
13 - 17
or plan.
J. Notification of DEEP
1. If any portion of the property which is the subject of an application is located within an
area designated as “State and Federal Listed Species & Significant Natural Communities”
on the most current Natural Diversity Data Base Areas map for North Stonington prepared
by the Connecticut Department of Energy and Environmental Protection (DEEP), the
applicant must notify DEEP of the application.
2. A report from DEEP shall be a required for any application for Site Plan approval or a
Zoning Permit for any such property, and any such application submitted without a DEEP
report shall be considered incomplete (see §1306.C).
K. Beneficiaries of a Trust. Any person who makes an application to the Commission pertaining
to real property, the record title to which is held by a trustee of any trust, shall file with the
application a sworn statement disclosing the name(s) of the equitable owner(s) of such real
property or the beneficiary(ies) of the trust.
L. Bonds
1. Where a bond or surety is required by any Commission decision, it shall be in one of the
following forms, and the ZEO shall require evidence of compliance with the following
standards before accepting any bond:
a. cash deposited with the Town;
b. certified bank check to the order of the Town when the amount of the check is fully
insured by the FDIC;
c. bank deposit (such as a passbook savings account) assigned irrevocably and solely to
the Town when the amount of the deposit is fully insured by the FDIC; or
d. irrevocable letter of credit naming the Town as sole beneficiary, provided that:
i. such letter of credit shall be issued by, and drafts thereunder presentable at, a
branch of a bank in Connecticut, so long as:
• such bank is included in the most recent list issued by the Securities Valuation
Office of the National Association of Insurance Commissioners (or any
successor office or organization, “NAIC”) as a bank meeting NAIC standards
for issuing letters of credit for reinsurance purposes; or
• the long-term unsecured debt of such bank (or the long-term unsecured debt
of its holding company) is rated BBB or better by Standard & Poor’s rating
service or Baa or better by Moody’s rating service.
ii. The terms and conditions of such letter of credit shall be acceptable in form and
substance to the Town; and
iii. If and when such letter of credit shall, through the passage of time, have less than
30 days remaining until its expiration or lapse date, and such date shall not have
been extended, the Town may draw under said letter of credit the full amount
thereof and the proceeds may be retained by the Town as the bond.
Chapter 13 – Permits by Commission
13 - 18
e. Other form of bond (such as a performance bond) acceptable in form and substance to
the Town.
2. Any required bond shall not be released by the Commission until:
a. the release has been requested, in writing, by the applicant;
b. the ZEO has submitted a letter stating that all pertinent conditions and requirements of
the Commission’s approval have been satisfied; and
c. the applicant’s engineer or surveyor has certified to the Commission, through
submission of a set of detailed “Record” plans on mylar, that all improvements and
other work pertinent to the bond are in accordance with submitted site plans;
3. Any cost of collecting a bond, including without limitation, attorney, bank and other
collection fees and expenditures, shall be for account of the applicant and may be deducted
from amounts released in §1306.L.2.
Chapter 14 – Zoning Board of Appeals
14 - 1
1400 ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
1400.1 Powers and Duties. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have such powers and duties as
may be provided in the Connecticut General Statutes, including, but not limited to, CGS
§8-6.
1400.2 Procedures. Procedures for submission of applications to the Zoning Board of Appeals
shall be as provided in the Connecticut General Statutes, including, but not limited to, CGS
§8-7, or as may be established by rule or regulation of the Zoning Board of Appeals.
1400.3 Limitations on Use Variances. As authorized by CGS §8-6, the Commission establishes
the following limitations on use variances.
A. No use variance shall be granted where a dimensional variance would relieve the
exceptional difficulty or unusual hardship.
B. No use variance for a business use or an industrial use shall be granted in a Residential
Zone.
C. A use variance shall be granted only where, without the use variance, the private
property would be rendered valueless or unusable for any purpose.
1400.4 Following Approval
A. A variance granted by the Board shall become effective only upon the filing of a copy,
certified by the Board, in the land records of the Town, in accordance with the
following provisions.
The applicant shall record the variance in the office of the Town Clerk of North
Stonington, and any variance not so recorded within ninety (90) days following its
approval, or within ninety (90) days of the date upon which said plan is taken as approved
by reason of the failure of the Board to act, shall become null and void. The applicant
may request two (2) additional ninety (90) day extensions. The request for an extension
must come before the expiration for the initial time period. A signed copy of the approved
variance shall be provided by the applicant to the Zoning Enforcement Officer and to the
office of the Town Assessor.
B. A variance shall authorize only the particular activities specified in the Board’s
approval.
1401 FLOODPLAIN VARIANCES
1401.1 Specific Situation Variances
A. Buildings on a Historic Register. Variances may be issued for the reconstruction,
rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic
Places, the State Inventory of Historic Places, or any locally-adopted historic district
without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this section and provided
the proposed reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration will not result in the structure
losing its historical designation.
B. Functionally Dependent Use or Facility. Variances may be issued for new
construction and substantial improvements and other development necessary for the
conduct of a functionally dependent use or facility provided the structure or other
Chapter 14 – Zoning Board of Appeals
14 - 2
development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage, creates no
additional threat to public safety and meet all the requirements of subpart C below.
C. Floodway Prohibition. Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway
if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
1401.2 Considerations for Granting Floodplain Variances: In passing upon such applications,
the Zoning Board of Appeals shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors,
all standards specified in other sections of this regulation and the items listed below. Upon
consideration of these factors and the purposes of this regulation, the Zoning Board of
Appeals may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to
further the purposes of this regulation.
A. The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others.
B. The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage.
C. The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the
effect of such damage on the individual owner.
D. The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community.
E. The necessity of the facility to waterfront location, in the case of a functionally
dependent facility.
F. The availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding or erosion damage for
the proposed use.
G. The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development.
H. The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain
management program for that area.
I. The safety access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles.
J. The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the flood
waters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site.
K. The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions
including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas,
electrical and water systems, and streets and bridges.
1401.3 Conditions for Floodplain Variances
A. Variances shall only be used upon a determination that the variance is the minimum
necessary to afford relief considering the flood hazard; and in the instance of a
historical building, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary as not
to destroy the historic character and design of the building and result in the loss of
historic designation of the building. Variances pertain to a piece of property and are
not personal in nature. A properly issued variance is granted for a parcel of property
with physical characteristics so unusual that complying with the regulation would
create an exceptional hardship to the applicant or the surrounding property owners.
Those characteristics must be unique to that property and not be shared by adjacent
parcels. For example, economic or financial hardship is not sufficient cause for a
variance, nor are inconvenience, aesthetic considerations, physical handicaps, personal
Chapter 14 – Zoning Board of Appeals
14 - 3
preferences or disapproval of one’s neighbors.
B. Variances shall only be used upon (i) a showing of good and sufficient cause, (ii) a
determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship,
and; (iii) a determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased
flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create
nuisance, damage the rights or property values of other persons in the area, cause fraud
on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws, ordinances or
regulations. Only hardships that are based on unusual or unique physical
characteristics of the property in question, characteristics that are not shared by
adjacent parcels, shall quality to meet subsection (ii) above. Claims of hardship based
on the structure, on economic gain or loss, or on personal or self-created circumstances
are not sufficient cause for the granting of a variance.
C. No variance may be issued within a regulatory floodway that will result in any increase
in the 100-year flood levels. A variance may be issued for new construction,
substantial improvements and other development necessary for the conduct of a
“functionally dependent use” provided that there is good and sufficient cause for
providing relief; and the variance does not cause a rise in the 100-year flood level
within a regulatory floodway. The structure and other development must be protected
by methods that minimize flood damages.
D. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the
structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest floor elevation below the base
flood elevation (BFE), and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with
the increased risk resulting from the lowest floor elevation up to amounts as high as
$25 for $100 of insurance coverage.
Chapter 14 – Zoning Board of Appeals
14 - 4
Chapter 15 – Separability and Effective Date
15 - 1
1501 SEPARABILIY
Should any section or provision of these Regulations be declared by the courts to be
unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of these Regulations as a
whole, or any part thereof, other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.
1502 EFFECTIVE DATE
The Zoning Regulations of the Town of North Stonington were originally adopted on May 21,
1964. These amended Regulations are effective November 17, 2017.
Chapter 15 – Separability and Effective Date
15 - 2
Chapter 16 – Definitions
16 - 1
1600 DEFINITIONS
The symbol § means “section.”
Abandonment
The intentional discontinuance of a use of a structure or of land. An intention to discontinue a use may be
inferred from the circumstances surrounding the discontinuance.
Accessory Apartment, Commercial Caretaker
A residence used by an employee who serves as a caretaker of a principal commercial use located on the
same lot. The residence may be attached to or detached from the principal commercial use.
Accessory Apartment, Residential
A residence located on the same lot as a principal single-family home. The accessory residence may be
attached to or detached from the principal structure.
Accessory Structure (see Structure, Accessory)
Accessory Use (see Use, Accessory)
Agriculture-Related Terms
Agriculture: Except as otherwise specifically limited in these Regulations, the words “agriculture” and
“farming” shall include cultivation of the soil, dairying, forestry, raising or harvesting any agricultural
or horticultural commodity, including the raising, shearing, feeding, caring for, training and management
of livestock, including horses, bees, poultry, fur-bearing animals and wildlife, and the raising or
harvesting of oysters, clams, mussels, other molluscan shellfish or fish; the operation, management,
conservation, improvement or maintenance of a farm and its buildings, tools and equipment, or salvaging
timber or cleared land of brush or other debris left by a storm, as an incident to such farming operations;
the production or harvesting of maple syrup or maple sugar, or any agricultural commodity, including
lumber, as an incident to ordinary farming operations or the harvesting of mushrooms, the hatching of
poultry, or the construction, operation or maintenance of ditches, canals, reservoirs or waterways used
exclusively for farming purposes; handling, planting, drying, packing, packaging, processing, freezing,
grading, storing or delivering to storage or to market, or to a carrier for transportation to market, or for
direct sale any agricultural or horticultural commodity as an incident to ordinary farming operations, or,
in the case of fruits and vegetables, as an incident to the preparation of such fruits or vegetables for
market or for direct sale. For the purposes of these regulations the term “agricultural” also includes the
use of horses for riding, pulling, training, lessons, showing, and other similar uses, but only when such
uses are incidental to the raising and/or boarding of horses on the same lot.
The term “farm” includes farm buildings, and accessory buildings thereto, nurseries, orchards, ranges,
greenhouses, hoop houses and other temporary structures or other structures used primarily for the
raising and, as an incident to ordinary farming operations, the sale of agricultural or horticultural
commodities.
The term “aquaculture” means the farming of any waters and/or wetlands and the production of plant
or protein food, including fish, oysters, clams, mussels and other molluscan shellfish. “Aquaculture”
includes, without limitation, outdoor and/or indoor hatcheries, aquaponics, and hydroponics.
Chapter 16 – Definitions
16 - 2
Agricultural Buildings and Structures: Buildings or other structures used in connection with
agriculture, including shelter for livestock and storage for farm machinery, equipment and supplies.
Agricultural Building, Specialized: A building used for (a) processing or packaging of farm products
or by-products produced on the premises; (b) shelter for more than one hundred (100) cattle or pigs, 50
horses, or 20,000 fowl; or (c) workplaces for more than five (5) non-family employees.
Agricultural commodity: Same meaning as “Farm products.”
Commercial Farm: A farm producing farm products for sale by wholesale, or for sale at locations (not
including farmers’ markets) other than the farm property on which they were produced.
Farm: A tract of land used principally for agriculture, with or without an associated single-family
dwelling. In zoning districts in which a farm is allowed, both the agricultural activities and any singlefamily
dwelling that may exist shall be deemed to be permitted, joint principal uses.
Farm pond: A pond used as an accessory to an agricultural use.
Farm products: Any products of agriculture, including fruits; vegetables; mushrooms; nuts; shell eggs;
honey or other bee products; maple syrup or maple sugar; flowers; nursery stock; Christmas trees; other
horticultural commodities; livestock food products, including meat, milk, cheese and other dairy
products; food products of “aquaculture,” as defined above, including, but not limited to, all plant food,
fish, oysters, clams, mussels and other molluscan shellfish; products from any tree, vine or plant and
their flowers; or any such products that have been processed by a farmer, including, but not limited to,
baked goods made with farm products.
Farmers’ market: A for-profit or nonprofit cooperative, enterprise, or association that regularly
occupies a given location, and that operates principally as a common marketplace for a group of farmers,
at least two of whom are selling Connecticut-grown fresh produce, to sell Connecticut-grown farm
products directly to consumers.
Farm Store: Retail sales of farm products, the majority of which are produced in North Stonington.
Seasonal Roadside Stand: A building or other structure, not to exceed a gross floor area of 200 square
feet, from which agricultural products, primarily produced on the owner’s premises in North Stonington,
are sold.
Advertising
Any wording, logo, or other representation that, directly or indirectly, names, identifies, announces, or calls
attention to a business, product, service, or other commercial activity.
Adventure Park (Outdoor)
An Outdoor Recreational Facility which can contain a wide variety of elements, such as rope
climbing courses, obstacle courses and zip-lines, and other non-motorized rides intended for
recreation. Rides primarily propelled by gravity such as an alpine slide, a mountain coaster, and
other similar rides are not considered to be motorized nor mechanical and are permitted in an
Outdoor Adventure Park. (See also Recreational Facility, Outdoor)
Aircraft Landing Field
A lot, or portion thereof, used for the purpose of landing, parking, storing, or launching aircraft.
Chapter 16 – Definitions
16 - 3
Alteration
Any construction, reconstruction, or other action resulting in a change in the structural parts or height,
number of stories, size, use, or location of a building or other structure, as well as any excavation, grading,
or filling of land.
Amusement Park
A park that features various attractions, including mechanical and motorized rides and devices (such as a
merry-go-round, Ferris wheel, roller coaster, etc.), booths for games and refreshments, and other events for
entertainment purposes. A theme park is a type of amusement park that bases its structures and attractions
around a central theme, often featuring multiple areas with different themes.
Area median income
The area median income for the area in which the Town of North Stonington is located, as that area has
been determined by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development (see CGS §8-30g).
Arterial Roadway
Roadways that provide rapid connection between regional freeways and the community collector streets.
Connecticut Routes 2, 49, 184, 617 and 201 are arterial roadways.
At Least
The term “at least” is used in these Regulations to mean “equal to or more than.”
Base Flood (See Flood, 100-Year)
Beacon
Any light with one or more beams directed into the atmosphere or directed at one or more points not on the
same premises as the light source. Also, any light with one or more beams that rotate or move.
Bed and Breakfast
A private house in which a portion of the building is maintained and held out to the public as transient
overnight accommodations, and which provides breakfast for overnight guests only.
Board
The Zoning Board of Appeals of the Town of North Stonington.
Buffer Area
An area within a required yard that may
be designed or required to contain trees,
shrubs, walls, rocks, berms, and other
landscaping materials whose primary
function is to provide visual, noise, and
odor insulation from adjacent property
and roadways.
Chapter 16 – Definitions
16 - 4
Buildable Area
A minimum amount of contiguous area required on each lot to be capable of locating the principal building,
accessory uses and on-site water and sewer facilities without major physical alterations of the land. See §
402 of these Regulations for further description of the term.
Building
An enclosed, roofed structure designed or intended to provide shelter for persons, animals, or property. For
the purposes of this definition, the term “roof” shall include a covering made of any material, including but
not limited to wood, stone, metal, and fabric, whether or not permanent in nature.
Building Lot (see Lot, Building)
Building Line
The line or lines created by the required front,
rear, and side yard dimensions for unoccupied
space of a lot, to establish an area within which
structures allowed by these Regulations may be
located.
Bulk
The size and shape of buildings and
non-building uses and the physical
relationships of their exterior walls or their
location to lot lines and other buildings or other
walls of the same building and to all open spaces required in connection with a building. Bulk regulations
include provisions dealing with floor area ratio, building height, lot area per dwelling unit, lot frontage, lot
width, required yards, courts, usable open space, spacing between buildings on a single lot, and length of
buildings in a row. Buffer requirements are not deemed to be bulk regulations.
Business Office (see Office, Business)
Camp
A lot, consisting of five (5) or more acres, on which non-profit organizations offer the temporary occupancy
of seasonal shelters, as well as indoor or outdoor activities for children or adult participants, including
sports, arts and crafts, entertainment, recreation, educational activities, swimming, fishing, horseback
riding, and incidental food service. If incidental to the camp use, camp facilities may be used to provide
meeting, recreation, or social facilities for a private association or group.
Cemetery
Land used for the burial of human remains, and dedicated for cemetery purposes, excluding crematories
and mortuaries.
CGS
The Connecticut General Statutes
Church
A building, facility, or main activity area used primarily as a place for regular religious assembly and
worship. Includes synagogue, temple, mosque, and similar places for worship.
Chapter 16 – Definitions
16 - 5
Cluster Development
A building pattern concentrating units on a particular portion of a parcel so that at least one-third of the
parcel remains as open space to be used exclusively for recreational, conservation and agricultural purposes.
Collector Street
Any public roadway other than an interstate highway, arterial roadway or dead-end road.
Commission
The Planning and Zoning Commission of the Town of North Stonington.
Commercial Services
Business services that generally relate to real or personal property (as opposed to services that are performed
on people, such as barbering and hairdressing).
Commercial Use or Facility
A use or facility intended as a profit-making enterprise.
Common Driveway (See Driveway, Shared)
Communications-Related Terms
Communications Tower
A structure erected for the principal purpose of receiving, transmitting or re-transmitting radio frequency
signals, such as wireless communications. Examples of communications towers include guy-wiresupported
and self-supporting lattice and monopole towers.
Antenna
A device used to receive or transmit electromagnetic waves. Examples include, but are not limited, to
whip antennas, panel antennas and parabolic dish antennas.
Co-location
The installation of antennas owned by more than one provider on a single tower. Also, the installation
of towers, antennas and facilities owned by more than one provider on a single site.
Fall Circle – The area created by a circle formed with the tower at the center and a radius equal to the
tower height or other specified length.
Lattice Tower – A tower typically having a triangular cross-section constructed with continuous crossbracing.
It may be self-supporting, guyed or bracketed.
Monopole
An unguyed tower of tapered pole construction, made of steel or other materials, such as concrete.
Tower Height
Distance from the ground elevation at the base of the tower to the topmost point of the tower including
any antenna or other appurtenances.
Wireless Communications (or Telecommunications)
Commercial wireless communications and telecommunications systems that include but are not limited
Chapter 16 – Definitions
16 - 6
to cellular, personal communications services (PCS), specialized mobilized radio (SMR), enhanced
specialized mobilized radio (ESMR), paging and related systems.
Wireless Communications (or Telecommunications) Facilities
All ground and roof-mounted equipment, ancillary buildings and other structures, except towers,
associated with the transmission and reception of wireless communications.
Community Facility
A facility intended for social, recreational, or other non-commercial uses by Town residents generally or
by members of established residential subdivisions or similar communities.
Comprehensive Plan
The Commission’s general plan to control and direct the use and development of property in North
Stonington, as found in the overall scheme of the Zoning Map and these Regulations.
Consolidated Parcel
Two or more adjoining parcels that are planned and developed as one integrated development. The parcels
do not need to have the same owners.
Construction Office or Construction Trailer
A temporary structure, which may be mobile, established for the specific purpose of providing contractor
office space at a site during the construction phase of a building.
Convalescent Home
A facility established to care for patients while recuperating health and strength following physical illness
or injury, or one dedicated to the care of the elderly.
Corner Lot (see Lot, Corner)
Country Inn
Any owner-occupied dwelling or group of related dwellings having twenty (20) or fewer guest rooms (not
including the owners’ or staff quarters) without their own separate kitchen facilities, in which overnight
accommodations and meals are provided to guests, and in which no guest may arrange to stay for a single
period of more than thirty (30) consecutive days.
Curve Return
The point at which a curve beginning near the end of a driveway or similar, generally linear feature
terminates at an intersecting linear feature, such as a road.
Day Care/Nursery School
A service that provides supplementary care to seven (7) or more children outside their primary residence(s)
on a regular basis during a portion of the day, and for one or more days in any week.
Dead-End Road
A public road, or segment of a public road, that has only one point of ingress and egress and that terminates
at a point beyond which further travel by motor vehicles is prohibited or effectively impractical.
Chapter 16 – Definitions
16 - 7
Detention Basin (see also Retention Basin)
A structure or facility, natural or artificial, which stores stormwater on a temporary basis and releases it at
a controlled rate. A detention basin may drain completely after a storm event, or it may be a body of water
with a fixed minimum and maximum water elevation between runoff events. For the purposes of these
Regulations, a drainage system that incorporates infiltration components shall also be considered a
detention basin.
Discontinuance
Cessation or termination. For example, the phrase “discontinuance of a use” means the cessation, or
termination, of that use, regardless of the reasons for the cessation or termination or the intention of the
persons who were making or carrying out such use.
Driveway
A paved or unpaved access strip of land providing a vehicular connector between the public right-of-way
of a street and the interior of a lot or other tract of land.
Driveway, Common or Shared
A driveway that provides access to more than one (1) lot or separate tract of land.
Duplex Residence (see Residence, Duplex)
Dwelling-Related Terms
Dwelling
A single building designed and used exclusively as living quarters. The term “dwelling” shall not be
deemed to include hotel, motel, inn, boarding or rooming house, convalescent or nursing home, mobile
home trailer, tourist home, or tent.
Dwelling, Multi-Family (See Residence, Multi-Family)
Dwelling, Single-Family (See Residence, Single-Family)
Dwelling Unit
One (1) or more rooms in a residential building that are collectively arranged, designed, or intended for
use by one (1) family, and that include lawful cooking space and lawful sanitary facilities reserved for
the occupants thereof. The term “dwelling unit” shall not be deemed to include hotel, motel, inn,
boarding or rooming house, convalescent or nursing home, mobile home trailer, tourist home, or tent. In
the case of buildings having two (2) or more portions divided by party walls forming a complete
separation above the basement, each such portion shall be considered to be a separate principal dwelling
unit.
Emergency Services
Private or public services, such as fire protection, ambulance, and rescue, provided in times of emergency
for the general health and welfare of Town residents.
Excavation (Excavation of Earth Materials)
The removal of earth, sand, gravel, clay, rock or other natural earth products from the ground.
Chapter 16 – Definitions
16 - 8
Façade
The exterior surface of a building.
Fall Circle
The area created by a circle formed with the tower at the center and a radius equal to the tower height or
other specified length.
Family
(1) All persons related by blood, marriage, or legal adoption; or (2) five or fewer persons who are not related
by blood, marriage, or legal adoption, including domestic employees, but who occupy a single dwelling
unit and live as a single, permanent, housekeeping unit. Lodgers shall not be deemed to be part of the
family whose home they are temporarily occupying.
Farm Winery
Any place or premises in which wine is manufactured, stored and sold, and which is located on a farm
consisting of at least twenty-five (25) acres with at least five (5) acres dedicated to vineyards or to the
growing of other fruits used on site for creating wine.
Farm Winery Restaurant
A use that is incidental, complementary and secondary to a farm winery. A farm winery restaurant shall be
conducted in a permanent building in which hot and cold food can be prepared and served to members of
the public seated indoors or on a patio area adjoining the building.
Filling (Filling of Earth Materials)
The addition to existing land of earth, sand, gravel, clay, rock or other natural earth products.
Financial Institution
A facility such as commercial bank, savings bank, mutual savings bank, savings and loan, or credit union
that is chartered and regulated by a State or Federal agency.
Flood-Related Terms
Flood
The temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
Base Flood
The elevation of the crest of the base flood or 100-year flood. The height in relation to mean sea level
expected to be reached by the waters of the base flood at pertinent points in the floodplains of coastal
and riverine areas.
Base Flood Elevation (BFE)
The elevation of the crest of the base flood or 100-year flood. The height in relation to mean sea level
expected to be reached by the waters of the base flood at pertinent points in the floodplains of coastal
and riverine areas.
Basement
Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.
Chapter 16 – Definitions
16 - 9
Building
See definition for “Structure”
Cost
As related to substantial improvements, the cost of any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, alteration,
repair or other improvement of a structure shall be established by a detailed written contractor’s estimate.
The estimate shall include, but not be limited to: the cost of materials (interior finishing elements,
structural elements, utility and service equipment); sales tax on materials, building equipment and
fixtures, including heating and air conditioning and utility meters; labor; built-in appliances; demolition
and site preparation; repairs made to damaged parts of the building worked on at the same time;
contractor’s overhead; contractor’s profit; and grand total. Items to be excluded include: cost of plans
and specifications, survey costs, permit fees, outside improvements such as septic systems, water supply
wells, landscaping, sidewalks, fences, yard lights, irrigation systems, detached structures such as
garages, sheds and gazebos.
Development
Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to the
construction of buildings or other structures; the construction of additions, alterations or substantial
improvements to buildings or structures; the placement of buildings or structures; mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials; the
storage, deposition, or extraction of materials; and the installation of public or private sewage disposal
systems or water supply facilities.
Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision
A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots
on which the manufactured home are to be affixed (including, as a minimum, the installation of utilities,
the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed
before April 26, 1985, the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by the
community.
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision
The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the
manufacturing homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets,
and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA)
The federal agency that, in addition to carrying out disaster response and recovery activities, oversees
the administration of the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP).
Finished Living Space
Finished living space can include, but is not limited to, a space that is heated and/or cooled, contained
finished floors (tile, linoleum, hardwood, etc.), has sheetrock walls that may or may not be painted or
wallpapered, and other amenities such as furniture, appliances, bathrooms, fireplaces and other items
that are easily damaged by floodwaters and expensive to clean, repair or replace.
Flood or Flooding
A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
Chapter 16 – Definitions
16 - 10
1. The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
2. The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of
undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly
caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or
by an unanticipated force of nature, such as flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly
unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined above.
Flood Hazard Area
The maximum area of the flood plain that is likely to be flooded by a 100-year flood, or any area on
which mudslides can reasonably be anticipated.
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)
The official map of a community on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has
delineated both the special flood hazard areas (100-year floodplain) and the risk premium zones
applicable to a community.
Flood, 100-Year
That level of flooding having a one percent probability of occurrence in any year.
Flood Insurance Study (FIS)
The official study of a community in which the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has
conducted an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate,
corresponding water surface elevations.
Flood Plain Area
The relatively flat area or low lands that adjoin the channel of a river, stream, watercourse, canal, or any
body of standing or tidal water, and that has been or may be covered periodically by flood water.
Floodproofing
Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to properties and
structures, primarily for the reduction or elimination of flood damage to lands, water, and sanitary
facilities, structures, and contents of buildings.
Floodway
The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to
discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot,
Chapter 16 – Definitions
16 - 11
or a designated height. For the purposes of these regulations, the term “Regulatory Floodway” is
synonymous in meaning with the phase “Floodway”.
Functionally Dependent Use or Facility
A use or facility that cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close
proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the
loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities. The term does
not include seafood process facilities, long-term storage, manufacturing, sales or service facilities.
Historic Structure
Any structure that is: (a) Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; (b) Certified or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historic significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic
district; (c) Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation
programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or (d) Individually listed on a local
inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified
either: (1) By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or (2) Directly
by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
Lowest Floor
The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant
enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building’s lowest floor, provided that such an enclosure is not built to
render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements as specified in
307.6(C) of this regulation.
Manufactured Home
A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed
for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term
“manufactured home” also includes park trailers, travel trailers, recreational vehicles and other similar
vehicles placed on a site for greater than 180 consecutive days.
Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision
A parcel or contiguous parcels of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or
sale.
Market Value
For floodplain management purposes, the market value of the structure shall be determined by the
property’s tax assessment, minus land value prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or in
the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring.
Mean Sea Level (MSL)
The North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 or other datum, to which base flood elevations
shown on a community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) are referenced.
Chapter 16 – Definitions
16 - 12
New Construction
Structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the effective date, April 26, 1985,
of a floodplain management regulation adopted by the community and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures.
New Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision
A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots
on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities,
the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on
or after the effective date, April 26, 1985, of floodplain management regulations adopted by the
community.
Recreational Vehicle
A vehicle which is: (a) built on a single chassis; (b) 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection; (c) designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and
(d) designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as a temporary living quarters for
recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA)
The land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one (1) percent or greater chance of flooding
in any given year. SFHAs are determined utilizing the base flood elevations (BFE) provided on the flood
profiles in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for a community. BFEs provided on the Flood Insurance
Rate Map (FIRM) are only approximate (rounded up or down) and should be verified with the BFEs
published in the FIS for a specific location. SFHAs include, but are not necessarily limited to, the land
shown as Zones A, AE, AO, and AH. The SFHA is also called the Area of Special Flood Hazard.
Start of Construction
For other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act
(P.L. 97-348), includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was issued,
provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement,
substantial improvement or other improvement was within one hundred and eighty (180) days of the
permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure
on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or
any work beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does
it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement,
footings, piers, or foundations or the erections of temporary forms; not does it include the installation on
the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part
of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.
Structure
A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, which is principally above ground,
as well as a manufactured home.
Chapter 16 – Definitions
16 - 13
Substantial Damage
Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before
damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
Substantial Improvement Any combination of repairs, reconstruction, rehabilitation, alterations,
additions or other improvements to a structure, taking place during a five (5) year period, in which the
cumulative cost equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the “start
of construction” of the improvement. This term includes structures that have incurred “substantial
damage”, regardless of the actual repair work performed. For purposes of this definition, “substantial
improvement” is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other
structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions
of the structure. The term does not, however, include either: (1) Any project for improvement of a
structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications
which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary
to assure safe living conditions; or (2) Any alteration of a “historic structure”, provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a “historic structure”.
Variance
A grant of relief by a community from the terms of the floodplain management regulation that allows
construction in a manner otherwise prohibited and where specific enforcement would result in
unnecessary hardship.
Violation
The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community’s floodplain
management regulations.
Water Surface Elevation
The height, in relation to the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or other datum, where
specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas.
Floor Area
The sum of the areas of the floors intended for human occupancy of a building as measured by the external
wall dimensions. The following surfaces shall not be considered in calculating floor area: porches, decks,
and other surfaces not fully enclosed by walls; floor
space that is above the first floor and that does not
have access by an inside permanent stairway; floor
space that does not have a ceiling height of at least
seven (7) feet; garages; and detached accessory
buildings.
Floor Area Ratio
The numerical value obtained by dividing the gross
floor area of a building by the area of the lot on which
the building is constructed.
Chapter 16 – Definitions
16 - 14
Footprint
When used in connection with a building or other structure, “footprint” means the area of the minimum
horizontal plane which, if its perimeter were extended vertically upward, would enclose all portions of the
structure. If a structure is partly cantilevered, or includes a deck or similar feature extending above, but not
touching, the ground, the area directly below the cantilevered portion, deck or other similar feature is
included in the footprint.
Frontage
The linear measurement of the distance between the intersection of each side lot line with the front lot line.
Funeral Home
An establishment with facilities for the preparation of the dead for burial or cremation, for the viewing of
the body, and for funeral services or ceremonies.
Gasoline (Gas) Station
An establishment whose primary business is to provide petroleum products for motor vehicles.
Golf Course Development
A playing course of at least eighteen (18) golf holes, which may also include as accessory uses a clubhouse,
restaurant, pro-shop, health facility, maintenance facility, golf practice facility, golf villas, gatehouse, and
additional recreational facilities, as may be specified in these Regulations.
Grading
Any excavating, grubbing, filling (including hydraulic fill) or stockpiling of earth materials or any
combination thereof, including the land in its excavated or filled condition.
Groundwater
All water beneath the surface of the ground. Unless otherwise indicated, the term “depth to groundwater”
shall mean the vertical distance from the ground surface to the level to which the water table generally rises
for the duration of one (1) month or longer during the wettest season of the year.
Hazardous Substance
Any substance defined by regulation as hazardous by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or the
State of Connecticut Department of Energy and Environmental Protection, with the exception of heating
oil, motor fuel, and gasoline.
Health Club
A gymnasium or other establishment that provides facilities and equipment for exercise, and that may
include game courts, swimming facilities, saunas, showers and lockers.
Height
When used in relation to a building or other structure, “height” means the average vertical distance from
the finished grade level to the highest point of the structure, calculated from measurements taken at all
sides.
Home Occupation
The use of a portion of a dwelling or residential accessory building(s) for business purposes by the resident
occupants when clearly incidental and secondary to the residential use of the dwelling.
Chapter 16 – Definitions
16 - 15
Hospital
An institution that is licensed by the State of Connecticut to provide in-patient and out-patient medical care
and/or major surgical services for persons who are sick or injured, and that may include such related
facilities as laboratories, medical testing services, central service facilities, hospice care, and staff offices.
The term “hospital” does not include drug rehabilitation facilities, halfway houses, convalescent or nursing
homes, institutions for mentally ill individuals, or other similar facilities.
Hotel
One or more buildings containing living units intended to be occupied by guests on a temporary basis, in
rooms without cooking facilities except for a manager’s apartment.
Impervious Coverage
The area of a building site or lot that is covered
by materials that prevent the infiltration of
surface water into the ground beneath. Such
materials may include, but are not limited to,
roofs, paved driveways, concrete slabs, sealedjoint
paving blocks or stones, and pools.
Income, Median (see Median Income)
Interior Lot, (see Lot, Interior)
Junk Yard
A lot, land, or structure, or part thereof, used
primarily for the collecting or storage of waste
paper, rags, scrap metal, or discarded materials,
or for the collecting, dismantling, storage, and
salvaging of machinery or vehicles not in running condition, or of discarded solid materials including
garbage, scrap metal, junk, and refuse materials, including inert matter and landscape refuse.
Junk
Any worn out, cast off, or discarded article or material that is ready for destruction or has been collected or
stored for salvage or conversion to some use. Any article or material that, unaltered or unchanged and
without further reconditioning, can be used for its original purpose as readily as when new shall not be
considered junk.
Kennel, Commercial
The boarding, breeding, raising, grooming, or training of two or more dogs, cats, or other household pets
that either (1) are not owned by the owner or occupant of the premises, or (2) are intended for sale. When
pets are available for sale from the premises on a frequently recurring basis, the premises shall be deemed
to be a commercial kennel.
Kennel, Hobby
The boarding, breeding, raising, grooming, or training of two or more dogs, cats, or other household pets
that are owned by the owner or occupant of the premises and are not regularly intended for sale.
Land Trust
A private, not-for-profit conservation organization formed to protect natural resources.
Chapter 16 – Definitions
16 - 16
Lighting-Related Terms
Outdoor Lighting
Any device used outdoors for artificial illumination.
Disability Glare
Outdoor lighting that can cause momentary
blindness or reduced vision.
Down-light
Any light source that distributes illumination only
below a vertical cut-off angle of ninety (90) degrees.
Foot-candle
A unit of measure for illuminance. The ratio of quantity of light in lumens divided by the surface area in
square feet on which the lumens are falling.
Glare
The sensation produced by lighting that is bright enough to cause discomfort or reduced vision.
Light Trespass
Light from an artificial light source that is intruding into an area where it
is not wanted or does not belong.
Luminaire, Full Cut-Off
A light fixture that, by design of its housing and when installed in a
horizontal position, does not allow any light dispersion or direct glare to
shine above a vertical cut-off angle of ninety (90) degrees.
Up-light
Any light source that distributes illumination above a ninety (90) degree horizontal plane.
Loading Berth or Space
An off-street area available for the standing, loading, and unloading of one tractor-trailer truck, excluding
additional maneuvering area.
Lodger
An individual who is furnished transient living accommodations within a dwelling unit and is not related
to the persons therein by blood, marriage or similar legal status.
Chapter 16 – Definitions
16 - 17
Lot-Related Terms
Lot
An undivided area or parcel of land designated and recorded
in the land records of the Town as a separate tract of land.
Where two or more adjacent parcels are occupied by a single
use, as, for example, when a building straddles the line
dividing the parcels as described in the land records, the
parcels may collectively be deemed a single lot. See also
§ 305.3.B, regarding lot merger. For the purposes of meeting
minimum lot area requirements, the land beneath the waters
of Billings Lake, Blue Lake, Wyassup Lake, and/or Long Pond shall not be included.
Lot, Building
A lot that is in conformance with all applicable provisions of these Regulations for building purposes.
Lot, Corner
A lot that has two (2) adjacent lot lines abutting the rights of way of two (2) intersecting public roads
with an interior angle of one hundred and thirty-five (135) degrees or less.
Lot Depth
The mean horizontal distance between the front lot line and rear lot line.
Lot Line
Any property line bounding a lot.
Lot Line, Front
The line dividing a lot from the right of way of a public road.
Lot Line, Rear
Any lot line or portion of a lot line that is parallel to, or within 45 degrees of being parallel to, the line
along which lot frontage is measured.
Lot Line, Side
Any lot line that is not a front lot line or rear lot line.
Lot, Interior
A parcel of land having access to, but less than the required frontage on, a public road and having,
typically, a major portion of its area located to the rear of the abutting lots fronting on the public road.
Lot, Non-conforming
A lot, existing on the effective date of these Regulations or any subsequent amendment thereto, that is
not in conformity with all provisions of these Regulations for building purposes.
Lot, Through
A lot that has two non-adjacent lot lines that each abut the right of way of a public road.
Chapter 16 – Definitions
16 - 18
Lot Width
The linear distance between the side lot lines as measured at the required front-yard setback.
Low Impact Development (LID)
An ecologically friendly approach to site development and stormwater management that integrates site
design and planning techniques to mitigate development impacts to land, water, and air. Such practices
include conservation measures, reduced impervious coverage, and the use of landscape design and features
to reduce and cleanse runoff.
Manufacturing, Heavy
The mechanical or chemical transformation of materials or substances into new products, including the
assembling of component parts, and the creation of products. Also: (1) the manufacturing, assembly,
fabrication, packaging or other industrial processing of products primarily from extracted or raw materials
or the bulk storage and handling of such products and materials, and (2) any industrial establishment having
potential to produce substantial noise, dust, glare, odors or vibration beyond its property line. This term
includes but is not limited to: (a) processing and packaging of alcoholic beverages; (b) chemical
manufacturing; (c) manufacturing of stonework or concrete products; (d) fabrication of metal products; and,
(e) motor-vehicle manufacturing.
Manufacturing, Light
The manufacturing, predominately from previously prepared materials, of finished products or parts,
including processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment, and packaging of such products, and the incidental
storage, sales, and distribution of such products, provided that all manufacturing activities are contained
entirely within a building and that noise, odor, smoke, heat, glare, and vibration resulting from the
manufacturing activity are confined entirely within the building.
Marquee
Any permanent roof-like structure projecting beyond a building or extending along and projecting beyond
the wall of the building, generally designed and constructed to provide protection from the weather.
Mechanical Amusement Ride
A mechanical device or attraction (such as might be found in a theme park) that carries riders over a fixed
or restricted area, primarily for the passengers’ amusement.
Medical Clinic
An office that is operated by physicians, dentists or similar professionals or that is staffed on a rotational
basis with personnel from an area hospital, where persons are examined or treated on an outpatient basis
only. Medical laboratory work is permitted as a principal use within a medical clinic and may be performed
for persons not examined or treated at the site. A pharmacy may be permitted as an accessory use; however,
only prescription and nonprescription drugs and similar health-related items may be sold from the premises.
Median Income
After adjustments for family size, the lesser of the state median income or the area median income for the
area in which the municipality containing the affordable housing development is located, as determined by
the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development. The definition of the term “median
income” is intended to be the same as set forth in CGS §8-30g.
Chapter 16 – Definitions
16 - 19
Medical Office (see Office, Medical)
Membership Club
An establishment operated solely for recreational, social, fraternal, religious, political, or athletic purposes,
in which activities are confined to the members and guests of an organization whose primary purpose is not
financial gain, and which meets the criteria for exemption from federal income tax under Internal Revenue
Code §501(c)(7).
Micro-Assisted Living Facility
A living residence primarily serving adults age 55 and older, who are capable of self-preservation, and who
need some health or nursing care or assistance with activities of daily living such as cooking, bathing,
toileting, dressing, and minor house chores, but do not need the skilled care a nursing home provides.
Mixed Use Development
A single building, or a group of buildings on one lot, in which multiple principal uses may occur. The
different uses must be in close proximity, planned as a unified complementary whole, and functionally
integrated to the use of shared vehicular and pedestrian access and parking areas.
Mixed Use Structure
A single building containing more than one land use.
Mobile Home
A trailer used as a temporary or permanent residence.
Mobile Home Park
Two or more mobile homes located on the same lot.
Motor Vehicle Dealership
An establishment whose primary business is to provide new, factory direct, motor vehicles for sale with
supplemental related services.
Motor Home (see Recreational Vehicle)
Multi-family Residence (see Residence, Multi-family)
Multiple Use Commercial Building
A single building having more than one principal commercial use.
Multiple Structures/Single Use Commercial Development
Developments having only one principal commercial use but more than one principal building.
Non-conforming
A use, building or other structure, or lot that fails to conform to one or more of the current requirements of
these Regulations will be deemed lawfully “non-conforming” if it (1) was lawfully established or created
prior to the date these Regulations, or any applicable amendment thereto, became effective; and (2) the nonconforming
use or structural element has never been abandoned. If the use, building or other structure fails
to comply with these Regulations as currently amended but does not meet the criteria above, it shall be
deemed to be an unlawful non-conforming use. Unless the context otherwise requires, the term “nonconforming,”
as used in these Regulations, shall be deemed to mean lawfully non-conforming.
Chapter 16 – Definitions
16 - 20
Office-Related Terms
Office, Business
Building space used by a commercial enterprise primarily for administrative purposes. Business offices
include offices for real estate, insurance, and travel agents and for contractors. The following are
examples of offices that are not business offices: retail sales establishments, professional offices (e.g.,
lawyers, doctors, and accountants), medical testing laboratories and personal service establishments.
Office Facility
A building or group of buildings with offices or office suites.
Office, Medical
The private office or offices of physicians, dentists, or similar professionals, where persons are examined
or treated on an outpatient basis only. Minor laboratory tests shall be permitted as an accessory use only,
and may be performed only for patients receiving medical attention within the office.
Office, Professional
The office or offices of members of recognized professions, including doctors or physicians, dentists,
optometrists, ministers, architects, engineers, lawyers, and other recognized professional occupations.
Open Space
Land areas designated for protection from commercial or residential development, including but not limited
to lands reserved for protection of public health and safety, outdoor recreation, natural resource protection,
farmlands and forests, preservation of community character, and historic and archaeological preservation.
Open Space Surplus Percentage
The difference between (1) the percentage of open space that would be permanently preserved by a cluster
development subdivision plan, and (2) 15 percent. For example, if 50 percent of the parcel would be
preserved as open space, the open space surplus percentage would be 35 percent (i.e., 50 – 15 %).
Outdoor Lighting (see Lighting-Related Terms)
Overlay Zoning District
A designated area or district, delineated by an overlay on the Zoning Map that may incorporate portions of
one or more underlying zoning districts, and that generally includes special regulations that differ from
those in the underlying district(s).
Owner
When these Regulations require action or a signature by an “owner,” the term shall be deemed to include
the duly authorized agent or attorney of such owner, or any other person having lawful authority to act in
lieu of the owner with regard to the relevant property rights.
Park
An area of land and/or water primarily in its natural state, except for man-made recreational facilities or
other improvements related to the purposes hereafter stated, and dedicated and used for recreation, scenic,
leisure, conservation, historic, or ornamental purposes. A park, as used herein, does not include an
“amusement park” or any type of park with mechanical rides, games, arcades, or similar amusements.
Chapter 16 – Definitions
16 - 21
Parking-Related Terms
Parking Island
A landscaped area located within the interior of a parking lot, and surrounded on all sides by parking
spaces and/or aisles.
Parking Lot
An off-street, ground-level area used exclusively for parking motor vehicles.
Parking Space
An off-street space intended, designed, and reserved exclusively for the parking of one motor vehicle.
Structured Parking Facility
A covered structure or portion of a covered structure, accessory to a principal use, that provides parking
areas for motor vehicles. Parking on top of a structure, where there is gross building area below the
parking, but nothing above, is considered structured parking.
Passive Solar
A system specifically designed to use natural and architectural components to collect and store solar energy
without using any external mechanical power.
Personal Services
Grooming or physical fitness services provided to individuals or groups of individuals. Massage parlors
are excluded from this definition, except for state licensed therapeutic massage facilities.
Personal Services, Accessory
Grooming or physical fitness services provided to individuals or groups of individuals as accessory to
another principal commercial or recreational use. Massage establishments are excluded from this
definition, except for state licensed therapeutic massage facilities. (See § 603.4 of these Regulations)
Planned Business Development (see §606 of these Regulations).
Portable Storage Container (see §306 of these Regulations)
Post Office
A building, or portion thereof, that is used primarily for receiving and distributing U.S. mail.
Print Shop
An establishment whose primary purpose is to reproduce printed or graphic material by electronic or
mechanical means.
Principal Structure (See Structure, Principal)
Principal Use (See Use, Principal)
Private Roadway
A private right-of-way providing vehicular access to one (1) or more tracts of land.
Professional Office (See Office, Professional)
Public Road
Chapter 16 – Definitions
16 - 22
A road accepted and maintained by the Town or by the State of Connecticut for public travel by motor
vehicles.
Public Utility
A building or structure, including office space, used or intended to be used by any public utility company
for activities primarily related to the generation, transmission, treatment, storage, or delivery of utilities, as
defined in these Regulations.
Public Utility Distribution
Facilities for the conveyance of utilities. Also includes pipeline surface and terminal facilities, such as pump
stations, surge and storage tanks. Does not include offices or service centers, or distribution centers.
Recreation, Active
Recreational activities and uses that require either: (a) the use of a playing field or playground; (b) the
installation of buildings or other structures; or (c) the substantial modification or grading of a tract of land.
Recreation, Passive
Recreational activities and uses that are not included in the definition of “active recreation.” The installation
of a building or structure in connection with a particular recreational activity shall not, in and of itself, cause
the activity to be classified as “active” if the building or structure was not necessary to allow the activity to
occur. For example, the installation of posts, signs, or water fountains along a hiking trail will not cause
hiking to be deemed an active recreational use.
Recreational Campground
A commercial lot containing camping sites for two (2) or more recreational vehicles or for two (2) or more
tents.
Recreational Facility, Indoor
A commercial recreational land use conducted entirely within a building, including, but not limited to an
arcade, indoor water park, arena, art gallery and studio, art center, assembly hall, athletic clubs, auditorium,
bowling alley, club or lounge, community center, conference center, exhibit hall, gymnasium, library,
movie theater, museum, performance theater, pool or billiard hall, and accommodations for a variety of
individual or organized non-professional athletic activities, including but not limited to basketball, ice
hockey/skating, wrestling, soccer, tennis, volleyball, racquetball, or handball. Such facility may also
provide health and fitness club facilities, swimming pool, snack bar, restaurant, and retail sales of related
sports, health or fitness items, and other support facilities. Franchised sports facilities and events, and race
tracks of any kind are expressly excluded/prohibited.
Recreation Facility, Outdoor
Recreational uses conducted wholly outdoors or in partially enclosed or screened facilities, including golf
driving ranges (not associated with a golf course), miniature golf, adventure activity centers, athletic fields,
skateboard parks, swimming facilities, tennis, handball, and basketball courts, batting cages and similar
uses, and characterized by potentially moderate impacts on traffic, the natural environment, and the
surrounding neighborhood. Mechanical outdoor amusement park rides, outdoor water parks, firing ranges,
franchised sports facilities and events, and race tracks of any kind are expressly excluded/prohibited.
Chapter 16 – Definitions
16 - 23
Outdoor Recreational Facilities consisting of woodlands, water courses, and fields used for active
recreational activities that do not require significant modification to the existing setting, including but not
limited to, paintball, laser tag, and orienteering. (See Also Adventure Park, Outdoor)
Recreational Vehicle
A self-propelled, towed, or mounted unit currently registered and licensed for highway use and providing
temporary living quarters for travel, camping, recreation, or vacation purposes. The new (2012)
Recreational Park Trailers or Park Model RVs (PMRVs) not to exceed 400sf in set-up mode as defined by
Recreational Vehicle Industry Association (RIVA) are included in this definition.
Recreational Vehicle Park
Any lot or parcel of land used or intended to be used for the accommodation of recreational vehicles,
established or maintained for occupancy by the general public for a fee as temporary living quarters for
recreation or vacation purposes. Park may include buildings and sites set aside for individual or group
camping and buildings containing laundry, restrooms, showers, and similar uses intended to serve the needs
of the residents of the park.
Recreational Vehicle Park, Luxury
Any Recreational Vehicle Park as defined above except that additional accessory uses may be permitted
per §1018 of these Zoning Regulations.
Rehabilitation Facility
A place in which persons are given medical care and services during rehabilitation for conditions including,
but not limited to, stroke, spinal cord injury, congenital deformity, muscular injury, amputation, major
multiple trauma, bone fracture, brain injury, neurological disorders (e.g., multiple Sclerosis, Parkinson’s),
burns, and arthritis. Facilities for alcohol and/or drug treatment are excluded from this definition.
Repair Shop, (Non-vehicular)
A building, or portion thereof, used primarily for the purpose of repairing or rebuilding of appliances, shoes,
or other consumer products, but not including motor vehicles.
Research Facility
A building, or portion thereof, or a group of buildings, within which the primary function is research and
development as opposed to sales, manufacturing, repair, or similar end products.
Residence, Duplex
A building containing two (2) principal dwelling units connected by at least one (1) common wall or ceiling
(i.e., units may be built one on top of one another, or one beside the other). The dwelling units may, but
need not, have separate driveways, yards, and ownership.
Residence, Multi-family
A building containing more than two (2) principal dwelling units, with each such unit being connected to
at least one other unit by a common wall or ceiling.
Residence, Single-Family
A building containing no more than one principal dwelling unit and no more than one accessory apartment.
Chapter 16 – Definitions
16 - 24
Residential District
One of the following zoning districts: R-40, R-60, or R-80.
Restaurant
An establishment devoted primarily to the serving of prepared foods and drinks, which, when properly
licensed under State law, may include the serving of alcoholic beverages to seated customers from a service
bar.
Retail Store
A building, or portion thereof, whose primary business is to sell products directly to consumers. A
component of the retail business may include the on-site production of certain handcrafted goods including,
but not limited to, candles, small-scale wood furniture, cabinets, toys, woven textiles, and other such craft
items, where such items are then sold on site.
Retention Basin
A stormwater facility that is designed to accept runoff from a developed site and discharge it at a limited
rate. Flows exceeding the limited rate are stored until they can be released at the limited rate (when the
runoff rate into the system drops below the limited rate). A specified volume is stored indefinitely (retained)
until it is displaced by runoff from another storm.
Roadside Stand
A building or structure from which agricultural products produced on the owner’s premises are sold.
Setback Line
The line created by the minimum yard dimensions set forth in these Regulations.
Shared Driveway (See Driveway, Common or Shared)
Sidewalk
An improved pedestrian walkway or access way.
Sign-Related Terms
Sign
Any natural or artificial structure, object, device, light or display that is used to advertise, identify, or
attract attention to any object, product, institution, organization, business, service, or location by any
means, including but not limited to letters, numbers, banners, flags, insignias, devices, designs, symbols,
fixtures, colors, illumination or logos; and which is situated so that it can be seen from a street.
Animated Sign
A sign that uses movement or change of lighting to depict action or create a special effect or scene.
Awning Sign
A sign painted on or attached to the cover of a moveable frame of the hinged, roll, or folding type of
awning.
Chapter 16 – Definitions
16 - 25
Banner Sign
A sign of lightweight fabric or similar material that is mounted to a structure by means of attachments
to one or more of its edges. Banners used as a symbol of a nation, state, or other political subdivision
shall not be considered banner signs under these Regulations.
Billboard
A free-standing sign larger in area than permitted in §312 of these Regulations, or a wall sign covering
more than ten (10) percent of the area to which it is affixed.
Bunting Sign
A sign made of coarse, open fabric or worsted; or of lightweight fabric, or paper, usually mounted in the
form of draperies or wide streamers. Bunting used as a symbol of a nation, state, or other political
subdivision shall not be considered bunting signs under these Regulations.
Changeable Copy Sign
A sign or portion thereof with characters, letters, or illustrations that can be changed or rearranged
without altering the face or the surface of the sign. A sign on which the message changes more than
eight (8) times per twenty-four (24) hour period shall be considered an animated sign and not a
changeable copy sign. A sign on which the only copy that changes is an electronic or mechanical
indication of date, time or temperature shall be considered a “time and temperature” portion of a sign
and not a changeable copy sign.
Clustered or Compositional Unit Sign
Multiple signs clustered together in a single structure or unit.
Date/Time/Temperature Sign
A sign that, through electronic or mechanical means, imparts the current date, time, and or temperature.
Flag Sign
A sign of lightweight fabric, varying in design, usually attached at one edge to a staff or cord, with
distinctive colors, patterns, or symbols. Flags used as a symbol of a nation, state, or other political
subdivision shall not be considered flag signs under these Regulations.
Flashing Sign
A sign whose illumination is not kept constant in intensity at all times when in use, and that exhibits
changes in light, color, direction, or animation. Illuminated signs that indicate only the date, time, and
temperature shall not be considered flashing signs.
Freestanding Sign
A self-supporting sign not attached to any building, wall, or fence, but in a fixed location. This definition
does not include portable or trailer-type signs.
Illuminated Sign
Any sign lit by electrical bulbs, fluorescent lights, neon tubes, or other light emitting source (e.g., LED)
Neon tubes used as abstract, graphic, decorative, or architectural elements shall be considered to
constitute an illuminated sign.
Chapter 16 – Definitions
16 - 26
Mailbox Sign
A sign that resembles in design or structure the rural
free delivery mailbox, but to which no mail deliveries
are made by the U.S. Postal Service.
Marquee Sign
A sign attached in any manner to, or painted on or
incorporated into, or made a part of, a marquee.
Non-conforming Sign
A sign that does not conform to the provisions of §312.
Off-premises Sign
A sign that is not on the premises of the use or service that it denotes, including a billboard.
On-premises Sign
A sign that advertises, calls attention to or identifies the occupant of the premises on which the sign is
located, or the business transacted thereon.
Painted Wall Sign
A permanent message or mural painted directly onto a building surface.
Pennant Sign
Any sign made of lightweight plastic, fabric, or other material suspended from a rope, wire, or string,
usually in a series, designed to move in the wind. Pennants used as a symbol of a nation, state or other
political subdivision shall not be considered pennant signs under these Regulations.
Portable Sign
A sign not permanently attached to the ground or to another permanent structure, or a sign designed to
be transported, as, for example, by wheels. Examples include A- or T-frame signs; menu and sandwich
board signs; balloons used as signs; umbrellas used for advertising; and signs attached to or painted on
parked vehicles that are visible from a public right-of-way, unless said vehicle is regularly used for
transportation in the normal day-to-day operations of the business.
Projecting Sign
A sign affixed to a building or wall in such a manner that its leading edge extends more than six (6) inches
beyond the surface to which it is affixed.
Ribbon Sign
A sign made of a long, narrow flexible woven strip of fine material, usually wound around a pole or
similar structure, suspended from a structure, or suspended between two (2) or more points within or
between structures. Ribbons used as a symbol of a nation, state or other political subdivision shall not
be considered ribbon signs under these Regulations.
Roof Sign
A sign that is located above, or projects above, the lowest point of the eaves or the top of the parapet
Chapter 16 – Definitions
16 - 27
wall of any building, or that is painted on or fastened to a roof or constructed through the arrangement
of the structured materials constituting the roof.
Sign Area
The surface area of any sign is the entire area within a single continuous perimeter, enclosing the extreme
limits of lettering, representations, emblems, or other figures, together with any material or color forming
an integral part of the display or used to differentiate the sign from the background against which it is
placed. Only one (1) side of a double-faced sign shall be used in computing the total sign area, providing
that the two (2) surfaces are joined at an angle of no greater than sixty (60) degrees. The area of a sign
composed of characters or words attached directly to a large, uniform building wall surface shall be the
smallest rectangle that encloses the whole group of said characters or words.
Sign Setback
The distance from the front, rear, or side lot line to the nearest part of the sign, measured perpendicularly
to the applicable lot line.
Spinner Sign
A sign made of any material that is designed or constructed to rotate, spin, or move either through the
force of wind or by electrical or mechanical means. Spinners used as a symbol of a nation, state, or other
political subdivision shall not be considered spinner signs under these Regulations.
Streamer Sign
A long, narrow banner sign, flag sign or pennant sign. Streamers used as a symbol of a nation, state, or
other political subdivision shall not be considered streamer signs under these Regulations.
Suspended Sign
A sign that is suspended from the underside of a horizontal plane surface and is supported by such
surface.
Wall Sign
A sign that is painted on, incorporated into, or affixed parallel to the wall of a building such that its
leading edge extends no more than six (6) inches from the surface to which it is attached, and that displays
only one sign surface.
Window Sign
A sign that is placed inside or on a window and is visible from the exterior of the window.
Site Plan
A drawing or series of drawings by which proposed or existing uses, dimensions, or conditions of land or
any building or structure are graphically illustrated.
Single-Family Residence (see Residence, Single-Family)
Specially Permitted Use (see Use, Specially Permitted)
Special Zoning District
A zoning district for which standards and criteria have been established in these Regulations but which, as
of the time of adoption of the specific regulations pertaining to such districts, had not yet been established
on any land within the Town.
Chapter 16 – Definitions
16 - 28
Stacking Lane
The space specifically designated as a waiting area for vehicles whose occupants will be using a drivethrough
window at a business location. Such space encompasses the area directly alongside the drivethrough
window and the lanes leading up to and away from it.
Storage Trailer
A vehicle used or designed primarily for hauling or storing materials or goods, and capable of being readily
moved by a tractor or other motor vehicle, including shipping containers such as those transported by trucks
or rail.
Story
A set of rooms on the same floor or level of a building. A “full story” has a ceiling at least eight (8) feet
above the floor over 75 percent or more of the floor area on that level. A “half story” has a ceiling at least
eight (8) feet above the floor over less than 75 percent of the floor area on that level.
Street
Includes (1) any public road; (2) any way designated for vehicular travel on a recorded subdivision map
duly approved by the Commission; and (3) any way designated for vehicular travel on a map duly recorded
in the Town land records and constructed in accordance with all then-existing Town ordinances and
regulations. “Street” shall be deemed to include the
entire width of the right-of-way.
Street Line
A boundary of a street right-of-way.
Structure
Includes (1) an object that is constructed or erected
and the use of which requires more or less permanent
location on ground or water areas or attachment to
something having permanent location on ground or
water areas, not, however, including a vehicle; (2) an
edifice or building of any kind; (3) any production or
piece or work, artificially built up or composed of parts
and joined together in some definite manner, and
requiring an attachment to the ground, including but not
limited to wharves, docks, satellite dishes, aboveground
tanks, solar panels, tennis and other game
courts, and fences and walls. A “structure” is also a
“use” of land, as defined under these Regulations.
Structure, Accessory
Any permitted structure other than a principal structure.
Structure, Principal
A structure in which the most significant or substantial aspects of the primary use of the property regularly
occur, or are intended to occur. In some instances, a single principal use may be carried on in multiple
principal structures on the same lot.
Chapter 16 – Definitions
16 - 29
Studio for Production, Television and Film
A structure or structures housing film and television production facilities, and associated outdoor facilities
such as temporary outdoor sets, that are used for the creation of film, television, music video, multi-media,
and associated production activities. Such a facility shall not be open to the general public.
Substantial Improvement
Any combination of repairs, reconstruction, alteration or improvements to a structure taking place over a
one (1) year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value
of the structure. The “market value of the structure” is defined as the appraised value of the structure using
the cost method, either (a) prior to the start of the initial repair or improvements, or (b) in the case of
damage, prior to the occurrence of the damage. For the purpose of this definition, “Substantial
Improvement” is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural
part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the
structure. The term does not, however, include either: (a) any project for improvement of a structure to
comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications that are necessary solely
to assure safe living conditions; or, (b) any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic
Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places.
Temporary Outdoor Set
A temporary structure or group of structures that is accessory to a production studio for film and television,
and that is used for a specific production and removed at the end of production.
Terrace or Patio
An improved or graded area located on the ground with no structural supports other than the subsurface
base material and retaining walls.
Theater
A building or structure dedicated to public entertainment in the form of movies or live performances.
Through Lot (See Lot, Through)
Trailer
Any vehicle that is or can be used for sleeping, living or working quarters, or storage, and that is, has been,
or can be mounted on wheels, whether or not currently resting upon a temporary or permanent foundation.
The term “trailer” includes, but is not limited to, park trailers, travel trailers, camper-trailers, and mobile
homes, but excludes manufactured homes having as their narrowest dimension twenty-two (22) feet or more
and built in accordance with federal manufactured home construction and safety standards.
Truck Terminal
A building, or portion thereof, or a group of buildings whose primary use is for the loading, unloading, and
parking of trucks.
Use-Related Terms
Use
The purpose for which a structure or land is actually used, occupied or maintained. If no use has yet
been established, the term “use” shall mean the purpose for which the structure or land is arranged,
Chapter 16 – Definitions
16 - 30
designed, or intended to be used, occupied, or maintained. Every structure, in itself, shall also be
considered a “use” under these Regulations.
Use, Accessory
A use of land, buildings or structures that is incidental and subordinate to, customarily used in connection
with, and located on the same lot as the principal building, structure or use.
Use, Principal
The main or primary purpose for which a structure or lot is used.
Use, Specially Permitted
A use of property that would not be appropriate generally or without restriction throughout the zoning
district, but that may be allowed by the Commission upon issuance of a Special Permit in accordance
with applicable statutory and regulatory procedures and upon determination that all requirements and
standards set forth in these Zoning Regulations would be met and that such specific use would be in
harmony with the neighborhood and the Town as a whole.
Used Car Dealer
A person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of merchandising used motor vehicles, and who may,
incidental to such business, offer as a service the repair of motor vehicles.
Utilities
Utilities include water, sewer, natural gas, electricity, and telephone and television lines and cables, but not
petroleum.
Variance
A relaxation or modification of the terms of these Regulations by the North Stonington Zoning Board of
Appeals pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes §§8-6 and 8-7.
Vehicle
A man-made object or device, whether motorized or unmotorized, that is designed or used primarily to
move persons, materials or goods from one place to another.
Veterinary Hospital
A building or group of buildings dedicated to health care services for domestic animals and/or household
pets.
View Shed Analysis
An analytical technique for determining and delineating geographic areas from which a proposed structure
or use will be visible.
View Shed Map
A map resulting from a view shed analysis and delineating the geographic areas from which a proposed
structure or use will be visible. Coding is used to illustrate areas from which the structure will be visible.
Villa
A detached structure located within a Golf Course Development and providing accommodations for guests
of the golf course.
Chapter 16 – Definitions
16 - 31
Warehousing/Distribution
A use engaged in storage, wholesale, and distribution to off-site locations, of manufactured products,
supplies, and equipment, excluding bulk storage of hazardous materials, manure or other waste products,
or other substances or materials that are toxic or highly flammable.
Waste Product
Any defective, superfluous, or otherwise unusable material destined for disposal or reclamation that is
generated from animal or human activity or process, or is the byproduct of an operation or service. Earthen
materials are excluded from this definition providing they are clean, inert, and uncontaminated (e.g., rock
or soil that is natural, crushed, or ground and is free of hazardous wastes, scrap metal, wood, trash, and
garbage).
Watercourse
Any river, stream, brook, waterway, lake, pond, marsh, swamp, bog, or other body of water, natural or
artificial, public or private, vernal or intermittent, that is contained within, flows through, or borders upon
the Town or any portion thereof, and is not regulated pursuant to §§22a-28 through 22a-35 of the
Connecticut General Statutes.
Water Table
The level in the ground below which all voids and pore spaces are filled with water.
Wetland
Land, including submerged land, that is not regulated pursuant to §§22a-28 through 22a-35 inclusive of the
Connecticut General Statutes, and that consists of any of the soil types designated as poorly drained, very
poorly drained, alluvial and flood plain by the National Cooperative Soils Survey, as it may be amended
from time to time, of the Natural Resources Conservation Service of the U.S. Department of Agriculture
(USDA). Such areas may include filled, graded or excavated sites, which possess an aquatic (saturated)
soil moisture regime as defined by the National Cooperative Soil Survey.
Wind Energy Facility-Related Terms
Wind Energy Facility
All equipment, machinery and structures utilized in connection with the conversion of wind to electricity.
This includes, but is not limited to, transmission, storage, collection and supply equipment, substations,
transformers, service and access roads, and wind turbines.
Wind Energy Facility, Large-Scale (see §1019.3)
Wind Energy Facility, On-Site
A wind project located at a commercial, industrial, agricultural, institutional, or public facility that will
consume more than fifty (50) percent of the electricity generated by the project on-site.
Wind Energy Facility, Small-Scale (see §1019.2)
Wind Monitoring or Meteorological Tower
A temporary tower equipped with devices to measure wind speeds and direction, and used to determine
how much wind power a site can be expected to generate.
Chapter 16 – Definitions
16 - 32
Wind Turbine
A device that converts kinetic wind energy into rotational energy that drives an electrical generator. A
wind turbine typically consists of a tower, nacelle body, and a rotor with two or more blades.
Wine
Includes any alcoholic beverage, other than beer and hard cider, obtained by the process of fermentation.
Yard
An ungraded open space between a structure and the adjoining lot lines, unoccupied and unobstructed by
any portion of a structure from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided herein.
Yard, Required or Minimum
The minimum distance that a yard is required to be maintained from property lines.
Yard, Front
A yard extending between the nearest line of a structure and all points along the front lot line(s).
Yard, Rear
A yard extending between the nearest line of a
structure and all points along the rear lot line(s).
Yard, Side
A yard extending between the nearest line of a
structure and all points along the side lot line(s).
Yard Sale
The non-regular sale of miscellaneous items
commonly associated with residential use. Yard
sales shall not be for the sale of products grown,
made or produced on the property. The term
“yard sale” includes “sidewalk sale,” “garage
sale,” “basement sale,” “estate sale,” and similar
appellations.
Zoning Compliance, Certification of
A written notice issued by the Commission or its designated agent upon application, certifying that a land
use or any extension or alteration thereof, as proposed, built or established, conforms with all applicable
requirements of the Zoning Regulations and of any Zoning Permit or Special Permit issued to allow such
use, extension, or alteration. A Certification of Zoning Compliance is required both prior to the issuance of
a Building Permit and prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
Zoning Enforcement Officer (ZEO)
A person officially designated by the Commission to enforce the provisions of these Regulations.
Zoning Permit
The type of permit required for a generally permitted use. As used in these Regulations, a “Special Permit”
is not a “Zoning Permit.”


B-1
APPENDIX B: ROAD CLASSIFICATIONS
INTERSTATE HIGHWAYS
I-95
PRIMARY ARTERIALS
Route 2 – Norwich Westerly Road
SECONDARY ARTERIALS
Route 49 - Pendleton Hill Road
Route 184 - Providence/New London
Turnpike
Route 201 - Cossaduck Hill Road, Mystic
Road (in part), Main’s Crossing (in part)
Route 617 – Frontage Road
Route 627 – Mystic Road (in part)
PRIMARY ROADS
Babcock Road
Boom Bridge Road
Chester Main Road
Clarks Falls Road
Ella Wheeler Road
Grindstone Hill Road
Hangman Hill Road
Jeremy Hill Road
Johnson Road
Lake of Isles Road
Lantern Hill Road
Main’s Crossing Road
Milltown Road
North Anguilla Road
Northwest Corner Road
Reutemann Road
Rocky Hollow Road (South of Rte 2)
Ryder Road
Stony Brook Road
Swantown Hill Road (paved section)
Wintechog Hill Road
Wyassup Road
SECONDARY ROADS
Anna Farm Road (East and West)
Anthony Road
Armstrong Pentway
Billings Lake (Road and Extension)
Button Road
(SECONDARY ROADS CONTINUED)
Cedar Crest Road
Cedar Drive
Denison Hill Road
East Clarks Falls Road
Farm Ponds Road
Forest Drive
Fowler Road (#1, 2, and 3)
Hewitt Road (unpaved)
Hickory Lane
Hollowell Road
Holly Lane
Kingswood Drive
Laurelwood Road
Ledgen Wood Road (#1 and 2)
Loin Hill Road
Main Street
Meadow Wood Drive
Mill Village Pentway
Miller Road
Miner Pentway
Murphy Road
Oak Drive
Old Colony Road
Pinecrest Road
Pinewoods Road
Pond Drive
Puttker Road
Ravenwood Road (#1 and 2)
Rhonda Lane
Rocky Hollow Road (Historic District
Section)
Sharon Lane
Sleepy Hollow Road (#1 and 2)
Starlight Lane
Stillman Road
Surrey Lane
Swantown Hill Road (unpaved section)
Tom Wheeler Road
Wyassup Lake Road
Yawbux Valley Road
Appendix C
Form PZ103-002
PLOT PLAN CHECK SHEET
Note: Proposed use or activity may have additional approval criteria specific
to that use or activity.
The following information shall be provided on an 8.5 x 11 inch plan (or greater), neatly drawn to
scale.
1. Name, Address, North Arrow, Scale, and date of drawing;
2. Improvements to approved building lot showing:
• All existing and proposed structures located on the property (principal and accessory)
• Adjacent boundary lines and distances
• Required Zoning District setback lines
• Driveway location (if applicable)
• Location of well and septic system (if applicable)
• Location of any existing or proposed easements and deed restrictions affecting the
property including Conservation and/or Open Space areas including any
areas/easements required by the Inland Wetlands Commission.
• Any other information deemed necessary by the ZEO to determine compliance with
these Regulations.
3. A zoning compliance chart or table that indicates the dimensional and use requirements for
the property in the Zone and how the proposed structure and uses will comply with the
requirements.
Please provide copies of the following:
• Copy of the Current Deed (Available from Town Clerk’s Office);
• Copy of Property Card (Available from Tax Assessor’s Office);
• Copy of Tax Map/Plot Plan (Available from Tax Assessor’s Office);
• Copy of any ZBA variances (if applicable) (Check in Land Use Office);
• Copy of the written notification/letter from the holder of any Conservation restriction on
the property; and
• If the resident is not the owner, please provide a letter from the owner(s) identifying and
approving the proposed home occupation.
• Copy of the building plans and renderings of any proposed building specifying siding
materials specified (front, side, and rear elevations shall be shown).
• Any other information deemed necessary by the ZEO to determine compliance with these
Regulations.
Possible Conditions of Approval:
• Prior Planning and Zoning Commission Approval; and/or
• Other State or Local Agency Approval.
Appendix D
Form PZ103-002
SITE PLAN CHECK SHEET
Standard Elements of the Site Plan. As indicated in Section 1302 of the Zoning
Regulations, the following information is usually required with any application for
Site Plan approval. However, the Commission may approve or modify and approve a
Site Plan application that does not include all such information if it finds that such
information is not needed to assure that the proposed use or uses will be in compliance
with the substantive provisions of these Regulations. The Commission may also
require additional information if necessary to determine compliance. For
modifications to Site Plans produced prior to 1996, additional boundary information
may be required.
The following information shall be provided on a 24 x 36 inch plan, with scale of 1" =
40'. Applicant shall submit three full size plans. Ten additional copies of the Site Plan
shall be provided on an 11 x 17 (reduced copy) plan.
A. Property and applicant information:
1. address of the property;
2. name and address of owner of record; and
3. name of and address of the applicant.
B. Names and addresses of current owners of property within 100 feet of the
parcel as shown in the Assessor's records, including properties across from any
street/road, river, and/or municipal boundary, and properties sharing a
driveway with the subject property.
C. Zone of site and of all property within 500 feet.
D. Copies of the current tax map, property card, and deed associated with the
property.
E. North arrow (if other than North American Datum (NAD) 83 the applicant
shall state why and provide standard for alternative), scale, name(s) of
person(s) preparing plan, date of drawing, and any revision dates with
description of revisions (revision dates shall appear on each plan sheet that
has been revised and shall include a description of the revisions).
F. Property boundaries (Class A-2 with dimensions, angles, and area of the parcel
and/or parcels subject to the application).
G. Existing and proposed street and lot lines and the dimensions of all yards and
buildable area, per Chapter 4 of the Regulations.
H. A zoning compliance chart or table that indicates the dimensional and use
requirements for the property in the Zone and how the proposed structure and
uses will comply with the requirements.
I. Existing and proposed contour lines. For all areas of the parcel within 100 feet
of any proposed work (including construction, excavation, filling, grading, and
clearing of vegetation), the contour interval shall be no greater than two (2)
feet (T-2 or T-3 accuracy). Topography taken from USGS Quadrangle
interpolation shall not be acceptable for such areas, but may be used for other
portions of the site. The Commission may require the applicant to submit
Appendix D
Form PZ103-002
design drawing(s), including cross sections and elevation, of all proposed
activity. Additional spot elevations may be required where necessary to
indicate drainage patterns.
J. Locations and specifications of all existing and proposed structures and uses
including, but not limited to, buildings, stone walls, fences, sidewalks,
driveways, parking and loading areas, exterior storage areas, signs, abutting
streets, utility structures, and hydrants. Existing and proposed buildings and
structures shall detail the number of bedrooms in each and/or the total number
of bathrooms. Renderings of any proposed building, specifying siding
materials, should be provided; front, side, and rear elevations shall be shown.
K. Locations and descriptions of water supply wells or other water sources and of
all sewage disposal facilities, together with percolation and test pit data.
L. Location of proposed subsurface sewage disposal systems and reserve fields,
showing distances to adjacent land, distances from all wells within 200 feet (on
or off the tract), and distance from any manure handling systems.
M. Locations of existing and proposed drainage facilities on the site and those offsite
that may be affected by the proposed activity, as well as any points of
collected drainage discharges (i.e., discharges other than natural sheet flow)
onto or off of the site.
N. Location of wetlands, watercourses and wetlands buffers, with the live
signature of the soil scientist who identified such features. All wetlands shall
be field located. In addition to the wetlands delineation all soil types shall be
shown per “Soil Survey of New London County, Connecticut.”
O. Identification of surface and groundwater resources on and around the site,
including any public or private domestic users of such waters; the depth to
groundwater and description of adjacent soils, and an evaluation of the impact
of the proposal on existing and potential surface and ground drinking water
supplies. The Commission may require additional information necessary to
ensure protection of water resources, and may require that the report be
prepared by a hydrogeologist or other qualified professional.
P. Identification of any chemicals or potential contaminants to be used, stored or
produced on site or discharged on or off the site, and a detailed description of
methods and procedures by which any chemicals or potential contaminants on
site will be stored, used, applied, discharged, and disposed.
Q. All soil types per “Soil Survey of New London County, Connecticut.” Provide
signature block for the soil scientist certifying that all wetlands and
watercourses have been delineated or that there are none on the property shall
be placed on the plans.
R. Any existing or proposed easements and deed restrictions affecting the
property including Conservation and/or Open Space areas including any
areas/easements required by the Inland Wetlands Commission.
S. Areas within 100 year flood hazard areas as delineated by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) and as shown on the most recently
amended maps prepared by FEMA must be shown with a note saying "Limits
of Flood Hazard Zone are approximate and are scaled from the
Appendix D
Form PZ103-002
Federal Flood Hazard maps." When a lot does not include land within the
100-year flood hazard area, the map shall include the following notation: "This
lot does not include land areas within the Federal Emergency
Management Agency's 100-year flood hazard area.”
T. Any boundaries of any sub-regional watersheds that lie within the site, as
shown on maps available from the Natural Resources Center of the
Department of Energy and Environmental Protection.
U. A landscape plan in conformance with Section 1103 showing the planting,
location and species to be used, the ground cover and surface treatments
proposed, and identification of the types and location of existing vegetation to
remain in place on the site. The Commission shall require such plans to be
prepared by a professional landscape architect (e.g., American Association of
Landscape Architects, ASLA).
V. Sight line information at proposed driveway cut(s), and statement that plans
have either been submitted to DOT for review or that DOT review is not
required.
W. Lighting Plan in conformance with Section 1110.
X. All wooded areas, specimen trees (exceeding 30 inches diameter at breast
height (dbh), five feet above the ground), rock outcroppings (greater than 200
square feet surface area) and any unique and fragile natural features.
Y. The general location of any endangered special and/or species of special
concern per DEEP NDDB Map.
Z. Any stonewalls, monuments, and other structures having historical
significance.
AA. Any archaeological sites including but not limited to those known to the State
Archaeologist's Office. The Commission may require the Applicant to submit
a report from the State Archaeologist's Office.
BB. Any historic buildings and sites listed on the National Register of Historic
Places.
CC. If required by the Commission, evidence of submission, review and
acceptability of plans to other State and Local regulatory agencies with
jurisdiction over some or all of the proposed structures and/or uses including
but not limited to the following permits: Inland/Wetland permits, Dept. of
Transportation Encroachment Permit and/or State Traffic Commission
permit, DEEP, Water Diversion Permit Floodway Encroachment Permit.
DD. Any other information deemed necessary by the Commission to determine
compliance with these Regulations. The Commission may require evaluation
reports by Commission-approved independent professionals and other
experts, including and not limited to: traffic engineers, hydrologists, soil
scientists, geologists.
Appendix E
MASTER PLAN CHECK SHEET
The following information shall be provided on a 24 x 36 inch plan, with scale of 1" = 40'. Applicant
shall submit three full size plans. Ten additional copies of the Site Plan shall be provided on an 11 x 17
(reduced copy) plan.
1. Master Plan for the area to be rezoned, including the following elements:
a. Property and applicant information:
1. address of the property;
2. name and address of owner of record; and
3. name of and address of the applicant.
b. boundary survey of the land to be included in the district at a scale no smaller than 1” = 50 feet,
and prepared at the A-2 standard of accuracy by a Connecticut Licensed Land Surveyor;
c. existing topography with 2’ contours to T-2 or T-3 level of accuracy show the general gradient of
the site, existing structures, existing roads and rights-of-way, major topographic features, and limits
of inland wetlands, watercourses and floodplains as mapped in the field by a qualified Soils
Scientist and plotted by a Connecticut Licensed Land Surveyor;
d. existing land uses and zoning within 500 feet of the area to be rezoned;
e. names of all property owners located within 500 feet of the boundary of the property to be rezoned,
as listed on the Town Assessor’s records;
f. location of proposed land uses within the area to be rezoned;
the number of residences, and the allocation among various types of residences; the aggregate
square footage of each type of dwelling unit; the aggregate maximum number of bedrooms for each
type of residential use; the residential density and the method used to calculate it;
g. proposed contours with intervals adequate to indicate drainage and grades;
h. location and size of proposed buildings and structures, including:
• the square footage of each proposed building
• the allocation of uses for each type of building
• the height of each building or structure
• the location and use of existing buildings or structures, and the intended use thereof
• and the architectural and Site Design Guidelines (see Chapter 11 of the Zoning Regulations)
h. public and private streets and circulation patterns and potential traffic improvements proposed by
the applicant;
i. general locations of on and off-street parking, loading and delivery areas;
j. existing and proposed pedestrian facilities and circulation routes;
k. potential location of public transit connections or stops;
l. public and private open spaces, both improved and natural, and the square footage or acreage
thereof;
m. general locations of utilities and drainage facilities to serve the area to be rezoned;
Appendix E
n. general landscaping plans, including existing vegetation to be preserved and general location of
landscape buffers, including general type of landscaping proposed (e.g., evergreen tree, shade tree,
flowering tree, evergreen shrub or hedge, flowering shrub, ground cover, existing vegetation to
remain) and general location of landscaping (buffers, street trees, parking lot islands, foundation
plantings); provided that details such as the species, number, size, and exact location of such
landscaping may be deferred to the subsequent Special Permit review;
o. proposed project phasing of residential and retail components, including phasing of public
improvements and provisions to address construction traffic;
p. the location of all inland wetlands and watercourses as delineated by a certified soil scientist in
Connecticut;
q. any exposed area of ledge in excess of 200 square feet; and
r. identification of any known natural and/or cultural resources (e.g., stone walls, foundations,
archeological sites, etc).

i
TABLE OF CONTENTS
SECTION 1: TITLE, PURPOSE, AUTHORITY, AND EFFECTIVE DATE 1
1.1 Title 1
1.2 Purpose 1
1.3 Authority 1
1.4 Repeal of Prior Regulations 1
1.5 Effective Date 1
SECTION 2: DEFINITIONS 3
SECTION 3: ADMINISTRATION 5
3.1 Applicability 5
3.2 Approval and Endorsement Required 5
3.3 Easements and Deeds 5
3.4 Surety 5
3.5 Waivers 6
3.6 Enforcement Officer 6
3.7 Amendments 6
3.7 Effect of Regulation Changes 6
SECTION 4: APPLICATION PROCESS 7
4.1 Preliminary Discussion 7
4.2 Formal Application Submission 7
4.3 Receipt of Application 8
4.4 Notice to the Regional Planning Agency 8
4.5 Notice to Adjoining Towns 9
4.6 Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission Referral 9
4.7 Town Health Officer Referral 9
4.8 Copies of Applications to Other Agencies 10
4.9 Formal Consideration 10
4.10 Public Hearing 10
4.11 Action by the Commission 11
4.12 Notice of Decision 11
4.13 Performance Surety Requirements 11
4.14 Recording of Easements, Payment of Fees, and Transfer of Land 12
4.15 Endorsement of the Plan 12
4.16 Recording the Plan 12
4.17 Time Limit on Completion 13
ii
TABLE OF CONTENTS (Continued)
SECTION 5: SUBDIVISION PLAN REQUIREMENTS 15
5.1 General Requirements 15
5.2 Reference Maps 16
5.3 Boundary Survey Map 16
5.4 Site Analysis Plan 17
5.5 Construction Plan 19
5.6 Erosion and Sediment (E&S) Control Plan 19
5.7 Stormwater Management 20
5.8 Other Supporting Documents 24
SECTION 6: SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS 25
6.1 Lots 25
6.2 Roads 25
Figure 6-1 Measuring the Length of Cul-de-Sacs 27
6.3 Sidewalks and Trails 27
6.4 Drainage 28
6.5 Flooding Considerations 28
6.6 Open Space, Parks, Playgrounds, and Municipal Land 28
6.7 Road Signs 33
6.8 Easements 33
6.9 Protection of Natural and Historic Features 33
6.10 Fire Protection 33
Table 6-1 Road Design Standards 34
SECTION 7: IMPROVEMENT SPECIFICATIONS 37
7.1 Monuments 37
7.2 Road Grading 37
7.3 Road Construction 38
7.4 Curbing 39
7.5 Sidewalks and Trails 39
7.6 Drainage 40
7.7 Planting Strips 41
7.8 Side Slopes 41
7.9 Guide Rails 41
7.10 Loaming 42
7.11 Road Signs 42
7.12 Water Supply 42
7.13 Sewage Disposal 42
7.14 Underground Services 42
7.15 Clean Up 42
iii
TABLE OF CONTENTS (Continued)
7.16 Inspection and Control 42
SECTION 8: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES 45
8.1 Criminal 45
8.2 Civil 45
SECTION 9: SEPARABILITY 47
SECTION 10: APPEALS 49
SECTION
1
TITLE, PURPOSE, AUTHORITY, AND EFFECTIVE DATE
Section 1- Title, Purpose, Authority, and Effective Date Page-1
1.1 TITLE
These Regulations shall be known and may be cited as the Subdivision Regulations, Town of North Stonington, Connecticut, and are herein referred to as "these Regulations.”
1.2 PURPOSE
These Regulations are intended to insure that land to be subdivided shall be of such character that it can be used for building purposes without danger to health or the public safety; and that proper provision be made for flood control, roads, drainage, utilities, open space, parks, playgrounds, erosion and sedimentation control, and measures that encourage the increased use of solar energy systems and other renewable forms of energy.
1.3 AUTHORITY
These Regulations are promulgated by the North Stonington Planning and Zoning Commission, herein referred to as "the Commission,” under the provisions of Chapter 126 of the Connecticut General Statutes, Revision of 1958, as amended. Wherever the requirements of the Connecticut General Statutes with regard to these Regulations and the contents thereof shall differ from these Regulations as to procedure or otherwise, the Connecticut General Statutes shall prevail.
1.4 REPEAL OF PRIOR REGULATIONS
The “Town of North Stonington Subdivision Regulations” adopted October 18, 1963 and all amendments thereto, are repealed coincident with the effective date of these Regulations. The repeal of the Subdivision Regulations and all amendments thereto shall not affect, validate, excuse, or impair any act done, offense committed or right accruing, accrued or acquired, or any liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred, prior to the time such repeal took effect, but the same may be enjoyed, asserted, enforced, prosecuted or inflicted as fully and to the same extent as if such repeal had not been effected.
1.5 EFFECTIVE DATE
The Regulations, and any amendments or changes hereto, shall be in full force and effect from the date established by the Commission in accordance with the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut. The effective date of these Regulations is November 2, 2015.
TITLE, PURPOSE, AUTHORITY, AND EFFECTIVE DATE
SECTION
1
Page-2 Section 1- Title, Purpose, Authority, and Effective Date
SECTION
2
DEFINITIONS
Section 2 - Definitions Page - 3
For purposes of these Regulations, certain terms and words used herein shall be used, interpreted, and defined as set forth in this section. All other words shall be as defined in Chapter 126 of the Connecticut General Statutes, or shall have commonly accepted definitions.
2.1 APPLICANT
Either the owner of the land stated in the application for subdivision, or all the owners where title is held jointly, in common, or in tenancy by the entirety including corporations. An agent, representative, or his assigns may act for an owner, provided written evidence of such fact is submitted. For a corporation, evidence in the form of a list of its officers and designated authority to sign legal documents shall be required.
2.2 AT LEAST
The term “at least” is used in these Regulations to mean “equal to or more than.”
2.3 COMMISSION
Shall mean the Planning and Zoning Commission of the Town of North Stonington.
2.4 CONSERVATION EASEMENT
Non-possessory interest in real property imposing limitations or affirmative obligations, the purposes of which include retaining or protecting natural, scenic, or open space values of real property; assuring its availability for agricultural, forest, recreational, or open space use; protecting natural resources; or maintaining air or water quality.
2.5 DATE OF RECEIPT
The Date of Receipt of an application shall be the day of the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Commission immediately following the day of the submission to the Commission of an application for subdivision, or thirty-five (35) days after such submission, whichever is sooner.
2.6 HOMEOWNER’S ASSOCIATION
A legal entity created for the purpose of developing, managing and selling a community of homes. It is given the authority to enforce the covenants, conditions, and restrictions and to manage the common amenities of the development.
2.7 ENGINEER
A person registered and legally permitted to engage in engineering practice in the State of Connecticut.
2.8 LOT, FRONT BUILDING
A lot with the Front Lot Line abutting the right-of-way of an accessible Town-accepted road or State highway.
2.9 LOT, INTERIOR BUILDING
A lot with principal boundaries not abutting a Town-accepted road or State highway, and established in accordance with the requirements of Section 1537 of the Zoning Regulations for the Town of North Stonington Connecticut.
DEFINITIONS
SECTION
2
Page - 4 Section 2 - Definitions
2.10 OPEN SPACE
Any land or area, the preservation of which in its present use would: (1) conserve and enhance natural or scenic resources; or (2) protect streams or water supply; or (3) promote conservation of soils, wetlands, or beaches; or (4) enhance the value to the public of abutting or neighboring parks, forests, wildlife preserves, nature reservations, or sanctuaries; or (5) enhance recreation opportunities.
2.11 PRINT
A blue- or black-line print on white paper by diazo or other similar process, which reproduces exactly the data on the original drawing from which it is made.
2.12 RE-SUBDIVISION
A change in a map of an approved or recorded subdivision or re-subdivision if such change (a) affects any road layout shown on such map, (b) affects any area reserved thereon for public use, or (c) diminishes the size of any lot shown thereon and creates an additional building lot, if any of the lots shown thereon have been conveyed after the approval or recording of such map.
2.13 ROAD
An improved right-of-way accepted for public use by lawful procedure; or a proposed road shown on the subdivision plan under consideration or on one previously approved by the Commission.
2.14 SUBDIVISION
The division of a tract or parcel of land into three or more parts or lots subsequent to October 18, 1963, for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or building development expressly excluding development for municipal, conservation, or agricultural purposes, and including re-subdivision.
2.15 SURVEYOR
A person licensed and legally permitted to practice land surveying in the State of Connecticut.
2.16 TOWN
Shall mean the Town of North Stonington, Connecticut.
2.17 UTILITIES
Utilities include water pipes; steam pipes; sewer pipes; gas mains; electric conduits; television, telephone and other communications cables; storm drains; and other similar service lines, facilities and equipment.
SECTION
3
ADMINISTRATION
Section 3 - Administration Page-5
3.1 APPLICABILITY
These Regulations shall be applied to subdivision and resubdivision of land within the Town of North Stonington.
3.2 APPROVAL AND ENDORSEMENT REQUIRED
3.2.1 No person or other entity shall make a subdivision of land, or sell or offer for sale lots from a subdivision, until a plan for such subdivision has been approved by the Commission and has been filed or recorded by the Town Clerk. No such plan shall be recorded or filed by the Town Clerk until its approval has been endorsed thereon by the chairperson of the Commission, and the filing or recording of a subdivision plan without such approval shall be void.
3.3 EASEMENTS AND DEEDS
3.3.1 Any open space, parks or playgrounds to be dedicated to the Town, and any easements for storm drainage, sanitary sewers, or rights of way to be dedicated to the Town, shall be confirmed by written conveyance and certificate of title describing the land involved and privileges of the Town in a form satisfactory to legal counsel as designated by the Commission. Open space, parks, playgrounds, easements and rights of way which are not to be dedicated to the Town shall also be confirmed by written conveyance (certificate of title), or other appropriate documentation suitable for filing in the Land Records, approved as to form by legal counsel as designated by the Commission, describing the land involved and the privileges of the owner of the open space, easement or right of way. Suitable recordable documents shall be submitted to the Commission prior to endorsement of the subdivision plan. The Commission shall accept from the applicant all easements, fees, and land associated with the subdivision approval as required by these Regulations, including, but not limited to, easements for the construction of roads, drainage features, the installation of monuments and markers, the grading and improvement of recreation facilities, clean-up of the premises and measures to be taken to control soil erosion and sedimentation likely to occur from the proposed subdivision, the dedication of conservation easements, and/or the dedication of land for open space.
3.4 SURETY
In lieu of the completion of proposed public work, the Commission may require a subdivider to file a surety, performance or maintenance guarantee with the Town. The amount of the surety must be sufficient to protect the Town from any expenses incurred, or necessary to complete the required work of the subdivision. The surety shall satisfy the following requirements.
3.4.1 The surety shall be cash or other form satisfactory to legal counsel as designated by the Commission.
3.4.2 The amount of the surety shall be set by the Commission in consultation with the Town Engineer and/or other qualified party. The amount shall be set twenty (20) percent higher than the estimated cost of construction of the work to allow for inflation and expenses incurred by the Town in overseeing any necessary construction.
3.4.3 The Commission shall state the improvements or group of improvements that the guarantee secures the completion of, and shall state the amount for each improvement or group of improvements.
ADMINISTRATION
SECTION
3
Page - 6 Section 3 - Administration
3.4.4 The Commission shall not authorize the full release of the surety until it has determined that all improvements subject to the surety have been completed.
3.4.5 The Commission may, at its discretion, recommend reducing the amount of the surety as work progresses.
3.4.6 The Commission shall set the time period within which the work covered by the surety shall be completed.
3.5 WAIVERS
The Commission may waive a requirement of these Regulations as specified below, or as specifically stated within a subsequent section, by a 3/4 vote of all the members of the Commission, in cases where conditions exist that affect the subject land and that are not generally applicable to other land in the area, except that no waiver shall be granted that would have a significant adverse effect on adjacent property or on public health and safety. Waivers may be granted only when the Commission deems that strict compliance with these Regulations would not to be in the best interests of the Town or the general public. Requests for waivers shall be submitted in writing, specifying each section of these Regulations to be waived and the reason for the waiver.
3.5.1 The Commission may waive specific provisions within Section 5 (Subdivision Plan Requirements).
3.6 ENFORCEMENT OFFICER
The Commission may designate the Chairperson, a member of the Commission, or any other person it deems appropriate as the enforcement officer of these Regulations.
3.7 AMENDMENTS
These Regulations may be amended, changed, or repealed in accordance with the Connecticut General Statutes. Amendments shall become effective at such time as is fixed by the Commission, provided a copy of such change shall be filed in the Town Clerk’s office and notice of the decision shall have been published in a newspaper having substantial circulation in the Town before such effective date.
3.8 EFFECT OF REGULATION CHANGES
Subdivision Applications that are complete, and contain all information required by these Regulations when filed shall be protected from subsequent changes in the Subdivision Regulations to the extent provided in Connecticut General Statutes 8-28a and 8-28b.
SECTION
4
APPLICATION PROCESS
Section 4 – Application Process Page- 7
4.1 PRELIMINARY DISCUSSION
The Commission recommends that subdivision applicants come to a Commission meeting for a preliminary discussion prior to submitting a formal application. Persons wishing to do so should notify the Commission seven (7) days prior to the meeting date. A preliminary discussion is not a substitute for a formal application, and neither an applicant nor the Commission is bound by the comments made during a preliminary discussion. The Commission can only make binding decisions after a formal application is submitted.
4.1.1 Optional Sketch Plan
A. Purpose. The Pre-application Sketch Plan is a general layout of a proposed subdivision submitted by the future subdivider for informal consideration by the Commission, prior to a formal submission of an application for approval. A Pre-application Sketch Plan shall not be required prior to submission of an application, but applicants are encouraged to use it as a means of ensuring that basic requirements can be met prior to incurring engineering, application, and legal fees involved with submission of the required application and plan. It should be clearly understood that the Pre-application Sketch Plan enjoys no official legal status and that consent with regard to feasibility of the Pre-application Sketch Plan on the part of the Commission in no way predicates approval of the required plan. A Pre-application Sketch Plan is encouraged in the interest of improved communication between the applicant and the Commission with regard to intent and general design, but it is at the sole discretion of the applicant.
B. Contents. The Pre-application Sketch Plan may be drawn on tracing paper with pencil at a suitable scale, which will show sufficient information about the subdivision to present a clear picture of its scope and impact. To be effective, the Pre-application Sketch Plan should show:
1. the subdivision name, boundaries, true north point, date, and scale;
2. the names and address of the record owner and the applicant;
3. approximate locations of all major site features such as existing streams, water bodies, stonewalls, large trees, rock ridges, outcroppings, and regulated soil;
4. the names and approximate location of existing adjacent roads and proposed roads;
5. the total site area, the total number of proposed lots, the general configuration of the proposed lot boundary lines, and approximate area of each proposed lot;
6. areas dedicated or reserved for purposes other than residential use; and
7. subsurface soil conditions based on results of random soil pit tests distributed evenly over the proposed subdivision tract.
4.2 FORMAL APPLICATION SUBMISSION
Any person intending to subdivide land in the Town of North Stonington shall submit an application as prescribed herein to the Commission. Fifteen (15) copies of the plan shall be submitted, plus a copy of the list of property owners within one hundred (100) feet of the parcel being subdivided, including the names of all property owners, street address per the Assessor’s
APPLICATION PROCESS
SECTION
4
Page - 8 Section 4 – Application Process
map, and Assessor’s map(s) and parcel number(s) for each property. Such list shall be provided at the time of application along with the completed application form and required fee. Application forms are available from the Land Use Office. Applications and related documents shall be submitted by mail or by hand to the Commission at the Land Use Office in the Town Hall. Applications received less than seven (7) days before a regularly scheduled meeting will be considered received as set forth below, but the Commission will not be required to consider such s on the agenda of the upcoming meeting.
4.2.1 A complete application consists of a written application completed in full on forms provided by the Commission, and signed by the applicant or lawful agent. If the applicant is not the owner of the land, the owner shall sign also. The application form shall contain a list of all items submitted as part of the application, including a breakdown of the fee paid. The Commission shall make final determination of completeness of the application. An incomplete application may be grounds for denial. The application includes an agreement to be signed by the owner of the land, granting officials and agents of the Town and of the Commission permission to enter onto any part of the land that is the subject of the application, for the purposes of inspection and, in the event of the failure of the applicant to make required improvements, in order to make such improvements.
4.2.2 The applicant must submit all required fees and file a copy of the completed application and all necessary maps, and any revisions to the application or maps, showing all the information required by these Regulations, with the Town Clerk, for public inspection at the time of application to the Commission. Any additional information and/or revised plans must also be submitted to the Town Clerk at least five (5) working days before a scheduled public hearing or continued meeting if no public hearing is held. The fees paid via check or money order shall be made payable to the "Town of North Stonington" in accordance with the Schedule of Fees posted in the office of the Town Clerk.
4.3 RECEIPT OF APPLICATIONS
The official date of receipt of applications and requests shall be the date of the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Commission immediately following the day of submission at the Land Use Office, or thirty-five (35) days after such submission whichever is sooner. The official date of receipt for applications and requests submitted at a regular or special meeting shall be the date of the next regularly scheduled meeting or thirty-five (35) days after such submission, whichever is sooner.
4.4 NOTICE TO THE REGIONAL PLANNING AGENCY
In accordance with Connecticut General Statute 8-26b, whenever a proposed subdivision abuts or includes land in another Connecticut municipality, the Commission shall notify the regional planning agency of the pendency of the subdivision application. Such notice shall be made by certified mail, return receipt requested not later than thirty (30) days before the public hearing to be held in relation thereto. A regional planning agency receiving such notice shall, at or before the hearing, report to each such planning commission and to the proponent of such subdivision on its findings on the intermunicipal aspects of the proposed subdivision, including street layout, storm drainage, sewer and water service and such other matters as it considers appropriate. If such report of a regional planning agency is not submitted, at or before the hearing, it shall be presumed that such agency does not disapprove of the proposed subdivision.
SECTION
4
APPLICATION PROCESS
Section 4 – Application Process Page- 9
4.5 NOTICE TO ADJOINING TOWNS
In accordance with Connecticut General Statutes Section 8-7d(f), the Commission shall notify the clerk of an adjoining town of any application in which one or more of the following apply: (a) any portion of the property affected by a decision of such commission, board or agency is within five hundred (500) feet of the boundary of the adjoining municipality; (b) a significant portion of the traffic to the completed project on the site will use streets within the adjoining municipality to enter or exit the site; (c) a significant portion of the sewer or water drainage from the project on the site will flow through and significantly impact the drainage or sewerage system within the adjoining municipality; or (d) water runoff from the improved site will impact streets or other municipal or private property within the adjoining municipality.
Such notice shall be made by certified mail, return receipt requested, and shall be mailed within seven (7) days of the date of receipt of the application, petition, request or plan. Such adjoining municipality may, through a representative, appear and be heard at any hearing on any such application, petition, appeal, request or plan.
4.6 INLAND WETLANDS AND WATERCOURSES COMMISSION REFERRAL
If an application involves land regulated as an inland wetland or watercourse under the provisions of the Connecticut General Statutes, Chapter 440, the applicant shall submit an application to the agency responsible for administration of the inland wetlands regulations no later than the day the application is filed for the subdivision or re-subdivision. The Commission shall not render a decision until the inland wetlands agency has submitted a report with its final decision to such Commission. In making its decision the Commission shall give due consideration to the report of the inland wetlands agency.
4.6.1 If the proposed subdivision involves the relocation or alteration of any stream having a watershed of more than three (3) square miles or an average stream flow greater than five (5) cubic feet per second, the Commission shall notify adjacent communities within the watershed and the Water Resources Unit of the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection, prior to approving any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit copies of such notices to the Federal Insurance Administrator. (This provision is intended to satisfy requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program.)
4.7 TOWN HEALTH OFFICER REFERRAL
The applicant shall submit a copy of the application to the Health Officer or his or her designated agent for review at the time of application to the Commission and any additional information and/or revised plans at least five (5) working days before such scheduled public hearing or continued meeting if no hearing is held. The project developers’ Engineer shall complete, in its entirety, sign and seal Form #2 “Investigation for Sewage Disposal System” as provided in the Technical Standards of the Public Health Code (as amended) for each proposed lot. System design should be based upon a four (4) bedroom house design. The Engineer should take into account the system spread necessary by the Minimum Leaching System Spread (MLSS) calculation. The conceptual layout on the subdivision plan shall show the footprint of a four (4) bedroom house, the septic tank, the leaching field and the one hundred (100) percent reserve area.
Any subdivision, which is revised and/or resubmitted with a reconfiguration of the lots and/or lot lines, will require resubmission of a complete set of Form #2s for the subdivision indicating on
APPLICATION PROCESS
SECTION
4
Page - 10 Section 4 – Application Process
the sheets which lots were changed and which did not change. A revised subdivision plan shall also be resubmitted with revisions to the conceptual plot layout for each lot.
The developer is required to inform the Health Officer, or his or her designated agent, of the testing schedule for the on-site investigations. Any lots with severe soil types, excessive slope, extensive wetland, or limited area should be identified in the schedule.
4.8 COPIES OF APPLICATIONS TO OTHER AGENCIES
The applicant must file a copy of the completed application and all necessary maps, showing all information required by these Regulations, with the Fire Marshall, Fire Chief, Board of Selectmen, Assessor, Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission, and the Zoning Enforcement Officer at the time of application to the Commission, and any additional information and/or revised plans at least five (5) working days before such scheduled public hearing or continued meeting if no hearing is held.
4.9 FORMAL CONSIDERATION
The Commission in its formal consideration of the application shall follow the following procedures.
4.9.1 The Commission shall determine whether the application submitted is complete and meets the requirements of the Regulations. If the application is not complete, the Commission may, in its discretion, deny the application or allow the applicant additional time to complete it.
4.9.2 The Commission may transmit copies of the maps and plans to other boards and Commissions, other public agencies and officials, and to consultants that, in the opinion of the Commission, may be advisable for their information, review and recommendations.
4.9.3 Whether or not a public hearing is held, every applicant shall be afforded the opportunity to appear before the Commission to discuss the application before final action by the Commission.
4.9.4 If there are infrastructure improvements/work proposed or required as part of the subdivision, then the application shall not be approved by the Commission without the Town Engineer’s review and recommendation(s) regarding the construction and grading plans. Prior to endorsement by the Commission, the Town Engineer shall sign the appropriate drawings as having been reviewed.
4.10 PUBLIC HEARING
The commission may hold a public hearing regarding any subdivision proposal if, in its judgment, the specific circumstances require such action. Provided that no plan of re-subdivision shall be acted upon by the commission without a public hearing, such public hearing shall be held in accordance with the provisions of the Connecticut General Statutes, Chapter 124, Section 8-7d (the public hearing shall: commence within sixty-five (65) days after receipt of the application; be completed within thirty-five (35) days after such hearing commences; and decisions shall be rendered within sixty-five (65) days after completion of such hearing; however, the applicant may consent to one or more extensions of any period specified herein provided the combined extension(s) of all such periods shall not exceed sixty-five (65) days). If a public hearing is not
SECTION
4
APPLICATION PROCESS
Section 4 – Application Process Page- 11
held the Commission shall render a decision with sixty-five (65) days of the receipt of the application.
If the land subject to the application, contains inland wetlands and the application was referred to the appropriate commission, the Commission shall wait to render its decision until the Inland Wetlands Commission has submitted a report with its final decision; and the time period for a decision by the Commission may be extended to thirty-five (35) days after the decision of the Inland Wetlands Commission.
4.11 ACTION BY THE COMMISSION
The Commission shall approve, modify and approve, or disapprove any subdivision or re-subdivision application or maps and plans submitted therewith, including existing subdivisions or re-subdivisions made in violation of this section, within the period of time permitted under Connecticut General Statutes, Chapter 124, Section 8-7d, as amended.
4.12 NOTICE OF DECISION
A copy of any decision shall be sent by certified mail to the person who submitted the application within fifteen (15) days after such decision is rendered. The commission shall publish notice of decision in a newspaper having a general circulation in the municipality within fifteen (15) days after such action or decision. In any case in which such notice is not published within the fifteen (15) day period after a decision has been rendered, the person who submitted such application may provide for the publication of such notice within ten (10) days thereafter.
4.13 PERFORMANCE SURETY REQUIREMENTS
4.13.1 Prior to endorsement of a subdivision, the Commission may require that the applicant post a performance surety with the Town, in an amount and form agreeable to the Commission. The type of surety shall be solely determined by the Commission. Such surety is intended to guarantee satisfactory completion of any required site improvements. Whenever the Commission has required such performance surety, no endorsement of the approved plans shall occur and no mylars shall be recorded with the Town Clerk until the applicant has delivered the required security to the Commission, or its delegated representative, in the required amount and form.
4.13.2 The applicant shall submit to the Commission, with any application for subdivision or re-subdivision, an estimate of the costs of any proposed site improvements. This estimate shall contain a separate inflation factor for the estimated improvement period. The Commission may refer such estimate to its own engineer for the estimate of costs, and the amount of the final cost estimate, as determined solely by the Commission, shall be the amount of the performance surety.
4.13.3 The surety, as posted, shall name as principal both the applicant and the record owner of the premises. The Commission may direct that the security be issued in the form of a savings passbook of an FDIC insured bank with an office in Connecticut, with the Town being named as the sole owner of the account; an irrevocable letter of credit issued by an FDIC insured bank with offices in Connecticut which provides for presentment in Connecticut; or a bond with surety by an insurance company authorized by the Connecticut Insurance Department to do business in Connecticut, and issue bonds in Connecticut. The Commission preferred types of security are as follows: first, cash; second, irrevocable letter of credit; and third, insurance bond.
APPLICATION PROCESS
SECTION
4
Page - 12 Section 4 – Application Process
A. The Commission may provide for the reduction of the surety as site improvements are completed to the satisfaction of the Commission (report by Zoning Enforcement Officer required). The amount of any reduction shall be in the sole discretion of the Commission.
B. The Commission may require a portion of the initial surety to be held as a maintenance surety for items including but not limited to landscaping, soil erosion and sediment control measures, and storm drainage infrastructure that may need monitoring beyond the granting of a certificate of zoning compliance. The commission shall stipulate the time period for the maintenance surety not to exceed one (1) year. Before release of the performance surety held by the Commission, a maintenance surety shall be submitted which shall be in an amount equal to ten (10) percent of the performance surety or $2,500, whichever amount is greater, and which shall be retained by the Commission for one year. The purpose of the maintenance bond is to guarantee correction of any construction failures related to the subdivision.
C. The surety shall be held by the Town Treasurer until its release is authorized by the Commission and not before the improvements have been completed and as-built plans (if required) are submitted to the Commission. Where new roads are involved, the surety shall not be released until such roads are certified as completed by the First Selectman. The Commission shall not release the entire surety until it receives certification from the Zoning Enforcement Officer that compliance with these Regulations has been met and that no maintenance surety is required.
4.14 RECORDING OF EASEMENT, PAYMENT OF FEES AND TRANSFER OF LAND
Prior to endorsement of the subdivision plan, the Commission shall accept from the applicant all easements, fees, and land (actual land transfer or executable deed with certificate of title) associated with the subdivision approval as required by these Regulations, including, but not limited to, easements for the construction on roads, drainage features, the installation of monuments and markers, the grading and improvement of recreation facilities, clean-up of the premises and measures to be taken to control soil erosion and sedimentation likely to occur from the proposed subdivision, the dedication of conservation easements, and/or the dedication of land for open space.
4.15 ENDORSEMENT OF THE PLAN
If the Commission votes to approve a plan or modify and approve a plan, its approval with the date thereof, together with a statement of any modifications applying to such approval, shall be endorsed and signed by the Chairman or Secretary of the Commission in the space provided for such purpose on each sheet of a mylar copy of the plan provided by the applicant. In addition to above, the applicant shall provide three (3) paper copies of the endorsed plan. Each paper copy shall contain same seals and live signatures that are required and appear on the mylar(s).
4.15.1 The Chairman or Secretary of the Commission shall, when endorsing the plan, indicate on the plan the date by which all improvements shown on the plan shall be completed in accordance with these Regulations.
4.16 RECORDING THE PLAN
The endorsed mylar copy of the plan shall be filed by the applicant in the office of the Town Clerk and any plan not so filed within ninety (90) days of the date such plan is delivered to the
SECTION
4
APPLICATION PROCESS
Section 4 – Application Process Page- 13
applicant or within ninety (90) days of the date upon which such plan is taken as approved by reason of failure of the Commission to act, shall become null and void, except that upon request by the applicant, the Commission may extend the time for such filing for as long as two (2) additional periods of ninety (90) days, and the plan shall remain valid until the expiration of such extended time. No such plan shall be filed or recorded by the Town Clerk until the Chairman or Secretary of the Commission has endorsed its approval in writing on such plan.
4.16.1 One (1) print of the approved plan shall be filed with the Assessor.
4.16.2 Two (2) prints of the approved plan shall be filed with the Zoning Enforcement Officer.
4.16.3 The applicant shall provide a digital copy of the approved plans in a format acceptable to the Town’s IT/GIS Coordinator or the applicant shall pay a $1,500 fee for the creation of the required digital data..
4.17 TIME LIMIT ON COMPLETION
Any person, firm or corporation making any subdivision of land shall complete all work in connection with such subdivision within five (5) years after the approval of the plan for such subdivision, which completion data shall be noted on the plan by the Chairman or Secretary of the Commission at the time of the approved plan.
4.17.1 Failure to complete all work within such five (5) year period shall result in automatic expiration of the approval of such plan, provided the Commission shall file on the land records of the Town of North Stonington notice of such expiration and shall state such expiration on the subdivision plan on file in the office of the Town Clerk, and no additional lots shall be conveyed in the subdivision by the subdivider or his/her successor in interest as such subdivider except with approval by the Commission of a new application for subdivision of the subject land.
If lots have been conveyed during such five (5) year period, the Commission shall call the bond or other surety on said subdivision to the extent necessary to complete work required to serve those lots. “Work” for purposes of this section means all physical improvements required by the approval of the plan, other than the staking out of lots, and includes but is not limited to, the construction of roads, storm drainage facilities and water and sewer lines, the setting aside of open space and recreation areas, installation of telephone and electrical services, planting of trees or other landscaping, and installation of retaining wall or other structures.
APPLICATION PROCESS
SECTION
4
Page - 14 Section 4 – Application Process
SECTION
5
SUBDIVISION PLAN REQUIREMENTS
Section 5 – Subdivision Plan Requirements Page- 15
5.1 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
Fifteen (15) copies of all maps, plans, and profiles shall be submitted with the application and fee, and unless otherwise permitted by these Regulations, be clear and legible, and conform to the current “Recommended Standards for Surveys and Maps in the State of Connecticut” as adapted by the Connecticut Association of Land Surveyors. The maps shall be prepared and sealed by a Connecticut Licensed Land Surveyor and/or Connecticut Licensed Professional Engineer and shall be presented on good-quality white paper prints and shall be not larger than thirty-six (36) by twenty-four (24) inches in size. All such prints shall have a minimum one half (.5) inch border on three (3) sides and minimum two (2) inch border on the left side. If more than one (1) sheet is submitted, they shall be bound. All such prints shall bear the following information:
5.1.1 All sheets shall contain a title block with the following:
A. statement of subdivision or re-subdivision;
B. the name or title of the subdivision and the words, “North Stonington, Connecticut;”
C. the name and address of the owner of the tract;
D. the original date of preparation of the map and revisions thereto; and,
E. the identity of person or company who prepared or was responsible for preparing each sheet.
5.1.2 The scale of the drawings/map.
5.1.3 Each map and plan (except for vertical profiles) shall contain a north arrow which shall, when practical, be consistent on all drawings and shall be to the top, or right side of sheet depending upon the shape of the subdivision. The type of north used shall be clearly marked. When the parcel is within 1,000 feet of a Connecticut grid point, Connecticut Grid North shall be used.
5.1.4 Where only a part of the subdivision is shown on the sheet, an Index map shall show its location in relation to the whole subdivision (see Section 5.2.3). All corresponding sheets shall show appropriate match lines.
5.1.5 The subdivision map is to be filed in as a permanent record in the Town Land Records, and shall meet the accuracy standards of an “A-2” survey as specified in the “Code of Recommended Practice for Standards of Accuracy of Survey and Maps by the State Board of Registration for Professional Engineers and Land Surveyors of the State of Connecticut. The Commission may accept a Class “D” survey, subject to the above referenced code, for a large parcel of land not proposed for sale or development or to establish the perimeter ownership boundary of a large parcel where a portion of the parcel is proposed for subdivision and shall be subject to an “A-2” survey.
5.1.6 Suitable space to record the action of the Commission and the signature of the Chairman or Secretary of the Planning and Zoning Commission. The plan shall contain the following statement:
“The Subdivision Regulations of the Town of North Stonington, Connecticut are a part of this plan, and approval of this plan is contingent on compliance with all requirements of
SUBDIVISION PLAN REQUIREMENTS
SECTION
5
Page - 16 Section 5 – Subdivision Plan Requirements
these regulations except for such variances or modifications as may be made in writing by the North Stonington Planning and Zoning Commission and attached hereto.”
5.1.7 Name, registration, original seal, and signature of the land surveyor or engineer, or both, that prepared the drawing.
5.2 REFERENCE MAPS
5.2.1 Location Map. The Location Map shall be at a scale not smaller than one (1) inch equals 1,000 feet and shall show the location of the proposed subdivision and all existing roads and watercourses within 5,000 feet of it. If space permits, the key map may be included as an insert map on the boundary survey map. The key map may be a simple tracing.
5.2.2 Assessors and Soils Map. This map contains a lot layout on the scale of one (1) inch equals two hundred (200) feet, showing lot lines and soil types.
5.2.3 Property history map. The property history map shall show the parcel of land existing on October 18, 1963 of which the proposed subdivision is a part and all divisions of that parcel since. (October 18, 1963 is the date of adoption of subdivision regulations in the Town.)
A. Scale of 1”= 200' (corresponding to the assessor’s maps).
B. A table including dates and names of grantees and grantors for all transfers of related land and easements following October 18, 1963.
C. Existing property lines and road right of way lines, including those for land trust preserves and Town open spaces within five hundred (500) feet of the perimeter boundary of the area to be subdivided.
5.3 BOUNDARY SURVEY MAP
This map shall show property to be divided into lots at a scale of one (1) inch equals forty (40) feet, although a scale of one (1) inch equals fifty (50) feet will also be acceptable. The boundary survey map shall show the following:
5.3.1 Boundaries, dimensions, and acreage of the property to be subdivided to Class A-2 standard, unless otherwise permitted.
5.3.2 Boundaries of properties and names of current property owners within one hundred (100) feet of the proposed new building lots.
5.3.3 Locations of wetlands and watercourses as delineated in the field by an appropriately certified soil scientist, aquifers, and ledge (greater than two hundred (200) square feet).
A. Signature block for the soil scientist certifying that all wetland and watercourses have been delineated or that there are none on the property. Live signature shall be shown on the plans submitted to the Commission at the time of application.
5.3.4 Boundaries, dimensions, angles, bearings, area in square feet and in acres, and lot numbers of all proposed lots (lot areas may be shown in tabular form on the same sheet).
5.3.5 All existing buildings, stone walls, cart paths, cemeteries.
SECTION
5
SUBDIVISION PLAN REQUIREMENTS
Section 5 – Subdivision Plan Requirements Page- 17
5.3.6 All existing and proposed monuments, pipe markers, stone piles, and any other physical evidence concerning property boundaries.
5.3.7 Locations of all existing and proposed easements, right-of-way, drainage rights, and open space.
5.3.8 Existing and proposed contours at two (2) foot intervals or at intervals as required by the Commission. The Commission shall require Class T-2 or T-3 accuracy for the topographic data. Additional spot elevations may be required where necessary to indicate drainage patterns. Elevations shall be referred to U.S. Geological Survey datum.
5.3.9 Maps shall designate Flood Hazard Zones for the subdivision. Subdivisions greater than fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres (whichever is less) shall include base flood 100-year storm) elevation data for that portion of the subdivision located within "A" Zones of the Flood Hazard Boundary Map or Flood Insurance Rate Map of North Stonington.
5.3.10 Areas of each proposed lot exclusive of areas designated as inland wetlands and watercourses by the Town’s Inlands Wetlands and Watercourses Commission.
5.3.11 Any reserved areas for water courses and wetlands protection or for conservation areas.
5.3.12 The words “Approved by the North Stonington Planning and Zoning Commission” with designated spaces provided for the date and signature of the Chairman or Secretary of the Commission.
5.4 SITE ANALYSIS PLAN
The purpose of the site analysis map is to enable the Commission to evaluate the impact of the proposed subdivision on the land that is the subject of the Application, on neighboring parcels, and all the natural and historic resources and features of the area. Where so much information drawn on any one sheet would make reading the sheet confusing, the information required on the site analysis map may be placed on more than one sheet as long as information on one can easily be related to information placed on the other. The site analysis map shall contain and conform to the following.
5.4.1 Boundaries, dimensions, and acreage of the property to be subdivided to Class A-2 standard, unless otherwise permitted.
5.4.2 Boundaries, dimensions, angles, bearings, area in square feet and in acres, and lot numbers of all proposed lots (Lot areas may be shown in tabular form on the same sheet).
5.4.3 A chart showing the dimensional requirements required by Section 1300 of the Zoning Regulations (i.e. setbacks, buildable area, frontage etc. and how the proposed subdivision will comply with the regulations).
5.4.4 Existing and proposed contours at two-foot intervals or at intervals as required by the Commission. The Commission shall require Class T-2 or T-3 accuracy for the topographic data. Additional spot elevations may be required where necessary to indicate drainage patterns. Elevations shall be referred to U.S. Geological Survey datum.
5.4.5 Designated Flood Hazard Zones for the subdivision. Subdivisions greater than fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres (whichever is less) shall include base flood 100-year storm) elevation data for that portion of the subdivision located within "A" Zones of the Flood Hazard Boundary Map or Flood Insurance Rate Map of North Stonington.
SUBDIVISION PLAN REQUIREMENTS
SECTION
5
Page - 18 Section 5 – Subdivision Plan Requirements
5.4.6 Locations of wetlands and watercourses, and wetland buffers (as delineated in the field by an appropriately certified soil scientist), aquifers, and ledge (greater than two hundred (200) square feet).
A. Signature block for the soil scientist certifying that all wetland and watercourses have been delineated or that there are none on the property. Live signature shall be shown on the plans submitted to the commission at the time of application.
5.4.7 Boundaries of any sub-regional watersheds that lie within the site, as shown on maps available from the Natural Resources Center of the Department of Environmental Protection.
5.4.8 All existing stonewalls, cart paths, and cemeteries.
5.4.9 All existing and proposed monuments, pipe markers, stone piles, and any other physical evidence concerning property boundaries.
5.4.10 Locations of all existing and proposed easements, right-of-way, drainage rights, and open space.
5.4.11 The location of any points of drainage points onto the tract from any street or other property.
5.4.12 Location of proposed septic-leach field systems and reserve fields, showing distances to adjacent land, distances from all wells within two hundred (200) feet (on or off the tract), and distance from any manure handling systems.
5.4.13 Location of percolation test holes and deep hole tests for each lot, keyed to Sanitary Report.
5.4.14 Location of proposed wells and water sources for each lot, keyed to Sanitary Report.
5.4.15 Any reserved areas for watercourses and wetlands protection or for conservation areas.
5.4.16 Areas proposed for preservation as open space and/or conservation easements.
5.4.17 Wooded areas, specimen trees (exceeding thirty (30) inches diameter at breast height (DBH), five (5) feet above the ground), and any unique and fragile natural features.
5.4.18 The general location of any State and Federal endangered species, and/or species of special concern and/or significant natural communities shall be shown on the plans.
5.4.19 Stonewalls and monuments, and other structures having historical significance.
5.4.20 Archaeological sites including those known to the State Archaeologist’s Office. The Commission may require the Applicant to submit a report from the State Archaeologist’s Office.
5.4.21 Historic buildings and sites listed on the National Register of Historic Places.
5.4.22 Location of existing and proposed buildings and structures and the number of bedrooms in each.
5.4.23 Location of all proposed utilities.
5.4.24 Location of proposed driveways.
5.4.25 Show sightlines for proposed driveways.
SECTION
5
SUBDIVISION PLAN REQUIREMENTS
Section 5 – Subdivision Plan Requirements Page- 19
5.4.26 Existing and proposed road (street?) and lot lines.
5.4.27 The information required in Section 5.5, Construction Plans, may be included on the site analysis map.
5.5 CONSTRUCTION PLAN
A Construction Plan, drawn at a scale of one (1) inch equals forty (40) feet, shall be submitted when any type of construction, such as roads, drainage, water supply or sewer systems, retaining walls, etc., is to be carried out in connection with the subdivision. The Construction Plan shall be prepared and sealed by a Connecticut Licensed Professional Engineer. All construction shall be in accordance with these Regulations or with the current issue of the Connecticut Department of Transportation, Bureau of Highways Standard Specifications for Roads, Bridges, and Incidental Construction any supplements and amendments thereof. The Construction Plan shall include the following where applicable:
5.5.1 Plan and profiles for all proposed roads, showing the following information.
A. Existing surface elevation along the centerline.
B. Locations, bearings, curve data, including arc length, radii and central angles, proposed grades, vertical curves with centerline elevations every fifty (50) feet, except that such information shall be provided at ten (10) foot intervals within eighty (80) feet of the centerline cross point of an intersection.
C. Locations, size, and invert elevations of existing and proposed storm drains, catch basins, manholes, bridges, culverts, out-falls, and other drainage features.
D. Location, size, and invert elevations of proposed sewers, if any.
E. Location and size of all water supply and distribution facilities and hydrants.
F. Cross-sections at twenty-five (25) foot intervals where existing terrain slopes more than ten (10) percent.
G. Sidewalk location, if any, and location of road paving and curbs within the right-of-way.
H. Location of road signs, trees, and other special landscape features to be installed by the applicant.
I. Road names.
5.5.2 Where drainage systems are to be constructed, one (1) copy of the Construction Plan shall be suitably marked to show watershed data used in the design of such systems and shall be accompanied by all calculations used in the drainage system.
5.5.3 In the case of retaining walls or other special features, a drawing to a scale of one half (.5) inch equals one (1) foot of all such details shall be furnished.
5.5.4 The words “Date of Completion of All Work” with designated space for the date and initial of the Chairman or Secretary of the Commission.
5.6 SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN (SE&SC)
Whenever plans for a subdivision show construction or improvements or buildings related to the subdivision that will result in the disturbance of more than one half (.5) acre of land, the applicant
SUBDIVISION PLAN REQUIREMENTS
SECTION
5
Page - 20 Section 5 – Subdivision Plan Requirements
will submit, as part of the subdivision plan, SE&SC Plan that presents, in mapped and narrative form, the measures to be taken to control erosion and sedimentation both during and after construction. Exempted from the provisions of this section are single-family residences that are not part of a subdivision. The SE&SC Plan shall be based on Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control, available from the Natural Resources Center of the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection.
5.6.1 The SE&SC Plan shall include the following information:
A. a description of the project and a schedule of the major activities to be constructed on the land;
B. locations of wetlands and watercourses;
C. locations of areas to be stripped of vegetation;
D. locations of areas to be regraded and contour data indicating existing and proposed grades;
E. a schedule of operations, including the sequence of major improvement phases such as clearing, grading, paving, installation of drainage features, and the like;
F. seeding, sodding, or revegetation plans and specifications for all unprotected or unvegetated areas;
G. location, design, and timing of structural control measures, such as diversions, waterways, grade stabilization structures, debris basins, and the like; and the narrative shall indicate design criteria used in the design of control measures;
H. a description of procedures to be followed to maintain sediment control measures; and,
I. the plan map shall show the words: “Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plan Certified by Vote of the North Stonington Planning and Zoning Commission on (date),” and a space for the signature of the Chairman or Secretary of the Commission.
5.6.2 After review of the SE&SC Plan by the Commission or its designee, the Commission shall certify that the plan is in compliance with these Regulations. A vote of the Commission to approve a subdivision plan constitutes approval of the SE&SC Plan as well.
5.6.3 The Commission, through its members, agents, and consultants, shall periodically inspect construction projects for which SE&SC Plans have been certified to verify that soil erosion and sediment controls are consistent with the certified plan.
5.6.4 The surety required for improvements in connection with the proposed subdivision shall be required to be sufficient to cover the costs of accomplishing the SE&SC measures.
5.7 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
5.7.1 Purpose and Authority. Increased development without proper consideration of stormwater impacts is a significant source of pollution to surface and ground water. These water resources are valuable natural, economic, recreational, cultural, and aesthetic resources. The protection and preservation of these resources is in the public interest and
SECTION
5
SUBDIVISION PLAN REQUIREMENTS
Section 5 – Subdivision Plan Requirements Page- 21
is essential to the health, welfare, and safety of the citizens of the Town. It is therefore, the purpose of this section to protect and preserve the resources within the Town of North Stonington by managing storm water flows in accordance with the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection “Connecticut Stormwater Quality Manual” (CSQM), as amended. The provisions of these Regulations are pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes 8-25 inclusive and 8-2(b) and shall apply to all development occurring within the Town. The provisions of this section of the Regulations shall be the minimum requirements for stormwater management plans in the Town of North Stonington, and enactment of this Regulation shall not preclude the application of applicable town, state and/or federal regulations to the facilities regulated thereby.
5.7.2 Applicability. A Stormwater Management Plan is required for any development requiring a Site Plan or for a Subdivision/Re-subdivision that disturbs over one (1) acre of land over the total project area. The stormwater management plan is to be designed to be consistent with the CSQM (as amended). The Commission shall use the standards and criteria for decision outlined in the CSQM (as amended) when reviewing the Stormwater Management Plan.
5.7.3 Design Criteria
A. Sedimentation. The system shall remove eighty (80) percent of the annual solid pollutant loading. This can be met by providing manufacturers data sheets, or calculations verifying the adequacy of a site designed system. CSQM guidelines may be used in such calculations, or the Engineer may use other methodologies with prior approval of the Town Engineer.
B. Stormwater Flow. Provide individual watershed stormwater flows across the site boundary (property line) equal to or less than the pre-existing condition. In other words, flows may not be increased within any watershed after development. This shall be provided for the 2, 10, 25 and 100-year rainfall events.
C. Stormwater Volume. For each of the design rainfall events (above), the volume of stormwater leaving the site shall be equal to or less than the volume of stormwater leaving the site in its pre-existing condition.
In granting the plan approval, the Commission may make modifications or impose such conditions that may be deemed necessary to ensure compliance with the CSQM (as amended).
5.7.4 Review Fee. A non-refundable review fee shall be collected per the Town Ordinance Concerning Fees for Review and Evaluation of Land Use Applications and Inspection of Land Use Permit Compliance; at the time the stormwater management plan is submitted.
5.7.5 Permitting. A Zoning Permit shall not be issued for any-development requiring a Site Plan or a Subdivision/Re-subdivision that disturbs over one (1) acre of land unless the Commission has approved a Stormwater Management Plan. Where appropriate, a Zoning Permit shall not be issued without the following, as appropriate:
A. recorded easements for the stormwater management facility and easements to provide adequate access for inspection and maintenance from a public right-of-way;
SUBDIVISION PLAN REQUIREMENTS
SECTION
5
Page - 22 Section 5 – Subdivision Plan Requirements
B. a recorded stormwater management maintenance agreement, per Section 5.7.9 (A) of these Regulations;
C. surety; and
D. easements from adjacent property owners as necessary.
5.7.6 Suspension and Revocation. Any Zoning Permit may be suspended or revoked after written notice is given to the permittee for any of the following reasons:
A. any violation(s) of the conditions of the Stormwater Management Plan approval;
B. changes in site runoff characteristics upon which an approval was granted;
C. construction is not in accordance with the approved plan;
D. noncompliance with correction notice(s) or stop work order(s) issued for the construction of the stormwater management facility; and/or
E. an immediate danger exists in a downstream area in the opinion of the Zoning Enforcement Officer.
5.7.7 Surety. A surety shall be required prior to the issuance of any zoning and/or grading permit for the construction of a stormwater management facility. The amount of the security shall not be less than the total estimated construction cost of the stormwater management facility. The surety required in this section shall include provisions relative to forfeiture for failure to complete work specified in the approved Stormwater Management Plan, and other applicable laws and regulations, and any time limitations established in the Stormwater Management Plan. The surety shall not be fully released without a final inspection of the completed work by a licensed Engineer and the Zoning Enforcement Officer, submission of “as-built” plans, and certification of completion by a licensed Engineer and the Zoning Enforcement Officer that the stormwater management facilities comply with the approved plan and the provisions of these Regulations.
5.7.8 Inspection
A. The developer shall retain a professional engineer licensed in the State to conduct inspections. Written inspection reports shall be made of the periodic inspections necessary during construction of stormwater management systems to ensure compliance with the approved plan.
B. The developer shall notify the engineer responsible for inspections as least forty-eight (48) hours before commencing any work in conjunction with the Stormwater Management Plan and upon completion of the project when a final inspection will be conducted.
C. Written inspection reports shall be provided to the developer and the Commission and shall include:
1. the date and location of the inspection;
2. whether construction was in compliance with the approved stormwater management plan;
3. any variations from the approved construction specifications; and
SECTION
5
SUBDIVISION PLAN REQUIREMENTS
Section 5 – Subdivision Plan Requirements Page- 23
4. any violations that exist.
D. The owner and/or developer and, as necessary, the on-site personnel shall be notified in writing when violations are observed. Written notification shall describe the nature of the violation and the required corrective action.
E. The inspector shall provide the owner and/or developer and the Commission with the inspection reports as soon as possible after completion of each required inspection. Upon issuance of a Notice of Violation or an unsatisfactory inspection report, all work shall cease until corrective measures are taken and approved by a licensed Engineer and the Zoning Enforcement Officer.
5.7.9 Maintenance
A. Maintenance Agreement
1. The applicant shall execute an inspection and maintenance agreement binding on the property owner and all subsequent owners. Such agreement shall provide for access at reasonable times for regular inspections by the Commission or its authorized representative, to ensure that the stormwater facilities are maintained in proper working condition to meet design standards.
2. The applicant and/or owner shall record the agreement in the Land Records of the Town.
3. The agreement shall provide that, if after notice by the Commission to correct a violation requiring maintenance work, satisfactory corrections are not made by the owner(s) within thirty (30) days; the Commission shall have the right but not the obligation to perform all necessary work to place the facility in proper working condition. The owner(s) of the facility shall be assessed the cost of the work and any penalties. Charges shall become a special assessment against the property and assessment. Nothing herein shall make or be construed to make the Commission, the Town, and/or Town officials, employees, representatives, or agents legally liable or in any way responsible for the cost, inspection, maintenance and/or operation of approved stormwater management facilities.
B. Responsibility
1. The owner of the property, and any other person or agent in control of such property, shall maintain in good condition and promptly repair and restore all grade surfaces, walls, drains, dams and structures, vegetation, erosion and sediment control measures, and other protective devices. Such repairs or restoration and maintenance shall be in accordance with the approved Stormwater Management Plan.
2. A maintenance and reporting schedule shall be developed for the life of any stormwater management facility and shall state the maintenance to be completed, the time period for completion, and who shall perform the maintenance. This maintenance and reporting schedule shall be developed as part of the approved Stormwater Management Plan.
SUBDIVISION PLAN REQUIREMENTS
SECTION
5
Page - 24 Section 5 – Subdivision Plan Requirements
C. Terms and Conditions
The agreement shall also provide that the applicant/developer and/or owner and each of their respective representatives, heirs, successors and assigns shall hold the Town of North Stonington and its officials, employees, representatives, agents, boards, agencies and commissions and each of their respective representatives, heirs, successors and assigns harmless and indemnify them from and against any claims, damages, losses, costs and expenses (including attorney’s fees) from any personal injury (including death) and property damage resulting from any act or omission of said applicant/developer and/or owner in the design, construction, inspection, maintenance and operation of stormwater management facilities approved pursuant to this section of the Regulations and from any acts or omissions, including without limitation negligent acts or omissions of said Town and/or its officials, employees, representatives, agents, boards, agencies and commissions and each of their respective representatives, heirs, successors and assigns in the approval and inspection of said facilities or the performance of any activities pursuant to Section 5.7.9 (A)(3) of these Regulations.
D. Any agreement pursuant thereto shall apply to the owners and/or lessees of the property in question and shall run with the land.
5.8 OTHER SUPPORTING DOCUMENTS
Before approval of any subdivision, the Commission shall require the following.
5.8.1 Evidence of an application to and/or approval from other local and/or state agencies for activities that are regulated by said entities where applicable.
5.8.2 The subdivider shall submit to the Commission written copies of all agreements, restrictive covenants, or other documents governing the use, reservation, or maintenance of land.
5.8.3 All deeds, surety, and other documents submitted pursuant to these Regulations shall be subject to approval as to form and content by the Counsel for the Town of North Stonington.
5.8.4 When the subdivision includes any portion of a watercourse that is located within an "A" Zone on the Flood Hazard Boundary Map or the Flood Insurance Rate Map for North Stonington, and the subdivision would result in the alteration or relocation of that watercourse, the applicant shall submit a hydrological design by a Licensed Professional Engineer that indicates that the flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse will not be impaired by any construction or additional runoff resulting from the subdivision.
SECTION
6
SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS
Section 6- Subdivision Design Standards Page-25
6.1 LOTS
Proposed lots shall be arranged to make the best use of the natural terrain, to preserve important natural features, and to afford maximum opportunity for the use of solar energy.
6.1.1 Lots shall conform to the requirements of the Zoning Regulations for the Town of North Stonington, Connecticut, as amended.
6.1.2 Where practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles to the road on which the lots front, or radial to curved road lines.
6.1.3 To the maximum extent possible, lots shall be generally rectangular in shape. Excessively deep or irregularly shaped lots shall be avoided.
6.1.4 Lots should be arranged in a manner that provides the best opportunity for the use of solar energy in buildings subsequently constructed on the lots. As a general rule, lot arrangements should enable principal buildings to be situated so that each longest axis lies in an east/west direction, so as to expose the front or rear of the building to the south. Attention should be given to ensuring that expected building locations are not shaded by topographic features or by buildings on adjoining properties.
6.1.5 Where a lot in a subdivision has frontage on, or potential access from more than one roadway, it shall be accessed by the lower intensity roadway unless alternative access is specifically approved by the Commission upon recommendation of the Town Engineer.
6.2 ROADS
6.2.1 All roads in any subdivision shall have free access to one or more State highways or Town approved roads.
6.2.2 Where the proposed subdivision abuts an existing Town road, the applicant shall consult with the Board of Selectmen to determine the right-of-way width along such road and the possible need to deed additional land to permit its widening. All subdivision approvals shall require that all land within a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet from the centerline of the traveled portion of existing roads be deeded to the Town of North Stonington and this shall be so noted on the map presented to the Commission for approval. In industrial and commercial subdivisions, the land required shall be a minimum of thirty (30) feet from the road centerline.
A. No lots shall be conveyed by the applicant until the road right-of-way for the entire subdivision along its frontage with an existing Town Road, as denoted on the plan, has been deeded to and accepted by the Town or an executable deed has be submitted to the Town for recording purposes.
6.2.3 Road jogs with centerline offset of less than one hundred and twenty-five (125) feet shall be avoided.
6.2.4 Except where impractical because of topography or other conditions, all roads shall join each other so that for a distance of at least fifty (50) feet the road is at right angles to the road it joins and has a maximum grade of three (3) percent.
6.2.5 Four-way intersections shall generally be minimized and shall, in any event, be specifically approved by the Commission upon recommendation of the Town Engineer.
SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS
SECTION
6
Page- 26 Section 6- Subdivision Design Standards
6.2.6 To the maximum extent possible, roads shall be laid out in a generally east/west direction to facilitate solar orientation of buildings on abutting lots.
6.2.7 The road standards presented in Table 6-1 shall be complied with unless:
A. a waiver is granted by the Commission in accordance with Section 3.5 of these Regulations, or
B. an alternative design standard (such as a boulevard or a hammerhead turnaround, for example) is found by the Commission to be acceptable in the specific circumstances.
6.2.8 Cul-de-Sac Length Limitation
A. Unless otherwise approved by the Commission, no permanent cul-de-sac shall be created that:
1. is less than two hundred and fifty (250) feet in length; or
2. exceeds six hundred (600) feet in length measured from the center of the nearest intersection, whether inside or outside of the subdivision that has two (2) means of access and egress to the center of the turnaround.
B. With receipt of approval that authorizes a modification of the provisions of the road ordinance, a greater length for a permanent cul-de-sac may be permitted by the Commission for:
1. significant preservation of open space;
2. significant preservation of natural features;
3. exemplary overall subdivision design;
4. the demonstrated likelihood of future road extension and connection to other streets providing an alternative means of access and egress; or
5. the creation of similar community benefits.
C. If allowing a greater length of cul-de-sac, the Commission may, in its sole discretion, require or accept plan modifications which offset the increased development in a less accessible location, such as:
1. increased pavement thickness and/or road shoulders that will accommodate emergency vehicles;
2. increased open space preservation and/or fewer lots in the overall development; and/or
3. other improvements such as significant community amenities.
SECTION
6
SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS
Section 6- Subdivision Design Standards Page-27
FIGURE 6-1: MEASURING THE LENGTH OF CUL-DE-SACS
6.3 SIDEWALKS AND TRAILS
6.3.1 Every subdivision shall, unless waived by the Commission, make provision for pedestrian and/or bicycle accessibility and circulation and this requirement may, with approval of the Commission, be met through:
A. the provision of stone dust (or other material acceptable to the Commission) greenway trails within open space areas on the land being subdivided or, with approval of the landowner and the Commission, on other open space areas in North Stonington;
B. the provision of stone dust (or other material acceptable to the Commission) greenway trails on one side of the street on the land being subdivided or, with approval of the Commission, elsewhere in North Stonington;
C. the provision of sidewalks on one side of the street on the land being subdivided within a 1-mile radius of a school or other major generator of pedestrian traffic or, with approval of the Commission, elsewhere in North Stonington;
D. the provision of sidewalks unrelated to roads as may be required by the Commission, where pedestrian access to schools, shopping, or employment centers is possible; and/or
E. the provision of an easement to the Town of North Stonington for future trails or sidewalks.
F. All sidewalks must be a minimum width of five (5) feet, made of concrete with a minimum thickness of four (4) inches.
SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS
SECTION
6
Page- 28 Section 6- Subdivision Design Standards
6.4 DRAINAGE
An adequate system of storm water drainage shall be provided and no natural watercourse shall be altered or obstructed in such a way as to reduce the natural runoff capacity unless substitute means of runoff are provided. If deemed necessary by the Commission, the developer shall provide additional capacity in adjacent culverts and other drainage features for accommodating increased runoff from the proposed development. All existing and proposed drainage systems shall be indicated on plans and profile sheets as to their material, size, and location.
6.4.1 The quantity of storm water carried by drains shall be determined by the method prescribed in Technical Release No. 55 of the U. S. Soil Conservation Service, and the design storm shall be fifty (50) years except for bridges, in which case it shall be one hundred (100) years.
6.4.2 Drainage rights-of-way through lots shall be at least twenty (20) feet wide, and follow property lines wherever possible. The Commission may require culverts and other storm water drainage installations, where it deems necessary, to connect with one or more natural watercourses. All necessary easements for drainage shall be provided prior to plan approval.
6.5 FLOODING CONSIDERATIONS
The Commission shall determine that proposed subdivisions are reasonably safe from flooding. When a subdivision is proposed in an "A" Zone on the Town’s Flood Hazard Boundary Map or Flood Insurance Rate Map, it shall be reviewed to assure the following:
6.5.1 That all proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage within the flood-prone areas.
6.5.2 That all public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
6.5.3 That adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
6.5.4 That new and replacement water supply systems are designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems.
6.5.5 That new and replacement sanitary sewer systems are designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems or discharges from the systems into floodwaters.
6.5.6 That on-site sewage disposal systems are located to avoid their impairment or contamination from them during flooding.
6.5.7 The Planning and Zoning Commission shall require the applicant to provide BFE data for all subdivision proposals, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions. In all special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation (BFE) data is not available, the applicant shall provide a hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analysis performed by a registered professional engineer that generates BFEs for all subdivision proposals and other proposed development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions.
SECTION
6
SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS
Section 6- Subdivision Design Standards Page-29
6.6 OPEN SPACE, PARKS, PLAYGROUNDS, AND MUNICIPAL LAND
6.6.1 General
A. As provided for in Connecticut General Statutes Section 8-25, every subdivision of land for residential use shall provide for open space in order to:
1. protect and conserve natural features;
2. protect and conserve community resources;
3. establish greenbelts and other linkages that connect open spaces;
4. provide for parks, playgrounds, and other active and passive recreation areas;
5. supplement existing open space areas;
6. provide, protect, or enhance local trails;
7. protect and provide for the preservation of agricultural land and uses;
8. implement the open space and other recommendations in the Plan of Conservation and Development;
9. protect and preserve the rural character of the Town of North Stonington by retaining natural open space areas and scenic views where they are most visible from public roads and parks and by preventing unsightly development of ridge tops and providing natural buffers;
10. protect and preserve forest resources;
11. protect and preserve natural resources including ledge outcroppings, stands of unique trees, unusual or unique wildlife habitats and other unusual and unique topographical and physical features;
12. protect and preserve historical and cultural resources, including historic and prehistoric archaeological sites, stone walls, trails, and cemeteries;
13. protect ground water, watersheds, aquifers and other aquatic resources; and/or
14. protect important ecological resources.
B. This open space requirement may, with approval of the Commission, be met through:
1. dedication of land within the proposed subdivision or resubdivision in fee or by conveyance of a conservation easement;
2. dedication of land acceptable to the Commission elsewhere in North Stonington,
3. a fee-in-lieu-of-land donation;
4. dedication of land and a fee-in-lieu-of-land-donation; or
5. some other arrangement that shall be found by the Commission to be acceptable (such as a scenic preservation easement, a trail easement, a conservation easement, or similar proposal).
SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS
SECTION
6
Page- 30 Section 6- Subdivision Design Standards
C. The Commission may solicit or accept comment regarding the proposed land dedication from any Town board or commission, Town official, land trust, or qualified consultant with respect to:
1. the need for a land dedication in the subdivision;
2. the land resources available;
3. the implications of a dedication in relation to open space system in the Town; and/or
4. preferred ownership.
6.6.36.6.2 Dedication of Land
A. Where the open space requirement shall be met through the dedication of land:
1. at least fifteen (15) percent of the total area of the subdivision shall be so dedicated; and
2. unless waived or modified by the Commission, the area reserved to meet the minimum dedication requirement shall not consist of a greater percentage of area classified as wetland, watercourse, 100-year floodplain, or slopes in excess of twenty-five (25) percent than the parcel as whole. Such information shall be provided for the overall parcel and the proposed open space by a Connecticut-licensed civil engineer or a Connecticut-licensed landscape architect.
EXAMPLE: Say a fifty (50) acre parcel of land is being subdivided and twenty (20) percent of the entire parcel is wetland, watercourse, 100-year floodplain, or steep slopes.
Regulation 6.6.2(A)(1) requires that at least fifteen (15) percent of the fifty (50) acres shall be provided as open space (at least seven and one half (7.5) acres).
Regulation 6.6.2(A)(2) requires that no more than twenty (20) percent of the seven and one half (7.5) acres can be wetland, watercourse, 100-year floodplain, or steep slopes (no more than one and a half (1.5) acres). In other words, six (6) acres of the open space must be land that is not wetland, watercourse, 100-year floodplain, or steep slopes.
More land on the parcel may be dedicated as open space but at least six (6) acres of the open space must be land that is not wetland, watercourse, 100-year floodplain, or steep slopes.
B. If an applicant/developer transfers land to the Town for municipal purposes other than for required road widening, such transfer may be considered by the Commission as a credit toward any dedication requirements.
1. Such dedication shall be in locations deemed proper by the Commission.
2. Such dedication shall be shown on the subdivision plan or on another suitable map if located elsewhere in North Stonington.
SECTION
6
SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS
Section 6- Subdivision Design Standards Page-31
C. When a subdivision abuts an existing open space, the Commission may require the lot lines of such land form a continuation of the existing open space to provide a single, unified area.
D. Land intended for dedication shall be suitable for the purpose intended.
E. The Commission may defer the requirements for the immediate provision of such land in a subdivision, which is a part of a larger tract of land, provided that the applicant/developer dedicates an area of land in the undeveloped portion of the tract equal to the requirements of this section in the developed portion.
F. In determining the appropriateness of an area proposed for open space or other public purposes, the Commission shall consider:
1. recommendations in the Plan of Conservation and Development, the presence or absence of any existing or potential dedicated open spaces in the area,
2. the opportunities to interconnect existing, proposed, and future open space dedications into a comprehensive greenway and trail system,
3. the size of the subdivision, and
4. responses to any referrals regarding need, resources, connection to the open space system of the Town and preferred ownership.
G. Fee title or a conservation easement shall be deeded in perpetuity and the applicant shall designate which entity is, or entities are, proposed to own the fee title or conservation easement to ensure its permanent protection as provided in these Regulations. The following are acceptable grantees of open space:
1. the Town for conservation or other purposes; or
2. the Town for active recreational purposes after all improvements have been completed; or
3. a recognized private organization legally constituted to accept and to maintain land for conservation purposes (such as a land trust) under terms acceptable to the Commission; or
4. a private association consisting of the owners of the lots within the subdivision (i.e. homeowners’ association) for specified recreational or conservation purposes upon such terms and conditions, as approved by the Commission, that will protect the public welfare and assure the continued use of the open space for the purpose intended. A copy of the homeowner’s deed and the by-laws of the homeowners’ association shall be submitted with the application.
H. Fee title or a conservation easement deeded to a private organization or a home owners’ association and shall provide in such deed that ownership shall revert to the Town for recreational or conservation purposes if such corporation or association shall cease to exist or shall relinquish ownership. If the land in question has been preserved as open space prior to the filing of the application via a conservation easement, it shall be sufficient that the existing conservation easement contains a reverter clause to a recognized private organization legally constituted to accept and
SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS
SECTION
6
Page- 32 Section 6- Subdivision Design Standards
to maintain land for conservation purposes (such as land trust) or is otherwise satisfactory to the Commission.
I. The Commission may require that any land have direct access to a public road through a right-a-way dedicated to public use and that it be graded and improved to allow for pedestrian access.
J. Land areas to be dedicated for open space shall not be used as a depository for brush, stumps, earth, building materials, or debris, except as may arise from activities permitted under a conservation easement.
K. Whenever the Commission has required land areas to be dedicated for open space, standard markers (available from the Town) shall be placed in the field delineating the area. No endorsement of the approved plans shall occur, and no mylars shall be recorded with the Town Clerk until the applicant has verified in writing that the markers have been installed and the Commission, or its delegated representative, has field verified the installation.
L. Where land reserved for open space abuts land used for residential purposes or other uses that are reasonably likely to lead to encroachment, its boundaries shall be set in the field and marked by permanent, readily visible markers at the intersection of any lot line, road or perimeter lines and at intervals along the boundaries of all open space parcels deemed sufficient by the Commission to protect the open space land from encroachment and insure that its boundaries are identifiable.
M. Where open space or easements are provided without frontage or other public access, a right of way shall be granted to the recipient of the open space or easement for the purpose of maintenance and monitoring.
6.6.3 Fee In Lieu of Open Space
A. Where dedication of land as open space will not meet the purposes of this section, the Commission may:
1. authorize the applicant/developer to pay a fee to the Town, or pay a fee to the Town and transfer land to the Town in lieu of any requirement to provide land, or
2. request the applicant/developer pay a fee to the Town or pay a fee to the Town and transfer land in lieu of the requirement to provide land.
B. If payment of a fee in lieu of open space is proposed by the applicant/developer, the Commission may refuse such fee if it determines, in its sole discretion, that there are acceptable areas on the Subdivision, which merit preservation by one of the methods, set forth in these Regulations.
SECTION
6
SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS
Section 6- Subdivision Design Standards Page-33
C. The open space payment shall be placed in the Town’s Open Space Fund.
D. Unless otherwise agreed by the Commission and the applicant/developer, (such as a fee based upon the assessed market value of the land or other basis), fee in lieu of open space procedures shall be in accordance with Connecticut General Statutes 8-25, as amended, provided that any required appraisal shall be performed by a Senior Residential Appraiser (SRA) or a Member Appraisal Institute (MAI).
E. The fee in lieu of open space may be paid in one lump sum by the applicant/developer or may be made in partial payments at the time of the sale of each approved lot in the subdivision. If partial payments are to be made, each payment shall be prorated in value relative to the number of approved lots in the subdivision.
F. When fractional payments are provided in lieu of open space, the applicant/developer shall execute a mortgage securing the fee-in-lieu-of-open space and such mortgage shall be recorded on the Town of North Stonington Land Records with a priority, form, and substance acceptable to the Town Land Use Attorney. Partial releases shall be provided upon the tender of each fractional payment.
6.6.4 Open Space Dedication Exemption. In accordance with Connecticutwith Connecticut General Statutes 8-25 as amended, the open space dedication requirement shall not apply if:
A. the transfer of all land in a subdivision of less than five (5) parcels is to a parent, child, brother, sister, grandparent, grandchild, aunt, uncle, or first cousin for no consideration; or
B. the subdivision contains affordable housing, as defined in Connecticut General Statutes Section 8-39a, equal to twenty percent (20) percent or more of the total housing to be constructed in such subdivision.
6.7 ROAD SIGNS
Road name signs shall be placed at all intersections on at least two (2) diagonally opposite corners. In the case of a T-junction, only one (1) sign shall be required.
6.7.1 Roads that join, or are in alignment with roads of an adjoining or neighboring property, shall bear the same name.
6.7.2 No duplication of road names shall be permitted except as indicated in Section 6.7.1, and all road names shall be subject to the approval of the Commission.
6.8 EASEMENTS
Easements for utilities across lots, or centered on rear or side lot lines, shall be provided where necessary and shall be at least twelve (12) feet wide.
6.8.1 Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainage way, channel or stream, the Commission may require that a storm water easement or drainage right-of-way be provided of adequate width to conform substantially to the lines of such watercourse, drainage way, channel or stream, and to provide for construction or other necessary purposes.
6.9 PROTECTION OF NATURAL AND HISTORIC FEATURES
SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS
SECTION
6
Page- 34 Section 6- Subdivision Design Standards
Due regard shall be shown for all natural and historic features, such as large trees, watercourses, scenic points, historic spots, and similar community assets, which, if preserved, will add attractiveness and value to the subdivision.
6.10 FIRE PROTECTION
6.10.1 Contingent upon receipt of a favorable recommendation from the Fire Department by the close of the public hearing on an application, each subdivision shall, at the applicant/developer’s expense, provide supplemental water supply system(s) in order to protect public safety. Such supplemental water systems, where required by the Commission upon recommendation of the Fire Department, may include:
A. a dry hydrant accessing a pond with adequate water supply for firefighting purposes;
B. an underground tank or cistern providing adequate water supply for firefighting purposes; or
C. individual fire protection sprinkler systems within homes.
6.10.2 The Fire Department may review and comment on the proposed location, size, design, construction specifications, and installation of such supplemental water supply system(s) and access thereto.
6.10.3 An as-built drawing shall be provided to the Fire Department prior to any request for acceptance of such supplemental water supply system(s).
6.10.4 The Fire Department will notify the Town upon acceptance of such supplemental water supply system(s).
6.10.5 The land area containing any supplemental water supply system(s) and access thereto shall, as necessary, be encumbered by easements approved by the Town Attorney to ensure the Town’s perpetual right to access and maintain any supplemental water supply system(s) and access thereto for firefighting purposes, and obligate the property owners to not inhibit the use of the fire protection facility for firefighting purposes without the approval of the Fire Department.
6.10.6 The Commission may require the use of landscaping or other materials to screen pipes, access drives, or other structures associated with the installation of supplemental water supply system(s). Such landscaping or other materials shall be approved by the Fire Department.
6.10.7 All fire protection measures required by the Commission and the Fire Department shall be completed prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for any dwelling in the subdivision.
TABLE 6-1
ROAD DESIGN STANDARDS
CHARACTERISTICS
RESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISION
COMMERCIAL OR INDUSTRIAL SUBDIVISION
Right-of-way width
50 feet
60 feet
Width of travel lanes (2 each)
12 Feet
12 Feet
Number of parking lanes (if required)
1
2
SECTION
6
SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS
Section 6- Subdivision Design Standards Page-35
Width of parking lanes (if required)
8 feet
10 feet
Total pavement width
24 feet
32 feet
Planting strip (2 each)
10 feet
2 feet
Sidewalk
See Section 6.3(When required minimum width shall be 5’)
See Section 6.3. (When required minimum width shall be 5’)
Radii at Curb-line Corner
25 feet
30 feet
Radii at Right-of-Way Corner
15 feet
20 feet
Centerline radius (horizontal)
150 feet
270 feet
Sight distance at intersection with State Highway
575 feet
575 feet
Sight distance at intersection with Town Road
350 feet
350 feet
Tangent distance between reverse curves
100 feet
100 feet
Block length (maximum)
None
None
Block length (minimum)
400 feet
400 Feet
Cul-de-sac length (maximum as measured from the center of the intersection road to the center of the turn-around)
Minimum Length – 250’
Maximum Length – 600’
See Section 6.2.8
Minimum Length – 250’
Maximum Length – 600’
See Section 6.2.8
Cul-de-sac turn-around right-of-way diameter (minimum)
100 feet
120 feet
Cul-de-sac turn-around pavement diameter (minimum
80 feet
100 feet
Cul-de-sac Center Islands on Cul-de-Sacs
Encouraged
Not Allowed
Gradient minimum
.05 %
.05 %
Gradient maximum
12%
8%
Curbing
Granite or Portland cement slope curbing unless waived by the Commission per Section 7.4.2
Granite or Portland cement slope curbing unless waived by the Commission per Section 7.4.2
Minimum pipe drain diameter
15 inches
15 inches
Temporary Cul-De-Sac
Design For Future
Cul-De Sac Extension
Temporary Cul-De-Sac
Design For Future
Lateral Road Connection
SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS
SECTION
6
Page- 36 Section 6- Subdivision Design Standards
Permanent Cul-De-Sac
Design With
Landscape Center Island
Permanent Cul-De-Sac
Design With
“Hammerhead” Turnaround
Road Cross-Section (with “Cape Cod” Curb)
“Cape Cod” Curb Detail
SECTION
6
SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS
Section 6- Subdivision Design Standards Page-37
Concrete Slope Curb Detail
6”x12” precast concrete curb with ½” minimum mortar joints
1:3:6 mixture of dry concrete to 4” minimum depth all around
Aggregate sub-base
SECTION
7
IMPROVEMENT SPECIFICATIONS
Section 7 – Improvement Specifications Page-37
7.1 MONUMENTS
Monuments shall be set at corners and angles of all roads and at all points of curvature and points of tangency of curved roads. Monuments shall be set plumb, in line with road lines one (1) inch above finish grade. They shall be of granite or reinforced concrete, not less than four (4) inches square and thirty (30) inches long, with a brass or copper plug or drill hole marking the center of the square. No permanent monuments shall be installed until all construction that could destroy or disturb the monuments is completed.
7.1.1 At least one (1) front corner of each lot shall be marked with a monument. Markers indicating all other lot boundaries may be solid iron rod, one (1) inch outside diameter, three (3) feet long, all set so that six (6) inches of rod is exposed above proposed grades.
7.2 ROAD GRADING
The entire area of each road within its exterior lines shall be cleared of all stumps, brush, roots, rocks, or boulders, and like material; and of all trees and shrubs not intended for preservation. Existing trees and shrubs standing within the exterior lines of the road, and suitable for preservation, shall be shown on the plan and may be preserved with the approval of the Commission.
7.2.1 Within each road, the full length and width of the roadway shall be excavated to a depth of at least eighteen and one half (18.5) inches below the finished surface or filled, as necessary, to a sub grade parallel to the finished grade herein specified. If the soil is soft or yielding, or contains rocks or boulders, clay, sand pockets, peat or other material detrimental to the sub grade, such material shall be removed to such additional depth as required by the Board of Selectmen and replaced with an approved well-compacted material, such as two and one half (2.5) inch trap rock. Where fills are very deep, the material shall be placed in layers of approximately six (6) inches and thoroughly compacted.
7.2.2 The roadway sub grade shall be inspected as provided hereafter (second inspection) prior to any further roadway construction. However, this inspection may be combined with the inspection of underground services (first inspection) at the election of the subdivider (see Section 7.16 of these Regulations).
7.2.3 Existing Roads
A. Access Improvements. Whenever any subdivision is proposed for land accessible only by an unpaved road, or by an existing Town Road that does not conform with the minimum requirements of grade, alignment, width and construction set forth in these regulations, or in the Town Road Ordinance (as amended), and the Commission determines that the subdivision plan would be contrary to the public safety unless such road was altered or improved where it fronts the proposed subdivision, the Commission may disapprove such plan or may condition its approval upon alteration of such street by and at the expense of the sub-divider, or may disapprove such plan until the Board of Selectmen has authorized expenditures for such improvements.
B. Frontage Improvements. Whenever any subdivision is proposed for land which fronts on an existing Town Road which does not conform with the minimum requirements of width and construction set forth in these Regulations, the sub-divider shall improve such frontage from the centerline of the road to the required frontage
IMPROVEMENT SPECIFICATIONS
SECTION
7
Page - 38 Section 7 – Improvement Specifications
road line, in accordance with these Regulations and/or Town Road Ordinance (as amended). Where such improvement from the centerline is impractical, the Commission may require improvements of comparable value to be performed along the existing road frontage of the subdivision, or adjacent frontage impacted by the subdivision. In the alternative, the Commission may require that the cost of such improvements shall be paid to the Board of Selectmen, or its designated agent, in lieu of the completion of such improvements by the applicant. Such payment shall be held in a separate fund to be used exclusively for the improvements of the subject road in ways that directly benefit the future owners of the lots in the subdivision.
In making the determinations set forth in the preceding two (2) paragraphs, the Commission shall take into account the road’s ability to handle the increased volumes of traffic which will be generated by the proposed subdivision, the ability of school buses and emergency vehicles to travel the road safely, the drainage conditions of the road, and the general ability of any vehicle to use the road safely.
C. Scenic Roads; Stone Walls. Frontage improvements, as described in the proceeding section, may be modified by the Commission in order to achieve the objectives of the Scenic Roads Ordinance (as amended). In addition, the Commission may waive any requirements for improvements described in this regulation in order to preserve existing stone walls or other historic items that are a part of the Town’s historic character. Any modifications pursuant to this paragraph shall be in accordance with the Scenic Road Ordinance (as amended) and the Zoning and Subdivision Regulations.
D. Exemption. The requirements of these Regulations (7.2.3) as they apply to a subdivision of three (3) or less building lots for conveyance to family members from the resident parcel owner, may be waived by a 3/4 vote of the Commission.
7.3 ROAD CONSTRUCTION
Roadways shall be constructed for the full length and width. The centerline of such roadways shall coincide with the centerline of the road right-of-way, unless a minor variation is specifically approved by the Commission.
7.3.1 Roadways shall be provided with a twelve (12) inch base course, a four (4) inch penetrated stone course, and a two and one half (2.5) inch wearing surface.
7.3.2 A rolled gravel base course shall be spread over the sub grade rolled and compacted in six (6) inch layers with a 10-ton roller, 15-ton in commercial and industrial subdivision, to a depth of twelve (12) inches and shall conform to the typical cross section.
7.3.3 The penetrated stone course shall be uniformly blended and shall conform to the requirements of the current edition of the Connecticut Department of Transportation, Bureau of Highways Standard Specifications for Roads, Bridges, and Incidental Construction and shall consist of clean two (2) inch course aggregate evenly applied and rolled to a depth of four (4) inches. The rolling shall be sufficient to form a uniform surface. These surfaces shall then be penetrated with penetration asphalt, applying between 1.35 and 1.75 gallons per square yard. Immediately following the applications of the penetration asphalt, sufficient one half (.5) inch keystone shall be spread to fill voids and allow a roller to pass over and not break or disturb the top of the stone course. This shall then be rolled to a smooth true surface two and one half (2.5) inches below the
SECTION
7
IMPROVEMENT SPECIFICATIONS
Section 7 – Improvement Specifications Page-39
proposed finished grade as shown on the profile, and having a transverse grade parallel to that shown on the applicable cross-section plan. Prior to any further construction, the roadway shall again be inspected as hereinafter provided (third inspection).
7.3.4 All road-wearing surfaces shall be paved to the full width specified herein to a compacted thickness of three (3) inches with Bituminous Concrete Pavement. The aggregate shall be composed, mixed, and laid out in two courses as specified in the Connecticut Department of Transportation, Bureau of Highways Standard Specifications for Roads, Bridges, and Incidental Construction.
7.3.5 Upon completion of the pavement, the roadway shall again be inspected, as hereinafter provided (fourth inspection).
7.4 CURBING
Unless waived by vote of the Commission, curbing shall be installed along each edge of the roadway on all roads as shown on the plan.
7.4.1 When curbed intersections involve one (1) or more roads having grassed shoulders, the curbing shall be placed at the edge of the roadway and the pavement on the road or roads with such shoulders shall be widened to the full width of the roadway (thus meeting the curb) within fifty (50) feet of the intersection, tapering down to normal width within seventy-five (75) feet thereof.
7.4.2 Curbing required hereunder shall be either standard granite or Portland cement concrete curbing, as required by the Commission as specified in the Connecticut Department of Transportation, Bureau of Highways Standard Specifications for Roads, Bridges, and Incidental Construction.
7.5 SIDEWALKS AND TRAILS
Sidewalks shall be constructed as required in Section 6.3 of these Regulations.
7.5.1 Sidewalks shall have a finished grade in relation to the finished grade of the roadway as shown on the applicable cross-section plan. When unusual physical land characteristics or topographic conditions require, the Commission may approve the placement of a sidewalk at a greater distance from the roadway or at a higher or lower elevation in relation thereto, provided such variation is indicated on the plan.
7.5.2 In constructing all sidewalks, the material shall be removed for the full width of the sidewalk to the sub grade at least ten (10) inches below the approved finished grade, and also all soft spots and other undesirable material below such sub grade shall be replaced with a good binding material and rolled with a 2-ton roller or equivalent. Unless the applicant elects to install cement concrete sidewalks (built according to specifications of the Connecticut Department of Transportation), the excavated area shall be filled with at least eight (8) inches of select gravel containing some binding material and compressed and rolled to a surface with the pitch parallel to that shown on the applicable cross-section plan. Sidewalks shall then be paved to a thickness of two (2) inches with bituminous concrete pavement.
7.5.3 In residential developments, public trails interconnecting activity nodes in North Stonington and existing and potential future protected open space are preferred to
IMPROVEMENT SPECIFICATIONS
SECTION
7
Page - 40 Section 7 – Improvement Specifications
sidewalks. Public trails or sidewalks, where required by the Commission, shall be constructed as follows.
7.5.4 Public trails shall be built to a minimum width of five (5) feet with existing material removed to a depth of six (6) inches and replaced with stone dust.
7.6 DRAINAGE
The construction of the drainage system, including methods of construction and quality of materials used, shall be in conformity with the subdivision plan and the details shall conform to the details of these Regulations and of the Connecticut Department of Transportation Standards Specifications, unless specifically accepted by the Commission.
7.6.1 All catch basins shall be constructed of brick (either clay or concrete, or of cement concrete, or of cement concrete blocks, laid in mortar and plastered on the outside, and standard “D” frames and grates.) Granite head walls shall be installed where required by the Board of Selectmen. A granite mouth curb is to be furnished and set as directed by the Board of Selectmen. All catch basins shall have an inside diameter of at least four (4) feet, and shall be constructed to a minimum depth of four (4) feet below the invert of the outflow pipe. Joints of all drainpipes shall be sealed unless open joints are specifically approved by the Board of Selectmen. All drainage pipes shall be reinforced concrete; there shall be a minimum cover of two (2) feet.
7.6.2 Pipe drains, where used, should be designed to flow full with the hydraulic gradient at the crown. However, in flat slope areas, surcharge may be allowed with the hydraulic gradient at a minimum depth of one (1) foot below the ground level. In determining the capacity of concrete pipe drains, the Manning formula should be used with the coefficient of fraction “n” equal to 0.013. The minimum velocity at design flow should be two and one half (2.5) feet per second (fps) and the maximum should be fifteen (15) fps.
7.6.3 In some cases, earth and stone-paved open channels should be used. The typical section of the earth channel should have a flat bottom and side slopes of one (1) vertical on two (2) horizontal with the top of the slope at least one (1) foot higher than the design water surface. The maximum velocity allowed in an open earth channel at design flow should be six (6) fps. A coefficient of friction “n” equal to 0.030 should be used for both the earth and stone-paved channels.
7.6.4 Where feasible, stormwater should be directed to enter the nearest open stream channel. Stormwater shall not be permitted to cross any roadway upon the surface, but must be piped underground. Catch basins shall be located on both sides of the roadway on continuous grades at intervals of not more than three hundred (300) feet for commercial and industrial subdivisions, and four hundred (400) feet for all other subdivisions, at all sags in the roadway, and near the corners of the roadway at intersecting roads.
7.6.5 Proper connections shall be made with any existing public drainage system within four hundred (400) feet of the subdivision. Where adjacent property is not subdivided and no public drain is within four hundred (400) feet, provisions shall be made for extension of the system by continuing appropriate drains to the exterior boundaries of the subdivision, at such size and grade as will allow for their proper protection.
7.6.6 All storm drains, sewers, culverts, manholes, water mains and laterals, shutoff valves, and hydrants shall be inspected prior to any back filling of trenches or other covering of
SECTION
7
IMPROVEMENT SPECIFICATIONS
Section 7 – Improvement Specifications Page-41
structure. Following such inspection, the fill material shall be carefully placed around the structures and rammed and compacted to a depth of one (1) foot before completing the filling.
7.6.7 No more than fifty (50) feet of surface drainage from any driveway shall drain directly onto a State highway or Town-accepted road without specific approval from the First Selectman or Town Engineer.
7.6.8 Subdivision drainage designs should demonstrate a zero increase in the peak rate of Runoff (100 year storm) from the site after development unless such requirement is waived by the Commission upon recommendation of the Town Engineer.
7.6.9 Detention basins, which are designed to be self-draining and have a positive drainage outlet, are encouraged to mitigate the accelerated runoff, which can result from development, and to renovate storm water runoff. Retention basins are discouraged. No basin shall have a side slope steeper than 4:1 unless waived by the Commission upon recommendation of the Town Engineer.
7.6.10 Infiltration or dry well drainage systems are discouraged unless such systems are designed with a positive storm drainage outlet. It shall be the sole discretion of the Commission shall determine if such systems are appropriate
7.7 PLANTING STRIPS
Planting strips of a width required by Table 6-1, and in accordance with the layout as shown on the plan, shall be provided on each side of the roadway.
7.7.1 The finished grade of such planting strips in relation to the finished grade of the roadway shall be as shown on the applicable cross-section plan. Where unusual physical land characteristics or topographic conditions exist or where trees, shrubs, or other natural features are suitable for preservation because of their location, species, or condition, the Commission may approve the construction of a planting strip irregular or sloped in cross section, provided such variation is indicated on the plan, and that no portion of the planting strip will project above a plane sloped two horizontal to one vertical upward from the edge of the roadway or be below a plane sloped two horizontal to one vertical downward.
7.7.2 No utility poles or trees shall be placed or retained within the planting strip so as to be closer than six (6) feet from the edge of the roadway.
7.8 SIDE SLOPES
The area in back of the sidewalk or, where no sidewalk is constructed, the area in back of the required planting strip shall be graded to a point where it coincides with the finished grade of abutting lots in such a manner that no portion thereof within the exterior lines of the road will project above a plane sloped two horizontal to one vertical from the edge of the sidewalk or grass lot, or be below a plane sloped two horizontal to one vertical downward.
7.9 GUIDE RAILS
Guide rails shall be placed along all roads as deemed necessary by the Commission, and shall be of such quantity and quality, as the Commission shall direct. The Commission may require the use of wooden or core ten guard rail systems.
IMPROVEMENT SPECIFICATIONS
SECTION
7
Page - 42 Section 7 – Improvement Specifications
7.10 LOAMING
The top four (4) inches of planting strips and side slopes shall consist of good quality loam, screened, raked, and rolled with a hand roller to grade. The loam shall be seeded with lawn grass seed applied in sufficient quantity to assure adequate coverage, rolled when the loam is moist.
7.11 ROAD SIGNS
Road signs which, in the opinion of the Commission, are of the type commonly used on public ways in the Town, and bearing the names of the road as indicated on the plan, shall be erected at all intersections of roads in the subdivision as prescribed in Section 6.7 of these Regulations.
7.12 WATER SUPPLY
Water supply and distribution systems shall be installed in accordance with the specifications of the Southeastern Connecticut Water Authority (SCWA) or the Connecticut Department of Health, whichever has jurisdiction. In accordance with Section 13 of Special Act 67-381, as amended by Special Act 73-133 of the Connecticut General Assembly, SCWA may exercise jurisdiction when it is the intention of the applicant to develop a well water supply on the basis of studies that indicate a maximum requirement in excess of fifty (50) gallons per minute, or when the tract to be subdivided contains fifty (50) acres or more and is intended to contain two (2) or more dwelling units to be served by a single water supply.
7.13 SEWAGE DISPOSAL
All sewage shall be disposed of by subsurface sewage disposal systems approved by the Town Health Officer or by other methods approved by the Department of Environmental Protection or the State Department of Health, all in accordance with the appropriate provisions of the Connecticut Public Health Code.
7.14 UNDERGROUND SERVICES
Utilities on every lot within the subdivision, whether serving that lot or another lot, shall be installed underground; except where, in the opinion of the Zoning Enforcement Officer, and described in writing by him or her, this burial will cause irreversible environmental damage or could present an unsafe condition.
For all new subdivision roads, and new installations on existing roads that abut and serve the subdivision, all utilities shall be installed underground except surface-mounted transformers, connection boxes, meter cabinets, and temporary utility service lines during construction.
7.15 CLEAN UP
The entire area must be cleaned up so as to leave a neat and orderly appearance free from debris and other objectionable materials. All catch basins shall be properly cleaned out.
7.15.1 Following the completion of this and other items of work, a final inspection (fifth inspection) shall be made.
7.16 INSPECTION AND CONTROL
The applicant shall employ, at his/her own expense, an engineer to set all lines and grades in a manner satisfactory to the Commission.
7.16.1 At the points herein before indicated, the construction of required improvements shall be inspected by the Commission, Board of Selectmen, Town Health Officer, or their
SECTION
7
IMPROVEMENT SPECIFICATIONS
Section 7 – Improvement Specifications Page-43
appointed agents, and unless each point has been given in writing, no further work shall be done until work is subsequently completed to such point to the written satisfaction of the Commission.
7.16.2 Inspection shall be requested by the subdivider at least forty-eight (48) hours in advance by notice to the Commission or its duly authorized representative.
IMPROVEMENT SPECIFICATIONS
SECTION
7
Page - 44 Section 7 – Improvement Specifications
SECTION
8
VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
Section 8 – Violations and Penalties Page -45
8.1 CRIMINAL
Any subdivider, person, firm, or corporation making any subdivision of land without first obtaining the approval of the Commission shall be fined not more than $500 for each lot sold or offered for sale or so subdivided.
8.2 CIVIL
The Commission, acting through its chairman, shall have full authority provided by law to enforce compliance with these Regulations, including instituting legal action for injunctive relief.
VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
SECTION
8
Page - 46 Section 8 – Violations and Penalties
SECTION
9
SEPARABILITY
Section 9 – Separability Page - 47
9.1 SEPARABILITY
If any section, subsection, sentence, or portion of these Regulations is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court or competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and independent provision, and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof.
SEPARABILITY
SECTION
9
Page - 48 Section 9 – Separability
SECTION
10
APPEALS
Section 10 – Appeals Page - 49
10.1 APPEALS
Any person claiming to be aggrieved by a decision of the Commission may appeal in the Superior Court pursuant and subject to the provisions of Connecticut General Statues Chapters 124 and 126.
APPEALS
SECTION
10
Page - 50 Section 10 – Appeals

INLAND WETLANDS
AND
WATERCOURSES REGULATIONS
OF THE
TOWN OF NORTH STONINGTON
Revised March 14, 2012
Effective
March 22, 2012
INLAND WETLANDS AND WATERCOURSES REGULATIONS
FOR THE
TOWN OF NORTH STONINGTON, CONNECTICUT
Pages
Section 1: Title and Authority ................................................................................................1
Section 2: Definitions ......................................................................................................... 2
Section 3: Inventory of Regulated Areas ............................................................................... 6
Section 4: Permitted Uses As of Right & Non-Regulated Uses ...................................... 7
Section 5: Activities Regulated by the State ...................................................................... 9
Section 6: Regulated Activities Subject to Permit.............................................................. 10
Section 7: Application Requirements for Regulated Activities ....................................... 10
Section 8: Application Procedures .................................................................................. 13
Section 9: Public Hearings on Regulated Activity Permits. ............................................... 14
Section 10: Considerations for Decision ........................................................................... 15
Section 11: Decision Process and Permit ....................................................................... 17
Section 12: Extension, Transfer and Modification of Regulated Activity Permits .............. 19
Section 13: Action by Duly Authorized Agent .................................................................... 20
Section 14: Bond and Insurance ........................................................................................... 21
Section 15: Enforcement ................................................................................................... 22
Section 16: Amendments ................................................................................................... 23
Sections 17: Appeals .............................................................................................................. 25
Section 18: Conflict and Severance ...................................................................................... 25
Section 19: Other Permits ..................................................................................................... 26
Section 20: Application Fees ................................................................................................ 26
Section 21: Effective Date of Regulations ........................................................................ 27
-1-
SECTION 1
TITLE AND AUTHORITY
1.1 The inland wetlands and watercourses of the State of Connecticut are an indispensable
and irreplaceable but fragile natural resource with which the citizens of the state have
been endowed. The wetlands and watercourses are an interrelated web of nature essential
to an adequate supply of surface and underground water; to hydrological stability and
control of flooding and erosion; to the recharging and purification of groundwater; and to
the existence of many forms of animal, aquatic and plant life. Many inland wetlands and
watercourses have been destroyed or are in danger of destruction because of unregulated
use by reason of the deposition, filling or removal of material, the diversion or
obstruction of water flow, the erection of structures or other uses, all of which have
despoiled, polluted and eliminated wetlands and watercourses. Such unregulated activity
has had, and will continue to have, a significant, adverse impact on the environment and
ecology of the State of Connecticut and has imperiled and will continue to imperil the
quality of the environment, thus adversely affecting the ecological, scenic, historic and
recreational values and benefits of the State for its citizens now and forever more. The
preservation and protection of the wetlands and watercourses from random, unnecessary,
undesirable and unregulated uses, disturbance or destruction is in the public interest and
is essential to the health, welfare and safety of the citizens of the State. It is, therefore,
the purpose of these regulations to protect the citizens of the State by making provisions
for the protection, preservation, maintenance and use of the inland wetlands and
watercourses by minimizing their disturbance and pollution; maintaining and improving
water quality in accordance with the highest standards set by federal, state or local
authority; preventing damage from erosion, turbidity or siltation; preventing loss of fish
and other beneficial aquatic organisms, wildlife and vegetation and the destruction of the
natural habitats thereof; deterring and inhibiting the danger of flood and pollution;
protecting the quality of wetlands and watercourses for their conservation, economic,
aesthetic, recreational and other public and private uses and values; and protecting the
State's potable fresh water supplies from the dangers of drought, overdraft, pollution,
misuse and mismanagement by providing an orderly process to balance the need for the
economic growth of the State and the use of its land with the need to protect its
environment and ecology in order to forever guarantee to the people of the State the
safety of such natural resources for their benefit and enjoyment and for the benefit and
enjoyment of generations yet unborn.
1.2 These regulations shall be known as the "Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations
of the Town of North Stonington".
1.3 The Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Agency of the Town of North Stonington was
established in accordance with an ordinance adopted 7/15/73, and shall implement the
purposes and provisions of these regulations and the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses
Act in the Town of North Stonington.
1.4 These Regulations have been adopted and may be amended, from time to time, in
accordance with the provisions of the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Act and these
regulations.
1.5 The Agency shall enforce all provisions of the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Act
and shall issue, issue with terms, conditions, limitations or modifications, or deny permits
for all Regulated Activities affecting inland wetlands and watercourses in the Town of
North Stonington pursuant to Sections 22a-36 to 22a-45, inclusive, of the Connecticut
General Statutes, as amended.
-2-
SECTION 2
DEFINITIONS
2.1 As used in these regulations:
a. "ACT" means the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Act, Sections 22a-36
through 22a-45, inclusive, of the Connecticut General Statutes.
b. "AGENCY" or “COMMISSION” means the Inland Wetlands and
Watercourses Commission of the Town of North Stonington.
c. "BOGS" are land areas that are generally characterized by the presence of
surface water, poor or very poor drainage, deposits of peat, and highly acidic
conditions.
d. "BUILDING" means a structure having a roof supported by walls and used or
intended for the shelter of persons or animals.
e. "C.G.S." means the Connecticut General Statutes.
f. "CLEAR-CUTTING" means the harvest of timber products in a manner that
removes every tree having a diameter of two inches or more when measured at
a height of four feet above the average ground level at the base of the tree.
g. "COMMISSION" or "AGENCY" means the Inland Wetlands and
Watercourses Commission of the Town of North Stonington.
h. "COMMISSION MEMBER" means a member or seated alternate of the
Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission of the Town of North
Stonington.
i. "COMMISSIONER OF ENERGY AND ENVIRONMENTAL
PROTECTION" means the Commissioner of the State of Connecticut
Department of Energy and Environmental Protection.
j. "CONNECTICUT GENERAL STATUTES" means the most current
version of the Connecticut General Statutes, as they may have been amended,
unless the context expressly requires a different meaning.
k. "CONTINUAL FLOW" means a flow of water that persists for an extended
period of time. Although this flow may be interrupted during periods of
drought or during the low flow period of the annual hydrological cycle, June
through September, it recurs in prolonged succession.
l. "DEPOSIT" includes, but shall not be limited to, fill, grade, dump, place,
discharge or emit.
m. "DESIGNATED AGENT" means an individual(s) designated by the Agency
to carry out its functions and purposes.
-3-
n. "DISCHARGE" means emission of any water, substance, or material into
wetlands or watercourses, whether or not such substance causes pollution.
o. "DISTURBING THE NATURAL AND INDIGENOUS CHARACTER OF
THE WETLAND OR WATERCOURSE" means causing a significant,
perceptible change in physical, biological, or chemical characteristics of a
wetland or watercourse.
p. "DULY AUTHORIZED AGENT" has the same meaning as
“DESIGNATED AGENT”.
q. "ESSENTIAL TO THE FARMING OPERATION" means that the
proposed activity is necessary and indispensable to sustain farming activities
on an existing farm.
r. "FARMING" shall be consistent with the definition set forth in Section 1-1(q)
of the Connecticut General Statutes.
s. "FEASIBLE" means able to be constructed or implemented consistent with
sound engineering principles.
t. "GARDENING" means the tilling of soil, and the planting, cultivating, and
harvesting of vegetable matter.
u. "GRAZING" means using any tract of land to feed or supply farm animals
with grass or pasture, to tend farm animals, or to grow silage and herbage.
v. "HARVESTING OF CROPS" means gathering plants or animals or plant or
animal products that have been grown to be harvested.
w. "LICENSE" has the same meaning as “PERMIT.”
x. "MANAGEMENT PRACTICE" means a practice, procedure, activity,
structure or facility designed to prevent or minimize pollution or other
environmental damage or to maintain or enhance existing environmental
quality. Such management practices include, but are not limited to: erosion
and sediment controls; restrictions on land use or development; construction
setbacks from wetlands or watercourses; proper disposal of waste materials;
procedures for equipment maintenance to prevent fuel spillage; construction
methods to prevent flooding or disturbance of wetlands and watercourses;
procedures for maintaining continuous stream flows; and confining
construction that must take place in watercourses to times when water flows
are low and fish and wildlife will not be adversely affected.
y. "MARSHES" are land areas with soils that exhibit aquic moisture regimes
that are distinguished by the absence of trees and shrubs and are dominated by
soft-stemmed herbaceous plants. The water table in marshes is usually at or
above the ground surface throughout the year and areas of open water six
inches or more in depth are common, but seasonal water-table fluctuations are
encountered.
-4-
z. "MATERIAL" means any substance, solid or liquid, organic or inorganic,
including but not limited to: soil, sediment, aggregate, land, gravel, clay, bog,
mud, peat, debris, sand, refuse, or waste.
aa. "MUNICIPALITY” means the Town of North Stonington, New London
County, Connecticut.
bb. "NURSERIES" means places where plants are grown for sale, transplanting
or experimentation.
cc. "PERMIT" means the whole or any part of any license, certificate of approval
or similar form of permission that may be required of any person under the
provisions of these Regulations.
dd. "PERMITTEE" means the person to whom a permit has been issued.
ee. "PERSON" means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company, organization or legal entity of any kind, including municipal
corporations, governmental agencies or subdivisions thereof.
ff. "POLLUTION" means harmful thermal effect or the contamination or
rendering unclean or impure of any waters of the State by reason of erosion, or
by any waste or other materials discharged or deposited therein by any public
or private sewer or otherwise so as directly or indirectly to come in contact
with any waters. This includes, but is not limited to, erosion and sedimentation
resulting from any filling, land clearing or excavation activity.
gg. "PRUDENT" means economically and otherwise reasonable in the light of the
social benefits to be derived from the proposed Regulated Activity, provided
cost may be considered in deciding what is prudent and further provided a mere
showing of expense will not necessarily mean an alternative is imprudent.
hh. "REGULATED ACTIVITY" means any operation within or use affecting a
wetland or watercourse by removal or deposition of material, or any
obstruction, construction, alteration, or pollution of such wetlands or
watercourses, whether or not they appear on the official Inland Wetlands and
Watercourses Map of the Town of North Stonington, except as may be
provided by State law or by Section 4 of these Regulations.
ii. "REGULATED AREA" means any inland wetland or watercourse as defined
in these Regulations, whether or not they appear on the official Inland
Wetlands and Watercourses Map of the Town of North Stonington, as well as
land within 100 feet in a horizontal direction of any wetland or watercourse.
jj. "REMOVE" includes, but shall not be limited to, drain, excavate, mine, dig,
dredge, suck, grub, clear cut timber, bulldoze, dragline or blast.
kk. "RENDERING UNCLEAN OR IMPURE" means any alteration of the
physical, chemical or biological properties of any waters of the State,
including, but not limited to, change in odor, color, turbidity or taste.
-5-
ll. "SIGNIFICANT ACTIVITY" on wetlands or watercourses means any
activity, including, but not limited to, the following activities, that may have a
major effect or substantial impact on an inland wetland or watercourse:
1. Any deposition or removal of material in or from a Regulated Area in a
manner that will or may cause a substantial effect on the physical, chemical
or biological characteristics of a wetland or watercourse, whether at or
outside the area for which the activity is proposed.
2. Any activity that substantially changes the natural channel or may inhibit the
natural dynamics of a watercourse system.
3. Any activity that substantially diminishes the natural capacity of an inland
wetland or watercourse to support desirable fisheries, wildlife, or other
biological life; to prevent flooding; to supply water; to assimilate waste; to
facilitate drainage; to provide recreation or open space; or to perform other
functions.
4. Any activity that is likely to cause or has the potential to cause measurable
turbidity, siltation or sedimentation in a wetland or watercourse.
5. Any activity that causes measurable diminution of flow of a natural
watercourse or groundwater levels of the Regulated Area.
6. Any activity that is likely to cause or has the potential to cause pollution of a
wetland or watercourse.
7. Any activity that damages or destroys unique wetland or watercourse areas or
such areas having demonstrable scientific or educational value.
mm. "SOIL SCIENTIST" means an individual duly qualified in accordance with
standards set by the Federal Office of Personnel Management.
nn. "STRUCTURE" means anything constructed, erected or assembled that
requires a location on or within the ground, or attachment to something having
a location on or within the ground. The term “Structure” includes, but is not
limited to, any building, manufactured home, paved area, storage tank, sign,
wall (retaining or otherwise), swimming pool, fence, telecommunications
equipment or facility, and any other man-made utility and infrastructure.
oo. "SUBMERGED LAND" means land that is inundated by water on a seasonal
or more frequent basis.
pp. "SUBSTANTIAL," in relation to an effect, impact or change, means that such
effect, impact or change is or would be readily perceptible, either visually or
with common measuring devices.
qq. "SWAMP" means land areas with soils that exhibit aquic moisture regimes
and are dominated by wetland trees and shrubs.
rr. "TOWN" means the Town of North Stonington, New London County in the
State of Connecticut.
ss. "VERNAL POOL" means a seasonal, generally shallow body of water in a
defined depression or basin that lacks a fish population (a self-sustaining
number of native fish) and supports or is capable of supporting breeding and
development of amphibian or invertebrate species recognized as obligate to
vernal pools.
-6-
tt. "WASTE" means sewage or any natural or man-made substance, liquid,
gaseous, solid or radioactive, that may pollute or have the potential to pollute
any of the wetlands or watercourses of the Town.
uu. "WATERCOURSES" means rivers, streams, brooks, waterways, lakes,
ponds, marshes, swamps, bogs, and all other bodies of water, natural or
artificial, vernal or intermittent, public or private, that are contained within,
flow through or border upon the Town of North Stonington or any portion
thereof, and that are not regulated pursuant to Section 22a-28 through 22a-35
inclusive of the Connecticut General Statutes. Intermittent watercourses shall
be delineated by a defined permanent channel and bank and the occurrence of
two or more of the following characteristics: (a) evidence of scour or deposits
of recent alluvium or detritus, (b) the presence of standing or flowing water for
a duration longer than a particular storm incident, and (c) the presence of
hydrophytic vegetation.
vv. "WETLANDS" means land, including submerged land as defined in Section
2.1.oo of these Regulations, that is not regulated pursuant to Section 22a-28
through 22a-35, inclusive, of the Connecticut General Statutes, and that
consists of any of the soil types designated as poorly drained, very poorly
drained, alluvial or floodplain by the National Cooperative Soils Survey, as it
may be amended from time to time, of the Natural Resources Conservation
Service of the U. S. Department of Agriculture (USDA), whether mapped or
unmapped per the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Map of the Town of
North Stonington. Such areas may include filled, graded, or excavated sites
which possess an aquatic soil moisture regime as defined by the USDA
Cooperative Soil Survey.
ww. "UPLAND REVIEW AREA" means land areas situated within 100 feet from
the boundary of any inland wetland or watercourse.
SECTION 3
INVENTORY OF REGULATED AREAS
3.1 The map of wetlands and watercourses entitled "Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Map,
North Stonington, Connecticut," delineates the general location and boundaries of inland
wetlands and the general location of watercourses. Copies of this map are available for
inspection in the office of the Town Clerk or of the Inland Wetlands Commission. In all
cases, the precise location of the wetlands and watercourses shall be determined by the
actual character of the land, the distribution of the wetland soil types, and locations of
watercourses. Where soil classifications are required, such determination shall be made
by field inspection and testing conducted by a certified soil scientist. Where watercourse
determinations are required, such determination may be made by other qualified
individuals having appropriate training or experience. However, areas designated as
wetlands or watercourses on the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Map shall be
presumed to be wetlands and watercourses, respectively, unless the Agency makes a
contrary finding based on evidence it receives. The Agency may use aerial photography,
remote sensing imagery, resource mapping, soils maps, site inspection observations or
other information in determining the location of wetlands and watercourses.
-7-
3.2 The Agency or its designated agent(s) shall monitor and maintain general surveillance of
all Regulated Areas. The Agency may amend its map as more accurate information
becomes available. Any person may petition for an amendment to the map. Petitioners
shall bear the burden of proof for all requested map amendments. Such map amendments
are subject to the public hearing process outlined in Section 16 of these Regulations.
However, whenever the Agency is considering an application for a permit for a Regulated
Activity, nothing in these Regulations shall be deemed to preclude the Agency from
making a decision based upon the actual character of the land, the distribution of the
wetland soil types and locations of watercourses, where such factors have been
demonstrated by competent evidence to be different from those shown on the official
map.
SECTION 4
PERMITTED USES AS OF RIGHT AND NONREGULATED USES
Section 22a-40 of the Connecticut General Statutes contains a list of operations and uses that are
either nonregulated or permitted in inland wetlands and watercourses as of right. For
informational purposes, the operations and uses allowed by that Statute as of the date of
enactment of these Regulations are set forth in Sections 4.1 and 4.2 below. It is the intention of
the Agency that the uses described in Sections 4.1 and 4.2 shall be deemed to be coextensive
with, and not any more or less inclusive than, those specified in that Statute, as it may be
amended.
4.1 The following operations and uses were permitted in inland wetlands and watercourses,
as of right, pursuant to CGS Section 22a-40, as of the time of enactment of these
Regulations:
a. Grazing, farming, nurseries, gardening and harvesting of crops and farm ponds of
three acres or less essential to the farming operation, and activities conducted by or
under the authority of, the Department of Energy and Environmental Protection, for
purposes of wetland or watercourse restoration or enhancement or mosquito
control. The provisions of this subsection shall not be construed to include road
construction or the erection of buildings not directly related to the farming
operation, relocation of watercourses with continual flow, filling or reclamation of
wetlands or watercourses with continual flow, clear cutting of timber except for the
expansion of agricultural crop land, or the mining of top soil, peat, sand, gravel or
similar material from wetlands or watercourses for the purpose of sale.
b. A residential home (i) for which a building permit has been issued, and/or (ii) on a
subdivision lot, provided the permit was issued or the subdivision was approved by
the Planning and Zoning Commission on or before July 1, 1974, and further
provided that no residential home shall be permitted as of right pursuant to this
subsection unless the building permit was obtained on or before July 1, 1987, and
has not expired. Any person claiming a use of wetlands permitted as a right under
this subsection shall document the validity of that claim by providing a certified
copy of the building permit and a site plan showing proposed and existing
topographic contours, house and well locations, septic system, driveway, approval
dates or other necessary information to document his or her right hereunder.
c. Boat anchorage or mooring, not to include dredging or dock construction.
-8-
d. Uses incidental to the enjoyment or maintenance of residential property. Such
incidental uses shall include maintenance of existing structures and landscaping,
but shall not include removal or deposition of more than one cubic yard of material
from or into a wetland or watercourse, or diversion or alteration of a watercourse
without a permit.
e. Construction and operation, by water companies as defined by Section 16-1 of the
Connecticut General Statutes or by municipal water supply systems as provided for
in Chapter 102 of the Connecticut General Statutes, of dams, reservoirs and other
facilities necessary to the impounding, storage and withdrawal of water in
connection with public water supplies, except as provided in Sections 22a-401
through 22a-410 of the Connecticut General Statutes.
f. Maintenance relating to any drainage pipe that existed before the effective date of
any municipal regulations adopted pursuant to Section 22a-42a of the Connecticut
General Statutes or July 1, 1974, whichever is earlier, provided such pipe is on
property that is zoned as residential but that does not contain hydrophytic
vegetation. For purposes of this subsection, “maintenance” means the removal of
accumulated leaves, soil, and other debris whether by hand or machine, while the
pipe remains in place.
4.2 The following operations and uses were permitted as nonregulated uses in wetlands and
watercourses, pursuant to CGS Section 22a-40, as of the time of enactment of these
Regulations, provided they do not disturb the natural and indigenous character of the
wetland or watercourse by removal or deposition of material, alteration or obstruction of
water flow or pollution of the wetland or watercourse:
a. Conservation of soil, vegetation, water, fish, shellfish, and wildlife. Such operation
or use may include, but is not limited to, minor work to control erosion, or to
encourage proper fish, wildlife and silviculture management practices.
b. Outdoor recreation including play and sporting areas, golf courses, field trials,
nature study, hiking, horseback riding, swimming, skin and scuba diving, camping,
boating, water skiing, trapping, hunting, fishing and shell-fishing and cross-country
skiing where otherwise legally permitted and regulated.
c. Removal or management of non-native invasive species as detailed in an approved
written plan developed by a qualified environmental professional (including but not
limited to a landscape architect, environmental engineer, soil scientist or wetlands
ecologist).
4.3 Movement of equipment in or through wetlands or watercourses must be reviewed by the
Inland Wetlands Enforcement Officer to determine whether such activity requires a
permit.
4.4 All activities in wetlands or watercourses involving filling, excavation, dredging, clear
cutting, clearing, and grading or any other alteration or use of a wetland or watercourse
that is not specifically allowed pursuant to CGS Section 22a-40 and that is defined as a
Regulated Activity by these Regulations shall require a permit from the Agency in
accordance with Section 6 of these Regulations.
-9-
4.5 To carry out the purposes of this Section, any person proposing to carry out a permitted
or nonregulated operation or use of a wetland or watercourse that may disturb the natural
and indigenous character of the wetland or watercourse shall, prior to commencement of
such operation or use, notify the Agency on a form provided by it, and provide the
Agency with sufficient information to enable it to properly determine that the proposed
operation and use is a permitted or nonregulated use of the wetland or watercourse. The
Agency or its designated agent shall rule that the proposed operation or use is a permitted
or a nonregulated use or operation or that a permit is required. Such ruling shall be in
writing and shall be made no later than the next regularly scheduled meeting of the
Agency following the meeting at which the request was received. The designated agent
may make such ruling on behalf of the Agency at any time. Notwithstanding the
foregoing provisions, if there is any change in State law regarding the definition or
qualifications of an activity to be a use permitted as of right or a nonregulated use before
such use has actually commenced, no ruling made by the Agency under this section shall
protect the proposed use from the effect of such change.
SECTION 5
ACTIVITIES REGULATED BY THE STATE
State law delegates to the Commissioner of Energy and Environmental Protection the exclusive
authority to regulate certain types of activities that may affect inland wetlands or watercourses.
For informational purposes, Sections 5.1 through 5.4 describe certain categories of activities for
which the Agency understands that such a delegation has been made to the Commissioner. It is
the intention of the Agency that the categories of activities described in Sections 5.1 through 5.4
shall be deemed to be coextensive with, and not any more or less inclusive than, the activities for
which State law, as it may be amended, has actually delegated such authority to the
Commissioner.
5.1 The Commissioner has exclusive jurisdiction over activities undertaken in Regulated
Areas by any department, agency or instrumentality of the State of Connecticut, except
any local or regional board of education, pursuant to Sections 22a-39 or 22a-45a of the
Connecticut General Statues.
5.2 The Commissioner has exclusive jurisdiction over activities in tidal wetlands, designated
and regulated pursuant to Sections 22a-28 through 22a-35 of the Connecticut General
Statutes, as amended.
5.3 The Commissioner has exclusive jurisdiction over activities authorized under a dam
repair or removal order issued by the Commissioner under Section 22a-402 of the
Connecticut General Statutes or a permit issued by the Commissioner under Sections
22a-403 of the Connecticut General Statutes. Any person receiving such dam repair or
removal order or permit shall not be required to obtain a permit from the Agency for any
action necessary to comply with said dam order or to carry out the activities authorized
by said permit.
5.4 The Commissioner has jurisdiction over the discharge of dredged or fill materials into
wetlands and watercourses pursuant to Section 401 of the Federal Clean Water Act, for
activities regulated by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers under Section 404 of that Act.
-10-
SECTION 6
REGULATED ACTIVITIES SUBJECT TO PERMIT
6.1 Except as set forth in Section 4 of these Regulations, no person shall conduct or maintain
a Regulated Activity without first obtaining a permit for such activity from the Agency.
6.2 Any person found to be conducting or maintaining a Regulated Activity without a permit,
or violating any other provision of these Regulations, shall be subject to the enforcement
proceedings and penalties prescribed in Section 15 of these Regulations and any other
remedies as provided by law.
SECTION 7
APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS FOR REGULATED ACTIVITIES
7.1 Any person intending to undertake a Regulated Activity shall apply for a permit on a
form entitled "Application for Regulated Activity Permit". An application shall include
an application form and such information as prescribed by Section 7.5 and, in the case of
a Significant Activity, by Section 7.6 of these Regulations. Application forms may be
obtained in the office of the Agency.
7.2 If an application to the Planning and Zoning Commission for subdivision or resubdivision
of land involves land containing a wetland or watercourse, the applicant shall, in
accordance with Section 8-26 of the Connecticut General Statutes, submit an application
for a permit to the Agency in accordance with this Section, no later than the day the
application is filed with the Planning and Zoning Commission.
7.3 No application shall be deemed complete unless it shall be in such form and contain such
information as the Agency deems necessary for a fair and informed determination of the
issues. The Agency shall inform the applicant of any such necessary information that is
not already specified in these Regulations.
7.4 A prospective applicant may, before submitting an application, ask the Agency to
determine whether or not a proposed activity would constitute a Significant Activity, as
defined in these Regulations.
7.5 All applications shall include a completed application form entitled "Application for
Regulated Activity Permit," containing, or accompanied by other documents containing:
a. The name, home and business mailing addresses, and telephone numbers of (i)
the owners of record; (ii) the applicants (if different from the owners); and (iii) an
individual person who will be the principal contact for the Agency with respect
to the conduct and completion of any Regulated Activities for which a permit is
issued. In the event of any change in the identity of the owners of record or of
the contact person, the current owners must file with the Agency a written
statement identifying the new owners and/or contact person, with the home and
business mailing addresses and telephone numbers of all such persons. The
failure of the current owners to file such a notice shall operate to suspend any
-11-
permit, and no further Regulated Activities may be conducted until such notice is
filed with the Agency.
b. If the owner is not the applicant, the signature of the owner or the owner’s agent
or other legal representative, signifying knowledge of and consent to the
application.
c. If the applicants are not the owners of record of the property, the nature of the
interest the applicants have in the property (e.g., lease or option or contract to
purchase).
d. The geographical location of the land that is the subject of the proposed activity
and a description of the land in sufficient detail to allow identification of the
inland wetlands and watercourses, the area(s) (in acres or square feet) of
wetlands or watercourses to be disturbed, soil type(s), and wetland vegetation;
e. The purpose and a description of the proposed activity and proposed erosion and
sedimentation controls and other management practices and mitigation measures
that may be considered as a condition of issuing a permit for the proposed
Regulated Activity including, but not limited to, measures to (1) prevent or
minimize pollution or other environmental damage, (2) maintain or enhance
existing environmental quality, or (3) in the following order of priority: restore,
enhance and create productive wetland or watercourse resources;
f. Alternatives that would cause less or no environmental impact to wetlands or
watercourses and why the alternative as set forth in the application was chosen.
The Agency may require such alternatives to be diagramed on a site plan or
drawing;
g. A site plan showing the proposed activity and existing and proposed conditions
in relation to wetlands and watercourses and identifying any further activities
associated with, or reasonably related to, the proposed Regulated Activity that
are made inevitable by the proposed Regulated Activity and that may have an
impact on wetlands or watercourses, drawn at an appropriate scale, and 11”x17”
reduced copies of all larger plans;
h. Names and mailing addresses of adjacent land owners;
i. Statement by the applicant that the applicant is familiar with all the information
provided in the application and is aware of the penalties for obtaining a permit
through deception or through inaccurate or misleading information;
j. A completed DEEP reporting form (see Section 7.10). To the extent necessary or
appropriate, the Agency shall revise or correct the information provided by the
applicant and submit the form to the Commissioner of Energy and Environmental
Protection as may be required by the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies;
k. Any other information the Agency deems necessary to the understanding of what
the applicant is proposing; and
l. Submission of the appropriate filing fee.
Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, the Agency may excuse compliance with any
of the specific requirements of this Section 7.5 (other than subsection l) if it does not find
that the information is necessary to enable the Agency to determine whether the proposed
activities would cause or create the risk of detrimental impacts to wetlands or
watercourses. The applicant shall also be required to acknowledge that the proper
processing of the application and the monitoring of activities under any subsequent
permit may require site inspections by the members or Designated Agent of the
Commission at reasonable times. The Commission or the Designated Agent shall, where
feasible, provide appropriate notice to the applicant or landowner of any such inspections.
-12-
7.6 If the proposed activity involves a Significant Activity as defined in Section 2.1 of these
Regulations, the following additional information shall be required, except as follows.
The Agency may excuse compliance with any of the specific requirements of this Section
7.6 if it does not find the information is necessary to enable the Agency to determine
whether the proposed activities would cause or create the risk of detrimental impacts to
wetlands or watercourses. In addition, the Agency may require additional information if
it determines that such information is needed properly to evaluate the potential effects of
the activity.
a. Site plans for the proposed activity and the land that would be affected.
b. Engineering reports and analyses and additional drawings to fully describe the
proposed project and any filling, excavation, drainage or hydraulic modifications
to wetlands and watercourses.
c. Description of the ecological communities and functions of the wetlands or
watercourses involved with the application and the effects of the proposed
Regulated Activities on these communities and wetland and watercourse
functions.
d. A biological evaluation of any wetlands or watercourses pertinent to the
proposed activity including:
1. Dominant botanical species, rare species and forest age classes of flora;
2. Habitat value of the affected property for all wildlife species;
3. Depth of water table below surface or level of water if inundated;
4. The location of all vernal pools.
e. A description of how the applicant will change, diminish, or enhance the
ecological communities and functions of the wetlands or watercourses involved
in the application and each alternative and a description of why each alternative
considered was deemed neither feasible nor prudent.
f. The effect of the proposed activity or use upon a watercourse, including existing
PH or alkalinity/acidity level; turbidity or solids in parts per million; bacterial
count in coliforms per milliliter; and flow, if any, in cubic feet per second;
together with an estimate of any changes in these measurements that may result
from the proposed use.
g. Best management practices and other measures that would mitigate the impact of
the proposed activity. Such measures may include, but are not limited to, plans
or actions that avoid destruction or diminution of wetland or watercourse
functions, recreational uses and natural habitats; that prevent flooding,
degradation of water quality, erosion and sedimentation and obstruction of
drainage; or that otherwise safeguard water resources.
7.7 In addition, the Agency may require such other data as it deems necessary to evaluate the
application in light of the purposes and policies of the Regulations.
7.8 The applicant shall certify whether:
a. Any portion of the property on which the Regulated Activity is proposed is
located within 500 feet of the boundary of an adjoining municipality;
b. Traffic attributable to the completed project on the site will use streets within the
adjoining municipality to enter or exit the site;
c. Sewer or water drainage from the project site will flow through and impact the
sewage or drainage system within the adjoining municipality; or,
d. Water run-off from the improved site will impact streets or other municipal or
private property within the adjoining municipality.
-13-
7.9 The applicant shall submit to the Agency five (5) copies of the application form and all
supporting materials, including 11”x17” reduced copies of all larger plans.
7.10 The applicant shall complete a reporting form during the application process which
provides the Commissioner of the Department of Energy and Environmental Protection
with information necessary to monitor properly the inventory of State wetlands. The
reporting form shall include the following: the name of the applicant, the name of the
project, a project description, the area of wetlands and/or lineal feet of watercourses to be
altered.
SECTION 8
APPLICATION PROCEDURES
8.1 All applications for a Permit shall be filed with the Agency.
8.2 When an application to conduct or cause to be conducted a Regulated Activity upon an
inland wetland or watercourse is filed and any portion of such wetland or watercourse is
within five hundred feet of the boundary of another municipality, the applicant shall give
written notice of the application by certified mail, return receipt requested, on the same
day to the Inland Wetlands Agency of such other municipality. The applicant shall
furnish a copy of the return receipt to the Inland Wetlands Agency of the Town of North
Stonington.
8.3 If a public hearing is to be held on any application for a permit, notice of the public
hearing shall be mailed by the applicant by certified mail in accordance with Section 9.4
of these regulations.
8.4 The Agency shall, in accordance with Section 8-7d(f) of the Connecticut General
Statutes, notify the clerk of any adjoining municipality of the pendency of any application
to conduct a Regulated Activity when:
a. Any portion of the property on which the Regulated Activity is proposed is
located within 500 feet of the boundary of an adjoining municipality;
b. A significant portion of the traffic to the completed project on the site will use
streets within the adjoining municipality to enter or exit the site;
c. A significant portion of the sewer or water drainage from the project site will
flow through and significantly impact the sewage or drainage system within the
adjoining municipality; or
d. Water run-off from the improved site will impact streets or other municipal or
private property within the adjoining municipality.
Notice of the pendency of such application shall be made by certified mail, return receipt
requested, and shall be mailed within seven (7) days of the date of receipt of the
application.
8.5 When an application is filed to conduct or cause to be conducted a Regulated Activity
upon an inland wetland or watercourse, any portion of which is within the watershed of a
water company as defined in Section 16-1 of the Connecticut General Statutes, the
applicant shall provide written notice of the application to the water company provided
such water company has filed a map showing the boundaries of the watershed on the land
-14-
records of the Town of North Stonington and with the Agency. Such notice shall be
made by certified mail, return receipt requested, and shall be mailed within seven days of
the date of submission of the application. The water company, through a representative,
may appear and be heard at any hearing on the application. Documentation of such
notice shall be provided to the Agency.
8.6 For purposes of Section 9 of these Regulations, the date of receipt of the application shall
be the day of the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Agency immediately following
the day of submission to the Agency or thirty-five days after such submission, whichever
is sooner.
8.7 At any time during the review period, the Agency may require the applicant to provide
additional information about the Regulated Area or Regulated Activity that is the subject
of the application, or about other wetlands or watercourses that may be affected by the
Regulated Activity. Requests for such additional information shall not stay the time
limitations as set forth in Section 9 of these Regulations.
8.8 If a public hearing is to be held on any application for a permit, all documentary evidence
in support of the application shall be filed with the Agency and available for public
inspection no less than fifteen (15) days prior to the day of the hearing or any
reconvening thereof. All other persons wishing to present documentary evidence in the
proceeding should file such evidence on or before the date on which the public hearing is
commenced. Nothing in this Section 8.8 shall prohibit the Agency, in the exercise of its
discretion, from receiving evidence from any person at a later time. However, the
Agency may refuse to consider any information and documentary evidence, including but
not limited to any proposed modifications to the applicant’s site plans or Regulated
Activities, that is submitted after the aforesaid dates if it determines that the Agency’s
members, staff or consultants would not have sufficient time to review such information
or evidence properly or thoroughly before the public hearing is closed.
8.9 All applications shall be open for public inspection.
8.10 Incomplete applications may be denied.
SECTION 9
PUBLIC HEARINGS ON REGULATED ACTIVITY PERMITS
9.1 No later than sixty-five (65) days after the date of receipt of an application, the Agency
may hold a public hearing on such application, in accordance with Section 9.2. At such
hearing any person or persons may appear and be heard and may be represented by agent
or attorney. The hearing shall be completed within thirty-five (35) days after its
commencement. Action shall be taken on applications within thirty-five (35) days after
completion of a public hearing. In the absence of a public hearing, action shall be taken
on applications within sixty-five (65) days after the date of receipt of the application.
The applicant may consent to one or more extensions of the periods specified in this
subsection, provided the total extension of all such periods shall not be for longer than
sixty-five (65) days, or may withdraw the application. The failure of the Agency to act
within any time period specified in this subsection, or any extension thereof, shall not be
deemed to constitute approval of the application. An application deemed incomplete by
-15-
the Agency may be withdrawn by the applicant or, if not withdrawn, shall be denied by
the Agency.
9.2 The Agency shall not hold a public hearing on an application unless (1) the Agency
determines that the proposed activity may have a significant impact on wetlands or
watercourses; or (2) a petition requesting a hearing, and signed by at least twenty-five
persons who are eighteen years of age or older and who reside in the Town of North
Stonington, is filed with the Agency not later than fourteen days after the official date of
receipt of such application; or (3) the Agency finds that a public hearing regarding such
application would be in the public interest. The Agency may issue a permit without a
public hearing provided no petition provided for in this Section is filed with the Agency
on or before the fourteenth day after the official date of receipt of the application. Any
public hearing shall be held no later than sixty-five days after the official date of receipt
of the application. All applications and maps and documents relating thereto shall be
open for public inspection.
9.3 The Agency shall publish notice of the public hearing at least twice at intervals of not less
than two days, the first not more than fifteen days and not fewer than ten days, and the
last not less than two days before the date set for the hearing in a newspaper having a
general circulation in each town where the affected wetland or watercourse is located.
9.4 The applicant shall mail notice of the public hearing by certified mail to the owner(s) of
record, as determined by the current Assessor's files, of all abutting land and, if the
applicant is not the owner of the property that is the subject of the application, to the
owners of the property. Such notices shall be mailed no less than fifteen (15) days prior
to the day of the hearing. The applicant must give proof of such mailing to the Agency at
or before the commencement of the hearing.
9.5 In the case of any application which is subject to the notification provisions of Section
8.2 of these Regulations, a public hearing shall not be conducted until the clerk of the
adjoining municipality(s) has received notice of the pendency of the application. Proof of
such notification shall be entered into the hearing record.
9.6 If a public hearing is to be held on any application for a permit, all documentary evidence
regarding the application shall be filed with the Agency in accordance with Section 8.8 of
these Regulations.
SECTION 10
CONSIDERATIONS FOR DECISION
10.1 The Agency may consider the following in making its decision on an application:
a. The application and its supporting documentation;
b. Public comments, evidence and testimony;
c. Reports from other agencies and commissions and organizations including but
not limited to, conservation commissions, planning and zoning commissions,
building officials, health officers and conservation organizations;
d. The Agency may also consider comments on any application from the Natural
Resources Conservation Service, regional planning agencies or other regional
organizations; agencies in adjacent municipalities that may be affected by the
proposed activity, and other technical agencies or conservation organizations;
-16-
e. Non-receipt of comments from agencies and commissions listed above within
any time provided by law shall neither delay nor prejudice the decision of the
Agency.
f. Advice received from Agency staff or Agency consultants after a public hearing
regarding evidence or testimony received before the close of the public hearing.
Such advice should be limited to comments or interpretations of materials that
were received before the close of the public hearing; it should not include new or
additional factual information to which the parties to the public hearing had no
opportunity to be apprised or heard.
10.2 Criteria for Decision. In carrying out the purposes and policies of Sections 22a-36 to
22a-45, inclusive, of the Connecticut General Statutes, including matters relating to
regulating, licensing and enforcement, the Agency shall take into consideration all
relevant facts and circumstances, including but not limited to:
a. The environmental impact of the proposed action on wetlands and watercourses,
including the effects on the capacity of the inland wetlands and watercourses to
support fish and wildlife, to prevent flooding, to supply and protect surface and
ground waters, to control sediment, to facilitate drainage, to control pollution, to
support recreational activities, and to promote public health and safety.
b. The applicant's purpose for, and any feasible and prudent alternatives to, the
proposed Regulated Activity, which alternatives would cause less or no
environmental impact to wetlands or watercourses. This consideration should
include, but is not limited to, the alternative of taking no action, or postponing
action pending further study, and the alternative of requiring actions of different
nature that would provide similar benefits with different environmental impacts,
such as using a different location for the activity.
c. The relationship between the short-term and long-term impacts of the proposed
Regulated Activity on wetlands or watercourses and the maintenance and
enhancement of long-term productivity of such wetlands or watercourses;
d. Irreversible and irretrievable loss of wetland or watercourse resources that would
be caused by the proposed Regulated Activity including the extent to which such
activity would foreclose a future ability to protect, enhance or restore such
resources, and any mitigation measures that may be considered as a condition of
issuing a permit for such activity including, but not limited to, measures to: (1)
prevent or minimize pollution or other environmental damage, (2) maintain or
enhance existing environmental quality, or (3) in the following order of priority;
restore, enhance and create productive wetland or watercourse resources
e. The character and degree of injury to, or interference with, safety, health or the
reasonable use of property that is caused or threatened by the proposed Regulated
Activity. This criterion includes recognition of potential damage from erosion,
turbidity, or siltation, the dangers of flooding and pollution, and the destruction
of the economic, aesthetic, recreational and other public and private uses and
values of wetlands and watercourses to the community; and
f. Impacts of the proposed Regulated Activity on wetlands or watercourses outside
the area for which the activity is proposed, and future activities associated with,
or reasonably related to, the proposed Regulated Activity that are made inevitable
by the proposed Regulated Activity and that may have an impact on wetlands or
watercourses.
10.3 In the case of any application that received a public hearing pursuant to a finding by the
Agency that the proposed activity may have a significant impact on wetlands or
watercourses, a permit shall not be issued unless the Agency finds on the basis of the
-17-
record that a feasible and prudent alternative does not exist. In making this finding the
Agency shall consider the facts and circumstances set forth in Section 10.2. The finding
and the reasons therefore shall be stated on the record and included in the Agency’s
minutes.
10.4 If an application is denied on the basis of a finding that there may be feasible and prudent
alternatives to the proposed Regulated Activity that may have less adverse impacts on
wetlands or watercourses, the Agency shall, to the extent required by state law, propose
on the record in writing the types of alternatives the applicant may investigate, provided
this section shall not be construed to shift the burden from the applicant to prove
entitlement to the permit or to present alternatives to the proposed Regulated Activity.
10.5 For purposes of Section 10, the terms “wetlands” and “watercourses” include aquatic,
plant or animal life and habitats in wetlands or watercourses, and the term “habitats”
means areas or environments in which an organism or biological population normally
lives or occurs.
10.6 The Agency shall not deny or condition an application for a Regulated Activity in an area
outside wetlands or watercourses on the basis of an impact or effect on aquatic, plant, or
animal life unless such activity will likely impact or affect the physical, chemical or
biological characteristics of such wetlands or watercourses.
10.7 A conclusion that a feasible and prudent alternative does not exist does not create a
presumption that a permit should be issued. The applicant has the burden of
demonstrating that the application is consistent with the purposes and policies of these
Regulations and Sections 22a-36 to 22a-45, inclusive, of the Connecticut General
Statutes.
10.8 The time within which the Agency must render a decision on an application is set forth in
Section 9.1 of these Regulations.
SECTION 11
DECISION PROCESS AND PERMIT
11.1 The Agency, or its duly authorized agent acting pursuant to Section 13 of these
Regulations, may, in accordance with Section 10 of these Regulations, grant the
application as filed or grant it upon other terms, conditions, limitations or modifications
of the Regulated Activity designed to carry out the purposes and policies of the Act, or
deny the application. Such terms may include any reasonable measures that would
mitigate the impacts of the Regulated Activity and would: (a) prevent or minimize
pollution or other environmental damage, (b) maintain or enhance existing environmental
quality, or (c) in the following order of priority: restore, enhance and create productive
wetland or watercourse resources. The time within which the Agency must render a
decision on an application is set forth in Section 9.1 of these Regulations.
11.2 To the extent required by state law, the Agency shall state upon its record and in its
minutes the reasons and basis for its decision. Such decision shall be based fully on the
materials properly received into the Agency’s record and shall, as applicable and in
accordance with Section 10 of these Regulations, incorporate a statement relative to the
consideration of feasible and prudent alternatives.
-18-
11.3 The Agency shall notify the applicant and any named parties to the proceeding of its
decision within fifteen (15) days after the date of the decision by certified mail and the
Agency shall cause notice of its order in the issuance or denial of the permit to be
published in a newspaper having general circulation in the Town of North Stonington.
The failure of the Agency to provide such notice or to make such publication shall not be
deemed to nullify, invalidate or otherwise affect such decision except as may be required
by state law. In addition, state law may allow the applicant to provide for the publication
of a notice of decision in the event the Agency fails to make timely publication.
11.4 If an activity authorized by the inland wetland permit also involves an activity which
requires zoning or subdivision approval, the Agency will provide a copy of its decision
and report on the application to the Town of North Stonington Planning and Zoning
Commission as may be required by state law. The failure of the Agency to submit any
such decision or report to the Planning and Zoning Commission shall not be deemed to
nullify, invalidate or otherwise affect such decision except as may be required by state
law.
11.5 If the Agency denies the permit as incomplete or if it grants a permit with terms,
conditions, limitations or modifications, the applicant may attempt to modify the proposal
to the Agency's satisfaction. If the modifications relate to an application that was
granted, as aforesaid, the Agency shall determine whether the proposed modification
requires the filing of new application.
11.6 In accordance with C.G.S. Section 22a-42a(d)(2), any permit issued under this section for
the development of property for which an approval is required under C.G.S. Sections 8-3,
8-25 or 8-26 shall be valid for five years, provided the Agency may establish a specific
time period within which any regulated activity shall be conducted. Any permit issued
under this section for any other activity shall be valid for not less than two years and not
more than five years. If the Agency fails to designate a specific duration, the term of the
permit shall be deemed to be five years. Any such permit shall be renewed upon
application of the permit holder, as provided in Section 12 of these Regulations, unless
the agency finds that there has been a substantial change in circumstances that requires a
new permit application or an enforcement action has been undertaken with regard to the
regulated activity for which the permit was issued, provided no permit shall be valid for
more than ten years. All activities specified on a permit must be completed by the
expiration of the permit or the permittee will be in violation of the North Stonington
Inland Wetlands Regulations and may be subject to penalties as specified in the
Connecticut General Statutes.
11.7 If a bond or insurance is required in accordance with Section 14 of these Regulations, no
Regulated Activities may lawfully begin until the bond is posted according to the
requirements in Section 14.1.
11.8 General conditions on the issuance of all permits:
a. When the Agency has issued a permit, and later finds that the applicant provided
false, deceptive, incomplete or inaccurate information upon which the Agency
relied in granting the permit, the Agency may, after providing a hearing to the
applicant or the applicant’s successor, modify, suspend or revoke the permit.
b. The Agency has no legal power to determine ownership rights or other legal
interests in property. Therefore, in accepting, or granting any permit under, an
application in which the applicant has claimed ownership rights or other legally
-19-
sufficient interests in the property to make the application, the Agency shall
assume that the applicant has the legal right to make such application and to
conduct the proposed activities on the subject property. Nevertheless, no such
permit shall be deemed to create a property right or interest in any person would
not otherwise be entitled to claim such interest. All permits shall be subject to
any and all public and private rights and to any federal, state, and municipal laws
or regulations pertinent to the property or activity.
c. The permittee shall employ construction management practices consistent with
the terms and conditions of the permit, utilizing Connecticut DEEP regulations,
standards, policies or guidelines to control stormwater discharges and to prevent
erosion and sedimentation and to otherwise prevent pollution of wetlands and
watercourses.
d. All permits issued that have not been completed within five years from the
original date of approval, or within any period of extension granted by the
Agency pursuant to Sections 11.6 and 12, will be subject to formal review by the
Agency and will require a new application.
11.9 Schedule of Construction of Regulated Activity:
Within fifteen (15) days after receiving approval of a Regulated Activity the applicant
will forward to the North Stonington Inland Wetlands office a schedule for commencing
and completing the Regulated Activity. The Applicant shall confirm or revise the
schedule fifteen (15) calendar days prior to commencement of construction. No
Regulated Activities may begin until the sixteenth day after the schedule is submitted
unless the Agency has expressly authorized such commencement when granting the
permit.
11.10 Construction of a Regulated Activity:
The Agency may require the following as part of a condition of approval:
a. That the construction of a Regulated Activity shall be under the supervision of a
properly qualified professional engineer, wetlands scientist, or other relevant
professional. The names, addresses, and telephone numbers of all such persons
shall be provided to the Agency prior to the commencement of the permitted
activities.
b. That any such professionals submit periodic reports to the Agency at intervals
chosen by the Agency. Such reports should contain a description of any work
already completed, work anticipated and scheduled for subsequent periods, and
reports of any problems. The failure to submit a required report may result in
appropriate enforcement by the Agency or its authorized Agent.
SECTION 12
EXTENSION, TRANSFER AND MODIFICATION
OF REGULATED ACTIVITY PERMITS
12.1 Any application to modify or to extend the expiration date of a previously approved
permit shall be filed with the Agency not later than sixty-five (65) days prior to the
expiration date for the permit in accordance with Section 8. The Agency may accept an
untimely application to extend the expiration date of a permit if the authorized activity is
ongoing and, during the pendency of the application, allow the continuation of work
beyond the expiration date if, in the Agency’s judgment, the permit is likely to be
extended and the public interest or environment will be best served by not interrupting
-20-
the activity. Except as may otherwise be provided by law, applications for extensions or
modifications of permits granted under previous regulations shall be reviewed and
decided in accordance with the current regulations. If an application is for an extension
of time:
a. The application shall state the reason why the authorized activities were not
initiated or completed within the time originally provided in the permit;
b. The application shall describe any changes in facts or circumstances involved
with or affecting wetlands or watercourses or the property for which the permit
was issued;
c. The application shall describe the extent of work completed at the time of filing
and the schedule for completing the activities authorized in the permit.
12.2 The Agency shall evaluate any application for modification pursuant to Section 10 of
these Regulations and grant the application as filed, grant it with any appropriate terms,
conditions or limitations, or deny it without prejudice with respect to the filing of a
subsequent permit application.
12.3 Applications for renewals of expired permits shall be processed in accordance with
Section 11.6 of these Regulations.
12.4 In the event any change is made in the identity of the owners of record or of the contact
person designated on the application form under which the permit was issued, and the
current owners have not filed with the Agency a written statement identifying the new
owners and/or contact person pursuant to Section 7.5.a of these Regulations, the permit
shall be automatically suspended, and no further Regulated Activities may be conducted
until such notice is filed with the Agency.
SECTION 13
ACTION BY DULY AUTHORIZED AGENT
13.1 The Agency delegates to its Duly Authorized Agent the authority to approve or extend a
permit for an activity that is not located in a wetland or watercourse when such Agent
finds that the conduct of such activity would result in no greater than a minimal impact
on any wetlands or watercourses, provided such agent has completed the comprehensive
training program developed by the Commissioner of Energy and Environmental
Protection pursuant to Section 22a-39 of the Connecticut General Statutes. Requests for
such approval shall be made in accordance with Section 7 on the "Application for
Regulated Activity Permit", a form provided by the Agency, and shall contain the
information specified in Section 7.5 of these Regulations and any other information the
Agency or Designated Agent may reasonably require. Notwithstanding the provisions for
receipt and processing applications prescribed elsewhere in these Regulations, such
Agent may approve or extend such an activity at any time. Notwithstanding the
foregoing provisions, the Agency may, by written notice to its agent, temporarily rescind
or suspend the delegation of authority to issue permits.
13.2 Any person receiving such approval from such Designated Agent shall, within ten days of
the date of such approval, publish, at the applicant's expense, notice of the approval in a
newspaper having a general circulation in the Town of North Stonington. Any person
may appeal such decision of such Agent to the Agency within fifteen days after the
publication date of the notice and the Agency shall consider such appeal at its next
regularly scheduled meeting, provided such meeting is no earlier than three business days
-21-
after receipt by such Agency or its Agent of such appeal. Any person may appear and be
heard at the meeting held by the Agency to consider the subject appeal. The Agency
shall, at its discretion, sustain, alter, or reject the decision of its Designated Agent or
require an application for a permit in accordance with Section 7 of these Regulations.
SECTION 14
BOND AND INSURANCE
14.1 The Agency may require, as a permit condition, the filing of a bond with such surety, and
in such amount and form, as may be approved by the Agency.
14.2 The bond or surety shall be conditioned on compliance with all provisions of these
Regulations and the terms, conditions and limitations established in the permit.
14.3 For the purpose of this Section, a bond shall mean one of the following:
a. A surety bond issued by a company licensed to do business in the State of
Connecticut, accompanied by the Power of Attorney of the person executing the
bond for the company. Such company shall have offices in New London County
and must submit certification from its home office that the local office in New
London County has authority to pay out the full value of the bond.
b. A bond secured by an assigned passbook savings account or a certificate of
deposit representing funds deposited in a financial institution that is on the list of
those approved for deposit of Town funds.
c. Cash or certified check in the required amount deposited with the Treasurer of
the Town of North Stonington.
d. An irrevocable letter of credit (original document).
14.4 Bonds shall be executed in accordance with the sample forms supplied by the Agency,
with proper reference made to all maps and plans describing the Regulated Activity
covered by the bond, and shall be satisfactory to the Agency or its agent(s) and to the
Agency’s legal counsel as to form, sufficiency and manner of execution.
a. Bonds secured by a passbook savings account or certificate of deposit shall be
accompanied by the savings passbook(s) or certificate of deposit passbook(s)
which shall remain in the possession of the Town until final release of the bond
b. When the bond is secured by a passbook savings account or a certificate of
deposit, the total amount in any single account or certificate may not exceed the
maximum amount per account guaranteed by the Federal Deposit Insurance
Corporation. Where the total amount of the bond required exceeds FDIC
coverage for a single account, additional accounts shall be established to ensure
that all deposited funds are FDIC insured.
14.5 Where a bond has been posted and work covered by the bond has not been completed
within the terms of such bond, the Town may declare the bond to be in default and
require that all work be completed regardless of the extent of development at the time the
bond is declared to be in default.
14.6 Upon written request from the permittee, the bond shall be released by the Agency or its
Agent(s) after approval of the completed Regulated Activity. Upon written request from
the permittee and a determination by the Agency or its Agent(s) that a substantial portion
-22-
of the work guaranteed by the bond has been completed, the Agency or its Designated
Agent may approve partial release(s) of the surety.
SECTION 15
ENFORCEMENT
15.1 The Agency may appoint an Agent or Agents to act in its behalf with the authority to
issue notices of violation or cease and desist orders and carry out other actions or
investigations necessary for the enforcement of these Regulations. In carrying out the
purposes of this Section, the Agency or its Duly Authorized Agent shall take into
consideration the criteria for decision under Section 10.2 of these Regulations.
15.2 When a permit has been issued to conduct Regulated Activities, the Agency or its
Designated Agent, upon receiving the consent of the owner, or authorized agent of the
owner, of the affected property, may make regular inspections of such activities at
reasonable hours. Nothing herein shall be deemed to prevent the Agency from requiring,
as a condition of approval of any permit, the opportunity to inspect and monitor any
permitted Regulated Activities.
15.3 When a permit to conduct Regulated Activities has expired, or Regulated Activities have
been conducted without a permit, the Agency or its Designated Agent, upon receiving the
consent of the owner, or authorized agent of the owner, of the affected property, or to the
extent otherwise allowed by law, may inspect such activities at reasonable hours.
Nothing herein shall be deemed to prevent the Agency or its Designated Agent from
conducting inspections of such activities without the owner’s consent, to the extent such
inspections may otherwise be allowed by law.
15.4 If the Agency or its Duly Authorized Agent finds that any person is conducting or
maintaining any activity, facility or condition that is in violation of the Act or these
Regulations, the Agency or its Duly Authorized Agent may:
a. Issue a written order by certified mail, return receipt requested, to such person
conducting such activity or maintaining such facility or condition to immediately
cease such activity or to correct such facility or condition. Within ten (10)
calendar days of the issuance of such order the Agency shall hold a hearing to
provide the person an opportunity to be heard and show cause why the order
should not remain in effect. The Agency shall consider the facts presented at the
hearing and, within ten days of the completion of the hearing, notify the person
by certified mail that the original order remains in effect, that a revised order is in
effect, or that the order has been withdrawn. The Agency shall publish notice of
its decision in a newspaper having general circulation in the Town of North
Stonington. The original order shall be effective upon issuance and shall remain
in effect until the Agency affirms, revises or withdraws the order. The issuance
of an order pursuant to this subsection shall not delay or bar an action pursuant to
Section 22a-44(b) of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
b. Issue a notice of violation to such person conducting such activity or maintaining
such facility or condition, stating the nature of the violation and the jurisdiction
of the Agency, and prescribing the necessary action and steps to correct the
violation including, without limitation, halting work in wetlands or watercourses.
The Agency may direct that the individual appear at the next regularly scheduled
-23-
meeting of the Agency to discuss the unauthorized activity and or provide a
written reply to the notice, or file a proper application for the necessary permit.
A notice of violation shall not be deemed to be an order of, or an official finding
of facts by, the Agency and shall not be binding on the Agency or on the person
receiving the notice. Failure to carry out the action(s) directed in a notice of
violation may result in the issuance of the order provided in Subsection "a" of
this Section or other enforcement proceedings as provided by law.
c. Suspend or revoke a permit if it finds that the applicant has not complied with the
terms, conditions or limitations set forth in the permit or has exceeded the scope
of the work as set forth in the application, including application plans. Prior to
revoking any permit, the Agency shall issue notice to the permittee, personally or
by certified mail, return receipt requested, setting forth the facts or conduct that
warrants the intended action. At the hearing the permittee shall be given an
opportunity to show compliance with the permit and any and all requirements for
retention of the permit.
15.5 The permittee shall be notified of the Agency's decision to suspend, revoke, or maintain a
permit by personal service or by certified mail within fifteen (15) days after the date of its
decision.
SECTION 16
AMENDMENTS
16.1 These Regulations and the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Map of the Town of North
Stonington may be amended, from time to time, by the Agency in accordance with
changes in the Connecticut General Statutes or regulations of the Connecticut
Department of Energy and Environmental Protection, or as new information regarding
soils and inland wetlands and watercourses becomes available.
16.2 An application filed with the Agency that is in conformance with the applicable Inland
Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations as of the date of the receipt of such application
shall not be required thereafter to comply with any change in such Regulations, including
changes to setbacks and buffers, taking effect on or after the date of such receipt. The
provisions of this subsection shall not be construed to apply (1) to the establishment,
amendment or change of boundaries of inland wetlands or watercourses or (2) to any
change in regulations necessary to make such regulations consistent with the provisions
of the Act as of the date of such receipt.
16.3 These Regulations and the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Map of the Town of North
Stonington shall be amended in the manner specified in Section 22a-42a of the
Connecticut General Statutes, as amended. The Agency shall provide the Commissioner
of Energy and Environmental Protection with a copy of any proposed regulations and
notice of the public hearing to consider any proposed regulations or amendments thereto,
except map amendments, at least thirty-five days before the public hearing on their
adoption.
16.4 Applications requesting changes or amendments to the Inland Wetland and Watercourses
Map of the Town of North Stonington shall contain at least the following information:
a. A completed application form entitled "Application for Inland Wetland
Boundary/Inland Wetland Regulation Amendment"
-24-
b. A map prepared to the following standards:
1. The size of the map shall be 18”x24” or 24" x 36".
2. The map shall be prepared at an appropriate scale.
3. The map shall be prepared by a Land Surveyor licensed in the State of
Connecticut in accordance with the Regulations of Connecticut State
Agencies Sections 20-300b-1 through 20-300b-20 and the “Standards for
Surveys and Maps in the State of Connecticut”, as adopted by the
Connecticut Association of Land Surveyors, Inc. on September 26, 1996.
c. The map shall contain the following:
1. Inland wetlands and watercourses boundaries and designation of type of
wetlands and watercourses as defined in Sections 2.1.vv and 2.1.uu and
provided by a Soil Scientist.
2. A locus map showing the geographical location of property.
3. Property boundary lines of the subject land parcel.
4. Owners of record of the subject property and adjoining properties.
5. Mapping of soil types consistent with the categories established by the
National Cooperative Soil Survey.
6. The inland wetlands boundaries and watercourses as shown on the Inland
Wetlands and Watercourses Map of the Town of North Stonington.
d. A soils report prepared and certified by a soil scientist.
e. A list of the U.S. Global Positioning System (GPS) coordinates of each inland
wetland boundary point shown on the map and the GPS coordinates of at least
three points located on the property boundary of the subject land parcel.
16.5 Any person who submits a petition to amend the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Map
of the Town of North Stonington shall bear the burden of proof for all requested map
amendments. Such proof may include, but is not limited to, professional interpretation of
aerial photography and remote sensing imagery, resource mapping, soils mapping, or
other information. If such person is the owner, developer or contract purchaser of the
land that is the subject of the petition, or if such person is representing the interests of
such an owner, developer or purchaser, in addition to the information required in
subsection 16.4, the petition shall include:
a. The name, mailing address and telephone number of the owner(s) of such land
and owner(s) agent or other representative.
b. The names and mailing addresses of the owners of abutting land.
c. Documentation by a soil scientist of the distribution of wetland soils on the
subject land. Such documentation shall, at a minimum, include the report of the
soil scientist documenting the location of wetland soils on the land and a map of
the land indicating the flag locations set by the soil scientist and defining the
boundaries of wetland soil types.
16.6 Watercourses shall be delineated by a soil scientist, geologist, ecologist or other qualified
individual. The Agency acknowledges that many watercourses may be readily identified
by lay persons.
16.7 A public hearing shall be held on applications to amend the Inland Wetlands and
Watercourses Map of the Town of North Stonington. Notice of the hearing shall be
published in a newspaper having substantial circulation in the Town of North Stonington
at least twice at intervals of not less than two days, the first not more than fifteen days nor
less than ten days, and the last not less than two days, before such hearing. A copy of
-25-
such proposed boundary change shall be filed in the office of the North Stonington Town
Clerk for public inspection at least ten days before such hearing.
16.8 Within sixty-five (65) days after the actual date of receipt of a complete application for a
change in the mapped boundaries of any wetland or watercourse, the Agency shall hold a
public hearing to consider the application. The Agency shall complete the public hearing
within thirty-five (35) days after the hearing commences. The Agency shall act upon the
change(s) requested in such application within sixty-five (65) days after the close of the
hearing. The applicant may consent to one or more extensions of the periods specified in
this subsection for the holding of the hearing and for action on such application, provided
the total of all extensions for all separate parts of the process does not exceed sixty-five
(65) days, or may withdraw such application. The failure of the Agency to act within any
time period specified in this subsection, or any extension thereof, shall not be deemed to
constitute approval of the application.
16.9 The Agency shall make its decision and state in writing the reasons why any change in
the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Map of the Town of North Stonington was made.
16.10 Within ninety (90) days following approval of a boundary change a mylar signed by the
Chairman of the Inland Wetlands Agency showing the final map shall be filed by the
applicant at its expense in the office of the North Stonington Town Clerk. Any map not
so filed within the prescribed ninety (90) days shall become null and void. However, the
filing date of the final map may be extended by mutual consent of the applicant and the
Agency.
SECTION 17
APPEALS
17.1 Appeal on actions of the Agency shall be made in accordance with the provisions of
Section 22a-43 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
17.2 Notice of such appeal shall be served upon the Agency and the Commissioner of Energy
and Environmental Protection.
SECTION 18
CONFLICT AND SEVERANCE
18.1 If there is a conflict between or among the provisions of these Regulations, the provision
that imposes the most stringent standards for the use of wetlands and watercourses shall
govern. The invalidity of any part of these Regulations shall not affect the validity of any
other part that can be given effect without such invalid part.
18.2 If there is a conflict between the provisions of these Regulations and the provisions of the
Act, the provisions of the Act shall govern.
-26-
SECTION 19
OTHER PERMITS
19.1 Nothing in these Regulations shall obviate the requirements for the applicant to obtain
any other assents, permits or licenses required by law or regulation by the Town of North
Stonington, State of Connecticut and the Government of the United States including any
approval required by the Connecticut Department of Energy and Environmental Protection
and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. Obtaining such assents, permits or licenses is the
sole responsibility of the applicant.
SECTION 20
APPLICATION FEES
20.1 Method of Payment. All fees required by these regulations shall be submitted to the
Commission by certified check or money order payable to the Town of North Stonington
at the time the application is filed with the Commission.
20.2 No application shall be granted or approved by the Commission unless the correct
application fee is paid in full or unless a waiver has been granted by the Commission
pursuant to subsection 4 of these regulations.
20.3 The application fee is not refundable.
20.4 Definitions. As used in this section:
a. "Residential Uses" means activities carried out on property developed for
permanent housing or being developed to be occupied by permanent housing.
b. "Commercial Uses" means activities carried out on property developed for
business purposes, whether profit or nonprofit.
c. "Other Uses" means activities other than Residential or Commercial Uses.
20.5 Fee Schedule. Application fees shall be based on the following schedule:
a. PERMITTED AND UNREGULATED USES - (See Section 4 of these
Regulations).
(1) Permitted Uses as of Right - no charge, unless State Fee required
(2) Non-Regulated Uses - no charge, unless State Fee required
b. REGULATED ACTIVITY - (See Section 2.1.hh and Section 6 of these
Regulations).
(1) Residential Uses - $100.00 base fee plus $50.00 per lot for review of
plans of property divisions, including but not limited to subdivisions, as defined
in C.G.S. Section 8-18..
(2) Commercial Uses - $100.00 base fee plus $50.00 per each acre or part
thereof on which any development is proposed.
(3) Other Uses - $70.00*
c. APPLICATION EVALUATION FEE – Where, in the judgment of the
Commission, the proper review of an application would require the assistance of
professional consultants, such as, but not limited to, engineers, scientists, and
lawyers, the actual fees and expenses charged by such professionals shall be paid
by the Applicant. The Commission shall submit to the Applicant, upon receipt,
all invoices for such fees and expenses and the Applicant shall be obliged to
make full payment within 30 days. No Regulated Activities may be initiated
under any permit until the Applicant has paid all such fees and expenses, unless
the Commission expressly allows such activities to commence at an earlier time
under the terms of approval of the permit.
-27-
d. MAP AMENDMENT PETITIONS - (See Section 16 of these Regulations). -
$50.00
e. MODIFICATION OR RENEWAL OF PREVIOUS APPROVAL – (See Section
12 of these Regulations) $50.00 (There shall be no fee for correcting
typographical or other immaterial errors).
f. STATE FEE - $60.00 for each application, or as may otherwise be required by
state law.
g. PREMATURE ACTIVITY FEE – The commencement of a Regulated Activity
before the issuance of a necessary permit for such activity requires the
Commission to consider additional factors, such as existing impacts to wetlands
and watercourses and the potential effects of remediating such impacts.
Therefore, the fees set forth in subsection b, above, shall be doubled for all
applications for permits for Regulated Activities in situations in which such
Activities have commenced without a necessary permit.
20.6 Exemption. Board, Commissions, councils and departments of the Town of North
Stonington are exempt from all fee requirements under these Regulations.
20.7 Waiver. The applicant may petition the Commission to waive, reduce or allow delayed
payment of the fees required by these Regulations. Such petitions shall be in writing and
shall state fully the facts and circumstances the Commission should consider in this
determination under this section. The Commission may waive all or part of the
application fee if the Commission determines that:
a. The activity applied for would clearly result in a substantial public benefit to the
environment or to the public health and safety and the application would
reasonably be deterred from initiating the activity solely or primarily as a result
of the amount of the application fee, or
b. The amount of the application fee is clearly excessive in relation to the cost to the
Town for reviewing and processing the application.
The Commission shall state upon its record the basis for all actions under this subsection.
SECTION 21
EFFECTIVE DATE OF REGULATIONS
21.1 These Regulations shall become effective upon filing in the Office of the North
Stonington Town Clerk.

TOWN OF NORTH STONINGTON
“LEVEL A”
AQUIFER PROTECTION AREA REGULATIONS
September 15, 2010
Effective
TABLE OF CONTENTS
SECTION
PAGE
1.0 TITLE AND AUTHORITY 1
2.0 DEFINITIONS 2
3.0 DELINEATION OF AQUIFER PROTECTION AREA BOUNDARIES 7
4.0 PROHIBITED AND REGULATED ACTIVITIES 9
5.0 ACTIVITIES REGULATED BY THE STATE 10
6.0 APPLICATION FOR AN EXEMPTION FROM PROHIBITION OR REGULATION 11
7.0 GENERAL REGISTRATION, PERMIT APPLICATION AND TRANSFER PROCEDURES 11
8.0 REGISTRATION REQUIREMENTS 12
9.0 PERMIT REQUIREMENTS 14
10.0 PUBLIC HEARINGS REGARDING PERMIT APPLICATIONS 18
11.0 BOND AND INSURANCE RELEVANT TO PERMIT APPLICATIONS 18
12.0 BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES 19
13.0 OTHER STATE, FEDERAL AND LOCAL LAWS 21
14.0 ENFORCEMENT 21
15.0 AMENDMENTS 23
16.0 APPEALS 23
17.0 CONFLICT AND SEVERANCE 23
18.0 APPLICATION AND REGISTRATION FEES 23
19.0 EFFECTIVE DATE OF REGULATIONS 25
“LEVEL A” AQUIFER PROTECTION AREA
Town of North Stonington -1- Aquifer Protection Regulations
1.0 TITLE AND AUTHORITY
1.1 Aquifers are an essential natural resource and a major source of public drinking water for the State of Connecticut. Use of groundwater will increase as the population grows and opportunities for new surface water supplies diminish due to the rising cost of land and increasingly intense development. At the same time, numerous drinking water wells have been contaminated by certain land use activities, and others are now threatened. To address this problem, Connecticut has established the Aquifer Protection Area Program (Connecticut General Statutes §22a-354a to §22a-354bb) to identify critical water supply aquifers and to protect them from pollution by managing land use. Protection requires coordinated responsibilities shared by the state, municipality and water companies to ensure a plentiful supply of public drinking water for present and future generations. It is therefore the purpose of these regulations to protect aquifer protection areas within the Town of North Stonington by making provisions for:
A. implementing regulations consistent with state regulations and An Act Concerning Aquifer Protection Areas, Connecticut General Statutes §22a-354a to §22a-354bb (“the Act”);
B. delineating aquifer protection areas on the Town zoning or inland wetland and watercourse areas maps;
C. regulating land use activity within the aquifer protection area including: prohibiting certain new activities; registering existing regulated activities; and issuing permits for new regulated activities at registered facilities; and
D. administering and enforcing these regulations.
1.2 These regulations shall be known as the Aquifer Protection Area Regulations (the "APA Regulations") of the Town of North Stonington.
1.3 These regulations were adopted and may be amended, from time to time, in accordance with the provisions of §22a-354p of An Act Concerning Aquifer Protection Areas, the Connecticut General Statutes §22a-354a to §22a-354bb and the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies §22a-354i-1 through §22a-354i-10.
1.4 The Planning and Zoning Commission of the Town of North Stonington is established as the Aquifer Protection Agency (the "Agency") in accordance with the "Ordinance for the Establishment of an Aquifer Protection Agency," (the "APA Ordinance") effective May 24, 2010, and shall implement the purposes and provisions of the APA Ordinance and the Act.
1.5 The Agency shall administer all provisions of the Act and shall approve or deny registrations, issue permits, issue permits with terms, conditions, limitations or modifications, or deny permits for all regulated activities in aquifer protection areas in the Town of North Stonington pursuant to the Act.
“LEVEL A” AQUIFER PROTECTION AREA
Town of North Stonington -2- Aquifer Protection Regulations
2.0 DEFINITIONS
2.1 As used in these regulations, the following definitions apply:
A. "Affected water company" means “affected water company” as defined in §22a-354h of the Connecticut General Statutes;
B. “Agency” means the board or commission authorized by the municipality under §22a-354o of the Connecticut General Statutes;
C. “Agriculture” means “agriculture” as defined in the §1-1(q) of the Connecticut General Statutes;
D. "Applicant" means, as appropriate in context, a person who applies for an exemption under §22a-354i-6 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies, a permit under §22a-354i-8 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies or a permit under Section 9.0 of the APA Regulations;
E. "Application” means, as appropriate in context, an application for an exemption under §22a-354i-6 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies, an application for a permit under §22a-354i-8 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies or an application for a permit under Section 9.0 of the APA Regulations;
F. "Aquifer protection area" means "aquifer protection area" as defined in §22a-354h of the Connecticut General Statutes and any extension of such area approved by the Commissioner pursuant to §22a-354i-4 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies;
G. "Area of contribution" means "area of contribution" as defined in §22a-354h of the Connecticut General Statutes and as mapped in accordance with §22a-354b-1 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies;
H. "Bulk storage facility" means property where oil or petroleum liquids are received by tank vessel, pipeline, railroad car or tank vehicle for the purpose of storage for wholesale distribution;
I. “Certified Hazardous Materials Manager” means a hazardous materials manager certified by the Institute of Hazardous Materials Management and who is qualified by reason of relevant specialized training and relevant specialized experience to conduct audits of regulated activities to ensure compliance with applicable laws and identify appropriate pollution prevention practices for such activities;
J. "Commissioner" means the commissioner of environmental protection, or his or her agent;
K. "Domestic sewage" means "domestic sewage" as defined in §22a-430-3(a) the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies;
L. "Facility" means property where a regulated activity is conducted by any person, including without limitation any buildings located on the property that are
“LEVEL A” AQUIFER PROTECTION AREA
Town of North Stonington -3- Aquifer Protection Regulations
owned or leased by that person; and includes contiguous land owned, leased, or for which there is an option to purchase by that person;
M. "Floor drain" means any opening in a floor or surface which opening or surface receives materials spilled or deposited thereon;
N. "Hazardous material" means: (A) any hazardous substance as defined in 40 CFR 302.4 and listed therein at Table 302.4, excluding mixtures with a total concentration of less than 1% hazardous substances based on volume, (B) any hazardous waste as defined in §22a-449(c)-101 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies, (C) any pesticide as defined in §22a-47 of the Connecticut General Statutes, or (D) any oil or petroleum as defined in §22a-448 of the Connecticut General Statutes;
O. "Hazardous waste" means "hazardous waste" as defined in §22a-449(c)-101 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies;
P. "Industrial laundry" means a facility for washing clothes, cloth or other fabric used in industrial operations;
Q. "Infiltration device" means any discharge device installed below or above the ground surface that is designed to discharge liquid to the ground;
R. "Inland wetland and watercourse areas map" means a map pursuant to §22a-42a of the Connecticut General Statutes;
S. "ISO 14001 environmental management system certification" means a current ISO 14001 environmental management system certification issued by an ISO 14001 environmental management system registrar that is accredited by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) - American Society for Quality (ASQ) National Accreditation Board (ANAB);
T. "Level A mapping" means the lines as shown on Level A maps approved or prepared by the Commissioner pursuant to §22a-354c, §22a-354d or §22a-354z of the Connecticut General Statutes encompassing the area of contribution and recharge areas;
U. "Lubricating oil" means oil that contains less than 1% chlorinated solvents and is used for the sole purpose of lubricating, cutting, grinding, machining, stamping or quenching metals;
V. "Municipality" means "municipality" as defined in §22a-354h of the Connecticut General Statutes;
W. "Owner" means the owner or lessee of the facility in question;
X. "De-icing chemical" means sodium chloride, calcium chloride, or calcium magnesium acetate;
Y. "Person" means any individual, firm, partnership, association, syndicate, company, trust, corporation, limited liability company, municipality, agency, political or administrative subdivision of the state, or other legal entity of any kind;
“LEVEL A” AQUIFER PROTECTION AREA
Town of North Stonington -4- Aquifer Protection Regulations
Z. "Pollution" means “pollution” as defined in §22a-423 of the Connecticut General Statutes;
AA. “Pollution prevention” means the use of processes and materials so as to reduce or minimize the amount of hazardous materials used or the quantity and concentration of pollutants in waste generated;
BB. "Professional engineer" means a professional engineer licensed in accordance with Chapter 391 of the Connecticut General Statutes, and who is qualified by reason of relevant specialized training and relevant specialized experience to conduct audits of regulated activities to ensure compliance with applicable law and identify appropriate pollution prevention practices for such activities;
CC. "Publicly Owned Treatment Works” means “publicly owned treatment works” as defined in §22a-430-3 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies;
DD. "Public service company" means "public service company" as defined in §16-1 of the Connecticut General Statutes;
EE. “Public supply well" means “public supply well” as defined in §19-13-B51b of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies;
FF. "Recharge area" means “recharge area” as defined in §22a-354h of the Connecticut General Statutes and as mapped in accordance with §22a-354b-1 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies;
GG. “Registered regulated activity” means a regulated activity which has been registered under §22a-354i-7 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies or Section 8.0 of the APA Regulations, and is conducted at the facility identified in such registration;
HH. "Registrant" means a person, who or which, has submitted a registration for an existing regulated activity under §22a-354i-7 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies or Section 4.0 of the APA Regulations;
II. "Regulated activity" means any of the following activities, which are located or conducted, wholly or partially, in an aquifer protection area, except as provided for in §22a-354i-5(c) and §22a-354i-6 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies, or Section 4.0 of the APA Regulations:
1. Underground storage or transmission of oil or petroleum, to the extent such activity is not pre-empted by federal law, or hazardous material, except for an underground storage tank that contains number two (2) fuel oil and is located more than five hundred (500) feet from a public supply well subject to regulation under §22a-354c or §22a-354z of the Connecticut General Statutes, or underground electrical facilities such as transformers, breakers, or cables containing oil for cooling or insulation purposes which are owned and operated by a public service company;
2. oil or petroleum dispensing for the purpose of retail, wholesale or fleet use;
3. on-site storage of hazardous materials for the purpose of wholesale sale;
4. repair or maintenance of vehicles or internal combustion engines of
“LEVEL A” AQUIFER PROTECTION AREA
Town of North Stonington -5- Aquifer Protection Regulations
vehicles, involving the use, storage or disposal of hazardous materials, including solvents, lubricants, paints, brake fluids, transmission fluids or the generation of hazardous wastes;
5. salvage operations of metal or vehicle parts;
6. wastewater discharges to ground water other than domestic sewage and stormwater, except for discharges from the following that have received a permit from the Commissioner pursuant to §22a-430 of the Connecticut General Statutes: a pump and treat system for ground water remediation; a potable water treatment system; a heat pump system; a non-contact cooling water system; and swimming pools;
7. car or truck washing, unless all waste waters from such activity are lawfully disposed of through a connection to a publicly owned treatment works;
8. production or refining of chemicals, including without limitation hazardous materials or asphalt;
9. clothes or cloth cleaning service which involves the use, storage or disposal of hazardous materials including without limitation dry-cleaning solvents;
10. industrial laundry activity that involves the cleaning of clothes or cloth contaminated by hazardous material, unless all waste waters from such activity are lawfully disposed of through a connection to a publicly owned treatment works;
11. generation of electrical power by means of fossil fuels, except for generation of electrical power by an emergency engine as defined by §22a-174-22(a)(2) of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies, or generation of electrical power by means of natural gas or propane;
12. production of electronic boards, electrical components, or other electrical equipment involving the use, storage or disposal of any hazardous material or involving metal plating, degreasing of parts or equipment, or etching operations;
13. embalming or crematory services which involve the use, storage or disposal of hazardous material, unless all waste waters from such activity are lawfully disposed of through a connection to a publicly owned treatment works;
14. furniture stripping operations which involve the use, storage or disposal of hazardous materials;
15. furniture finishing operations which involve the use, storage or disposal of hazardous materials, unless all waste waters from such activity are lawfully disposed of through a connection to a publicly owned treatment works;
16. storage, treatment or disposal of hazardous waste subject to a permit under §22a-449(c)-100 to §22a-449(c)-110, inclusive, of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies;
17. biological or chemical testing, analysis or research which involves the use,
“LEVEL A” AQUIFER PROTECTION AREA
Town of North Stonington -6- Aquifer Protection Regulations
storage or disposal of hazardous material, unless all waste waters from such activity are lawfully disposed of through a connection to a publicly owned treatment works, and provided that on-site testing of a public supply well by a public water utility is not a regulated activity;
18. pest control services which involve storage, mixing or loading of pesticides or other hazardous materials;
19. photographic finishing which involves the use, storage or disposal of hazardous materials, unless all waste water from such activity are lawfully disposed of through a connection to a publicly owned treatment works;
20. production or fabrication of metal products which involves the use, storage or disposal of hazardous materials including: metal cleaning or degreasing with industrial solvents; metal plating; or metal etching;
21. printing, plate making, lithography, photoengraving, or gravure, which involves the use, storage or disposal of hazardous materials;
22. accumulation or storage of waste oil, anti-freeze or spent lead-acid batteries which are subject to a general permit issued by the Commissioner under §22a-208(i) and §22a-454(e)(1) of the Connecticut General Statutes;
23. production of rubber, resin cements, elastomers or plastic, which involves the use, storage or disposal of hazardous materials;
24. storage of de-icing chemicals, unless such storage takes place within a weather-tight water-proof structure for the purpose of retail sale or for the purpose of de-icing parking areas or access roads to parking areas;
25. accumulation, storage, handling, recycling, disposal, reduction, processing, burning, transfer or composting of solid waste which is subject to a permit issued by the Commissioner pursuant to §22a-207b, §22a-208a, and §22a-208c of the Connecticut General Statute, except for a potable water treatment sludge disposal area;
26. dying, coating or printing of textiles, or tanning or finishing of leather, which activity involves the use, storage or disposal of hazardous materials;
27. production of wood veneer, plywood, reconstituted wood or pressure-treated wood, which involves the use, storage or disposal of hazardous material; and
28. pulp production processes that involve bleaching.
JJ. "Release" means "release" as defined in §22a-133k-1 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies;
KK. "State aquifer protection regulations" means §22a-354i-1 to §22a-354i-10, inclusive, of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies;
LL. "Storage" means the holding or possession of any hazardous material;
MM."Storage tank" means a stationary device which is designed to store hazardous materials, and is constructed of non-earthen materials including without
“LEVEL A” AQUIFER PROTECTION AREA
Town of North Stonington -7- Aquifer Protection Regulations
limitation concrete, steel, fiberglass or plastic;
NN. "Topographic feature" means an object, whether natural or man-made, located on the earth surface and of sufficient size that it appears on a 1:24,000 scale topographic quadrangle map drawn by the United States Geological Survey;
OO. "Underground" when referring to a storage tank or storage tank component means that ten percent or more of the volumetric capacity of such tank or component is below the surface of the ground and that portion which is below the surface of the ground is not fully visible for inspection;
PP. “Vehicle” or "vehicles" means a “vessel” as defined by §15-170 of the Connecticut General Statutes, and any vehicle propelled or drawn by any non-muscular power, including without limitation an automobile, aircraft, all-terrain vehicle, tractor, lawn mower or snowmobile;
QQ. "Waters” means “waters” as defined in §22a-423 of the Connecticut General Statutes;
RR. "Well field" means “well field” as defined in §22a-354h of the Connecticut General Statutes; and
SS. "Zoning district map" means any map showing zoning districts prepared in accordance with maps adopted pursuant to §8-3 of the Connecticut General Statutes.
3.0 DELINEATION OF AQUIFER PROTECTION AREA BOUNDARIES
3.1 The zoning, planning, or planning and zoning commission shall delineate the aquifer protection areas on the Town of North Stonington zoning district map. Such delineation shall consist of the combined areas of contribution and recharge areas as shown on Level A maps approved or prepared by the Commissioner.
A. Such boundaries shall be delineated within one hundred twenty (120) days after being notified by the Commissioner that an aquifer protection area is located partially or entirely within the Town of North Stonington.
B. Notice of such delineation shall be published in a newspaper having substantial circulation in the affected area. Such notice shall include at least the following:
1. a map or detailed description of the subject aquifer protection area; and
2. the name, telephone number, and address of a representative of the Agency who may be reached for further information.
3.2 In order to clarify the location of an aquifer protection area boundary, the Agency may apply to the Commissioner to extend such boundary to coincide with the nearest property line, municipal boundary or topographic feature pursuant to §22a-354i-4 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies. Such extension shall, at a minimum, fully encompass the aquifer protection areas bounded by the approved Level A
“LEVEL A” AQUIFER PROTECTION AREA
Town of North Stonington -8- Aquifer Protection Regulations
mapping but shall not exceed the distance necessary to clarify the location of the aquifer protection area or to facilitate the administration of regulations pertaining thereto. An aquifer protection area boundary may not be extended without prior written approval of the Commissioner.
A. Any request by the Agency to the Commissioner for extension of an aquifer protection area boundary shall include at least the following:
1. A map to scale delineating the aquifer protection area boundary mapped under Section 3.2 of the APA regulations, and the proposed extension of the aquifer protection area boundary;
2. A certification by the chairperson or duly authorized agent of the Agency that notice of such request has been provided to all owners of property within the proposed extended aquifer protection area and all affected water companies in accordance with the following:
a. Such notice shall include at least the following:
i. A map showing the aquifer protection area boundaries and the proposed extension of such boundaries,
ii. the name, address, and telephone number of a representative of the Agency who may be contacted for further information, and
iii.a statement that any person may, not later than thirty (30) days after said notification, submit to the Agency written comments on such proposed boundary extension;
b. Such notice shall be effectuated by the following:
i. Delivery of notice by certified mail to those individuals and entities identified in Section 3.2(A)(2), or
ii. the publication of a notice in a newspaper having substantial circulation in the affected area; and posting of notice near the proposed boundaries of the subject aquifer protection area of at least four signs each of which shall be at least four square feet in size (2' x 2'); and
c. a summary of comments received by such Agency regarding the proposed boundary extension and the Agency’s response.
B. Not later than sixty (60) days after receiving the Commissioner's written approval of a request to extend an aquifer protection area boundary, the Agency shall cause such boundary to be delineated in accordance with Section 3.1.
3.3 No person may challenge the boundaries of the aquifer protection area under the APA Regulations unless such challenge is based solely on a failure by the Agency to properly delineate the boundaries in accordance with §22a-354n of the Connecticut General Statutes.
3.4 A map of the location and boundaries of the aquifer protection areas, or regulated areas, shall be available for inspection in the Office of the Town Clerk or the Land
“LEVEL A” AQUIFER PROTECTION AREA
Town of North Stonington -9- Aquifer Protection Regulations
Use Office.
3.5 If the Level A mapping is amended in accordance with §22a-354b-1(i) or §22a-354b-1(j) of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies, the Agency shall cause the amended aquifer protection area boundary to be delineated in accordance with Sections 3.1 or 3.2.
4.0 PROHIBITED AND REGULATED ACTIVITIES
4.1 All regulated activities are prohibited in aquifer protection areas, except as specified in Section 4.2 below.
4.2 The following regulated activities are not prohibited in aquifer protection areas:
A. A registered regulated activity which is conducted in compliance with §22a-354i-9 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies or Section 12.0 of the APA Regulations; and
B. a regulated activity which has received a permit issued pursuant to §22a-354i-8 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies or Section 9.0 of the APA Regulations.
4.3 The following are not regulated activities:
A. Any activity conducted at a residence without compensation;
B. any activity involving the use or storage of no more than two and one-half (2.5) gallons of each type of hazardous material on-site at any one time, provided the total of all hazardous materials on-site does not exceed fifty-five (55) gallons at any one time;
C. any agricultural activity regulated pursuant to §22a-354m(d) of the Connecticut General Statutes;
D. any activity provided all the following conditions are satisfied:
1. such activity takes place solely within an enclosed building in an area with an impermeable floor;
2. such activity involves no more than 10% of the floor area in the building where the activity takes place;
3. any hazardous material used in connection with such activity is stored in such building at all times;
4. all waste waters generated by such activity are lawfully disposed through a connection to a publicly owned treatment works; and
5. such activity does not involve: the repair or maintenance of internal combustion engines, including without limitation, vehicles, or equipment associated with such vehicles; underground storage of any hazardous material; or above ground storage of more than one hundred and ten (110) gallons of
“LEVEL A” AQUIFER PROTECTION AREA
Town of North Stonington -10- Aquifer Protection Regulations
hazardous materials;
E. any activity solely involving the use of lubricating oil provided all the following conditions are satisfied:
1. such activity does not involve cleaning of metals with chlorinated solvents at the facility;
2. such activity takes place solely within an enclosed building in an area with an impermeable floor;
3. any hazardous material used in connection with such activity is stored in such building at all times; and
4. such activity does not involve: the repair or maintenance of internal combustion engines, including without limitation, vehicles, or equipment associated with such vehicles; underground storage of any hazardous material; or above ground storage of more than one hundred ten (110) gallons of such lubricating oil and associated hazardous waste; and
F. any activity involving the dispensing of oil or petroleum from an above-ground storage tank or tanks with an aggregate volume of two thousand (2000) gallons or less provided all the following conditions are satisfied:
1. such dispensing activity takes place solely on a paved surface which is covered by a roof;
2. the above-ground storage tank(s) is a double-walled tank with overfill alarms; and
3. all associated piping is either above ground, or has secondary containment.
4.4 Determination of a non-regulated activity
A. Any person proposing to carry out a non-regulated activity, as set forth in Section
4.3 of these regulations, in an aquifer protection area shall, prior to commencement of such activity, notify the Agency or its duly authorized agent on a form provided by the Agency. Such form shall provide sufficient information to enable the Agency or its duly authorized agent to properly determine that the proposed activity is a regulated activity or a non-regulated activity within the aquifer protection area.
B. If such activity is determined to be a non-regulated activity, then no further action under the APA Regulations is necessary.
5.0 ACTIVITIES REGULATED BY THE STATE
5.1 The Commissioner shall exclusively regulate activities within aquifer protection areas that are specified in §22a-354p(g) of the Connecticut General Statutes. The Agency shall regulate all other regulated activities.
5.2 Any person conducting regulated activities that are within the authority of the
“LEVEL A” AQUIFER PROTECTION AREA
Town of North Stonington -11- Aquifer Protection Regulations
Commissioner shall submit a registration or obtain a permit or exemption from the Commissioner prior to engaging in such activity. The Commissioner shall process applications for those regulated activities.
5.3 The Agency may submit an advisory decision to the Commissioner for consideration on any permit regulated under this Section in accordance with the Connecticut General Statutes §22a-354p(g).
6.0 APPLICATION FOR AN EXEMPTION FROM PROHIBITION OR REGULATION
6.1 The owner or operator of a regulated activity may seek an exemption from the Commissioner pursuant to §22a-354i-6 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies. Any person seeking an exemption from the Commissioner shall concurrently submit a copy of the application for an exemption to the Agency and any affected water company.
6.2 The Agency may submit written comments to the Commissioner on any exemption regulated under this Section in accordance with §22a-354i-6(c) of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies within sixty (60) days of the agency receipt of copy of the application.
7.0 GENERAL REGISTRATION, PERMIT APPLICATION AND TRANSFER PROCEDURES
7.1 All applications for permits and registrations shall contain sufficient information for a fair and informed determination of the issues. The Agency may request additional information from the applicant for this purpose.
7.2 The day of receipt of a registration, permit application or transfer form shall be the day of the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Agency, immediately following the day of submission of the application to the Agency or its duly authorized agent, or thirty-five (35) days after such submission, whichever is sooner.
7.3 At any time during the review period, the Agency may require the applicant or registrant to provide additional information about the regulated activity. Requests for additional information shall not stay the time limitations for registrations and permits as set forth in Sections 8.0 and 9.0 of the APA Regulations.
7.4 All permit applications and registrations shall be open for public inspection.
7.5 Incomplete permit applications and registrations may be denied without prejudice.
7.6 No permit or registration issued under Sections 8.0 or 9.0 of the APA Regulations shall be assigned or transferred except with written approval by the Agency.
7.7 The Agency shall notify the town clerk of any adjoining municipality of the pendency of any application, petition, appeal, request or plan concerning any project on any site
“LEVEL A” AQUIFER PROTECTION AREA
Town of North Stonington -12- Aquifer Protection Regulations
in which: (A) any portion of the property affected by a decision of such agency is within five-hundred (500) feet of the boundary of the adjoining municipality; (B) a significant portion of the traffic to the completed project on the site will use streets within the adjoining municipality to enter or exit the site; (C) a significant portion of the sewer or water drainage from the project on the site will flow through and significantly impact the drainage or sewerage system within the adjoining municipality; or (D) water runoff from the improved site will impact streets or other municipal or private property within the adjoining municipality. Such notice shall be made by certified mail, return receipt requested, and shall be mailed within seven (7) days of the date of receipt of the application, petition, request or plan. Such adjoining municipality may, through a representative, appear and be heard at any hearing on any such application, petition, appeal, request or plan.
8.0 REGISTRATION REQUIREMENTS
8.1 Any person engaged in a regulated activity which substantially commenced, or was in active operation within the past five (5) years, or with respect to which a municipal building permit was issued, either before the effective date of the state aquifer protection regulations, or before the date an applicable aquifer protection area is designated on a municipal zoning district map, whichever occurs later, shall register the activity in accordance with this Section unless such person has pending an application for an exemption pursuant to §22a-354i-6 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies.
A. The Commissioner shall process registrations for those regulated activities specified in §22a-354p(g) of the Connecticut General Statutes. The Agency shall process registrations for all other regulated activities.
B. If the regulated activity is not specified in §22a-354p(g) of the Connecticut General Statutes, the person engaged in such activity shall submit a registration to the Agency not later than one hundred eighty (180) days after adoption of regulations pursuant to §22a-354p of the Connecticut General Statutes, or the designation the aquifer protection area pursuant to §22a-354i-2 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies, whichever occurs later. Said person shall simultaneously file a copy of the registration with the Commissioner, Commissioner of Public Health and the affected water company.
8.2 All registrations shall be provided on a form prescribed by the Agency and shall be accompanied by the correct registration fee in accordance with Section 18.0 of the APA Regulations. Such registration forms may be obtained from the North Stonington Land Use Office. Such registration forms shall include at least the following information in writing or on maps or drawings:
A. The name, business telephone number, street address and mailing address of the:
1. Registrant; if the registrant is a corporation or limited partnership, the full name of the facility and such corporation or limited partnership as registered
“LEVEL A” AQUIFER PROTECTION AREA
Town of North Stonington -13- Aquifer Protection Regulations
with the Connecticut Secretary of State, and any officer or governing or managing body of any partnership, association, firm or corporation,
2. owner of such facility if different than the registrant, and
3. manager or operator overseeing the operations of such facility;
B. the location of such facility, using street address or other appropriate method of location, and a map showing the property boundaries of the facility on a 1:24,000 scale United States Geological Survey topographic quadrangle base;
C. an identification of the regulated activity or activities conducted at the facility, as described in Section 2.1(II) of the APA Regulations, which regulated activity or activities shall consist of any regulated activity which substantially commenced, was in active operation, or with respect to which a municipal building permit was issued within the past five (5) years; and
D. a certification by the registrant that the subject regulated activity is in compliance with the best management practices set forth in Section 12.1 of the APA Regulations, as follows, signed after satisfying the statements set forth in the following certification:
"I have personally examined and am familiar with the information submitted in this registration and all attachments, and I certify, based on reasonable investigation, including my inquiry of those individuals responsible for obtaining the information, the submitted information is true, accurate and complete to the best of my knowledge and belief. I understand that any false statement made in this document or certification may be punishable as a criminal offense under §53a-157b of the Connecticut General Statutes and any other applicable law.”
8.3 When deemed necessary to protect a public supply well subject to regulation under §22a-354c or §22a-354z of the Connecticut General Statutes, the Agency may:
A. require, by written notice, any registrant to submit for review and written approval a storm water management plan prepared in accordance with Section 12.2 of the APA Regulations. If so required, the storm water management plan shall be implemented by the registrant immediately upon its approval; or
B. require, by written notice, any registrant to submit for review and written approval the materials management plan prepared in accordance with Section 12.1 of the APA Regulations. If so required, the materials management plan shall be implemented by the registrant immediately upon its approval.
8.4 If the Agency determines that a registration is incomplete, it shall reject the registration and notify the registrant of what additional information is required and the date by which it shall be submitted.
8.5 If the registration is determined to be complete, and the regulated activity is eligible for registration, the Agency shall send written notification of such registration to the registrant. Such registration shall be determined to be complete and eligible if the registrant has not otherwise received a notice of rejection from the Agency, not later than one hundred and eighty (180) days after the date the registration is received by
“LEVEL A” AQUIFER PROTECTION AREA
Town of North Stonington -14- Aquifer Protection Regulations
the Agency.
8.6 The following general provisions shall be included in the issuance of all registrations:
A. The Agency has relied in whole or in part on information provided by the registrant and if such information subsequently proves to be false, deceptive, incomplete or inaccurate, the registration may be modified, suspended or revoked;
B. all registrations issued by the Agency are subject to and do not derogate any present or future rights or powers of the Commissioner, Agency, or municipality, and convey no rights in real estate or material nor any exclusive privileges, and are further subject to any and all public and private rights and to any federal, state, and municipal laws or regulations pertinent to the subject land or activity;
C. a complete registration shall expire five (5) years from the date of receipt of such registration by the Agency;
D. the registrant shall apply to the Agency to renew the registration on a form prescribed by the Agency for a facility prior to expiration of such registration; and
E. If a registered regulated activity is out of business or inactive when registration renewal is required, a five (5) year allowance shall be in effect from the date the registration expires. If the registrant has not applied to renew the registration within five (5) years of the date the registration expires, the facility is no longer eligible for registration.
8.7 If a regulated activity which is eligible for registration in accordance with Section 8.1 fails to be registered or if the registrant of an active registered activity fails to apply for renewal prior to expiration, the Commissioner or municipal aquifer protection agency, as appropriate, may accept a late registration at their discretion, subject to the limitations in Section 8.6(E) above.
8.8 Any person wishing to assume the benefits under a registration for regulated activities shall apply to transfer such registration on a form prescribed by the Agency and submitted to the Agency.
9.0 PERMIT REQUIREMENTS
9.1 Any person may apply for a permit to add a regulated activity to a facility where a registered regulated activity occurs.
9.2 The Agency shall process permit applications for those registrants that have registered pursuant to Section 8.0 of the APA Regulations. The Commissioner shall process permit applications for regulated activities specified in §22a-354p(g) of the Connecticut General Statutes and for those registrants that have registered pursuant to §22a-354i-7(b)(1) of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies.
9.3 Action shall be taken on permit applications within sixty-five (65) days after the completion of a public hearing or in the absence of a public hearing within sixty-five (65) days from the date of receipt of the application. The applicant may consent to
“LEVEL A” AQUIFER PROTECTION AREA
Town of North Stonington -15- Aquifer Protection Regulations
one or more extensions of either of these timeframes, provided the total extension of all such periods is sixty-five (65) days or less.
9.4 An application for a permit shall be made on a form prescribed by the Agency and shall be accompanied by the correct application fee in accordance with Section 18.0 of the APA Regulations. Such permit application forms may be obtained from the North Stonington Land Use Office. Simultaneously with filing an application, the applicant shall send a copy of the application to the Commissioner, the Commissioner of Public Health and the affected water company. An application shall include the following information:
A. The information as required for a registration under Section 8.2 of the APA Regulations shall be provided for the proposed regulated activity;
B. a confirmation and certification that the existing and proposed activity:
1. remains and shall remain in compliance with Section 12.1 of the APA Regulations;
2. shall not increase the number of underground storage tanks used for storage of hazardous materials; and
3. remains and shall remain in compliance with all local, state, and federal environmental laws;
C. a materials management plan in accordance with Section 12.1 of the APA Regulations;
D. a storm water management plan in accordance with Section 12.2 of the APA Regulations;
E. the following environmental compliance information with respect to environmental violations which occurred at the facility where the regulated activities are conducted, within the five (5) years immediately preceding the date of the application:
1. any criminal conviction involving a violation of any environmental protection law;
2. any civil penalty imposed in any state or federal judicial proceeding, or any penalty exceeding five thousand dollars imposed in any administrative proceeding; and
3. any judicial or administrative orders issued regarding any such violation together with the dates, case or docket numbers, or other information which identifies the proceeding. For any such proceeding initiated by the state or federal government, the Agency may require submission of a copy of any official document associated with the proceeding, the final judgment or order;
F. any additional information deemed necessary by the Agency regarding potential threats to the ground water and proposed safeguards; and
G. the following certification signed by the applicant and the individual responsible for preparing the application, after satisfying the statements set forth in the
“LEVEL A” AQUIFER PROTECTION AREA
Town of North Stonington -16- Aquifer Protection Regulations
certification:
"I have personally examined and am familiar with the information submitted in this document and all attachments, and I certify, based on reasonable investigation, including my inquiry of those individuals responsible for obtaining the information, the submitted information is true, accurate and complete to the best of my knowledge and belief. I understand that any false statement made in the submitted information is punishable as a criminal offense under §53a-157b of the Connecticut General Statutes and any other applicable law.”
9.5 The Commissioner, any affected water company or the Commissioner of Public Health may, not later than thirty (30) days after receiving a copy of an application for a permit under this Section, submit to the Agency written comments on such application. The Agency shall give due consideration to any such comments, and shall provide a copy of the decision to the Commissioner, the affected water company and the Commissioner of Public Health.
9.6 To carry out the purposes of the Act, the Agency may: grant an application as filed; grant it upon such terms, conditions, limitations or modifications necessary; or deny it. The Agency shall state upon the record the reason for its decision.
9.7 The Agency may hold a public hearing on an application for a permit in accordance with Section 10.0 of the APA regulations.
9.8 The Agency shall not issue a permit unless a complete application has been received and the applicant demonstrates to the Agency's satisfaction that all requirements of this Section of the APA regulations have been satisfied and all of the following standards and criteria have been met:
A. the proposed regulated activity shall take place at a facility where a registered regulated activity occurs;
B. the proposed regulated activity shall not increase the number, or storage capacity of underground storage tanks used for hazardous materials except for the replacement of an existing underground storage tank in accordance with Section 12.1(C) of the APA Regulations;
C. the materials management plan and storm water management plan have been satisfactorily prepared in accordance with Sections 12.1 and 12.2 of the APA Regulations;
D. the applicant has submitted a confirmation and certification that all regulated activities remain and shall remain in compliance with all local, state and federal environmental laws in accordance with Section 9.4(B);
E. the applicant’s compliance record does not indicate (A) that any noncompliance resulted from indifference to or disregard for the legal requirements, (B) an unwillingness or inability to devote the resources necessary to comply and remain in compliance, or (C) that instances of noncompliance have led to serious environmental harm, harm to human health or safety, or a substantial risk of such harm;
“LEVEL A” AQUIFER PROTECTION AREA
Town of North Stonington -17- Aquifer Protection Regulations
F. the proposed regulated activity shall be conducted in accordance with Section 12.0 of the APA Regulations;
G. the existing regulated activity is being conducted in accordance with Section 12.0 of the APA Regulations; and
H. the certification required under Section 9.4(G) has been signed by the applicant and the individual responsible for preparing the application.
9.9 The Agency may impose reasonable conditions or limitations on any permit issued under this Section to assure protection of the ground water, including, but not limited to the following:
A. best management practices in addition to those set forth in Section 12.0 of the APA Regulations; and
B. ground water monitoring.
9.10 The following general provisions shall be included in the issuance of all permits:
A. the Agency has relied in whole or in part on information provided by the applicant and if such information subsequently proves to be false, deceptive, incomplete or inaccurate, the permit may be modified, suspended or revoked;
B. all permits issued by the Agency are subject to and do not derogate any present or future rights or powers of the Commissioner, Agency, or municipality, and convey no rights in real estate or material nor any exclusive privileges, and are further subject to any and all public and private rights and to any federal, state, and municipal laws or regulations pertinent to the subject land or activity;
C. the permit shall expire ten (10) years from the date of issuance of such permit by the Agency; and
D. a person shall apply to the Agency to renew the permit on a form prescribed by the Agency prior to expiration of such permit. Such renewal shall be granted upon request by the Agency unless a substantial change in the permitted activity is proposed, or enforcement action with regard to the regulated activity has been taken, in which case, a new permit application shall be submitted and reviewed in accordance with the provisions of this Section.
9.11 The Agency shall notify the applicant or permittee within fifteen (15) days of the date of the decision by certified mail, return receipt requested, and the Agency shall cause notice of its order in issuance or denial of a permit to be published in a newspaper having a general circulation in the municipality in which the aquifer protection area is located.
9.12 A permittee may request a modification of a permit from the Agency. Such request shall be on a form prescribed by the Agency, and shall include the facts and reasons supporting the request. The Agency may require the permittee to submit a new application for a permit or renewal in lieu of a modification request.
“LEVEL A” AQUIFER PROTECTION AREA
Town of North Stonington -18- Aquifer Protection Regulations
9.13 A person wishing to assume the benefits under a permit for regulated activities shall apply to transfer such permit on a form prescribed by the Agency and submitted to the Agency.
10.0 PUBLIC HEARINGS REGARDING PERMIT APPLICATIONS
10.1 If the Agency decides to hold a public hearing regarding an application for a permit to conduct a regulated activity within an aquifer protection area, such hearing shall commence no later than sixty-five (65) days after the receipt of such application.
10.2 Notice of the hearing shall be published at least twice at intervals of not less than two (2) days, the first not more than fifteen (15) days and not fewer than ten (10) days, and the last not less than two (2) days before the date set for the hearing in a newspaper having a general circulation in each Town where the affected aquifer, or any part thereof, is located.
10.3 The Agency shall send to any affected water company, at least ten (10) days before the hearing, a copy of the notice by certified mail, return receipt requested. Any affected water company may, through a representative, appear and be heard at any such hearing.
10.4 All applications, maps and documents relating thereto shall be open for public inspection.
10.5 At such hearing any person or persons may appear and be heard.
10.6 The hearing shall be completed within thirty-five (35) days of its commencement.
10.7 The applicant may consent to an extension of the time frames in Sections 10.1 or 10.6, provided the total extension of all such periods, including any extensions provided in Section 9.3, totals sixty-five (65) days or less.
10.8 In reaching its decision on any application after a public hearing, the Agency shall base its decision on the record of that hearing. Documentary evidence or other material not in the hearing record shall not be considered by the Agency in its decision.
10.9 The applicant or permittee shall be notified of the Agency’s decision in accordance with Section 9.11 of the APA Regulations.
11.0 BOND AND INSURANCE RELEVANT TO PERMIT APPLICANTS
11.1 An applicant may be required to file a bond as a condition of the permit.
11.2 Any bond or surety shall be conditioned on compliance with all provisions of these regulations and the terms, conditions and limitations established in the permit.
“LEVEL A” AQUIFER PROTECTION AREA
Town of North Stonington -19- Aquifer Protection Regulations
12.0 BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES
12.1 Every regulated activity shall be conducted in accordance with the following:
A. hazardous materials may be stored above ground within an aquifer protection area only in accordance with the following conditions:
1. hazardous material shall be stored in a building or under a roof that minimizes storm water entry to the hazardous material storage area, except that a roof is not required for a bulk storage facility as defined in Section 2.0 of the APA Regulations;
2. floors within a building or under a roof where hazardous material may be stored shall be constructed or treated to protect the surface of the floor from deterioration due to spillage of any such material;
3. a structure which may be used for storage or transfer of hazardous material shall be protected from storm water run-on, and ground water intrusion;
4. hazardous material shall be stored within an impermeable containment area which is capable of containing at least the volume of the largest container of such hazardous material present in such area, or 10% of the total volume of all such containers in such area, whichever is larger, without overflow of released hazardous material from the containment area;
5. hazardous material shall not be stored with other hazardous materials that are incompatible and may create a hazard of fire, explosion or generation of toxic substances;
6. hazardous material shall be stored only in a container that has been certified to meet state or federal specifications for containers suitable for the transport or storage of such material;
7. hazardous material shall be stored only in an area that is secured against un-authorized entry by the public; and
8. the requirements of this subdivision are intended to supplement, and not to supersede, any other applicable requirements of federal, state, or local law, including applicable requirements of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976;
B. no person shall increase the number of underground storage tanks used to store hazardous materials;
C. an underground storage tank used to store hazardous materials shall not be replaced with a larger tank unless (A) there is no more than a 25% increase in volume of the larger replacement tank, and (B) the larger replacement tank is a double-walled tank with co-axial piping, both meeting new installation component standards pursuant to §22a-449(d)-1(e) and §22a-449(d)-102 of
“LEVEL A” AQUIFER PROTECTION AREA
Town of North Stonington -20- Aquifer Protection Regulations
the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies, and with interstitial monitoring;
D. no person shall use, maintain or install floor drains, dry wells or other infiltration devices or appurtenances which allow the release of waste waters to the ground, unless such release is permitted by the Commissioner in accordance with §22a-430 or §22a-430b of the Connecticut General Statutes; and
E. a materials management plan shall be developed and implemented in accordance with the following:
1. a materials management plan shall contain, at a minimum, the following information with respect to the subject regulated activity:
a. a pollution prevention assessment consisting of a detailed evaluation of alternatives to the use of hazardous materials or processes and practices that would reduce or eliminate the use of hazardous materials, and implementation of such alternatives where possible and feasible;
b. a description of any operations or practices which may pose a threat of pollution to the aquifer, which shall include the following:
i. a process flow diagram identifying where hazardous materials are stored, disposed and used, and where hazardous wastes are generated and subsequently stored and disposed;
ii. an inventory of all hazardous materials which are likely to be or will be manufactured, produced, stored, utilized or otherwise handled; and
iii. a description of waste, including waste waters generated, and a description of how such wastes are handled, stored and disposed;
c. the name, street address, mailing address, title and telephone number of the individual(s) responsible for implementing the materials management plan and the individual(s) who should be contacted in an emergency;
d. a record-keeping system to account for the types, quantities, and disposition of hazardous materials which are manufactured, produced, utilized, stored, or otherwise handled or which are discharged or emitted; such record-keeping system shall be maintained at the subject facility and shall be made available thereat for inspection during normal business hours by the Commissioner and the municipal aquifer protection agency; and
e. an emergency response plan for responding to a release of hazardous materials. Such plan shall describe how each such release could result in pollution to the underlying aquifer and shall set forth the methods used or to be used to prevent and abate any such a release;
“LEVEL A” AQUIFER PROTECTION AREA
Town of North Stonington -21- Aquifer Protection Regulations
2. when a materials management plan is required under either Section 8.3 or 9.4 of the APA Regulations, such materials management plan shall be completed and certified by a professional engineer or a certified hazardous materials manager, or, if the facility where the regulated activity is conducted has received and maintained an ISO 14001 environmental management system certification, then the registrant may complete and certify the materials management plan; and
3. the materials management plan shall be maintained at the subject facility and shall be made available thereat for inspection during normal business hours by the Commissioner and the municipal aquifer protection agency.
12.2 The development and implementation of a storm water management plan required for regulated activities in accordance with Sections 8.3 and 9.4 of the APA Regulations, shall be as follows: A storm water management plan shall assure that storm water run-off generated by the subject regulated activity is: managed in a manner so as to prevent pollution of ground water: and shall comply with all of the requirements for the General Permit of the Discharge of Storm Water associated with a Commercial Activity issued pursuant to §22a-430b of the Connecticut General Statutes.
13.0 OTHER STATE, FEDERAL AND LOCAL LAWS
13.1 Nothing in these regulations shall obviate the requirement for the applicant to obtain any other assents, permits or licenses required by law or regulation by the Town of North Stonington, State of Connecticut and the Government of the United States including any approval required by the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and the United States Environmental Protection Agency. Obtaining such assents, permits or licenses are the sole responsibility of the applicant.
13.2 No person shall conduct any regulated activity within an aquifer protection area which requires zoning or subdivision approval without first having obtained a valid certificate of zoning or subdivision approval, special permit, variance, or other documentation establishing that the proposal complies with the Town of North Stonington zoning or subdivision regulations.
14.0 ENFORCEMENT
14.1 The Agency may appoint a duly authorized agent to act in its behalf with the authority to issue notices of violation or cease and desist orders.
14.2 If the Agency or its duly authorized agent finds that any person is conducting or maintaining any activity, facility or condition which violates any provision of these regulations, the Agency or its duly authorized agent may:
“LEVEL A” AQUIFER PROTECTION AREA
Town of North Stonington -22- Aquifer Protection Regulations
A. Issue a notice of violation.
1. The notice of violation shall state the nature of the violation, the jurisdiction of the Agency, and the necessary action required to correct the violation including without limitation halting the activity in the aquifer protection area.
2. The Agency may request that the person appear at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Agency to discuss the unauthorized activity, and/or provide a written reply to the notice or file an application for the necessary permit or registration. Failure to carry out the action(s) directed in a notice of violation may result in issuance of an order under Subsection B of this Section or other enforcement proceedings as provided by law.
B. Issue a written order.
1. Such order shall be issued by certified mail, return receipt requested to such person conducting such activity or maintaining such facility or condition to cease such activity immediately or to correct such facility or condition. The Agency shall send a copy of such order to any affected water company by certified mail, return receipt requested.
2. Within ten (10) days of the issuance of such order the Agency shall hold a hearing to provide the person an opportunity to be heard and show cause why the order should not remain in effect. Any affected water company may testify at the hearing. The Agency shall consider the facts presented at the hearing and, within ten (10) days of the completion of the hearing, notify the person by certified mail, return receipt requested, that the original order remains in effect, that a revised order is in effect, or that the order has been withdrawn.
C. Suspend or revoke registration or permit.
1. The Agency may suspend or revoke a registration or a permit if it finds, after a hearing, that the registrant or permittee has not complied with the terms, conditions or limitations set forth in the registration or the permit. Prior to revoking or suspending any registration or permit, the Agency shall issue notice to the registrant or the permittee, personally or by certified mail, return receipt requested, setting forth the facts or conduct that warrants the intended action.
2. The Agency shall hold a hearing to provide the registrant or permittee an opportunity to show that it is in compliance with its registration or permit. The Agency shall notify the registrant or permittee of its decision by certified mail within fifteen (15) days of the date of its decision. The Agency shall publish notice of a suspension or revocation in a newspaper having general circulation in the Town of North Stonington.
14.3 An order issued pursuant to Section 14.2(B) shall be effective upon issuance, shall remain in effect until the Agency affirms, revises, or withdraws the order, and shall not delay or bar an action pursuant to Section 14.2(C).
“LEVEL A” AQUIFER PROTECTION AREA
Town of North Stonington -23- Aquifer Protection Regulations
14.4 A court may assess criminal and or civil penalties to any person who commits, takes part in, or assists in any violation of any provision of the APA regulations in accordance with §22a-354s(b) and §22a-354s(c) of the Connecticut General Statutes.
15.0 AMENDMENTS
15.1 These regulations may be amended, changed or repealed in accordance with §22a-354p(b) of the Connecticut General Statutes.
15.2 If a complete application is filed with the Agency which is in conformance with the APA regulations as of the date of its filing, the permit issued shall not be required to comply with any changes in regulations taking effect on or after the filing date. The provisions of this Section shall not apply to the establishment, amendment, or change of the boundaries of the aquifer protection area or to any changes in the APA Regulations necessary to make the regulations consistent with Chapter 446i of the Connecticut General Statutes as of the date of the Agency’s decision.
16.0 APPEALS
16.1 Appeal of the Agency’s regulation, order, decision or action shall be made in accordance with §22a-354q of the Connecticut General Statutes.
17.0 CONFLICT AND SEVERANCE
17.1 If there is a conflict between the provisions of the APA Regulations, the provision that imposes the most stringent standards shall govern. The invalidity of any word, clause, sentence, section, part, subsection, subdivision or provision of these regulations shall not affect the validity of any other part that can be given effect without such valid part or parts.
17.2 If there is a conflict between the provisions of the APA Regulations and the Act, the provisions of the Act shall govern.
18.0 REGISTRATION AND PERMIT APPLICATION FEES
18.1 All fees required by these regulations shall be submitted to the Agency by certified check or money order payable to the Town of North Stonington at the time the registration or permit application is filed with the Agency.
18.2 No registration or permit application shall be granted or approved by the Agency
“LEVEL A” AQUIFER PROTECTION AREA
Town of North Stonington -24- Aquifer Protection Regulations
unless the correct registration/application fee is paid in full or unless a waiver has been granted by the Agency pursuant to Section 18.6.
18.3 The registration or permit application fee is nonrefundable.
18.4 Registration or permit application fees shall be based on the following schedule:
FEE SCHEDULE
Facility Size
Small (< 1 acre)
Medium (1-5 acres)
Large (> 5 acres)
Registrations:
Industrial
100.00
200.00
300.00
Commercial
100.00
200.00
300.00
Other
100.00
200.00
300.00
Permits:
Industrial
100.00
200.00
300.00
Commercial
100.00
200.00
300.00
Other
100.00
200.00
300.00
Materials Management Plan Reviews
100.00
200.00
300.00
Storm water Management Plan Reviews
100.00
200.00
300.00
Public Hearing
250.00
250.00
250.00
Facility Inspection/Monitoring
$5.00 per each % impervious surface
$10.00 per each % impervious surface
$15.00 per each % impervious surface
Regulation Petition
100.00
100.00
100.00
Transfer Fee
50.00
50.00
50.00
18.5 Boards, commissions, and departments of the Town of North Stonington are exempt from all fee requirements.
“LEVEL A” AQUIFER PROTECTION AREA
Town of North Stonington -25- Aquifer Protection Regulations
18.6 The registrant or applicant may petition the Agency to waive, reduce or allow delayed payment of the fee. Such petitions shall be in writing and shall state fully the facts and circumstances the Agency should consider in its determination under this Section. The Agency may waive all or part of the application fee if the Agency determines that:
A. the activity applied for would clearly result in a substantial public benefit to the environment or to the public health and safety and the registrant or applicant would reasonably be deterred from initiating the activity solely or primarily as a result of the amount of the registration or permit application fee; or
B. the amount of the registration or permit application fee is clearly excessive in relation to the cost to the Town for reviewing and processing the application.
18.7 Extra Assessments
A. In the event that additional expenses, including but not limited to outside consultants, experts, or legal advisors are incurred in processing the registration or permit application the applicant/registrant may be assessed an additional fee not to exceed $ 5,000.00 to cover said costs. Said fees are to be estimated by the duly authorized agent and submitted with the application fee and held until the application is completely processed after which time any residual funds pertaining to this assessment are to be returned to the applicant/registrant.
B. For the purpose of this assessment, an “outside consultant” means a professional who is not an employee of the Town of North Stonington including but not limited to engineering, environmental, hydrogeology and hazardous materials management professionals.
18.8 The Agency shall state upon its record the basis for all actions under this Section.
19.0 EFFECTIVE DATE OF REGULATIONS
The APA Regulations, APA boundaries and amendments thereto, shall become effective upon (1) the Commissioner’s determination that such regulations are reasonably related to the purpose of ground water protection and not inconsistent with the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies §22a-354i-1 through §22a-354i-10 and (2) filing in the Office of the Town Clerk.
Effective Date: ____________
Revision Date: _____________