CODE OF ORDINANCES BOROUGH OF NAUGATUCK, CONNECTICUT 
____________ 
CONTAINING 
THE CHARTER AND SPECIAL ACTS 
AND 
GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE BOROUGH 
____________ 
Published by Order of the Board of Mayor and Burgesses 
____________ 

OFFICIALS 
of the 
BOROUGH OF NAUGATUCK, CONNECTICUT 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
John E. Letts, Sr. 
Mayor 
____________ 
Neal B. Hanlon 
Deputy Mayor 
____________ 
Jeffrey Burmeister 
Robert Burns 
Catherine Jerome 
Henry Kogut 
Ronald SanAngelo 
Joan Taf 
Mary Tamosaitis 
Robert Woodfield 
Burgesses 
____________ 
Sophie K. Morton 
Town Clerk 
____________ 
Kara K. Anderson 
Borough Clerk 
____________ 
Donald Cowan 
Treasurer 
____________ 
Gerald Labriola, Jr. 
Borough Attorney 
____________ 
JoAnn Keating 
Controller 
PREFACE 
    This Code is a recodification of the ordinances of the Borough of Naugatuck, Connecticut, of a general and permanent nature. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1973 Code, as supplemented through February 9, 1973, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the Board of Mayor and Burgesses. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this volume, the reader can locate any section of the 1973 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Footnotes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state laws have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this volume. 
Numbering System 
    The numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and municipal codes. Each section number consists of two component parts separated by a dash, the figure before the dash referring to the chapter number and the figure after the dash referring to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of Chapter 1 is numbered 1-1 and the fourth section of Chapter 8 is 8-4. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter and at the same time new sections or even whole chapters can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. By way of illustration: If new material consisting of three sections that would logically come between sections 8-2 and 8-3 is desired to be added, such new sections would be numbered 8-2.1, 8-2.2 and 8-2.3 respectively. New chapters may be included in the same manner. If the new material is to be included between Chapters 11 and 12, it will be designated as Chapter 11.5. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject, the next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. 
Indices 
    The indices have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of the headings being couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by municipal officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within each index which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which he is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this Code to which the attention of the user is especially directed is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing for the Code. With this system, the Code will be kept up-to-date periodically. Upon the final passage of amendatory ordinances, they will be properly edited and the appropriate page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the Code, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Successfully keeping this Code up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the volume. As revised sheets are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    The publication of this Code was under the direct supervision of Jan N. Shekitka, Supervising Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Kara K. Anderson, Borough Clerk, Gerald Labriola, Jr., Borough Attorney and Kevin DelGobbo, Mayoral Assistant, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the borough readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the borough's affairs. 
MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION 
Tallahassee, Florida  
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
ORDINANCE #91 
An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a New Code of Ordinances for the Borough of Naugatuck, Connecticut; Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances Not Included Therein; Providing a Penalty for the Violation Thereof; Providing for the Manner of Amending Such Code; and Providing Then Such Code and This Ordinance Shall Become Effective. 
Be it Ordained by the Board of May or Burgesses of the Borough of Naugatuck. 
    Section 1. The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances of the Borough of Naugatuck, Connecticut," published by Municipal Code Corporation consisting of Chapters 1 through 19, each inclusive, is adopted. 
    Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before May 1, 1990, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
    Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
    Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulations adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00). Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is re-enacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the board of mayor and burgesses may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunction relief, and revocation of licenses or permits. 
    Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code, when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the board of mayor and burgesses to make the same a part of the Code, shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
    Section 6. Ordinances adopted after May 1, 1990, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
    Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective upon its second publication in the newspaper. 
    Approved, adopted and ordered published by the Board of Mayor and Burgesses at their Regular Meeting of November 13, 1990. 
    Effective date November 20, 1990. 
Attest: 
/s/   
      Kara M. Keating 
      Borough Clerk   
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omitted." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date 
Adopted Included/ 
Omitted Supp. No.  121 12- 2-08 Included 14  (Amend.)  7- 7-09 Included 14  (Amend.) 12- 1-09 Included 14  (Amend.)  3- 2-10 Included 14  122 10- 5-10 Included 14  (Ord.) 12-28-10 Included 14   83  4- 2-13 Included 15  123 11- 1-12 Included 15  124  4- 2-13 Included 15  125  2- 4-14 Included 15  126  2- 4-14 Included 15  
PART I - CHARTER AND SPECIAL ACTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- This part consists of two subparts. Subpart A contains the Charter of the borough, being Special Laws 1893, Act No. 161, as amended from time to time, and is included herein for the convenience of the users of this Code. The arrangement, format, etc., of the Charter have been retained. Bracketed material [ ] consists of section catchlines and other material added for clarity. Amendments have been worked into their proper places and amended or repealed provisions deleted. Original and amendatory laws from which the sections are derived are cited in parentheses ( ) following such sections. Subpart B contains a list of special acts applicable to the borough which did not amend the Charter. 

Subpart A - CHARTER 

Section 1. - [Territorial limits; incorporation.] 
    All such portions of the town of Naugatuck as is embraced and included within and by the following limits and lines, to wit: Commencing at a point in the highway, known as the Millville road, twenty-four feet westerly of the southwest corner of Newell A. Smith's barn at an iron pin on the northerly side of the said highway; thence in a straight line south two degrees, fifteen minutes east (magnetic) to an iron pin on the northerly line of the highway leading to Andrew's Hill, and about fifteen hundred and thirty-four feet westerly as the highway runs from Dooley's barn; thence southeasterly in a straight line to an iron pin located on the easterly side of the highway leading to Hoadley Mountain, so called, and north forty-seven degrees, ten minutes west, and two hundred and sixteen feet distant from southwest corner of an old barn belonging to Edward Hard; thence easterly in a straight line to the northwest corner of Grove cemetery, on the road leading to Beacon Falls; thence northeasterly in a straight line to an iron pin on the westerly side, and opposite a sluice in the highway leading to Hopkins hill, and about one hundred and sixty feet southwest from the house of Frederick Webber; thence northerly in a straight line to an iron pin in the railing on the north side of the highway leading to Prospect, and ninety-seven and one-half feet east from the northeast corner of Edwin F. Smith's engine-house; thence northwesterly in a straight line to an iron pin in the easterly line of the highway leading to Waterbury, and about one hundred and thirty-three and two-tenths feet southerly from the tenement house of August Webber; thence northwesterly in a straight line to an iron pin placed one foot westerly of a post at the southeasterly one of the four corners next northerly from the slaughter house of the E.H. Carrington Company, on what is known as the old Litchfield turnpike road; thence westerly in a straight line for a distance of two thousand, one hundred and twenty feet, more or less, to the dividing lines of the properties of Arnold L. and Anna W. Anderson and the Naugatuck Development Company; thence northwesterly along the southeasterly line of the Anderson property to Field street; thence southwesterly along Field street for a distance of one thousand feet more or less to the boundary line between the properties of Joel E. Anderson and the Naugatuck Development Company; thence southeasterly along the dividing line between the properties of the said Joel E. Anderson and Joseph F. Frick and the Naugatuck Development Company for a distance of one thousand, three hundred and fifteen feet more or less and thence to the place of beginning. 
    The territorial limits of the body politic and corporate existing under the name of The Borough of Naugatuck, shall hereafter include all the land and territory situate within the limits of the town of Naugatuck, and all the electors of this state inhabitants of the town of Naugatuck, and residing within said limits are hereby ordained, constituted and declared to be a body corporate and politic by the name of Borough of Naugatuck, and by that name they and their successors shall and may have perpetual succession, and shall be capable of suing and being sued, pleading and being impleaded, in all suits of any nature whatsoever; and also of purchasing, holding and conveying any estate, real or personal, necessary for the purposes of said borough, and may have a common seal, and may change and alter the same at pleasure; and they shall be freemen of said borough. 
(Special Laws 1893, Act No. 161, § 1; Special Laws 1895, Act No. 185, § 1; Special Laws 1945, Act No. 156) 
Editor's note- Special Laws 1895, Act No. 185, § 1, amended § 1 of the Charter by substituting the above second paragraph in lieu of the following: 
"And all the electors of this state, inhabitants of the town of Naugatuck, and residing within said limits, are hereby ordained, constituted, and declared to be a body corporate and politic, by the name of Borough of Naugatuck, and by that name they and their successors shall and may have perpetual succession, and shall be capable of suing and being sued, pleading and being impleaded, in all suits of what nature soever; and also of purchasing, holding, and conveying any estate, real or personal, necessary for the purpose of said borough, and may have a common seal and may change and alter the same at pleasure; and they shall be freemen of said borough." 
Section 2. - [Division into three wards.] 
    The Borough of Naugatuck is and shall continue to be divided into three wards, designated and described as follows: So much of said borough as is included in the following boundaries, to wit: all of the territory within the borough boundaries lying west of the Naugatuck river, and southerly and westerly of a line described as follows, to wit: commencing at a point on the northwesterly boundary of said borough where it crosses the highway running between Bradleyville and Millville, so called, and running thence southerly in the center of the highway leading by the house of Thomas W. Conklin, to a point near the house formerly occupied by Edward Wilmot; thence easterly in the center of an old highway to the Gunn Hill road; thence easterly in the center of said Gunn Hill road, and from the easterly terminus of said Gunn Hill road near to the Naugatuck river, on a line which, if extended, would intersect the Waterbury road where the highway between the Hillside and Catholic cemeteries joins said Waterbury road, shall be and remain the first ward of said borough. 
    So much of said borough as is included in the following boundaries, to wit: all of the territory within the limits of the borough lying east of the Naugatuck river and south of a line in the center of the following described highways: commencing at a point in the eastern boundary of said borough where it crosses the highway leading from Prospect to Naugatuck by the house of William Hopkins; thence westerly from said point of beginning in the center of said highway to a point near the Pond Hill district schoolhouse; thence westerly in the center of highway leading past the house of L. Monroe Baldwin, by the way of Deep-hollow road so called, past the house of John Dalton to a point therein where the same is intersected by the highway leading past the house of William E. Stevens; thence southerly from said point in the center of said last mentioned highway past the house of said Stevens to a point therein where said highway is intersected by the highway leading easterly from the Waterbury road, and between the Catholic and Hillside cemeteries; thence westerly in the center of said last-mentioned highway to said Waterbury road; and thence on a line to Naugatuck river, and which, if extended, would intersect the easterly terminus of the Gunn Hill or Millville road, so called, shall be and remain the second ward. 
    So much of said borough as is included in the following boundaries, to wit: all of the territory of said borough lying on both sides of the Naugatuck River and northerly of the northerly boundary lines of the first and second wards shall be and remain the third ward of said borough. 
(Special Laws 1893, Act No. 161, § 2; Special Laws 1895, Act No. 185, § 2) 
Section 3. - [Freemen.] 
    All of the electors aforesaid residing within the limits of said borough, aforesaid, shall be freemen of said borough, and every elector of this state who shall hereafter have continuously resided within the limits of said borough for the period of six months, shall be a freeman of said borough. 
(Special Laws 1893, Act No. 161, § 3; Special Laws 1895, Act No. 185, § 3) 
[Section 3.1. - Qualified voters in Town of Naugatuck entitled to vote at all meetings of borough, etc.] 
    Every elector of this state qualified to vote in the town of Naugatuck shall be entitled to vote at all meetings of said borough, and at all meetings of the ward in which he is duly registered. 
(Special Laws 1895, Act No. 185 § 4) 
Editor's note- Special Laws 1895, Act No. 185, §§ 4-14, 16-19, 21-25, 27, 34, 36, 38, 40, as amended, did not expressly amend the Charter, hence codification as §§ 3.1-3.25 was in the editor's discretion. 
[Section 3.2. - Property, rights, etc., of Town of Naugatuck transferred to borough.] 
    All property and rights of every description belonging to or vested in the town of Naugatuck, and all liabilities, debts and obligations owing from said town of Naugatuck are hereby transferred to said borough; and said borough shall be the successor to the said town in respect to the same. 
(Special Laws 1895, Act No. 185, § 5) 
[Section 3.3. - Burdens, expenses, etc., of Town of Naugatuck to be borne by borough, etc.] 
    All burdens and all expenses imposed by law upon the town of Naugatuck, for the conduct of elections, for the care and support of the poor, insane and imbecile persons, and for the construction and maintenance of highways and bridges, for the support of schools, and for the construction and maintenance of public buildings, for the prosecution of criminal offenses, for the payment of the principal and interest of the town debt, for the payment of state, military, commutation and county taxes, and for all other purposes for which towns now are or hereafter may be liable, shall hereafter be borne by said borough, and said borough shall hereafter perform all the duties and have and exercise all the rights, powers and privileges of and relative to said purposes and matters by law conferred upon said town, and all laws of the state imposing such duties, burdens and expenses, and conferring such rights, powers and privileges upon said town are hereby amended so as to be hereafter applicable to and operative upon said borough, except as is herein otherwise provided. 
(Special Laws 1895, Act No. 185 § 6) 
[Section 3.4. - Borough divided into two districts for purposes of taxation.] 
    Said borough for the purposes of taxation is hereby divided into two districts. The first district shall comprise all the territory that lies within the limits of said borough, and the second district shall comprise all the territory that lies within the limits of said borough as the same existed on the first day of January, 1895. 
(Special Laws 1895, Act No. 185, § 7) 
[Section 3.5. - Taxation to defray burdens and expenses, etc.] 
    All the inhabitants and property within the limits of the first district shall be liable to taxation to defray the burdens and expenses imposed upon said borough by this act, to the same extent as they would be liable if said burdens, expenses, duties and powers had not been transferred from said town to said borough; and in addition thereto for the expenses of the board of health of said borough; and the expenses less receipts from criminal prosecutions and police protection outside of said second district and truant officers, which expenses shall be ascertained by the mayor and burgesses of said borough, and all other burdens and expenses of said borough shall be met by taxation levied upon the inhabitants and property within the limits of the second district; and it shall be the duty of the assessors and board of relief of said borough to indicate in the compilation of the grand list what is and is not taxable by said borough in each of said districts, and the public money, derived from taxation of the inhabitants and property of the second district exclusively, shall not be expended for any purpose for which the money of the second district of said borough could not lawfully be expended at the time of the passage of this act. 
(Special Laws 1895, Act No. 185, § 8) 
[Section 3.6. - Town of Naugatuck exempted from operation of state laws requiring moneys to be paid to towns, etc.] 
    The town of Naugatuck is hereby exempted from the operation of all existing laws of the state requiring moneys to be paid to towns, or to the treasures or other officers of towns; and in said town all such moneys shall hereafter be paid to the treasurer of the borough of Naugatuck, and all state, county, city and town officers, or other persons or corporations who are now required by law to pay money to towns, or to the treasurers or other officers of towns, are hereby authorized and directed to pay to the treasurer of said borough of Naugatuck all moneys which the town or [of] Naugatuck or the treasurer or other officers of the said town would be entitled, had the above act not been passed. 
(Special Laws 1895, Act No. 185, § 9) 
[Section 3.7. - Power of borough to levy taxes.] 
    Said borough, in annual meeting[s] assembled, shall have power to levy taxes on the polls and estate within the limits of said borough for such purposes as said borough is by law authorized. Every tax hereafter laid by said borough shall be laid on the grand list of said borough, which shall have been made according to law next before the laying of such tax; provided, however, that the grand list of the town of Naugatuck as made, compiled and adjusted by the assessors and board of relief of said town for the year of 1894, is hereby made the grand list of the borough of Naugatuck for said first district, and the grand list for the borough of Naugatuck so made for said year is made the grand list for said borough for the second district, under this act. 
(Special Laws 1895, Act No. 185, § 10) 
Editor's note- Superseded in part by Special Laws 1953, Act No. 159. 
[Section 3.8. - Estimate of amount required for departments, etc.] 
    Hereafter the mayor and burgesses of the borough of Naugatuck shall, at least fifteen days before each annual meeting, make an estimate of the amount required for the several departments for the ensuing year, giving details as far as practicable, with the estimated receipts for said year, and also recommend to said borough such tax rates as they shall deem propery [proper] and submit the same to the annual meeting of said board for the laying of taxes, and said meeting shall thereupon take action on such recommendations made as aforesaid, but the amount appropriated shall not be greater than the estimated receipts and the money so appropriated shall be used by said borough for no other item or items than that for which it shall have been appropriated, and in no case shall the expenses of said borough exceed the amount of its revenues for any one year, except in case of loss of bridges, public buildings, and unusual damage to highways by the elements, and in such cases a special borough meeting shall be called and a special tax be laid to meet such extra expense. All money not used must be covered into the hands of the treasurer on or before the last day of March in each year. 
(Special Laws 1895, Act No. 185, § 11; Special Laws 1897, Act No. 415, § 4) 
Editor's note- Superseded in part by Special Laws 1953, Act No. 159. 
[Section 3.9. - Meetings.] 
    All town meetings of the town of Naugatuck, and all annual borough meetings of said borough, shall hereafter be warned by the mayor of said borough in the manner provided by law for the warning of town meetings by selectmen; and all electors' meetings in the town of Naugatuck shall hereafter be warned by the mayor of said borough in the manner required by law of the constables of said town; and all meetings held by the electors of said borough for the choice of officers by ballot shall hereafter be warned and held and conducted in the manner provided by law for the warning, holding and conducting of any electors' meetings in the town of Naugatuck, in November; and for giving in, receiving and counting the votes at such meetings. The mayor of said borough shall posses all the powers now vested in, and perform all the duties now imposed by law upon, the selectmen of said town for providing the designating ballot boxes, ticket booths and suitable and convenient places for the holding of elections in said town and borough, and for securing the quiet conduct of said elections. At all meetings held by the electors of said borough for the choice of borough and town officers, every person may vote who was registered as an elector on the last revised and completed registry list of said town or borough, and who by virtue of such registration was entitled to vote in such town or borough, unless after such registration be removed from such town or borough, or was convicted of a crime by which he forfeited the privileges of an elector; and every person offering so to vote and being challenged as to his identity or residence, shall, before he votes, prove his identity with the person on whose name he offers to vote, or his continued residence in said town or borough since the completion of said list, as the case may be, by the testimony under oath of at least one elector. At all borough meetings, all those male citizens may vote who are of the age of twenty-one years, and who have resided in this state the one year, and in the town or borough the six months next preceding, and who have been duly admitted as electors in said town. 
(Special Laws 1895, Act No. 185, § 12; Special Laws 1897, Act No. 415, § 4; Special Laws 1919, Act No. 43) 
[Section 3.10. - Election of selectmen of Town of Naugatuck and town clerk.] 
    At the annual borough meeting the electors of said borough shall elect from their number, by a plurality of ballots, three selectmen of the town of Naugatuck, and a town clerk, but no person shall vote for more than two of said selectmen, who shall hold office for one year, commencing on the second Monday of July following their election, and until their successors are duly elected and qualified. The powers and duties of said selectmen shall hereafter be limited to those powers vested in, and those duties imposed upon, them by the constitution and laws of this state, relative to the admission of persons to the privileges of electors in said town, and to the entering on, and erasure from, the registry list of the names of those who have gained or lost the privileges of electors in said town. The elector's meeting held on the first Monday in May in each year, in said borough, shall be held to be a town meeting for all purposes required by law. The compensation of the selectmen of said town for each full day actually spent in performing the duties required of them shall be determined by the board of mayor and burgesses. 
(Special Laws 1895, Act No. 185, § 13; Special Laws 1947, Act No. 472; Referendum of 5-5-1969) 
Editor's note- Term of office of town clerk changed to two years. See § 3.14 below. 
[Section 3.11. - Jurors.] 
    The mayor and burgesses of said borough shall annually, on the first Tuesday of June, choose by ballot from the electors of said borough eighteen persons esteemed in the community as men of good character, approved integrity, sound judgment, and fair education, to serve as jurors from such town in the superior court, the court of common pleas of New Haven county, and the district court of Waterbury, and in trials before justices of the peace in said town, and in the borough court of said borough, for one year from the first day of the following September. 
    The mayor of said borough shall, on or before the first day of July in each year, send a list of the persons so chosen to the clerk of the superior court in New Haven county. 
    A certificate of the form provided by the chief justice of the supreme court of errors, and prepared and sent to the mayor of said borough by the clerk of the superior court, and signed by the mayor, shall be affixed to said list. All warrants summoning jurors from said town may thereafter be directed to the sheriff of said county, or his deputy, or either bailiff of the borough of Naugatuck. 
(Special Laws 1895, Act No. 185, § 14) 
Editor's note- See the general statutes of the State of Connecticut. 
[Section 3.12. - Board of public charities.] 
    There shall be in said borough a board of public charities, composed of six electors of said borough, who shall serve without compensation, two of whom shall be from each ward and shall be of different political parties and shall be appointed by the mayor, with the advice and consent of the burgesses, and whenever a vacancy shall occur in said board it shall be filled for the unexpired term in the manner provided aforesaid for the appointment of members. Annually in May two members of said board shall be appointed, as aforesaid, for the term of three years from the first Monday of June next following the date of appointment, and until their successors are appointed and qualified. The mayor and burgesses of said borough may remove any member of said board for cause, but no member shall be removed by said board unless five of the burgesses vote in favor of such removal, and the action of the board upon the removal of such member shall be final. Said board shall have power to appoint a superintendent of the poor, who shall hold office for two years, and until another shall be appointed and qualified in his stead, at such compensation as they shall prescribe, and to employ such other persons as may be necessary for the performance of the duties imposed upon said board. The mayor of said board shall, ex officio, be a member of said board of public charities, but shall have no vote in any of their proceedings, except in case of a tie, but the mayor shall not vote off a tie at the first meeting of said board of public charities when they go into session for the purpose of appointing a superintendent of the poor, and if said board fails to agree on same for a superintendent at said first meeting, the matter shall be laid over until the next meeting of the board, which shall be held within ten days thereafter, and a ballot shall be taken at such meeting before the mayor shall have authority to vote, and if the vote of said board is a tie the mayor may break such a tie by voting at such meeting of said board. The mayor shall preside at all meetings of said board of public charities at which he is present, and at all meetings of said board four members exclusive of the mayor, shall constitute a quorum, and the concurrence of four of them shall be necessary for the transaction of business, except as herein otherwise provided. The members of said board of public charities, before entering upon the discharge of their duties, shall be sworn to a faithful discharge thereof. Said board of public charities shall have the general superintendence, management and control of the affairs of said borough relative to poor persons, insane persons and imbeciles. They shall be the overseers of the poor, and shall, at the expense of the borough, provide all articles necessary for the subsistence of all paupers, and shall possess all powers vested in, and perform all the duties imposed upon, selectmen relative to the support, control and removal of paupers, to the giving and receiving of notices to and from other towns relative to paupers, to the appointment of conservators, to the appointment of guardians, to the appointment of overseers of spendthrifts, to the confinement of habitual drunkards, dipsomaniacs and persons addicted to the immoderate use of narcotics or stimulants, to the custody of insane convicts, to the confinement of insane persons, to the care of insane paupers and indigent persons, to commitments to and removals from Connecticut Industrial School for Girls, to commitments to and removal from temporary homes for dependent and neglected children, to commitments to and removals from the Connecticut School for Imbeciles, to commitments to and removal from the Connecticut School for Boys, to contracting for the maintenance of insane poor at Hartford, to the burial of paupers, to delivering bodies for dissecting, to the burial of deceased soldiers and sailors, to giving directions to whom money for soldiers' orphans shall be paid, to returning lists of soldiers' orphans to the comptroller, to the visitation and inspection of boarding houses and nurseries for infants, in making returns in regard to deaf, dumb and blind persons, to giving foundlings in adoption, to indenturing apprentices for services, to bastardy proceedings, to forbidding the giving, sale or delivery of intoxicating liquors to persons addicted to the use of such liquors. The powers now vested in the inhabitants of the town of Naugatuck, its justices and selectmen, relative to the admission of persons to settlement therein shall be vested exclusively in said board of public charities. All applications for warrants for the removal of paupers shall be made by said board to the judge or deputy judge of the borough court of said borough, and said warrants shall be directed to and executed by any proper officer, and the lawful fees for the services of the same at the rate allowed for criminal process shall be paid by the town to which said pauper shall belong to said borough; provided nothing herein contained shall effect the validity of any action or notice of the selectmen of any other town relative to paupers. Said board of public charities shall also have the sole control and management of the town hall in said borough, and the clerk of the board of public charities shall be the employed welfare clerk of the welfare department. 
(Special Laws 1895, Act No. 185, § 16; Special Laws 1917, Act No. 217; Referendum of 5-1-89) 
Editor's note- See also Article XIV of subpart C of this volume (Special Acts 1969, Act No. 30) for the mayor's membership and voting rights on the board of public charities. 
[Section 3.13. - Power of board of charities and committees to compel attendance and testimony of witnesses, etc.] 
    The board of charities, and every committee appointed by the board of mayor and burgesses, shall have power to compel the attendance and testimony of witnesses, and commit for contempt in the same manner and to the same extent as the superior court for New Haven county, and to administer oaths by its chairman; and willful and false swearing before it shall continue the crime of perjury, and may be punished as such. 
(Special Laws 1895, Act No. 185, § 17) 
[Section 3.14. - Town clerk.] 
    The town clerk of said town may, with the approval of the mayor and burgesses of said borough, appoint an assistant town clerk, and said town clerk, ex officio, [shall] be the registrar of births, marriages and deaths of said town, and the assistant town clerk shall, ex officio, be the assistant registrar of births, marriages and deaths of said town. The office of town clerk and borough clerk shall not be held by the same person, and the town clerk of said town shall hold his office for the term of two years from the first Monday of January next succeeding his election, and until his successor shall be elected and qualified. 
(Special Laws 1895, Act No. 185, § 18; Special Laws 1923, Act No. 17) 
[Section 3.15. - Fire marshal.] 
    The board of fire commissioners appointed by the mayor and burgesses of said borough are hereby authorized and empowered to appoint as fire marshal who shall serve without compensation, and whose duties, powers, and authority shall be defined by the by-laws and ordinances of said borough. 
(Special Laws 1895, Act No. 185, § 19) 
Editor's note- See also Special Laws 1955, Act No. 595. 
[Section 3.16. - Electors.] 
    The selectmen and town clerk of said town of Naugatuck shall hold a session to examine the qualifications of electors, and admit to the electors oath, those persons who shall be found qualified, on Wednesday, and the following Saturday of the second week before the borough meeting held on the first Monday of May, 1896, and annually thereafter, from nine o'clock in the forenoon until eight o'clock in the afternoon, unless all on the list "to be made" have been admitted or rejected before that time of each of said days, except that if it appears that the rights of any person of the first list under the title "to be made" will mature after said Saturday, and on or before the said annual borough election, they shall meet on the Saturday before said annual election, and remain in continuous session from nine o'clock in the forenoon until five o'clock in the afternoon, and not afterwards, for the purpose of admitting such persons, and for no other purpose whatsoever. The general statutes and all amendments thereto are hereby made applicable to and operative upon the selectmen of said town of Naugatuck, on the days and time[s] above mentioned, in the same manner as they now are, on and for biennial elections in said town. 
(Special Laws 1895, Act No. 185, § 21) 
Editor's note- See the general statutes of the State of Connecticut. 
[Section 3.17. - Salary of town clerk, etc.] 
    The mayor and burgesses shall have power and authority to determine and fix the salary of the town clerk and the assistant town clerk, from and after the first Monday of May, 1895; they shall also have and exercise the same powers and duties as selectmen of the town of Naugatuck have heretofore had and exercised, in the care and management of all bridges and approaches thereto in the town of Naugatuck; they shall also fix and determine the location of the office of the superintendent of the poor, and the number of hours that said office shall be kept open during each day, Sundays and legal holidays excepted, and also to fix and determine the compensation of the members of the board of assessors, and of the board of relief, and also to limit the time within which the board of assessors shall perform their duties. 
(Special Laws 1895, Act No. 185, § 22) 
Editor's note- Superseded in part by Special Laws 1961, Act No. 192. 
[Section 3.18. - Board of education.] 
    There shall be in said borough a board of education consisting of six electors of said borough. Of the members elected at the annual electors' meeting of said borough in May, 1895, two shall be elected for the term of three years, two for the term of two years, and two for the term of one year respectively, and at said election in May, 1895, no person shall vote for more than one person for each of the respective terms last above named. At the borough election held on the first Monday of May, 1896, and annually thereafter, two members of said board of education shall be elected for the term of three years, but no person shall vote for more than one member of said board at any election after May, 1895, except for persons to fill vacancies. Vacancies in said board may be filled by the remaining members of said board until the same shall be filled by the voters thereof, but only for the unexpired term. 
    Said board of education shall have all the powers now or hereafter vested in and shall perform the duties now or hereafter imposed by law on the school visitors of the several towns in this state. 
    The board of education and the mayor and burgesses of said borough shall meet as a joint board on the second Tuesday in June in each year and prepare a statement showing the estimated cost of each and all the public schools in the borough for the succeeding school year, and shall immediately thereafter notify the committees of the respective school districts of the several amounts so estimated, and said board of education shall present at the annual borough meeting a written or printed statement of the total cost of each and all the public schools in said borough for the school year next preceding, and an estimate of the cost of such schools for the current school year, at a meeting of the freemen of the borough held in July in each year, and said joint board shall hereafter do and perform all other acts and things that the school visitors and the selectmen of said town of Naugatuck have heretofore done and performed and as may be hereafter required by law to be done and performed in the several towns by the board of school visitors and selectmen. 
(Special Laws 1895, Act No. 185, § 23) 
Editor's note- Superseded in part by Special Laws 1937, Act No. 168, § 3, by Special Laws 1953, Act No. 159, § 12, and by Special Laws 1967, Act No. 24, §§ 1, 2. 
Charter revision changes voted on in the November 5, 1996 State Election, and amended again on November 4, 1997 provided: 
"Section 1. Board of Education members shall be elected for a term of two years effective at the May 1999 Election and Biennially thereafter, successors to the members of said Board whose term of office then expire shall be elected for a term of two years. Said Board shall, from May 1999 Election, be a nine member Board, consisting of (8) elected board members and the Mayor Elect. At no time shall the Mayor be elected Chairman of said Board. At the Town and Borough Election of said Naugatuck to be held May 1999, there shall be elected two members to the Board of Education. In May, 2001, there shall be elected five members to the Board of Education. In May of 2003 and thereafter there shall be eight members elected to the Board of Education." 
"Section 2. Electors shall be entitled to vote for the maximum number of members of the board of education permitted by the general statutes." 
[Section 3.19. - Moneys received for licenses from persons licensed to sell intoxicating liquors.] 
    The county commissioners of New Haven county are hereby directed to pay to the treasurer of said borough, in accordance with the statute laws of this state, all moneys received for licenses from persons licensed to sell intoxicating liquors in said borough, and the treasurer of said borough is hereby directed to receive the same, and authorized and empowered to receipt therefor. 
(Special Laws 1895, Act No. 185, § 24) 
[Section 3.20. - Assessment list.] 
    The assessors of said borough shall, on or before January 31 of the new year 1990 and annually thereafter, make out a correct asssessment list of all real and personal estate of the inhabitants thereof liable to be set in the list by assessors of towns, and shall assess all property at its true and just market value, and not its value at a fixed or auction sale. On the completion of the assessment list, the assessors shall sign and deposit it with the borough clerk, who shall forthwith give notice thereof by publication in some newspaper published in said borough. 
(Special Laws 1895, Act No. 185, § 25; Referendum of 5-1-89) 
[Section 3.21. - Three selectmen and town clerk to be chosen.] 
    In addition to the officers now provided by law for said borough, there shall be chosen three selectmen and a town clerk, and for said purpose the annual borough meeting shall be the annual town meeting. 
(Special Laws 1895, Act No. 185, § 27) 
[Section 3.22. - Term of office of grand jurors, etc.] 
    The term of office of the grand jurors and constables of the town of Naugatuck, elected on the first Monday of October, 1894, shall cease and terminate on the first Monday of May, 1895, and the term of office of the town treasurer, town auditors, and town agent of said town of Naugatuck, elected on the first Monday of October, 1894, shall cease and terminate on the first Monday of July, 1895. 
(Special Laws 1895, Act No. 185, § 34) 
[Section 3.23. - Effect of Special Laws 1895, Act No. 185.] 
    All acts and parts of acts inconsistent herewith, or with any other amendment to the original Charter of the borough of Naugatuck, are hereby repealed; provided, however, that nothing in this act shall impair any contract made by or with said town of Naugatuck, or any debts, or liabilities due, or from said town, but the obligations and rights of said town in respect to all such contracts shall continue to be the same as they would have been if this act had not been passed; provided, also, that this act shall not release or affect any taxes heretofore laid, or any assessment list already made, or any fines, forfeitures, or penalties; and all taxes laid on said assessment list may be collected and enforced in the same manner and to the same extent as if this act had not been passed; and provided further, that this act shall not affect any suit now pending, or any cause of action now existing; and provided further, that the officers of said town shall continue to act in their respective offices, until the officers who are to succeed to their duties respectively under this act are duly appointed and qualified, and the Charter of the borough of Naugatuck is hereby affirmed in every respect, except wherein it is changed by this act. 
(Special Laws 1895, Act No. 185, § 36) 
[Section 3.24. - Application of chapter CCXLVII of the public acts of 1889.] 
    The provisions of chapter CCXLVII of the public acts of 1889, entitled, "An Act Concerning Elections" shall apply to all annual elections held in said borough, wherein town and borough officers are to be elected by ballot. 
(Special Laws 1895, Act No. 185, § 38) 
[Section 3.25. - Registrars of voters. 
    The registrars of voters of the borough of Naugatuck shall, at least eighteen days before the annual elector's meeting of said borough, held on the first Monday of May, A.D. 1896, and annually thereafter, complete a correct list of all electors in the borough or the voting districts therein who will be entitled to vote in such borough or voting districts as such meeting and shall place on such list under the title "to be made" the names of those persons by whom, or in whose behalf a claim is made to either registrar in the manner hereinafter provided, that they will be entitled to be made electors in such borough, on or before the day of such meeting; the residence of such person shall be written on said list opposite his name, and sufficiently described for identification, giving the street and number, if any, and the name of no person shall be placed on any list under the title "to be made" after five o'clock in the afternoon of Thursday of the third week preceding the said annual borough election, and said list shall be completed, and certified to by respective registrars, and deposited in the town clerk's office at least eighteen days before said annual borough meeting. 
    Said registrars shall also make out, and deposit in the borough clerk's office, a corrected list, on or before the Wednesday preceding said annual meeting. 
    The general statutes and all amendments thereto are hereby made applicable to and operative upon the said registrars on the days and times above mentioned in the same manner as they now are on and for biennial elections in said town. 
(Special Laws 1895, Act No. 185, § 40) 
[Section 4. - [Reserved.] 
Editor's note- Special Laws 1895, Act No. 185, § 28, amended the Charter by repealing § 4 thereof. 
Section 5. - [Officers.] 
    The officers of said borough shall be a mayor, six [nine] burgesses, a clerk, who shall, before he takes office, give to the borough a bond with surety to the acceptance of the board of mayor and burgesses for the faithful discharge of his duties and he shall procure such bond from a surety company of good standing, approved by the board of mayor and burgesses and the premium on such bond shall be paid by the borough, a treasurer, a collector, four [eight] bailiff(s), two registrars of voters, two auditors, and such other officers as are hereinafter provided for. The mayor, burgesses, [town clerk, selectmen,] treasurer, bailiff(s), registrars of voters, collector, and auditors shall be elected by ballot at the annual [biennial] meeting of said borough from the freemen of said borough as hereinafter provided. All other officers of said borough shall be appointed by the mayor and burgesses. A plurality of the ballots cast for any office shall elect. 
(Special Laws 1893, Act No. 161, § 5; Special Laws 1895, Act No. 185, § 29; Special Laws 1931, Act No. 86; Special Laws 1955, Act No. 575) 
Editor's note- Superseded in part by Special Laws 1937, Act No. 168, as amended. Special Laws 1955, Act No. 575, amended the Charter by changing the title of "warden" to "mayor". This change is inserted in all special acts included herein. See § 6.1 below. 
Section 6. - [Reserved.] 
Editor's note- Superseded by Special Laws 1937, Act No. 168, as amended, and by the general statutes of the State of Connecticut. Section 6, as amended by Special Laws 1917, Act No. 271, and as amended by Special Laws 1945, Act No. 128, provided: 
"Section 6. The annual meetings of said borough shall be held on the first Monday of May of each year, in the several wards of said borough, at which time the freemen of said borough shall elect by ballot, from their number residing in said borough, a mayor, a treasurer, eight bailiffs, two registrars of voters, a collector and two auditors. At said annual meetings the freemen of each ward in said borough, shall elect by ballot from their number residing in said ward, respectively, two burgesses of said borough, provided, at the annual meeting, or at any meeting when a full board of burgesses, registrars and auditors are to be elected, no freeman shall vote for more than four bailiffs, one burgess, one registrar of voters and one auditor. In case there shall be a tie vote between any persons voted for as aforesaid, for any office, the vacancy shall be filled by a new election to be held for that purpose on the same day of the following week, at the same place or places, as the case may be, and at which the polls shall be open the same hours. In all elections for the choice of officers of said borough, the names of all such officers that any one freeman may vote for as hereinbefore provided, or so many thereof as each freeman may choose to vote for, shall, with the office for which they are respectively intended, be written or printed on one ballot of white paper. Said annual meetings shall stand adjourned till eight o'clock in the evening of the same day at some suitable place designated by the mayor in said borough, for the transaction of business, other than the election of officers, and may be further adjourned, at the pleasure of said meeting, to any other time or place in said borough." 
[Section 6.1. - Biennial meetings for election of officers.] 
    A meeting for the election of officers of the town and borough of Naugatuck shall be held on the first Monday of May, 1937, and biennially thereafter. The polls in each ward shall be open from six o'clock in the forenoon to eight o'clock in the evening on the day of each biennial meeting, and at special elections during the same hours unless otherwise provided by law. At the town and borough election of the town and borough of Naugatuck to be held on the first Monday of May, 1995, and biennially thereafter, there shall be elected a mayor, nine burgesses, a town clerk, three selectmen, a treasurer, eight bailiffs and a collector of taxes and other officers for whose election no special provision is made in the Charter of said town and borough, each of who[m] shall hold office for two years from the date of his election, except the mayor whose term of office shall be from the last Wednesday in May of 1995 at 8:00 p.m. through the third Monday in May of 1997 at 8:00 p.m. Thereafter, the term of office for the mayor shall be for two years from the third Monday in May at 8:00 p.m. and the town clerk whose term of office shall be for two years, beginning on the first day of July following the municipal election at which such clerk is elected. Burgesses shall be elected on an at-large basis without regard for ward boundaries. No town committee, caucus or party convention shall endorse and certify to the town clerk, and no primary shall choose, and no nominating petition filed in accordance with the Connecticut General Statutes shall nominate, more than six candidates for the office of burgess. Each elector shall be entitled to vote for six burgess candidates with the nine candidates receiving the highest number of votes declared as being elected. The burgess receiving the highest number of votes in any municipal election shall be designated as the "Deputy Mayor" and the burgess receiving the next highest number of votes shall be designated as the "Second Deputy Mayor." If any burgesses receive an equal number of votes, the aforementioned offices shall be filled by vote of the board of mayor and burgesses, with only those burgesses tied for the highest number of votes eligible for election by said board, to both the office of "Deputy Mayor" and "Second Deputy Mayor." 
(Special Laws 1937, Act No. 168, §§ 1, 2; Special Laws 1939, Act No. 214; Special Laws 1941, Act No. 191; Special Laws 1959, Act No. 289; Special Laws 1959, Act No. 354; Special Laws 1967, Act No. 25, §§ 1-3; Referendum of 5-1-89; Amd. of 11-8-94) 
Editor's note- Special Laws 1937, Act No. 168, §§ 1, 2, as amended, did not expressly amend the Charter, hence codification as § 6.1 was in the editor's discretion. 
[Section 6.2. - Annual meetings for transaction of other business than election of officers.] 
    The town and borough of Naugatuck shall continue to hold an annual meeting on the first Monday of May at eight o'clock, p.m., for the transaction of other business than the election of officers. 
(Special Laws 1937, Act No. 168, § 4) 
Editor's note- Special Laws 1937, Act No. 168, § 4, did not expressly amend the Charter, hence codification as § 6.2 was in the editor's discretion. 
Section 7. - [Special meetings.] 
    Special meetings of the freemen of said borough may be called and held from time to time, in such manner as the by-laws of said borough may prescribe, and such special meetings shall be called by the mayor and burgesses, upon the written petition of not less than twenty freemen of said borough; provided, such petition specifies an object or objects which should be voted upon by the freemen of said borough. All special meetings may be adjourned at the pleasure of said meeting to any other time or place in said borough. All votes and questions shall be decided by a majority of the freemen present and voting. 
(Special Laws 1893, Act No. 161, § 7) 
Section 8. - [Notice.] 
    Notice of the annual and all special meetings, aforesaid, shall be given by the mayor of said borough at least five days before the day of such meeting, by posting a written or printed notice thereof upon the public signpost, and by publishing the same in a newspaper published in said borough, if one there be, which notice shall specify the object or objects of said meeting, and shall also specify the time and place of the holding thereof, and the time during which the polls will be open at such meeting. 
(Special Laws 1893, Act No. 161, § 8) 
Editor's note- Superseded by Special Laws 1937, Act No. 168, as amended, and by the general statutes of the State of Connecticut. 
Section 9. - [Quorum.] 
    Not less than twenty-five of the legal voters of said borough shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business at any annual or special meeting of the freemen of said borough, and if twenty-five legal freemen shall not be present at any such meeting, the mayor of said borough, and, in the absence of the mayor, the clerk of said borough, may adjourn such meeting to such other time at the same place, as he may deem best, at which time, if no such quorum be present he shall again adjourn such meeting to such time as he may deem best, and if at said time to which said second adjournment was made, there shall be no quorum present, then said meeting shall be finally adjourned without day [delay]. And all meetings of the freemen of said borough where a quorum shall be present may be adjourned from time to time by a vote of a majority of the legal freemen present and voting; provided, that the provisions of this section aforesaid shall not affect the election of any officers of said borough to be voted for at such meetings. 
(Special Laws 1893, Act No. 161, § 9) 
Editor's note- Superseded by Special Laws 1937, Act No. 168, as amended, and by the general statutes of the State of Connecticut. 
Section 10. - [Voting generally.] 
    At least five days prior to the annual meeting for the election of borough officers, the registrars of voters for said borough shall deliver to the borough clerk of said borough a list, as nearly perfect as practicable, of the names of the persons entitled to vote at said annual meeting in each and every ward of said borough, which names shall be arranged in alphabetical order, by wards, with the street on which such person resides, and the number of his residence, if such there be. Said list shall be open to inspection at the office of the borough clerk, and shall be the legal register for the ensuing year. The presiding officer in each ward shall receive the ballots of all persons whose names are registered, on the list in said ward, unless the right of any such person to vote shall be challenged, in which case the presiding officer shall, before receiving said vote, make inquiry into the right of said person to vote, and hear and determine such challenge, administer oaths of the parties challenged, and all witnesses heard in relation thereto, and, upon determining the challenge, receive or reject said vote. The name of any elector omitted from said list by clerical error may be added upon election day by the presiding officer of the ward in which such elector resides, upon sworn proof of his right to vote. Every person who shall be examined by any presiding officer relative to the right of himself or any other person to vote, who shall be guilty of wilful false swearing, shall be liable to the penalties of perjury. The mayor and burgesses shall designate the polling places in each ward in said borough, notice whereof, signed by the mayor shall be published in a newspaper published in said borough, if any there be, otherwise to be posted upon the public signpost of said borough at least two weeks preceding such annual meeting. The polls in each ward shall be open from nine o'clock in the forenoon until five o'clock in the afternoon on the day of each annual meeting, and at special elections during the same hours. The mayor and burgesses shall, at least five days before any election is to be held, under the provisions of this act, appoint some freeman from each ward to be the presiding officer in said ward at such meeting; they shall also appoint one or more assistants to relieve said presiding officer in his duties, and attend the ballot-box in said ward; they shall also appoint some suitable person to check the voting list in each ward, provided, that in case any of such assistants, checkers or counters shall be unable or fail to appear and act as such, such presiding officer may appoint any freeman of his ward to act in his or their stead, as the case may be. The presiding officer shall receive and deposit in the ballot-box the ballots of those persons found qualified to vote as hereinbefore prescribed, and none others. Immediately at the close of the polls the counters, without removing the box from said polls, shall publicly count the ballots therein contained, and shall deliver the result thereof to the presiding officer of said ward, who shall publicly declare the same. Immediately thereafter the presiding officer in each of the several wards of said borough, except the first, shall transmit to the presiding officer of the first ward of said borough a certificate of the results in each of their respective wards; said presiding officer of the first ward shall forthwith cause said returns to be compiled and publicly announce the names of the successful candidates for the several offices, and shall forthwith transmit a copy of said returns to the borough clerk, who shall record the same. The mayor and burgesses shall provide suitable ballot-boxes for the reception of votes at all meetings for the election of officers, or when the vote is legally required to be by ballot. Every ballot-box shall be so arranged that its lid may be securely locked, and shall have an aperture in its lid through which the ballot shall be deposited in said box, and said box shall be so constructed that when the voting is completed the aperture may be effectually closed, so that no ballots can thereafter be placed in or taken from said box without reopening said box. When the ballots cast at such meeting aforesaid shall have been counted, and the result declared by the presiding officer as aforesaid, they shall be returned to their respective boxes in which they were deposited, and said boxes shall be securely locked and sealed up by him by the use of sealing wax, and shall bear the private seal or the signature of such presiding officer in such manner that said boxes cannot be opened without breaking or mutilating such seal or signatures aforesaid. And said boxes with the keys thereof shall be immediately returned by him to the clerk of said borough, who shall carefully preserve boxes with the seals unbroken for six months after such meeting, except the same may be opened and the ballots therein examined according to law. No double ballot shall be counted, and if any ballot shall contain a greater number of names for any office than is to be voted for by any one person, as provided in this Charter, it shall not be counted for any person for such office. No freeman shall be entitled to vote at such elections whose name does not appear upon said list as aforesaid. The presiding officer in each ward shall have all the power for the preservation of the peace and good order at said meetings, as is conferred by law upon the moderators of town meetings. Said registrars, presiding officers and other officers of election shall be subject to the same penalties for refusal or neglect to discharge their duties, or malfeasance in office, as is prescribed by statute for like offenses at electors' meetings. The presiding officer of the first ward shall give notice of the adjournment of said annual meeting till eight o'clock on the evening of the same day, for the transaction of further business as provided in this Charter, and no further business shall be done until said hour of eight o'clock, except such as pertains to such election. The mayor and burgesses of said borough may make such ordinances, not inconsistent with this section and the statutes of the state, as may be necessary to regulate such meetings and elections, and to provide for holding and conducting thereof, and shall fix the compensation of the registrars, their assistants, presiding officers, box-tenders, check clerks, and counters. Within twenty-four hours after the closing of the polls in each ward, the presiding officer of his respective ward shall return to the borough clerk a certificate declaring the whole number of names contained on the register of each of said wards, the number of names checked as having voted in each ward, and the number of names now checked in each ward. If any officer of said borough is removed from said borough, he shall, upon such removal, cease to hold his office therein, and such office shall thereupon be deemed to be vacant. When any vacancy shall occur in any office of said borough, the mayor and burgesses of said borough at their next annual meeting or at a special meeting duly called, shall proceed to fill said vacancy; if in the board of burgesses, from the freemen of the ward in said borough from which the former incumbent of said office was chosen; if in any other office, from the freemen of said borough; a plurality of ballots shall be sufficient to elect, and the person or persons so elected shall fill the unexpired term, and perform all the duties pertaining to said office. The officers elected by ballot shall hold their office for the term of one year from the time of their election, and until their successors shall be elected and qualified. And all officers of said borough appointed by said mayor and burgesses excepting the members of the board of education, board of relief, board of charities, board of assessors, and policemen shall hold their office from the date of their appointment until twelve o'clock of the Monday night succeeding the next annual borough meeting, and until their successors are appointed and qualified. 
(Special Laws 1893, Act No. 161, § 10; Special Laws 1895, Act No. 185, § 30; Special Laws 1897, Act No. 415, § 1) 
Editor's note- Superseded by Special Laws 1937, Act No. 168, as amended, and by the general statutes of the State of Connecticut. 
Section 11. - [Mayor.] 
    The mayor of said borough shall be the chief executive magistrate thereof, and it shall be his duty to be vigilant and active in causing the laws to be enforced; he shall preside at all meetings of the freemen of said borough, except during the meetings for the election of officers, as hereinbefore provided. He shall be the conservator of the peace within said borough, and shall have power and authority, with force and strong hands when necessary, to suppress all tumults, riots, routs, and unlawful assemblages, and to arrest without warrant or complaints, and commit to the "lock-up" or prison in said borough, for a time not exceeding twenty-four hours, any person or persons who may be detected in quarreling, brawling, or in otherwise behaving in a disorderly manner, to the disturbance or annoyance of the peaceable inhabitants of said borough; and he shall have full power to call upon, and may at all times require the aid and assistance of any peace officer, sheriff, deputy sheriff, town constable, or borough policeman, or private person within said borough, to assist him in keeping the peace of said borough. In case of the absence or inability of the mayor to act as such, the deputy mayor (now known as the senior burgess) of said borough present at any time during such absence or inability of the mayor aforesaid, or in case of a vacancy in the office of mayor, shall act as mayor in his stead, during such absence or inability aforesaid, and have all the powers and rights of such mayor so acting for a maximum period of ninety days until a special election for a new mayor takes place. The candidates for the office of mayor for such unexpired term shall be chosen in accordance with the provisions of number 522, of the Special Acts of 1951, as amended. Said board of mayor and burgesses shall, at a regular or special meeting duly called within thirty days following such vacancy, name the date for said primary and said special election. In case of the absence or inability of the senior burgess to act as such, the second senior burgess present at any time during such absence or inability of the senior burgess aforesaid shall act as senior burgess in his stead during such absence or inability aforesaid; provided that said senior burgess or second senior burgess, while acting as mayor, shall only be entitled to the same rights as the mayor as to voting. The mayor shall preside at all meetings of the board of mayor and burgesses of the borough of Naugatuck and shall be entitled to vote upon any matter or question before it. In the event of a tie vote upon any matter before the board of mayor and burgesses the mayor shall be entitled to an additional vote on said board for the purpose of breaking the tie vote. The mayor shall be entitled to veto any matter approved by a vote of the board of mayor and burgesses, except that he shall not have the right to veto a vote appointing an officer of the borough of Naugatuck, the term "officer" to include any office or commission appointment provided for by the Charter and for which said Charter requires an affirmative vote of the mayor and burgesses. The mayor shall exercise his right to veto by notice mailed to each burgess within three days of the date of the vote being vetoed, which notice shall state that the mayor has exercised his veto and has caused the borough clerk to attest to said veto within said three-day period by notation on the official minutes of said board of mayor and burgesses. In such event the mayor shall call a special meeting of said board within ten days of the date of the veto for the specific purpose of reconsidering the vote. In order to override the mayor's veto a two-thirds vote of the burgesses present and voting at such special meeting shall be required. The mayor shall preside at such meeting and shall be counted for the purpose of determining a quorum, but shall not exercise a vote on the motion to override the veto. The rights of the mayor to vote upon any matter and to cast an additional tie-breaking vote, as provided in sections 1 and 2 hereof [§ 11], shall extend to all meetings of the board of mayor and burgesses and the board of finance, sitting jointly as provided for in the act creating the board of finance. In addition to the number of appointed members provided for by the Charter of the borough of Naugatuck on the police commission, fire commission, finance board and board of public charities the mayor shall be a voting member of each of said boards and commissions, and as such shall be entitled to vote upon any matter or question before them. In the event of a tie vote upon any matter before any of the boards or commissions listed in section 1 herein [§ 11], the mayor shall be entitled to an additional vote on such board or commission, as the case may be, for the purpose of breaking such tie vote. In any instance where the board of mayor and burgesses and any of the boards or commissions listed in section 1 herein [§ 11] meet jointly and vote jointly upon any matter, the mayor shall only be entitled to a single vote as a member of the board of mayor and burgesses, and to a single tie-breaking vote, and shall not be entitled to vote as a member of both boards. It shall also be the duty of the mayor to recommend the adoption of all such measures connected with the police, security, health, cleanliness, and general well-being of said borough, and the improvement of its government and finances as he shall deem expedient, and to communicate to the freemen of said borough, at the annual meeting, a general statement of the situation, state and condition of the borough in relation to its government, expenditures, finances, and improvements, which report and recommendation shall be entered upon the records of said borough within five days after their reception, and published in such manner as said freemen shall order. It shall also be the duty of the mayor to discharge all the duties imposed upon him by the Charter and ordinances of the borough, and the laws of the state and of the United States. 
(Special Laws 1893, Act No. 161, § 11; Special Laws 1897, Act No. 415, § 4; Special Laws 1953, Act No. 440, § 3; Special Laws 1967, Act No. 25, § 3; Special Laws 1969, Act No. 29, §§ 1-4; Special Laws 1969, Act No. 30, §§ 1-3; Referendum of 5-1-89) 
Editor's note- Special Laws 1967, Act No. 25, § 3, did not expressly amend the Charter, but superseded the following provision of § 11 which has been deleted therefrom and which provided: 
"The mayor and burgesses, at their first meeting, after each annual meeting, shall by ballot designate and choose from their number of burgesses, one to be the senior burgess of said borough for and during the ensuing term, and one to be the second senior burgess of said borough for and during the ensuing term." 
Said § 3 of Special Laws 1967, Act No. 25, has been codified in § 6.1. 
Special Laws 1953, Act No. 440, § 3, did not expressly amend the Charter, hence codification as the fourth through seventh sentences of § 11 was in the discretion of the editor. 
Special Laws 1969, Act No. 29, did not expressly amend the Charter, but § 1 thereof superseded the following provision of § 11: 
"The mayor shall also preside at all meetings of the mayor and burgesses, but shall not be entitled to vote upon any matter or question before them, except to dissolve a tie, and upon the appointment of any officer of said borough by them to be appointed." 
Said § 1 of Special Laws 1969, Act No. 29, has been codified as the ninth sentence of § 11. Sections 2-4 of said act have been codified as the tenth through fifteenth sentences of § 11. 
Special Laws 1969, Act No. 30, §§ 1-3, did not expressly amend the Charter, hence codification as the sixteenth through eighteenth sentences of § 11 was in the editor's discretion. 
Section 11.1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Proposal No. 4, approved November 8, 1994 amended the Charter by repealing § 11.1. Formerly such section pertained to term of mayor; certain actions restricted and derived from Referendum of 11-2-1982. 
Section 12. - [Clerk.] 
    The clerk of said borough shall be appointed by the mayor and burgesses, and such clerk may be removed from said office by the mayor and burgesses for any refusal or inability to serve, or neglect or malfeasance, in said office, and another appointed in his stead. The clerk of said borough shall keep the records thereof, and upon said records he shall make true and regular entries of the votes and proceedings of said borough, and of the mayor and burgesses thereof. He shall cause the by-laws of said borough, which may from time to time be enacted, to be published according to law, and when said by-laws have been so published, he shall enter upon said records his certificate of the fact that he has so caused the same to be published. He shall make upon said records from time to time records of his own acts in serving notice of orders passed by said mayor and burgesses. All records which shall be kept by any clerk of said borough shall have the same validity as the records of town clerks, and shall be in all courts evidence of the matters therein recorded; and a copy of such record, certified under the hand of the clerk of said borough, shall be received in all courts as evidence in the same manner as the original record would be received. It shall be the duty of the clerk to send notice by mail, on the day following any election, to every officer elected. The mayor and burgesses may at any time appoint an assistant clerk of said borough, who, having been duly qualified, shall, in the absence or disability of said clerk, perform all the duties of said clerk, and all records and acts of said assistant shall have the same validity as the records and acts of the borough clerk. The borough clerk, or in his absence, the assistant borough clerk, shall be clerk of such borough boards, commissions and agencies as directed by the board of mayor and burgesses and shall perform such duties as the said board of mayor and burgesses may prescribe. 
(Special Laws 1893, Act No. 161, § 12; Special Laws 1957, Act No. 231) 
Section 13. - [Treasurer.] 
    The treasurer of said borough shall have and exercise the same relative powers and duties in said borough as town treasurers have and exercise in their respective towns, and shall be accountable to said borough. He shall at the end of each fiscal year report to the mayor and burgesses a detailed statement of the receipts of money into the treasury, and the expenditures therefrom, during said year, together with an accurate statement of the condition of the treasury at the end of each fiscal year; each report, having been duly audited shall be recorded and published in like manner with the annual statement of the mayor. Said treasurer shall, in a book kept for that purpose, enter the date, amount, and time payable of all moneys borrowed by said borough, upon note or otherwise, together with the name of the payee, and upon the payment of any such loan shall enter the same in like manner in said book. He shall pay orders drawn upon him by the proper authorities, and shall comply with all ordinances and orders of the mayor and burgesses concerning his office. 
(Special Laws 1893, Act No. 161, § 13) 
Section 14. - [Bailiffs.] 
    The bailiffs of said borough shall have the same power and authority within the limits of said borough as constables of towns have in their respective towns, and they shall be liable for neglect of duty in the same manner and to the same extent as such constables are liable for neglect of duty. They shall also serve notices of the orders of the mayor and burgesses when directed by the clerk of the borough, and make due return of such service to said clerk, and perform such other duties as may be imposed under the provisions of the Charter and ordinances of this borough, and the laws of this state and their compensation for serving of notices of any character for the borough shall be fixed and determined by the mayor and burgesses thereof. 
(Special Laws 1893, Act No. 161, § 14; Special Laws 1895, Act No. 185, § 31) 
Section 15. - [Collector.] 
    The collector of said borough shall collect every tax and assessment duly made and laid by said borough or said mayor and burgesses, and having received a warrant therefor, signed by some justice of the peace for New Haven county, he shall have the same power and authority in said borough in the collection of said tax as collectors of town taxes have in their respective towns. He shall pay over all moneys by him collected to the treasurer of said borough, and shall be accountable to the mayor and burgesses in the same manner and to the same extent as collectors of town taxes are to the selectmen of towns. 
(Special Laws 1893, Act No. 161, § 15) 
[Section 15.1. - Assessor.] 
    The board of mayor and burgesses shall, in the month of June, 1953, and quadrennially thereafter, appoint an assessor for the term of four years and until his successor is appointed and qualified, who shall be selected on the basis of ability, training and experience. The assessor shall have the powers and duties prescribed by the general statutes and by ordinance or resolution of the board of mayor and burgesses. 
(Special Laws 1953, Act No. 440, § 5) 
Editor's note- Special Laws 1953, Act No. 440, § 5, did not expressly amend the Charter, hence codification as § 15.1 was in the discretion of the editor. 
Section 16. - [Auditors.] 
    The auditors of said borough shall annually, as soon after the end of the fiscal year of said borough as may be practicable, examine and audit the accounts and vouchers of all officers of said borough, who are authorized to receive or disburse money belonging to said borough, and report the result of such examination to the mayor and burgesses, which report shall be entered by the clerk of said borough upon the records of said borough, and may be published in such manner as may be ordered by said mayor and burgesses, or by the freemen of said borough. The fiscal year of said borough shall begin on the first day of April. Said auditors shall examine any of such accounts aforesaid, and report the result thereof at such other times as they may be directed by said freemen, mayor and burgesses or by the ordinances of said borough. 
(Special Laws 1893, Act No. 161, § 16; Special Laws 1959, Act No. 431, § 1; Special Laws 1961, Act No. 195) 
Section 17. - [Oath or affirmation.] 
    Every officer of said borough, except the assessors, shall, before entering upon the duties of his office, take the following oath or affirmation, to wit: "I, ____________ do solemnly swear (or affirm, as the case may be), that I will faithfully perform the duties of the office of ____________ , of the borough of Naugatuck to the best of my judgment and ability, so help me God," which oath or affirmation may be administered to the mayor of said borough by any officer qualified to administer oaths in the county of New Haven, and by said mayor to all the other officers, and the fact of such administration shall be recorded by the clerk. 
(Special Laws 1893, Act No. 161, § 17) 
Section 18. - [Bond with surety; special police.] 
    The treasurer, collector, chief of police, special police and bailiffs of said borough shall each give bond with surety to the mayor and his successors in office, to the acceptance of the mayor and burgesses, for the faithful performance of his duties before entering upon the same. The board of mayor and burgesses may appoint such residents of said borough as said board may determine as special police, each of whom shall take the oath prescribed for officers of said borough, and shall hold office from the date of appointment until twelve o'clock of the Monday night succeeding the next annual borough meeting unless removed by said board. Such special police shall have the same powers within the borough to preserve order and arrest offenders as constables have within their respective towns. 
(Special Laws 1893, Act No. 161, § 18; Special Laws 1917, Act No. 146) 
Section 19. - [Removal of officers.] 
    The mayor and burgesses of said borough shall be and they are hereby authorized and empowered, after having had a full hearing on reasonable notice of such proposed hearing, and upon due cause found by a vote of the majority of the board, to remove any treasurer, collector, bailiff, registrar of voters, assessors, or auditors of said borough, and any officer of said borough appointed by said board of mayor and burgesses for malfeasance in office, or for any neglect or refusal to properly perform the duties of their respective offices, and to fill the vacancy caused by such removal in the manner hereinbefore provided for filling vacancies. 
    Upon reasonable notice and after public hearing, said board of mayor and burgesses may remove from office, for malfeasance or for any neglect or refusal to properly perform the duties of his office, any borough official appointed by the board of mayor and burgesses. Such removal shall require an affirmative vote of at least five members of the board of mayor and burgesses. Any officer, or employee appointed by the mayor or the mayor and burgesses and so removed, may appeal from the action of said board to the court of common pleas for the judicial district of Waterbury at Waterbury. Such appeal shall be taken within thirty days from the date of notice of such action by said board. Said court may approve, modify or revoke the action of said board and may tax costs at its discretion. The action of the board shall remain in effect pending such appeal, but, if said court shall modify or revoke the action of said board, its decree may relate back to the date of the action of said board of mayor and burgesses. 
(Special Laws 1893, Act No. 161, § 19; Special Laws 1953, Act No. 440, § 4) 
Editor's note- Special Laws 1953, Act No. 440, § 4, did not expressly amend the Charter, hence codification as the second paragraph of § 19 was in the discretion of the editor. 
Section 20. - [Obstructing, etc., mayor; penalties.] 
    If any person shall hinder, obstruct, resist, or abuse the mayor or acting mayor in the execution of his office, such offender upon conviction shall pay a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars, or be imprisoned in the county jail not exceeding six months, or both, at the discretion of the court having jurisdiction of the offense. And if any person being of sufficient age and ability shall unreasonably refuse to assist the mayor or acting mayor in the execution of his office in suppressing riots, tumults, and breaches of the peace, where thereto commanded by such officer, such person shall upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding seven dollars, or be imprisoned in the county jail not exceeding thirty days, or both. 
(Special Laws 1893, Act No. 161, § 20) 
Section 21. - [Voting by ballot upon any matter other than election of officers.] 
    All meetings of the freemen of said borough, where the vote upon any matter, other than the election of officers, is legally required to be by ballot, shall be warned, opened, and held at eight o'clock in the forenoon at such places in each of the three wards of said borough designated in the warning therefor, and the voting machines for the casting of votes shall be opened at that hour and remain open continuously for the purpose of voting until six o'clock in the afternoon when said machines shall be closed and, in the event any such meeting is called during the period of time when such machines are closed by operation of law, then ballot boxes shall be substituted for said machines, and paper ballots, properly printed, shall be used by the freemen. No person shall be allowed to vote at such meeting whose name does appear upon the then voting or registry list of said borough, and no addition to, or correction of said list shall be made at such meetings. The mayor and burgesses shall appoint suitable persons to check the voting list, to attend the ballot-box, and to count the votes at such meetings. A copy of any resolution, proposed contract, proposition or measure to be voted upon at such meeting aforesaid, shall be included in the warning for such meeting, or shall be open to the inspection of the freemen of said borough, during such reasonable hours and at such place in said borough as shall be designated in said warning for at least five days before the day of said meeting. 
(Special Laws 1893, Act No. 161, § 21; Special Laws 1949, Act No. 424) 
Editor's note- See the general statutes of the State of Connecticut. 
[Section 21.1. - Elector's meetings held on Tuesday after first Monday of November.] 
    At all electors' meetings held in the town or borough of Naugatuck on the Tuesday after the first Monday of November the electors thereof shall be warned in the manner provided by law to meet at six o'clock in the forenoon, and the polls in each ward shall be opened for [from] six o'clock in the forenoon and remain open until six o'clock in the afternoon on the day of such election. 
(Special Laws 1897, Act No. 415, § 3; Special Laws 1929, Act No. 281) 
Editor's note- Special Laws 1897, Act No. 415, § 3, as amended by Special Laws 1929, Act No. 281, did not expressly amend the Charter, hence codification as § 21.1 was in the editor's discretion. See the general statutes of the State of Connecticut. 
Section 22. - [Violation of Charter relative to elections, etc.] 
    Any person who shall without reasonable cause neglect to perform any of the duties required of him by the provisions of this Charter relating to elections, or who shall be guilty of fraud in performing them; and any person who shall make any alteration in the voting list herein specified, except as provided herein, and any person in charge of a ballot-box, who shall neglect to receive or deposit, or suffer the voter to deposit any vote duly offered, shall be fined not more than three hundred dollars or imprisoned for not more than one year in the county jail, or both. 
(Special Laws 1893, Act No. 161, § 22) 
Section 23. - [Fradulent registration as freeman; penalty.] 
    Every person who shall fradulently procure himself or another to be registered as a freeman on the registry list of said borough, shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars, or imprisoned in the county jail not more than one year, or both. 
(Special Laws 1893, Act No. 161, § 23) 
Section 24. - [Fradulent voting; penalty.] 
    Every person not legally qualified who shall fraudulently vote, or attempt to vote at or in any freeman's meeting of said borough; and every legally qualified person who shall at such meeting fraudulently put into the ballot-box more than one vote at the same time, for any person for the same office, or upon the same question or matter then pending, or who shall fraudulently vote more than once at the same balloting, shall be fined not more than three hundred dollars, or imprisoned not more than one year in the county jail, or both. 
(Special Laws 1893, Act No. 161, § 24) 
Section 25. - [Fraudulent abstracting of votes from ballot-box, etc.; penalty.] 
    Every person who shall fraudulently abstract any vote from the ballot-box used at any meeting of the freemen of said borough within six months thereafter, or who shall, at such meeting, or within six months thereafter, fraudulently intermingle any vote or votes with the votes legally deposited in any such box, shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars, and imprisoned not more than two years in the state prison, nor less than six months in the county jail. 
(Special Laws 1893, Act No. 161, § 25) 
Section 26. - [Freemen authorized to lay taxes upon polls and ratable estate.] 
    The freemen of said borough may at any legal meeting lay taxes upon the polls and ratable estate within the limits of said borough for such purposes as may be authorized by the provisions of this Charter; such taxes may be laid at the annual meeting or at any special meeting of said freemen legally warned for that purpose; provided, that if the freemen of said borough shall refuse or neglect to lay necessary taxes in the manner aforesaid, then and in such event, the mayor and burgesses may make a rate bill upon the grand list of said borough then last completed, for so much as they may find is necessary, and cause the same to be collected, as if laid by said freeman as aforesaid. 
(Special Laws 1893, Act No. 161, § 26) 
Section 27. - [Reserved.] 
Editor's note- Special Laws 1895, Act No. 185, § 33, amended the Charter by repealing § 27. 
Section 28. - [Board of relief.] 
    The mayor and burgesses shall before the 15th day of June, next after the annual meeting of said borough, appoint a board of relief of said borough, consisting of three freemen residing within the limits thereof. Of the members of said board appointed in the year 1895, under this act, one shall be appointed for the term of three years, one for the term of two years, and one for the term of one year, and between the annual meeting of the borough and the fifteenth day of June in each year thereafter they shall appoint one person to act as a member of said board of relief for the term of three years next after the date of his appointment, and until his successor shall be appointed, and qualified: Which board of relief, at the end of fifteen days after the assessment list of said borough is made by said assessors shall have been returned to the clerk of said borough, as aforesaid, shall give notice of the time and place of their meetings as such board of relief, by written or printed notice put on the public signpost in said borough, at least ten days before the date of their said meeting, and at such meeting such board of relief may in all respects fully review the acts of said assessors in relation to said list and correct any error or injustice they may find to have been committed by such assessors, and shall have the same power and authority, and shall proceed in the same manner in relation to the assessments made by said assessors provided for in this Charter as the board of relief of towns have and do by law in relation to the list and assessment of towns, and the doings of assessors of towns, and said board of relief shall be lodged by said board with the clerk of said borough on or before the twenty-third day of February next after the appointment of said board. Nothing herein shall be construed to prevent the appointment of the mayor or any burgess as members of such board of relief. 
    Vacancies in said board may be filled by said mayor and burgesses for the unexpired term, and not more than two of the members of said board of relief shall, at any one time, be members of the same political party. 
(Special Laws 1893, Act No. 161, § 28; Special Laws 1895, Act No. 185, § 26) 
Editor's note- Now called board of tax review. See the general statutes of the State of Connecticut. 
Section 29. - [Rate bills.] 
    Whenever said freemen shall lay a tax, the mayor and a majority of the burgesses shall make out rate bills for the same under their hands, containing the proportion which each individual is to pay, according to the assessment list made and completed, as in this Charter provided, and the mayor shall apply to some justice of the peace in said New Haven county to issue a warrant directed to the collector appointed to collect such tax, commanding and empowering him to collect the same, and such justice of the peace shall issue such warrant, and whenever the rate bill of said borough shall have been delivered by said mayor to said collector without having procured a warrant for the collection of the tax in said rate bill, the collector of said borough may apply to some justice of the peace as aforesaid, to issue a warrant for the collection of such tax, or of such portions thereof as shall remain uncollected at the time of issuing such warrant, and such justice shall issue the same, and the collector of whom such warrant shall be delivered shall have the same power and authority as if said warrant had been issued with said rate bill, before the delivery of said rate bill to the collector. 
(Special Laws 1893, Act No. 161, § 29) 
Section 30. - [Inducement of persons or corporations to locate and engage in manufacturing business within limits of borough.] 
    To induce persons or corporations to locate and engage in manufacturing business within the limits of this borough, the board of mayor and burgesses of said borough shall have power and authority and they are hereby authorized and empowered to contract with any persons or corporations who may hereafter locate in said borough, to exempt from borough taxation a portion or all of the property by it or them invested in manufacturing in said borough, for a period not exceeding five years, and may, during such years, remit all such taxes that may be assessed on such manufacturing property or investment; provided, that any vote or resolution adopted, or action taken by the mayor and burgesses, under the provisions of this section, shall not take effect until approved by a vote of the freemen of said borough, and such vote shall be by ballot. 
(Special Laws 1893, Act No. 161, § 30) 
Section 31. - [Bonds.] 
    Said borough is hereby authorized to issue bonds, for the purpose of refunding any outstanding indebtedness, to an amount not exceeding the sum of two hundred thousand dollars outstanding at any one period, bearing interest at no greater rate than four per centum per annum, payable semiannually, and to run for a time not exceeding twenty-five years from the date thereof. Said borough shall, however, before such bonds are issued, at a meeting of the freemen of said borough, duly warned and held for the purpose, determine the several amounts of such bonds, the form of the same, the rate of interest to be paid thereon, not to exceed the rate aforesaid, the time they shall run, not to exceed said twenty-five years, the place of paying said interest and principal, and the persons who shall execute such bonds on behalf of said borough; and such bonds, when executed in the manner so determined, and issued and delivered by said borough or its duly appointed officers or agents, shall be obligatory upon said borough and upon the inhabitants thereof according to their tenor. Said borough shall annually appropriate a sum approximating one mill on the grand list of said borough, to be applied toward the payment of any outstanding bonds of said borough. 
(Special Laws 1893, Act No. 161, § 31; Special Laws 1911, Act No. 109) 
Section 32. - [Meetings of board of mayor and burgesses.] 
    The board of mayor and burgesses shall hold its first regular meeting in each year at eight o'clock on the evening on the Monday following the annual meeting, and thereafter on the first Tuesday of each month succeeding, at such an hour as said board may from time to time designate, and such regular meetings may be adjourned from time to time as said board may order. Special meetings of said board may be called at any time, by the mayor or any five burgesses, notice of which shall be given by the clerk depositing in the Naugatuck post office, postage paid as written or printed notice thereof, addressed to each burgess and to the mayor at least forty-eight hours before the time fixed for such meeting. A majority of the board of mayor and burgesses shall constitute a quorum at any meeting. Each burgess shall have one vote except as herein provided. A majority of the burgesses present and voting at any meeting shall be necessary to pass any act, except in the case of a tie vote as herein provided. 
(Special Laws 1893, Act No. 161, § 32; Special Laws 1967, Act No. 25, § 4) 
Editor's note- Special Laws 1967, Act No. 25, § 4, did not expressly amend the Charter, hence codification as second sentence of § 32 was in the editor's discretion. Said § 4 provided as follows: 
"Section 4. Special meetings of the board of mayor and burgesses may be called at any time by the mayor, or any five burgesses, by the giving of notice as provided in section 32 of the Charter of the borough of Naugatuck." 
[Section 32.1. - Filling of vacancies.] 
    When any vacancy shall occur in said board of burgesses, the mayor and burgesses of said borough at a special meeting duly called, within ninety days of such vacancy, shall proceed to fill such vacancy from the ward and from the political party from which the former incumbent was chosen. 
(Special Laws 1953, Act No. 440, § 2) 
Editor's note- Special Laws 1953, Act No. 440, § 2, did not expressly amend the Charter, hence codification as § 32.1 was in the editor's discretion. 
Section 33. - [Erection or removal of buildings.] 
    The mayor and burgesses shall have the power to designate in a by-law limits in said borough within or to which it shall not be lawful to erect or remove any building or any part of or addition to any building, unless such building, part, or addition, or the outer walls and roof thereof, shall be composed of such incombustible materials as the said mayor and burgesses may in said by-laws prescribe. Whenever any building or part thereof, or addition thereto shall be erected or in process of erection within said limits, or removed into the same in violation of the provisions of this section, the mayor shall give notice in writing to the owner or owners thereof to remove the same from said limits within a time to be specified in said notice. 
(Special Laws 1893, Act No. 161, § 33) 
Editor's note- See the state building code. 
Section 34. - [Use of buildings.] 
    The mayor and burgesses shall have power to prohibit the use of buildings in said borough for such manufacturers, trades, or purposes, as will in the opinion of said mayor and burgesses expose any such building, together with any other building, to unusual risks of fire. And whenever said mayor and burgesses shall determine that any building is so used, they may prohibit such further use, and the mayor shall thereupon give notice to the person or persons so using the same of such order or prohibition. 
(Special Laws 1893, Act No. 161, § 34) 
Editor's note- See the state building code. 
Section 35. - [Failure to remove buildings, etc.; penalty.] 
    Whenever any person or persons, after notice by the mayor as aforesaid, shall fail immediately to remove from said limits any building or part thereof, or addition thereto, erected within or removed into said limits, or in process of erection therein, in violation of the provisions of the two preceding sections or after notice by the mayor shall continue the use of any building as may be prohibited by the mayor and burgesses aforesaid, such person shall forfeit to the use of said borough the sum of one hundred dollars, and the further sum of one hundred dollars for every thirty days of such failure to remove, or such continued use as aforesaid, to be recovered in a civil action in the name of said borough. 
(Special Laws 1893, Act No. 161, § 35) 
Editor's note- See state building code. 
Section 36. - [Fire department.] 
    The mayor and burgesses shall have full power and authority to organize and continue a fire department in said borough, and to procure and maintain suitable and proper apparatus, and land and building therefor, and to appoint the officers of said fire department, one of whom shall be known as the chief engineer, whose annual salary shall not be less than two thousand dollars per year, one as first assistant engineer, and one as second assistant engineer, or any other officer in connection therewith, and prescribe the duties of all such officers: The above-mentioned officers and paid employees of the fire department shall hold office and membership in said department until dismissed by the board of mayor and burgesses for cause, and no officer or paid employee of the fire department shall be dismissed unless five members of the board of mayor and burgesses shall vote in favor of such dismissal. Any officer or paid employee so dismissed may appeal from the action of said board to the superior court for New Haven county, to be held at Waterbury. Such appeal shall be taken within thirty days from the date of notice of such action by said board. Said court may approve, modify or revoke the action of said board and may tax costs at its discretion. The action of the board shall remain in effect pending such appeal, but, if said court shall modify or revoke the action of said board, its decree may relate back to the date of the action of said board of mayor and burgesses, to make and cause to be executed by-laws, rules, and regulations for the good government of said fire department, or of any engine company, hose company, and hook and ladder company or companies, or any person or persons in said fire department; to enlist a sufficient number of men to fill the same, to discharge any such enlisted men for cause; and said company or companies, when enlisted and organized as aforesaid, shall have power to appoint their own officers, subject to the approval of the mayor and burgesses of said borough; to fill all vacancies that may occur in their numbers by voluntary enlistments, from time to time, as occasion may require, and to make and establish all necessary rules, regulations, and by-laws for their own government, not inconsistent with the laws of the United States or of this state, or the by-laws, rules, and regulations of said borough, which said enlistments to fill vacancies, and said rules, regulations, and by-laws last aforesaid, shall be subject to the approval of the mayor and burgesses of said borough. The mayor and burgesses shall have power to construct cisterns or tanks and to provide hydrants at such points in said borough as they may deem expedient, and to provide a sufficient supply of water for fire purposes. 
(Special Laws 1893, Act No. 161, § 36; Special Laws 1929, Act No. 347, § 1; Special Laws 1935, Act No. 529, § 1) 
Section 37. - [Drains and common sewers-Generally.] 
    The mayor and burgesses of said borough shall be and are hereby authorized and empowered to lay out, build, and construct drains and common sewers in any part or portion of said borough, and to assess the expenses thereof, or such part of said expense as said mayor or burgesses or a majority of them shall deem just and reasonable, upon any lands or buildings in said borough especially benefited thereby, in the judgment of said mayor and burgesses. Whenever the mayor or burgesses shall lay out, build, and construct or cause to be laid out, built, and constructed, any drain or common sewer as aforesaid, they may adjust and liquidate the expense thereof, and apportion and assess the same or such parts thereof as they shall deem just and reasonable, upon the lands and buildings especially benefited thereby, and upon the person, persons, or corporation owning or interested in such lands and buildings, and said mayor and burgesses shall thereupon give notice to such persons or corporation of the amount so assessed, and to be paid by them respectively, at least two weeks before the time when said payment shall be required. Said mayor and burgesses shall be, and they are hereby empowered at any time to make such alterations and repairs in any drain or common sewer as shall in their opinion be proper and necessary, and may adjust and liquidate the expense thereof, and apportion and assess the same upon individuals in the same manner as is in this section heretofore prescribed, in the case of laying out, building, and constructing drains or common sewers. 
(Special Laws 1893, Act No. 161, § 37) 
Section 38. - [Same-Damage to lands caused by taking right of way.] 
    Whenever the mayor and burgesses of said borough shall lay out or cause to be laid out and constructed any drain or common sewer in said borough, in whole or in part, through or across lands of individuals or corporations not used for a highway, they shall by themselves, or by a committee by them appointed, appraise the damage to such lands caused by taking the right of way to construct such drain or common sewer through or across such lands, and shall notify the owners of such lands of such layout and construction, and of the damages allowed to them respectively. If the owners of such lands are nonresidents the notice may be by letter of the clerk of said borough through the post office; if the owners are not known or their residence is unknown, notice to the occupant or person having the care of the land shall be sufficient. If the owner or owners of such lands shall be dissatisfied with such appraisement, they may, within ten days after the receipt of such notice, apply to one of the judges of the superior court of this state for the appointment of a committee to re-appraise such damages, first giving three days' notice to said mayor and burgesses of the time and place of making such application; and said judges shall appoint three judicious freeholders, residents of New Haven county, outside the limits of the town of Naugatuck, who shall be sworn to faithfully discharge the duties of their appointment; and shall give at least three days' notice to said parties of the time when they will view said premises and re-assess such damages, and after having heard the parties they shall re-appraise and re-assess such damages, and report the same to said mayor and burgesses in writing, and said re-appraisement and re-assessment shall be final and conclusive between the parties, and said borough shall pay said damages or deposit the same in the hands of the borough treasurer, subject to the order of the several owners of such land, to whom damages have been so assessed. No person shall construct any drain or sewer of any kind upon and from any premises in said borough, or permit any such drain to be used so as to flow water or other matter on to the surface of any street or highway in said borough, or shall use or permit to be used on his land any drain now existing within the limits of said borough of the description aforesaid, without in each of said cases the permission of the mayor and burgesses, and every person who shall construct, or use, or cause to be used, any drain or sewer contrary to the provisions of this act, shall forfeit and pay to the treasurer of said borough, for the use of said borough, a fine of seven dollars for each offense; and every person who shall, on premises under his control, permit to be used any such drain or sewer contrary to the provisions of this act, shall forfeit and pay to the treasurer of said borough a fine of two dollars for each day in which such drain or sewer is used or permitted to be used, as aforesaid. It shall be the duty of the grand jurors of the town of Naugatuck to prosecute for all violations of the provisions of this section before a justice of the peace residing in said town of Naugatuck, the same as other offenses committed in said town. All assessments made upon any land or buildings for the construction or repairs of any drain or sewer under the provisions of this act, and all expenses that may be the result of such assessment or order, shall be and remain a lien or real encumbrance upon such land and buildings in favor of said borough, and the payment thereof may be enforced by said borough in a civil action in the name of the treasurer of said borough, or by foreclosure or any other appropriate remedy; provided, that no such assessment for the construction of drains or sewers shall remain a lien on such premises, lands, and buildings, for a period longer than sixty days after such assessment shall have been made, unless a certificate in writing shall be made and signed by the mayor or clerk of said borough, describing the premises, the amount claimed as a lien, and the date of the assessment, and lodged with the town clerk of the town of Naugatuck for record. 
    Whenever the mayor and burgesses of said borough shall lay out a system of sewers therein, they shall have the same powers in regard to extending the main sewers to, into and through that part of the territory of said borough that has been added to the borough by this act, that they had under section thirty-eight of said borough Charter, on the first day of January, 1895, within the territorial limits of said borough, as it then existed. 
(Special Laws 1893, Act No. 161, § 38; Special Laws 1895, Act No. 185, § 39) 
Editor's note- Special Laws 1895, Act No. 185, § 39, did not expressly amend the Charter, hence codification as the second paragraph of § 38 was in the editor's discretion. 
Section 39. - [Public squares, streets, etc.-Generally.] 
    The mayor and burgesses are hereby authorized and empowered to open and lay out public squares, new highways, streets and public walks, to alter, grade, extend and enlarge all streets, walks, and squares, in said borough and to discontinue streets and highways or exchange the same for other highways, streets, and public walks, and to enclose and improve any public grounds in said borough, and to establish the names of streets and public squares, to number the buildings in said borough, and to make and cause to be executed all such orders relating thereto, as they shall judge proper. Said borough shall have sole and exclusive authority and control over all streets, sidewalks, public squares, public parks, and highways, and all parts thereof within its limits. And no person shall open within the limits of said borough any public way except and by virtue of the authority of the mayor and burgesses. 
(Special Laws 1893, Act No. 161, § 39) 
Section 40. - [Same-Notice, etc.] 
    Before the mayor and burgesses shall determine to open and lay out any public square, street, highway, or walk, or to alter, extend, or enlarge the same or to discontinue or exchange any highway or street in said borough they shall give notice to the owner or owners of the land upon, over, or through which the same is intended to be opened, laid out, altered, extended, exchanged or discontinued as aforesaid to appear before the mayor and burgesses and be heard in relation thereto, which notice shall be in writing, signed by the mayor or one of the burgesses of said borough, and shall be served by reading the same in the presence and hearing of the person or persons entitled to receive such notice as aforesaid, or in their absence from or residence without the state, in the presence and hearing of the occupant or person having care of the same, or by leaving a true and attested copy at his or their usual place of abode by the bailiff of said borough, or by some indifferent freeman thereof, at least ten days before the time of the hearing upon such subject as specified in such notice; and if the residence of such owner or owners is not known to said mayor and burgesses, or any of them, an order of notice may be obtained from any judge of the superior court, or court of common pleas, which order shall be complied with at least ten days before the time of hearing as aforesaid; and thereupon, at the time and place mentioned in said notice, and at any regular adjourned meeting therefrom, said mayor and burgesses shall hear all the parties in interest that may appear before them; and if after such hearing said mayor and burgesses shall determine to lay out, open, alter, extend, exchange, enlarge, or discontinue any highway, street, walk, or public square, as aforesaid, then it shall be the duty of said mayor and burgesses, by themselves or a committee by them appointed for the purpose to make and lay out, open, alter, extend, enlarge, or discontinue such highway, street, walk, or public square, as aforesaid; and to agree with the persons especially interested therein respecting the damages or benefits, as the case may be, resulting to them respectively from such layout, opening, alteration, extension, enlargement, or discontinuance aforesaid; and in case said mayor and burgesses or said committee cannot agree with all of said persons respecting said damages and benefits, then it shall be the duty of the mayor or, in his absence or disability, of the senior burgess, or, in his absence or inability to act, of the second senior burgess of said borough, acting as such mayor, to appoint three judicious and disinterested freeholders of New Haven county, outside the town of Naugatuck, to estimate and appraise the damages that may be sustained by any person or persons with whom said mayor and burgesses, or said committee cannot agree, above and beyond the special benefits he or they may receive from such layout, opening, alteration, extension, enlargement, exchange, or discontinuance aforesaid; and also to estimate and appraise the benefits that may accrue to any other person or persons with whom said mayor and burgesses or their said committees cannot agree above and beyond the damages sustained by him or them by said layout, opening, alteration, extension, enlargement, exchange, or discontinuance, and report said damages and benefits and the persons to whom they respectively belong, ascertained as aforesaid, to said mayor and burgesses. Before said freeholders shall proceed to execute the duties of their said appointment, they shall be sworn to a faithful and impartial discharge of their duties by the person so appointing them, and a certificate of their said appointment, and the administration of said oath shall be made under the hand of the person thus appointing them, and recorded in the records of said borough. It shall be the duty of said committee of freeholders to give notice to the parties interested in such layout, opening, alteration, extension, enlargement, exchange, or discontinuance, in the same manner as in this section is above provided, to be present at such time and place as shall be designated in said notice, to be heard in relation to the assessment of said damages and benefits, and at the time and place mentioned in said notice, and at any other times and places to which said committee of freeholders may adjourn therefrom, said committee of freeholders shall proceed to hear the parties in interest who may appear before them, and shall thereupon ascertain and determine what person or persons will be damaged by said layout, opening, alteration, extension, enlargement, exchange, or discontinuance and the amount thereof over and above any special benefits he or they may sustain thereby, and the said committee shall thereupon report the amount of the damages and benefits thus ascertained and determined, and the names of the persons to whom the same belong respectively, to the mayor and burgesses, who may accept said report, or return the same to said committee for their reconsideration or correction; and upon the acceptance of said report it shall be the duty of the clerk of said borough to record the same in the records of said borough, and give notice thereof to the parties interested therein accordingly; provided, that the whole amount of benefits assessed for any particular layout, alteration, extension, enlargement, exchange, or discontinuance shall not exceed the whole amount of damages assessed on account of the same layout, opening, alteration, extension, enlargement, exchange, or discontinuance. Nothing in this Charter shall be construed to affect in any way the jurisdiction over and liability concerning all bridges in said borough, on the part of the town of Naugatuck, but the duty and liability of said town as to such bridges shall be and continue the same as though this act has not been passed. 
(Special Laws 1893, Act No. 161, § 40) 
Section 41. - [Same-Payment of damages, etc.] 
    The mayor and burgesses shall order the damages thus assessed and determined to be paid to the persons to whom they belong respectively, out of the treasury of said borough, and shall order the benefits thus assessed and ascertained to be paid by the persons upon whom they are assessed respectively into the treasury of said borough, within such time as they shall judge reasonable and proper to limit and appoint; and it shall be the duty of said mayor and burgesses to make a survey of said layout, opening, alteration, extension, enlargement, or exchange, with a particular description thereof which being accepted by the mayor and burgesses, shall be signed by the mayor or, in his absence, by the senior or second senior burgess present in said borough, as the case may be, and recorded in the records of said borough; and said mayor and burgesses shall limit the time within which said public square, street, highway, or walk, so laid out or altered, shall be opened to the public, and at the expiration of the time so limited may adopt any and all such measures and make and cause to be executed all such orders as shall be necessary and proper to appropriate the same to the purposes for which the same was laid out, altered, extended, enlarged, or exchanged, as aforesaid; provided, that no public square, highway, street, or walk shall be so opened, altered, extended, enlarged, discontinued, or exchanged, until the damages so assessed, as aforesaid, shall be paid or deposited in the borough treasury for the use of the person or persons to whom the same may belong. 
(Special Laws 1893, Act No. 161, § 41) 
Section 42. - [Same-Lien, etc.] 
    All assessments for benefits made under the provisions of this act shall be and remain a lien upon the property especially benefitted by the public work or improvement in view of which such assessments were made, and such liens shall take precedence and priority of all other liens or encumbrances on the property whereon the same is imposed, except taxes, and the land, buildings, or other property on which such lien may exist, shall be liable to be foreclosed in the same manner as if said liens were a mortgage thereon in favor of said borough, to secure the amount of assessments or expense; provided, that no such lien shall continue to exist for a period of more than sixty days after such assessment shall have become payable, unless within said period of sixty days a certificate signed by the mayor or clerk of said borough, which certificate may be in the form hereinafter set forth, shall be lodged with the clerk of said town of Naugatuck; and any such lien shall cease to exist whenever a certificate, which may be of the form hereinafter set forth, signed by the mayor or clerk of said borough, that it has ceased to exist shall be lodged with the town clerk, and such certificate shall be recorded by said town clerk. And such assessments may also be collected by warrant under the hand of the mayor in the same manner as town taxes are by law collected. 
(Special Laws 1893, Act No. 161, § 42) 
Section 43. - [Same-Appeal; re-assessment of damages, etc.] 
    If any person or persons shall be aggrieved by the doings of said mayor and burgesses or of said freeholders appointed by them to estimate the damages as aforesaid, in the matter of assessing damages, expenses, or benefits to be paid to or by such person or persons whose property may be injured or benefited by their proceedings under section 37, 38, 39 or 40 of this Charter, such person or persons may by petition within thirty days after notice of such assessment, or estimate of damages, or betterments shall have been given, apply to any judge of the superior court or court of common pleas of New Haven county for a re-assessment of said damages, or of the sums ordered to be paid by them as aforesaid, giving reasonable notice in writing to the clerk of said borough of the time and place, when and where, and of the judge to whom applications will be made, and such judge shall appoint three judicious disinterested freeholders of New Haven county, not residents of said Naugatuck, to re-estimate such damages, or re-assess the sums ordered to be paid as aforesaid. And said freeholders shall re-assess said damages or re-estimate and assess said sums ordered to be paid as aforesaid under oath, and make return of their doings to the judge who appointed them, who shall have authority for any cause he may deem sufficient to set aside said report, and order another estimate or assessment to be made, or make such other order therein as to justice and equity shall appertain. If, upon such application for re-estimate or re-assessment the damages shall be increased or the assessments of benefits decreased, and the same be approved by said judge, the costs of application shall be paid by said borough, otherwise by the applicants, and said judge may issue execution for such costs. And such report of said freeholders, when accepted, shall be recorded in the records of said borough; provided, this section shall not apply to the assessment of damages to be assessed by a committee appointed by a judge of the superior court, as provided for in section 38 of this Charter. 
(Special Laws 1893, Act No. 161, § 43) 
Section 44. - [Same-Appeal; appointment of committee, etc.] 
    Any person aggrieved by the doings of the mayor and burgesses in laying out, opening, extending, enlarging, discontinuing, or altering any highway, walk, public square, or street under section 40, or in their refusal to lay out any highway or street, or to make any alterations in any existing highway or street, may, within thirty days next after the record of said survey, as provided for in section 41 of this Charter, prefer an application to the superior court for New Haven county, on the return day of said court next after the expiration of said thirty days, or in the vacation of said court, to any judge of said court, accompanied by a summons signed by proper authority, to be served in the same manner as civil process, on the mayor or clerk of said borough, citing said borough to appear before said court or said judge and be heard thereon, and unless the parties shall agree as to the judgment to be rendered, such application shall be heard and decided by a committee of three disinterested persons to be appointed by the court residing in said county outside of said town of Naugatuck. 
(Special Laws 1893, Act No. 161, § 44) 
Section 45. - [Same-Appeal; report of committee, etc.] 
    If said committee shall find that such highway, walk, square, street, or private way laid out, or alteration, opening, or enlarging made by said mayor and burgesses, will be of common convenience and necessity or that such discontinuance ought to be made, such appeal shall be dismissed with costs; but in case of the refusal of said mayor and burgesses on a written application to lay out a highway, extend or make an alteration in an existing way, if said committee shall find such highway, extension, or alteration will be of common convenience and necessity, they shall survey and lay out or extend the same, or make such alteration in existing ways paid for as they shall find necessary, and shall estimate the damages sustained by, or special benefits accruing to, each person by the layout of a new or the alteration of an existing highway, and report in writing their doing to said court. 
(Special Laws 1893, Act No. 161, § 45) 
Section 46. - [Same-Appeal; report to be recorded, etc.] 
    When the report of the committee finds that such highway, extension, or alteration will be of common convenience and necessity, or such discontinuance proper, and such report is accepted, it shall be recorded, and said road so laid out, extended, or altered, shall be a public highway or such highway discontinued, as the case may be; and judgment shall be rendered for the payment of the damages and benefits respectively assessed to be paid by or to said borough at such time as the court shall direct, and if the doings of said mayor and burgesses shall by said decree be reversed, said court shall direct that said borough shall pay the costs; in all other cases the costs shall be paid by the petitioner. 
(Special Laws 1893, Act No. 161, § 46) 
Section 47. - [Streets, sidewalks, gutters, etc.-Generally.] 
    The mayor and burgesses shall have the power from time to time, as they shall judge proper, by themselves, or a committee by them appointed, to designate, alter, fix, and establish the width, course, height, grade and level of the streets, sidewalks, and public walks, and gutters in said borough, and to order the owner or owners of lands or buildings fronting upon highways and streets in said borough, to make such walks and gutters on their several fronts, according to the width, height and grade designated as aforesaid, and also to curb, flag, or pave the same in such manner and with such materials as the mayor and burgesses or said committee shall direct; and also to order such owners to provide and erect such railing or guards along said walks as public safety may require, in front of their premises, and also to order any such proprietor to repair his sidewalk, curb, or gutter, and guard, or railing, as aforesaid, when such repair shall be necessary, to be done within such time and in such manner as said mayor and burgesses or said committee may designate and direct. If any such owner or owners shall refuse or neglect to perform the thing or things required by such order in the manner and within the time specified in such order, the mayor and burgesses or said committee may execute said order in the manner therein prescribed, at the expense of said borough; and the expense incurred in executing any such order shall, from time to time when such expense begins to be incurred, be and continue a lien upon land and buildings, in favor of said borough, which lien shall take precedence of all other liens thereon (except taxes due the state), and may be foreclosed as a mortgage, or such sum may be collected as provided in section 41 of this Charter; provided, however, such lien shall not continue for a longer period than sixty days after the final execution of such order, unless within that period a certificate of such lien, signed by the mayor or clerk of said borough, to be substantially in the same form as provided for certificates of liens in section 42 of this Charter, shall be lodged as provided in said section. Provided, that, whenever a sidewalk, curb, or gutter has been made or laid, or a guard or railing has been erected as aforesaid, by any person under any order aforesaid, made by competent borough authority, and it is deemed necessary to alter or change the said sidewalk, gutter, or curb in any way within ten years, or to alter or change such guard or railing within five years, after the said order has been complied with, then such change and alteration shall be done by said borough, and at its expense. And this provision shall apply to sidewalks, gutters, curbs, guards, and railings already made, laid, or erected in compliance with the orders of the mayor and burgesses; provided however, that nothing herein contained shall be so construed as to relieve adjoining proprietors from the duty of keeping their sidewalks, curbs, gutters, guards, and railings as aforesaid, in proper and suitable repair, under the orders of the borough. The mayor and burgesses may cause any or all street crossings to be leveled or raised and paved, or flagged, at the expense of said borough. 
(Special Laws 1893, Act No. 161, § 47) 
Section 48. - [Same-Notice, etc.] 
    Whenever the mayor and burgesses shall determine to alter, fix or establish the width, course, height, grade, and level of any street, sidewalk or public walk in said borough, or shall determine to order that any gutter or sidewalk be curbed, flagged, or paved, as provided in the preceding section, such determination shall be evidenced by a resolution duly passed by them at some regular or special meeting, which resolution shall set forth with reasonable certainty their proposed action, including a survey when necessary. Notice of such proposed action shall be given to all persons whose property may be affected thereby at least five days before the passage of such resolution by said mayor and burgesses. No further action shall be taken by them in such matter within thirty days after the adoption and recording of such resolution upon the borough records. Any person aggrieved by the doings of said mayor and burgesses aforesaid may, within said thirty days, proceed in the same manner in the nature of an appeal as is provided in section 44, and if such committee shall report that common convenience and necessity require such action so determined upon, as aforesaid, to be taken, such application and appeal shall be dismissed with costs otherwise the applicant shall recover costs and said proposed action appealed from shall be indefinitely postponed. The service of such application shall operate as a further stay of the proposed action appealed from, until the determination of said appeal. 
(Special Laws 1893, Act No. 161, § 48) 
Section 49. - [Same-Expense, etc.] 
    In all cases where an order of the mayor and burgesses, made under and pursuant to the powers given in section 47 of this Charter, shall have been executed at the expense of said borough, it shall be the duty of said mayor and burgesses to ascertain the amount of said expense and to order the same to be paid into the borough treasury within the time directed in said order, by the person or persons who are by law bound to pay the same. And when the premises subject to said expenses are owned by two or more persons, who have different estates or interests therein, said mayor and burgesses shall in said order apportion among such persons the amount of such expense to be paid by each, in proportion to the respective interest and estate of each. Where such premises are owned in fee, whether in joint tenancy or in common, no such apportionment need be made. And whenever the land and premises of any person or persons subject to such expense shall be occupied by at least one tenantable building for every one hundred and fifty feet of frontage upon the street upon which such order has been executed, the owners thereof shall pay the whole of the expense of executing such order. In all cases where the premises subject to expense, as aforesaid, are not so occupied by tenantable buildings, said mayor and burgesses may, on the petition of the owner or owners thereof, make such apportionment of said expense, between said borough and the owner or owners of said premises, as to said board of mayor and burgesses shall seem just and equitable; and may order that the whole or any reasonable part of said expense shall be borne by said borough, and paid out of the treasury thereof; provided, however, that nothing contained in this section shall be so construed as to relieve from the payment of any part or the whole of the expense incurred in the execution of any order, as aforesaid, any one lot or number of lots, with a dwelling house on one of said lots, however extended the frontage, which are used and occupied substantially as one homestead, home lot, or place of residence; but such premises shall pay the whose [whole] expense aforesaid, in like manner as lots having a frontage of one hundred and fifty feet, or less, with tenantable buildings thereon. 
(Special Laws 1893, Act No. 161, § 49) 
Section 50. - [Same-Appeal.] 
    If any person or persons shall be aggrieved by the doings of the mayor and burgesses under sections 49 and 52 of this act, such person or persons may prefer his, her, or their complaint to the superior court in the county of New Haven, against said borough, within thirty days after the order complained of has been served, by causing a copy of such complaint to be left with the clerk of said borough before the next return day of said superior court, after the expiration of said thirty days, and if said superior court on hearing said complaint shall be of opinion that such apportionment or orders are inequitable and ought to be changed and modified in any way, pursuant to said Charter, or that any part or the whole of the expense ordered to be paid or defrayed by such person or persons ought to be borne by said borough under the provisions of this Charter, said superior court shall apportion such expense as to it shall seem reasonable, and shall order and direct that such complainant or complainants be relieved from the payment of such part, or from the whole of such expense, as to said court may appear just and equitable; and shall order that the expense for which relief shall be granted, as aforesaid, be paid by said borough; and if it shall appear on such hearing that such complainant or complainants have actually paid any sum or sums of money in consequence of any order made by said mayor and burgesses as aforesaid, which ought to be refunded, said superior court may render judgment and grant execution thereon in favor of such complainant or complainants, against said borough, for said sum or sums and the costs of the proceedings. 
(Special Laws 1893, Act No. 161, § 50) 
Section 51. - [Macadamizing or paving streets or highways.] 
    The mayor and burgesses of said borough shall have power and authority to macadamize or pave any street or highway now existing or which may hereafter exist in said borough; provided, they shall have been directed so to do by the freemen of said borough in legal meetings duly warned for such purpose, wherein the voting of such freemen upon the question of such direction shall be by ballot; and said mayor and burgesses shall have power to assess the expenses thereof, or such part of said expenses as said mayor and burgesses, or a majority of them, shall deem just and reasonable upon any property in said borough, which in their judgment is especially benefited thereby, and upon the person, persons, or corporation owning or having an interest in such property, designating the particular property which shall be so benefited; and when the property so assessed, as aforesaid, is owned by two or more persons who have different estates or interests therein, said mayor and burgesses shall apportion among such persons the amount of such benefits to be paid by each. Before making any such assessments of benefits said mayor and burgesses shall give a public hearing to all persons interested herein. Written notice of such hearing and of the time and place thereof, signed by the mayor or one of the burgesses, shall be served by leaving a true and attested copy of the same with or at the usual place of abode of the persons entitled to receive the same by the bailiff of said borough, some other proper officer, or by some indifferent freeman thereof, at least ten days before the day of such hearing, as specified in such notice; and if the residence of such owner or owners of said property or any interest therein is out of this state, or is not known to said mayor and burgesses, or either of them, an order of notice to such owner or owners shall be obtained from any judge of the superior court, or the court of common pleas for New Haven county, which order shall be complied with at least ten days before said day of hearing, as aforesaid. All the provisions of section 42 of said Charter, relating to assessments of benefits, liens therefor, foreclosure, and collection of such liens, are hereby made applicable to assessments for such reasonable orders, rules, and regulations, in reference. And all of the provisions of section 43 of said Charter are hereby made applicable to the doings of said mayor and burgesses in assessing and apportioning benefits for macadamizing or paving streets or highways as aforesaid. 
(Special Laws 1893, Act No. 161, § 51) 
Section 52. - [Street railways.] 
    The mayor and burgesses of said borough shall have full power and authority at any time to make such reasonable orders, rules, and regulations, in reference to the location, operation, and maintenance of street railways within the limits of said borough, as in their judgment public safety and convenience may require. Whenever it shall become necessary to widen, or in any manner or way change or alter the width or grade of any street or highway or any part or portion thereof, in said borough in consequence of the location or operation of any street railway in, over, or through the same in order to properly accommodate the general public, the person, persons, or corporation owning or operating said street railway shall defray all the expense thereof, including the land damages as well, and if there be more than one street railway, the said expense shall be fairly and equitably apportioned between such owners by said mayor and burgesses. In case any street railway company shall neglect to obey any such orders, rules, or regulations made by said mayor and burgesses, or to defray such expense, they may cause the same to be executed at the expense of said borough, and said expense shall be paid by said borough, and the amount thereof shall be and remain a lien upon the property of said company, and may be enforced in the manner provided for the enforcement and collection of liens in section 42 of this act. The provisions of this section shall apply to any street railway company now or hereafter located in said borough, but shall not in any way conflict with the powers and authority of the selectmen and committee provided for in section 17 of the resolution incorporating the Naugatuck and Waterbury tramway company, passed at the January session of the General Assembly, 1889. All orders of the mayor and burgessess under the provisions of this section shall be served upon the person, persons, or corporation to be affected thereby, at least ten days before the same shall be required to be executed by the terms thereof. 
(Special Laws 1893, Act No. 161, § 52) 
Section 53. - [Appeal generally.] 
    In all applications in the nature of an appeal from the doings of the mayor and burgesses, or a committee appointed by them, as provided for in this act, the applicant shall be required by the judge or court to which the proceeding is returnable, on motion of said borough, to enter into sufficient recognizance with surety to said borough, conditioned for the payment of all taxable costs to said borough, in case said application or proceeding shall be determined in favor of said borough. And cost may be taxed on such applications and proceedings as in civil actions. 
(Special Laws 1893, Act No. 161, § 53) 
Section 54. - [Service of notices and orders generally.] 
    All notices given and orders made by the mayor and burgesses, under this Charter, except in cases where special provisions are made for the service of the same, may be served in writing upon the owner or owners of the land or buildings to which such notice or order relates, if they reside within the limits of said borough, by reading the same in the presence and hearing of such persons, or by leaving a true and attested copy thereof at the usual place of abode of such persons within said borough, by the mayor, any of the burgesses, the bailiff, any policeman, the clerk or any indifferent freeholder thereof; and if the owner or owners of such land or buildings shall not reside in said borough, such notice served as aforesaid, on the occupant or occupants, or person or persons, having the care of such land or building or property, shall be sufficient notice to all persons interested therein. 
(Special Laws 1893, Act No. 161, § 54) 
Section 55. - [Board of health-Generally.] 
    The mayor and burgesses shall constitute and be a board of health in said borough, and may appoint committees or a committee of such board of health consisting of any freeman of and residing within said borough, which said board and its said committee shall have and may exercise all the powers and authority given by law to the board of health of towns in this state, or that they shall judge necessary for the prevention of disease and the promotion of health of the inhabitants; and may make and cause to be executed all orders that they may deem necessary for such purpose, and may appoint committees of any freemen of said borough residing therein, to carry the same into effect; provided, that such orders shall not be inconsistent with the constitution or laws of this state or of the United States; and further provided, that all rules and regulations of said board shall be published in a newspaper published in the town of Naugatuck, or posted for three days on each signpost in said borough. And if any person or persons shall neglect or refuse to obey any order of said board of health, or of the committee by them appointed, on being duly notified of such order to remove any filthy, putrid, or noxious substance which shall be deemed injurious to the health or cleanliness of said borough, the mayor, or any of the burgesses, or said committee, may cause the same to be removed at the expense of such person so refusing or neglecting, and for such purpose may enter upon or into all lands and buildings in said borough, and the expense of such removal may be recovered against such persons by a civil action. When the premises upon, in, or about which such filthy, putrid, or noxious substances exist or remain, shall be held or occupied by any person for a term of years, whereof at least two are unexpired, or any greater estate less than a freehold, such person or persons shall be deemed the owner or owners within the meaning of this section; and if any such order shall be made upon any proprietor or proprietors, who are not in the occupation of such premises, he or they shall have a right to enter into and upon such premises, with proper assistants and agents for the purpose of executing the requirements of such orders, and may recover the expense of executing the same in a civil action against the person or persons in the occupation of such premises whose negligence or misconduct shall have caused such filthy, putrid, or noxious substances to exist on or about said premises. 
(Special Laws 1893, Act No. 161, § 55) 
Section 56. - [Same-Enquiry into sanitary condition of property, etc.] 
    The said board of health, in addition to the powers hereinbefore conferred upon them by this Charter as a board of health of said borough, are hereby authorized and empowered, by themselves or by a committee by them appointed, consisting of any freeman of said borough residing therein, to enquire into the sanitary condition of any property fronting on any street where a public sewer is laid, and if they find that such property for any cause cannot be used for a privy vault, cesspool, or other receptacle for the disposition of filth and drainage on such property, without danger to the public health, or without being offensive to the occupants on any property in that locality, they may issue an order forbidding the having or maintaining of any privy, privy vault, cesspool, or other place for the deposit of filth or drainage on said premises, unless such place or deposit shall be connected with a public sewer in such manner as to effectually remove or carry off such filth deposit or drainage; and they may order the owner or owners of such vaults, cesspools, and drains, to connect the same with the public sewer in such reasonable time as they shall designate in such order; provided, that before any such finding and order shall be made, the owner, or if the owner shall be absent, the agent having charge of such property, or, if there be none, then the occupants of such premises shall be duly notified to appear before said board and show cause, if any, why such finding and order should not be made. The provisions of section 55 of this Charter, providing the remedy for the removal and suppression of nuisances specified in said section, shall be applicable to the provisions of this section; and every owner, agent, and occupant refusing to comply with the orders and decrees of said board of health or any committee thereof, in this section authorized, in addition to said remedies in said section 55 provided, shall pay a fine of two dollars to the treasurer of said borough for each day said orders and decrees shall be neglected and not complied with. 
(Special Laws 1893, Act No. 161, § 56) 
Section 57. - [Same-Removal of filth, rubbish, etc.] 
    Said board of health or any committee thereof may, from time to time, order the proprietor or occupants of lands or buildings, within said borough, to remove from said land or buildings, within such time as said board of health or committee thereof shall limit, any filth, rubbish, or nuisance existing in or upon such lands or buildings; or remove any tree, tree-box, awning, steps, or other things which shall be within the limits of any sidewalk or highway within said borough, and which shall incommode or endanger travel thereon. And in making any such order, it shall not be necessary for said board of health or committee thereof to specify the particular filth, rubbish, or nuisance, tree or other thing to be removed; but they may, in general terms, require the removal of all filth, rubbish, or nuisance or obstructions to travel on or in such premises. And said board of health or committee thereof may, from time to time, order such proprietor or occupants to keep such land or buildings clean and free from filth, rubbish, and nuisances for such length of time as said board of health or committee thereof shall designate, but no such order for any length of time upon any proprietor or occupant shall continue in force against him after his proprietorship or occupancy shall have ceased. If any such order shall be made upon any proprietor who is not an occupant of such premises, he shall have the right to enter into and upon such premises, with and by proper assistants and agents, for the purpose of executing the requirements of such order, and may recover the expense of executing such order by a civil action against the person or persons whose negligence or misconduct shall have caused the said filth, rubbish, or nuisance to exist on said premises. When such premises are held by any person or persons for a term of years, whereof at least two are unexpired, or any greater estate less than a fee simple, such person or persons, and not the owner in fee, shall be deemed the proprietor or proprietors within the meaning of this section. If any person or persons upon whom any of the orders specified in this section shall have been made, as aforesaid, shall neglect to perform the requirements of such orders in the manner and within the time specified in such orders, the board of health or the committee thereof may execute such orders at the expense of the borough; and thereupon, the treasurer of said borough may recover for the use of said borough, by a civil action, brought in his own name as such treasurer, against said person or persons, the amount of such expense. 
(Special Laws 1893, Act No. 161, § 57) 
Section 58. - [Prosecutions.] 
    All prosecutions for the violation of the penal provisions of this Charter, or of the by-laws of said borough, shall be prosecuted by the prosecuting attorney of the borough court of Naugatuck, as other criminal offenses, except as herein otherwise provided. 
(Special Laws 1893, Act No. 161, § 58; Special Laws 1895, Act No. 185, § 35) 
Editor's note- See the general statutes of the State of Connecticut. 
Section 59. - [Lock-up or prison.] 
    The mayor and burgesses shall have power and authority to establish, lease, or provide for and maintain a lock-up or prison in said borough, for the temporary confinement and safekeeping of all persons who may be found drunken or disturbing the peace in said borough, and in which persons awaiting trial or examination for offenses committed in said borough may be confined until they shall be disposed of according to law; said mayor and burgesses shall appoint some suitable person to keep the keys and have the charge thereof; and the expense of establishing, leasing, providing, and maintaining the same shall be chargeable to said borough treasury, and such lock-up or prison shall be under such rules and regulations as the mayor and burgesses may prescribe. 
(Special Laws 1893, Act No. 161, § 59) 
Section 60. - [Police department.] 
    The mayor and burgesses shall have power and authority, from time to time, to appoint such number of policemen, not exceeding fifty, as they shall see fit, one of whom shall be designated as chief of police, who shall take the oath provided by law for constables of towns, and shall hold their offices until removed or expelled by said mayor or burgesses for cause, but no policeman shall be removed or expelled by said board unless five of the burgesses vote in favor of doing so, and the action of said board so voting, as aforesaid, shall be final, and no appeal shall be allowed therefrom; and such policemen shall have full power and authority within said borough, to arrest with or without previous complaint and warrant, all such persons as are guilty of drunkenness, disorderly conduct, assaults, breaches of the peace, and all other offenses, when such offenses shall be committed within the limits of said borough and such offenders shall be apprehended in the act, or on the speedy information of others; and may within said borough limits serve all criminal process to them directed; and may confine such persons so arrested, with or without previous complaint and warrant, in the lock-up or prison in said borough, for such reasonable time, not exceeding twenty-four hours, as shall be necessary to suppress assaults, breaches of the peace, and disorderly conduct, or for the safekeeping of such person, or in order to secure proper complaint and warrant against such offenders; and such policemen within said borough shall have all the power and authority which constables have in their respective towns, and may serve all mittimuses and warrants to them directed, in the same manner as constables of town. Said board of mayor and burgesses of said borough shall have authority to permanently retire from active service in said department any officer, of the regular force, who has attained the age of sixty-five years; and any officer so retired, who has served in said department continuously for a period of not less than twenty years, shall thereafter, during his life-time, unless dismissed from said department for cause, receive monthly from the treasury of said borough, as a pension, not more than one-half of the average rate of compensation for the ten years last preceding received by said officer while in active service; and said pension, when determined by the board of mayor and burgesses shall not thereafter be reduced in amount. Said board shall also have power to retire from active service in said department any regular officer of said department who has served therein continuously for a period of twenty years and who shall make application for such retirement, in writing, to said board, and to transfer to the veteran reserve any members of the regular force who shall, through age or physical disability incurred in the discharge of perilous duty, become permanently disqualified for the more active duties of the regular force; and any officer or member so retired or transferred, shall thereafter, during his lifetime, unless dismissed from said department for cause, receive monthly from the treasury of said borough as a pension not more than one-half of the average rate of compensation for the ten years last preceding received by said officer while in active service; and said pension, when determined by the board of mayor and burgesses, shall not thereafter be reduced in amount. Any regular officer applying for retirement on the ground of physical disability incurred in the discharge of duty, shall submit to an examination by a physician or physicians to be named and designated by the board of mayor and burgesses and his or their report or finding shall be final. No special officer shall receive the benefits of this act. 
(Special Laws 1893, Act No. 161, § 60; Special Laws 1895, Act No. 140; Special Laws 1919, Act No. 352; Special Laws 1927, Act No. 389 § 13; Special Laws 1929, Act No. 274; Special Laws 1931, Act No. 522; Special Laws 1941, Act No. 170; Special Laws 1953, Act No. 258) 
Section 61. - [Affairs of borough to be managed by mayor and burgesses.] 
    The affairs of said borough shall be managed by said mayor and burgesses, and they shall have the control and management of all property, both real and personal, belonging to said borough, all the finances thereof, and no debt or liability which may become a charge against said borough shall be created or contracted, except by their authority, and they shall establish and procure a seal for said borough. They may make any and all necessary repairs and improvements in or upon the property of said borough, and cause any part thereof to be insured when they shall deem it necessary. Said mayor and burgesses may rebate or remit the whole or any portion of any tax assessed against any property or person in said borough. They may sell, lease, or otherwise dispose of such property of said borough as shall not be required for the use thereof, and lease property of others for the use of said borough, or any of its officers or departments, as they shall deem necessary. All accounts and claims against said borough shall be presented to said mayor and burgesses, and shall be referred to a standing committee of said mayor and burgesses, to be composed of three members to be called the committee of finance; and it shall be the duty of said committee to require or examine into said accounts and claims, and they may send for persons and papers, and may examine the claimants or any other persons on oath in relation thereto, and shall report thereon to the board of mayor and burgesses. All orders upon the borough treasurer shall be signed by the mayor. 
(Special Laws 1893, Act No. 161, § 61) 
[Section 61.1. - Conflict of interest.] 
    No contract or agreement shall be valid or binding upon said borough wherein either the mayor or burgesses thereof shall have any pecuniary interest, directly or indirectly. 
(Special Laws 1897, Act No. 415, § 5) 
Editor's note- Special Laws 1897, Act No. 415, § 5, did not expressly amend the Charter, hence codification as § 61.1 was in the editor's discretion. 
Section 62. - [Superintendent of streets.] 
    The board of mayor and burgesses of the borough of Naugatuck may appoint some person to be known as superintendent of streets, who shall be under the directions of said board, shall attend to the repair of public streets and sewers of said borough, have charge of all public work for said borough, upon the streets, sidewalks and sewers thereof, shall present to said board detailed monthly reports of the expenditures and receipts of his department, specifying the particular street or section or object for which any such expenditure shall have been made and the itemized cost thereof, and, except as otherwise provided, shall report to said board and to the prosecuting officer having jurisdiction thereof any violation of the rules, regulations or by-laws of said borough and perform such other duties as may be prescribed by said board, which shall determine and fix the amount of his compensation. 
(Special Laws 1893, Act No. 161, § 62; Special Laws 1925, Act No. 314) 
Section 63. - [Powers and authority of mayor and burgesses.] 
    The mayor and burgesses shall have full power and authority under the restrictions otherwise provided in this act, and subject to any other express provision covering the same object, contained in this act, to make, alter, and repeal such orders, rules, regulations, and by-laws as they shall see fit in relation to the following subjects within the limits of said borough, to wit: 
1.  To provide for the custody and preservation of the public property, records, books, and papers belonging to said borough; to prevent or punish any injury to the same. 
2.  To protect the inhabitants in their person and property, suppress disorderly assemblages; preserve peace and good order, and promote the welfare and good government of said borough; to prohibit all kinds of gambling, and to regulate billiard rooms, bar rooms and bowling alleys; to suppress and restrain disorderly houses and houses of ill-fame. 
3.  To prohibit the gathering or assembling of persons upon the public streets of said borough, or congregating upon the corners of the streets thereof to the inconvenience or annoyance of public travel and the citizens of said borough. 
4.  To prescribe and define the duties and powers of all other officers of said borough not defined and prescribed in this act, and, in case an officer shall have duties specifically prescribed in this act, to prescribe such additional duties as they may deem the interest of the borough to require; and as shall not be inconsistent with this act; to prescribe the amount of bonds to be given by any officers of said borough who are required to give bonds by this act or by any by-law of said mayor and burgesses; to remove from office any officer guilty of malfeasance in office. 
5.  To restrain and punish vagrants, mendicants, street beggars, and persons soliciting alms, keepers of houses of ill-fame, and houses of assignation, common prostitutes, bawds, and disorderly persons, and to prevent or punish drunkenness, or immoral conduct in public places and streets. 
6.  To provide for the appointment of an attorney for said borough, and to fix and determine the compensation of the treasurer, clerk, and such attorney of said borough, when the same is not otherwise provided for by law, and to see that they perform faithfully and correctly their several duties, and that proper measures are taken to punish neglect of duty in any of them. 
7.  To audit such accounts and claims against the borough as are made out in items and verified, and order the payment of such as shall be allowed, and to make such other rules and regulations in regard to the same as they may deem necessary and proper. 
8.  To examine the accounts of the treasurer from time to time, and prescribe the manner of paying out and accounting for money received by him for the borough. 
9.  To establish and regulate one or more public pounds, and to restrain cattle, horses, sheep, swine, goats, geese, and other animals from running at large in said borough; and to authorize distraining, impounding, and sale of the same for the penalty incurred, and cost of keeping and proceedings. 
10.  To prevent or regulate bathing or swimming in public or exposed places within said borough. 
11.  To prevent horse-racing or immoderate riding or driving in the streets of said borough, and to authorize the stopping of any one who shall be guilty of immoderate riding or driving in said streets by any person, and to prevent the flying of kites, rolling hoops, playing ball, coasting, or any other amusements practiced, having a tendency to endanger or annoy persons passing on the streets or sidewalks, or to frighten teams of horses in said borough; to keep the streets and other public places free from all undue noises; to regulate and prohibit coasting or sliding down hill in or upon any of the streets, highways, or public parks or grounds within said borough, and prohibit the sale of newspapers or other articles on the Sabbath day within one hundred and fifty feet of any place of public worship. 
12.  To regulate the burial of the dead, and public burying grounds, and the ringing of bells, and the blowing of steam whistles within said borough. 
13.  To regulate by license, the exhibition for money of any circus, caravan, theater, curiosities, or other entertainments. 
14.  To survey and designate the boundaries of said borough, and of the streets, highways, and public grounds thereof, and to designate and alter the names of said streets, and the number of all lots and buildings. 
15.  To regulate, license or prohibit auction sales and other sales by transient persons in said borough, and hawking and peddling in the streets of said borough. 
16.  To prevent the incumbering or stoppage of the streets, squares, sidewalks, crosswalks, lanes, and alleys with railroad cars, teams, carriages, carts, sleighs, sleds, wheelbarrows, boxes, lumber, timber, firewood, coal, or any other substance or material whatsoever, and to prohibit, restrain, and regulate by license the running of carts, or hacks, or other vehicles for transporting passengers, or freight, or baggage within said borough; provided, that no fee for any one such license exceeding one dollar shall be charged, and to fix the rates of fares and cartage to be charged by expressmen, teamsters, cartmen, and stage or hack-drivers doing business in said borough, and to regulate the speed of railroad trains running through said borough. 
17.  To compel the owner or occupant of any premises in said borough to clear the snow, ice, dirt, or other substances or material off the sidewalk and out of the gutter in front of such premises, and in case of neglect or refusal of such owner or occupant so to do, to cause the same to be done at the expense of such owner or occupant, and to collect such expense as hereinafter provided. 
18.  To regulate and superintend the laying of all gas-pipes and water-pipes, and the erection of any posts or poles in the streets or public grounds in said borough, and to require any person, corporation, or company, after laying or repairing such pipes, or erecting such posts or poles, in any street, or highway, or public grounds in said borough, to put such street or highway or public grounds in good condition or repair, and to remove all incumbrances or obstructions which said person, corporation, or company may have placed or caused to be placed in any such street, or highway, or public grounds, without unnecessary delay, and to require such person, corporation, or company to keep proper signal lights burning at night at all holes, excavations, obstructions, or ditches, or other places which may have been rendered dangerous to persons traveling such streets or highways, or public grounds, and in case any person, corporation, or company shall neglect or refuse to do any of the acts required of him, or it, the said mayor and burgesses shall have power to cause the same to be done at the cost and expense of such person, corporation, or company, and to collect such cost and expense as hereinafter provided. 
19.  To regulate the erection or construction of any building or other structure which shall project into any street or sidewalk in said borough, and the hanging or suspending of any goods, signs, signboards, awnings, or any other thing whatsoever, in or over any such street or sidewalk, and to remove the same at the expense of the person, owner, or occupant causing the same, and to collect such expenses as hereinafter provided. 
20.  To erect lamps, lamp-posts, and fixtures, and to cause such of the streets of said borough as they may deem proper to be lighted at such times as in their opinion the wants and interest of the borough require. 
21.  To prohibit, license, or regulate the keeping, storage, use, or sale of gunpowder, kerosene, nitro-glycerine, or any other combustible or explosive substance or compound, and the conveyance or transportation of the same in or through any part of said borough, also to regulate or prohibit the use of firearms in said borough. 
22.  To prevent or regulate the construction or use of any building, chimney, fire-place, heater, stove, stovepipe, oven, depository of ashes or charcoal, boiler, furnace, or any other apparatus, or anything whatever which may be considered dangerous with regard to fire, and to cause the owner or occupant of any premises upon which shall be found anything dangerous with regard to fire to remove the same, or to put the same in a safe condition, and in case such owner or occupant shall neglect or refuse to do so, said mayor and burgesses shall have the power to cause the same to be done at the cost or expense of such owner or occupant, and to collect such cost and expense as hereinafter provided, and for the purposes aforesaid, or any or either thereof, the said mayor and burgesses shall have the power to enter in or upon, or authorize the entry in or upon, any building or premises in said borough. 
23.  To regulate the use of lights in stables, or buildings in which combustible materials may be deposited, and prescribe the use of lanterns or safety lamps in stables and buildings; to regulate the cleaning and sweeping of chimneys. 
24.  To prevent, abate, and discontinue nuisances of all kinds arising from sinks, cess-pools, privies, drainsewers, gutters, ponds, rivers and streams, stables, barns, pig-pens, slaughter houses, deposits of filth, rubbish and garbage, or any other cause whatever, and determine what are such, either upon view or upon testimony of witnesses, who may be examined upon oath before them and for these purposes, or any, or either of them, to enter into or upon, or authorize the entering into or upon, any building or premises in said borough, and in case the owner or occupant of any building or premises in, or upon which, said nuisance may be found, shall neglect or refuse to remove, abate, or discontinue the same, after being notified to do so, the said mayor and burgesses shall have power to cause the same to be removed, abated, or discontinued at the expense of said owner or occupant, and to collect such cost and expense as hereinafter provided. 
25.  To compel the owner or person having control of any grocery, market, tallow-candler's shop, factory, privy, pig-sty, drain or sewer, or any unwholesome, offensive or nauseous house or place, to cleanse, purify, remove or abate the same from time to time, or as often as in the opinion of the mayor and burgesses it may be necessary for the health, comfort or convenience of the inhabitants of said borough. 
26.  To prohibit any person from bringing or depositing any unwholesome, putrid or decayed carcass, skins, fish, meats or other substance or thing within said borough, or throwing or leaving the same upon any street thereof, and to require and authorize the removal and destruction thereof. 
27.  To prohibit and regulate slaughter-houses, and the slaughter of animals, and to regulate the time, place and manner of the sale of meat, fish and vegetables, within said borough, or the keeping of markets for the sale thereof within said borough, except at such places as said board shall designate, and to regulate the time and manner of driving cattle through the streets of said borough. 
28.  To prescribe regulations as to the location and construction of private sewers, drains, or water or gas pipes in said borough, and for the prevention of any injury, or obstruction of any street or sidewalk thereby. 
29.  To prosecute in the corporate name of the borough any proper action upon any contract or liability in which said borough may be interested, and for all fines and penalties, costs and expenses imposed by this act, or by any ordinance or by-laws of the borough, and to enforce the collection thereof. 
30.  To purchase fire-engines and necessary hose, and other apparatus for the use of the fire department, to erect engine houses, or hire suitable places for keeping said engines, hoses, and apparatus, procure hydrants and other necessary fixtures therefor, and a fire alarm and appurtenances thereto, and necessary fixtures therefor, and to carry into effect any lawful vote or resolution which may be adopted or passed by the electors at any annual or special meeting; to provide for the protection of property, both real and personal, of persons or corporations at times of fires, and for the appointment of guards for the protection of the same, and to prescribe their powers, duties, and compensation. 
31.  To direct and regulate the planting of shade trees and ornamental trees, plants, flowers and shrubbery, along the streets and sidewalks of said borough, or in the public ground thereof, and to regulate the trimming of the same, and to prevent injury to or destruction of such trees, plants, flowers and shrubbery, and to prevent the injury or defacement of fences, walls, posts, bridges and buildings in said borough; to prohibit and punish trespasses in gardens, cemeteries and enclosures in said borough; to regulate and prohibit the distribution, posting or painting of bills, posters, handbills, or any advertisement in said borough. 
32.  To compel the owner or occupant of any wall or building within the borough which may be in a dangerous or unsafe condition, to render the same safe, or to take down and remove the same, and to prohibit such erection, and in case of the neglect or refusal of such owner or occupant to render such wall or building safe, the mayor and burgesses shall have power to cause the same to be taken down and removed at the expense of such owner or occupant, and to collect such cost or expense as hereinafter provided. 
33.  All costs and expenses incurred by the borough under the provisions of subdivisions seventeen, nineteen, twenty-two, twenty-four and thirty-two, shall be and remain a lien upon the lots or premises therein mentioned or implied, and such liens shall take precedence and priority of all other liens or incumbrances on the property whereon the same is imposed (except taxes); provided, that no such liens shall continue to exist for a period of more than sixty days after such cost and expense shall have been incurred, unless within said period a certificate, signed by the mayor or clerk of said borough (which certificate may be in the form hereinafter set forth), shall be lodged with the town clerk of said town of Naugatuck; and any such lien shall cease to exist whenever a certificate (which certificate may be in the form hereinafter set forth), by the mayor or clerk of said borough, that it has ceased to exist, shall be lodged with the town clerk, and such certificate shall be recorded by said town clerk. All such cost and expense may be collected by warrant under the hand of the mayor, in the same manner as town taxes are by law collected, or by a civil action in favor of said borough. 
34.  To prevent and punish the discharge of fire-arms, rockets, gunpowder, fire-crackers and fire-works, the firing of cannons, or bonfires, in or near the streets of the borough, or contiguous to any building. 
35.  To establish and maintain a watch or police for said borough. To preserve order in said borough by the watch or police thereof, and to cause the enforcement by them of the by-laws of said borough, and the prevention by them of the violation of such by-laws in said borough; to fix and provide for the compensation of such watch or police. 
36.  To provide the manner of warning meetings of said borough and of the mayor and burgesses, and of the time and place of holding such meetings; to prescribe the manner of conducting borough elections, and the mode and manner of voting at such elections, except when expressly regulated by this act. The board of mayor and burgesses of the borough of Naugatuck may, by ordinance, establish voting districts within each ward and shall designate the voting places in each ward or district. 
37.  The board of mayor and burgesses of said borough shall have the power and authority to designate a line or lines on the land adjoining any highway or street in said borough, between which line and the highway or street, no building, or part thereof, shall be erected, and any person who shall erect or suffer to be erected any building or part of a building between any line so designated and the highway or street, shall forfeit and pay for the use of said borough, not exceeding one hundred dollars for each offense, and the continuance of any building, or part of a building, erected after said lines shall have been designated, between any such line and any highway or street in said borough, for each day of twenty-four hours after the day of commencement thereof, shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense, and, in addition to said forfeiture, all such buildings shall be annually assessed four-fold in the assessment list of the town and borough of Naugatuck, and the payment of said forfeiture may be enforced by said borough in a civil action in the name of the treasurer of said borough, or by any other appropriate remedy. 
38.  To regulate military and other parades and rendezvous, and the marching of military companies or societies, in said borough, public assemblages, receptions, celebrations, shows, processions and music in said borough. 
39.  To regulate the construction and mode of building and the materials used for building or altering buildings within said borough, or any part thereof, and mode of using any building therein and of heating the same, when such regulations seem expedient for the purpose of protecting said borough from the dangers of fire; to regulate the cleaning of chimneys; to grant permits for the erection, addition to, repair and enlargement of buildings and the removal of the same, and to prevent the erection, addition to, repair or enlargement or removal thereof, without such permits; to establish and designate districts of said borough within which it shall not be lawful to remove any wooden building except by license of said board of mayor and burgesses; to prohibit the erection or use within said borough of buildings which, by reason of their structure or use, are or may become unsafe; to provide for and enforce the disuse, removal or demolition of such buildings, or of such parts thereof as are or may become unsafe; to provide for the appointment of a building inspector and to prescribe his duties; to provide that, before any building shall be erected or altered, the plans and specifications therefor shall be submitted to the building inspector for his approval; to provide that no building shall be erected, repaired or altered, without the approval of the building inspector; to regulate and provide for the convenience and safe egress, in case of fire or other accident, from theaters or other buildings designed in whole or in part for public use, and to prohibit the use of such buildings as are or may become unsafe by reason of insufficient facilities for egress or for other cause, and to establish building lines in the streets and ways of said borough beyond which it shall not be lawful to erect buildings or other structures. 
40.  The excavating or opening of streets or highways for public or private purposes, and the location thereon, whether temporary or permanent, of any work or thing over or under the surface thereof, the depositing therein of building materials of any kind, and the removal of buildings through the same. 
41.  The finances of said borough and the property thereof, real and personal, the borrowing of money by said borough for any purpose for which said borough may lay a tax, and the giving of security for such borrowed money; the authentication, execution, and delivery of deeds, grants, leases, and releases, and conveyance of borough property. 
42.  The punishment and penalty for resisting, hindering or obstructing public officers or committees in the discharge of their duties, the salaries, fees and compensation of all borough officers and committees appointed, as provided in this act, and the mode of payment of the same by the borough treasurer; provided, that the annual salary of [the] mayor and burgesses shall be determined by the board of finance. 
43.  To prevent or regulate the use of any building for the purpose of carrying on any trade, business or manufacture in said borough, which, in the opinion of said mayor and burgesses, shall be prejudicial to public health, or an unreasonable annoyance to those living or owning property in the vicinity; the sale, or offering for sale of unwholesome meat, vegetables, produce, or food of any kind, the measurement of coal and wood, and the inspection of all produce, and articles of food or drink offered for sale, and the appointment of inspectors and measures of said articles. 
44.  The penalties to be incurred by those who, being chosen to an office in said borough, shall, without being excused by said borough, refuse to serve. 
45.  To regulate and control the use of all engine houses, rooms, and buildings owned or occupied by said borough, and for the purposes aforesaid, or any, or either of them, or of executing any powers conferred upon the mayor and burgesses, or upon the said borough by this act, or otherwise, the said mayor and burgesses shall have full power to make, establish, publish, modify, amend or repeal ordinances, rules, regulations, and by-laws, and prescribe, fix, and enforce such penalties, forfeitures, or fines as they may deem improper for the violation of them respectively; provided that no ordinance, rule, regulation, or by-law shall be repugnant to the laws of the state, or of the United States, and that every such ordinance, rule, regulation, or by-law shall be published at least twice in a newspaper printed in said borough, if any there be, but if there be no newspaper published in said borough, then in a newspaper having a circulation in said borough, and published in Waterbury, in New Haven county, before the same shall take effect, and every such ordinance, rule, regulation or by-law, together with a certificate by the clerk of the borough of the time of publication thereof, shall be entered in writing, and recorded in a book to be provided and kept for that purpose, and the said record, or a copy thereof certified by the clerk of said borough, shall be prima facie evidence in all courts and places, and in all actions and proceedings, of the due passage of such ordinance, rule, regulation or by-law, and of its having been duly published. The violation of any ordinance or by-law relative to nuisances injurious to health, obstruction of highway, if malicious, illegal charges of hackmen, expressman, teamsters, cartmen and stage drivers, or any by-law or ordinance designed to prevent disorders or the disturbance of the public peace and safety, or the obstruction and resistance of officers shall be a misdemeanor, and may be prosecuted as such before any court having jurisdiction of the offense, and said court may inflict therefor the penalty named in such by-law; and provided further, that no fine, penalty, or forfeiture, other than such as shall indirectly accrue from the abatement of nuisances, shall exceed the sum of fifty dollars for a single offense; and, provided further, that the license fee to be charged for circuses shall not exceed fifty dollars, for public auctioneers shall not exceed ten dollars, for the storing, keeping, or selling of gunpowder shall not exceed fifty dollars per year, and that in all other cases where by law a license fee may be charged, and the amount of such fee is not fixed by law, or by any other provisions of this act, such fee shall not exceed ten dollars; and said mayor and burgesses may, at their discretion, in such by-laws prescribe penalties and forfeitures for the breach of the same, and the manner in which such penalties or forfeitures may be recovered, except as otherwise expressly provided in this act; provided, that no penalty or forfeiture shall exceed the sum of fifty dollars. Nothing in this section shall be construed to conflict in any way with any other express provision of this Charter. 
(Special Laws 1893, Act No. 161, § 63; Special Laws 1923, Act No. 161; Special Laws 1931, Act No. 101; Special Laws 1937, Act No. 148; Special Laws 1943, Act No. 264; Special Laws 1946, Act No. 3; Special Laws 1953, Act No. 404; Special Laws 1959, Act No. 420, § 1; Referendum of5-5-1969) 
Editor's note- Special Laws 1953, Act No. 440, § 1, did not expressly amend the Charter, hence codification as the second sentence of § 63 (36) was in the editor's discretion. 
[Section 63.1. - Obstructing streets, etc.] 
    When any person shall cause any defect in, or placed or caused to be placed, any obstruction on any of the streets of the borough of Naugatuck such person shall be held to answer any claim for damages which may be made against said borough therefor; and whenever any suit shall be brought against said borough for such damages such person may be cited in to defend the same, in which case no judgment shall be rendered against said borough until the execution issued upon the judgment against such person shall have been returned unsatisfied, and upon the payment of any such judgment against such person by the borough the judgement against such person shall inure to the benefit of said borough; said borough shall in no case be liable for any injury occasioned by ice and snow upon the sidewalks of said borough, except in cases where there is some structural defect in such walk which is rendered more dangerous by reason of ice or snow thereon. 
(Special Laws 1917, Act No. 440) 
Editor's note- Special Laws 1917, Act No. 440, did not expressly amend the Charter, hence codification as § 63.1 was in the editor's discretion. 
Section 64. - [Questions.] 
    All questions which by this Charter, or by any amendment thereto, hereafter to be made, are to be submitted to the freemen of said borough, and which involve, or may involve, an expenditure of money to the amount of five hundred dollars or more, shall be determined by ballot; provided however, that this section shall not be construed to include the expense of ordinary repairs to the streets in said borough, nor the ordinary and regular expenditures of the borough. 
(Special Laws 1893, Act No. 161, § 64) 
Editor's note- See Special Laws 1953, Act No. 159. 
Section 65. - [Forms.] 
    Forms substantially like the following may be used in reference to the matters indicated in their titles, and shall be sufficient, but nothing in this section shall be so construed as to prohibit the use of other forms in reference to the same matters, or to invalidate other forms. 
No. 1. Form of warrant for the collection of taxes. 
The following form may be used for a warrant for the collection of taxes in said borough, to wit: To A.B., collector of the borough of Naugatuck (for bailiff or other meet person, as the case may be), in the town of Naugatuck, in New Haven county: By authority of the state of Connecticut, you are hereby commanded forthwith to levy and collect of each of the persons named in the annexed list herewith committed to you, his several proportions of the sum total of said list, as therein stated, being a tax or assessment agreed upon by the inhabitants of said borough regularly assembled on the ____________ day of ;daterule; A.D. 189 ____________ for (here state the purpose for which the tax is laid); and you are to pay the sums which you shall so levy and collect, to the treasurer of said borough, on or before the ____________ day of ;daterule; A.D. 189 ____________ ; and if any person shall neglect to make payment of the sum at which he is assessed and set in said list, you are to distrain the goods and chattels of such person, and dispose of the same as the law directs, and after satisfying said tax and the charges, you are to return the overplus, if any, to said person, and for want of goods and chattels on which to make distress, you are to take the body of the person so neglecting, and him commit unto the keeper of the jail of said county, within the prison, who is hereby commanded to receive and safely keep him until he shall pay said sum, with your fees. 
Dated at Naugatuck, this ____________ day of ;daterule; A.D. 189 ____________ . 
A.B., Justice of the peace. 
No. 2. Form of by-laws. 
Be it ordained by the mayor and burgesses of the borough of Naugatuck: 
No. 3. Form of order under section____________. 
Ordered, that (a or the) sidewalk (or gutter, etc.) on the side of ____________ street (or highway, describing it), from ;daterule; to ;daterule;, be (whatever is ordered to be done) by the (proprietor or proprietors) of the land fronting on said street (or highway) on that side thereof, and between said points, to the acceptance of (mayor and burgesses, or committee, etc.) on or before the ____________ day of ;daterule; A.D. 189 ____________ . 
No. 4. Form of certificate of lien. 
This certificate witnesseth that the borough of Naugatuck has a lien on certain lands in said borough (and the building thereon), owned in whole or in part by A.B., bounded and described as follows, to wit: (describe the premises) and that the amount claimed as a lien aforesaid on said premises is ;$rule; dollars and ____________ cents, and is for an assessment made in [on] the ____________ day of ;daterule; 18 ____________ , for (state for what purpose the assessment was made). 
In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand, at said borough, this ____________ day of ;daterule; A.D. 189 ____________ . 
C.D., mayor (or clerk) of the 
borough of Naugatuck. 
    [No. 5.] Certificate of discharge of lien. 
This certificate witnesseth that the lien heretofore claimed by the borough of Naugatuck upon the premises owned in whole or in part by A.B., bounded and described as follows: (describe the premises) has ceased to exist. 
In witness whereof I have hereunto set my hand this ____________ day of ;daterule;, 189 ____________ . 
C.D., mayor (or clerk) of the 
borough of Naugatuck. 
No. 6. Form of an order of apportionment under section____________. 
Whereas, by an order of the mayor and burgesses of the borough of Naugatuck, it has been made the duty of the proprietors of a certain piece of land, to wit: (describe it) to (whatever has been ordained to be done) in front of said land; and whereas, the land is held by different persons, to wit: (A.B., C.D., E.F., etc.) in such manner as to authorize the said mayor and burgesses to apportion among said persons, pursuant to section ____________ of the borough Charter, the expenses of executing said order; and whereas, said expense is estimated at (or ascertained to be) ;$rule; dollars and ____________ cents, ordered that the said A.B. pay (state the fractional part) of said expense, and C.D. (state fractional part) of said expense, (and so on for each person interested). 
No. 7. 
Ordered that the proprietor (or proprietor or occupant, as the case may be) of the land and premises fronting on ____________ street, in this borough, and described as follows: (here briefly describe the premises), be, and he hereby is, ordered to (here state the thing to be done), within ____________ days from the date hereof to the acceptance of ____________ , and that notice of this order be given to said ____________ , in the manner provided by the Charter of the borough of Naugatuck. 
No. 8. 
Whereas the (road, street or sidewalk) in front of the land of ____________ , lying in this borough, and described as follows: (here describe the land briefly), is so made and raised above the adjoining ground as to be unsafe for travel. Ordered, that the ____________ make and put up on the side of said (road, street or sidewalk) a suitable and proper railing to the height of ____________ feet, and ____________ feet in length, extending from ____________ to ____________ , to the acceptance of the mayor and burgesses, within ____________ days from the time this order is served upon ____________ . 
(Special Laws 1893, Act No. 161, § 65) 
Section 66. - [Reserved.] 
Editor's note- Special Laws 1895, Act No. 185, § 37, amended the Charter by repealing § 66. 
Section 67. - [Public act.] 
    This act shall be taken to be a public act to all intents and purposes, and may be altered, amended, or repealed, at the pleasure of the general assembly. 
(Special Laws 1893, Act No. 161, § 67) 
Section 68. - [First meeting of freemen for election of officers, etc.] 
    The first meeting of the freemen of said borough for the election of officers shall be holden on the fourth Monday next after the passage of this act; except and provided, that if said act shall be passed before the tenth of April, 1893, then, and in that case, said first meeting shall be held on the first Monday of May, 1893. Said meeting shall be held in the several wards of said borough at such places therein as shall be designated in the warning thereof, which warning shall specify the objects of said meeting, including any proper business to be transacted at the business meeting, which shall be held at 8 o'clock in the evening of the same day, at the court room in the town hall building, in said borough; and said warning shall be signed by a committee consisting of Bronson B. Tuttle, Franklin B. Tuttle, Fremont W. Tolles, Thomas Conran, and Patrick Brennan, of said Naugatuck or any three thereof and advertised by setting a copy thereof upon the public signposts in said borough, at least five days before said meeting, and also by publishing a copy thereof in a newspaper published in said borough, if one there be. Said committee, or any three thereof, shall meet at said court room at least ten days prior to the day of the first meeting of said freemen as herein provided for, at 8 o'clock in the afternoon, and shall appoint and designate some elector of the town of Naugatuck, residing within said borough limits, to act as moderator of said first meeting, and as presiding officer of said first ward, who shall, as such moderator, be sworn by some competent authority to the faithful discharge of his duties, and, on the day of said meeting, shall have all the powers, and shall assume all the duties, as to said first meeting, which are provided in this act for the mayor of said borough. Said committee, or any three thereof, shall, at their said meeting aforesaid, also appoint presiding officers for the second and third wards, and shall appoint the necessary check clerks and counters, a temporary clerk of said borough, and any other officers necessary to conduct such election according to the provisions of this act, for annual meetings and elections of said borough. All officers so appointed by said committee, or by a majority thereof, at their said meeting so to be held as aforesaid, shall take the oath before competent authority, prescribed for similar officers under this act, and shall have the same powers, and assume the same duties, as to said first meeting, as are prescribed for similar officers in this Charter, except as herein provided. And all officers elected at said first meeting shall hold their respective offices from the date of their election until their successors are chosen and qualified as provided in this act; provided, that such officers shall also qualify according to the provisions of this act. The registrars of voters of the town of Naugatuck shall, from the last revised registry list of said town, prepare a list of the freemen of said borough, entitled to vote at said first meeting, and who are residents within said borough limits, according to the provisions of this Charter, so far as they are able to do so, for each ward thereof, which lists so made shall be certified to by said registrars, and a copy thereof published by posting the same in a conspicuous place for public examination in the office of the town clerk in the town hall building in said town of Naugatuck, at least ten days prior to the day of said first meeting, and said registrars shall, on the Thursday preceding the day of said first meeting, be in session at the said court between the hours of two and six o'clock of the afternoon of said day, for the final corrections of said lists; at least two days' notice of said session shall be given by said registrars by posting upon the sign-posts within the limits of said borough notice thereof. And said registrars shall deliver certified copies of said lists, at least one for each ward, to the presiding officer for such ward, to be designated and appointed as aforesaid, which list, so certified and delivered, shall be the voting or registry list for such ward for said first meeting, and no person shall be allowed to vote at said meeting whose name is not found on said list. 
(Special Laws 1893, Act No. 161, § 68) 
Section 69. - [Expense of preparing and procuring Charter, etc.] 
    The reasonable and proper expense of preparing and procuring this Charter shall be audited by the mayor and burgesses, and, so far as approved by them, shall be paid by said borough. And said mayor and burgesses of said borough, first elected, shall, as soon as they reasonably can, procure an accurate survey to be made of the territorial limits of said borough, following the lines described in section one of this Charter as nearly as practicable, and an accurate description thereof to be signed by themselves, or a majority of them, and recorded on the records of the borough, and when so recorded such description shall be the legal limits of said borough. Said description shall be also recorded upon the land records of the town of Naugatuck by the clerk of said town. 
(Special Laws 1893, Act No. 161, § 69) 
Section 70. - [Effective date.] 
    This act shall take effect on the fourth Monday after its passage; except and provided, that, if this act shall be passed before the first Monday of May, one thousand eight hundred and ninety-three, then, and in that case, this act shall take effect on the first Monday of May, one thousand eight hundred and ninety-three; and except and provided further, that the provision of section 68, and all provisions of said act, relating to said first meeting, shall take effect upon the passage of this act. 
(Special Laws 1893, Act No. 161, § 70) 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Territorial limits; incorporation, § 1; division into three wards, § 2. 
State Law reference- Municipal powers generally, G.S. § 7-148; powers of municipalities, G.S. § 7-194; municipal charters and special acts, G.S. §§ 7-187-7-201; municipal ordinances and regulations generally, G.S. §§ 7-148-7-186; scope of municipal ordinances, G.S. § 7-148. 

Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
    The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances of the Borough of Naugatuck, Connecticut," and may be so cited. 
(Code 1973, § 1-1) 
Sec. 1-2. - Rules of construction and definitions. 
    In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the board of mayor and burgesses: 
    Generally. The provisions of this Code shall be liberally construed to effect the purposes expressed therein or implied from the expression thereof. In case of doubt or ambiguity in the meaning of such provisions, the general shall yield to the particular. Reference for interpretation and construction shall tend to further the accomplishment of the elimination of the particular mischiefs for which the provisions were enacted. Words shall be construed in their common and usual significance unless the contrary is clearly indicated. 
    Board. Whenever the word "board" is used, unless otherwise specified, it shall be construed to mean the Board of Mayor and Burgesses of the Borough of Naugatuck. 
    Board of mayor and burgesses. Whenever the words "board of mayor and burgesses" are used, they shall be construed to mean the Board of Mayor and Burgesses of the Borough of Naugatuck. 
    Borough; corporation. Whenever the words "the borough," "this borough," "the corporation" or "this corporation" are used, they shall be construed as if the words "of Naugatuck, Connecticut" followed them. 
    Burgess. The word "burgess" shall mean any person elected or appointed to that office. 
    Charter. The word "Charter" shall refer to the Charter of the Borough of Naugatuck, as amended. 
    Computation of time. Whenever a notice is required to be given or an act to be done, a certain length of time before any proceeding shall be had, the day on which such notice is given, or such act is done, shall be counted in computing the time, but the day on which such proceeding is to be had shall not be counted. 
    Corporate limits, corporation limits. Whenever the words "corporate limits," "corporation limits" or "borough limits" are used, they shall mean the legal boundary of the Borough of Naugatuck. 
    County. The words "the county" or "this county" shall mean the County of New Haven in the State of Connecticut. 
    Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department of the borough to do some act or make certain inspections, it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act or make the required inspection unless the terms of the provision or section designate otherwise. 
    Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. 
    Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of the Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the general provisions imposed by the Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. 
    Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three (3) or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers. 
    Keeper, proprietor. The words "keeper" and "proprietor" shall mean and include persons, firms, associations, corporations, clubs and partnerships, whether acting by themselves or through a servant, agent or employee. 
    Mayor. Whenever the word "mayor" is used, it shall mean the mayor of the Borough of Naugatuck, and where an ordinance or section shall direct that an act be performed or decision be made by the mayor, such expression shall be deemed to include not only the mayor, but the acting mayor in the absence of the mayor, or any member of the board of burgesses designed by the board or the mayor to perform the act or exercise the discretion referred to; but this provision shall not be construed to authorize the mayor or the board to delegate any power or duty on the part of the mayor to any other person except a member of the board of burgesses of the borough, or except as otherwise provided by law. 
    Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
    Name of officer or employee. Whenever the name of an officer or employee is given, it shall be construed as though the words "of the Borough of Naugatuck" were added. 
    Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language; but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. 
    Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons and things as well as to one (1) person and thing. 
    Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases, the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
    Or, and. "Or" may be read "and," and "and" may be read "or" if the sense requires it. 
    Owner. The word "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant, or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
    Person. The word "person" shall extend and be applied to associations, clubs, societies, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals. 
    Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property except real property, as herein described. 
    Preceding, following. The words "preceding" and "following" shall mean next before and next after, respectively. 
    Premises. Whenever the word "premises" is used, it shall mean place or places. 
    Property. The word "property" shall include real and personal property. 
    Real property. The term "real property" shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
    Seal. Whenever the word "seal" is used, it shall mean the borough or corporate seal. 
    Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians. 
    Signature or subscription. The word "signature" or "subscription" of a person shall include a mark when the person cannot write. 
    State. The words "the state" shall be construed to mean the State of Connecticut. 
    State law, general law or general statutes shall refer to the General Statutes of Connecticut, Revision of 1958, as amended. 
    Street. The word "street" shall include but shall not be limited to streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts and all other public highways in the borough. 
    Tenant, occupant. The word "tenant" or "occupant," applied to a building or land, shall include any person holding a written or oral lease or who occupies the whole or a part of such buildings or land, either alone or with others. 
    Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
    Week. The word "week" shall be construed to mean seven (7) days. 
    Written, in writing. The words "written" or "in writing" shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
    Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year. 
(Code 1973, § 1-3) 
State Law reference- Rules of construction of terms used in the general statutes, G.S. § 1-1. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines and headings. 
    The catchlines of the several sections of this Code, printed in boldface type, and the chapter, article and division headings are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section, chapter, article or division and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such section, chapter, article or division, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such section, chapter, article or division, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(Code 1973, § 1-2) 
Sec. 1-4. - History notes and references. 
    The history notes appearing in parentheses after each section and the references and editor's notes scattered throughout the Code are for the benefit of the user of the Code and shall not be considered as part of the text of the Code. 
Sec. 1-5. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal for an offense committed under the ordinance repealed. 
(Code 1973, § 1-5) 
Sec. 1-6. - Altering Code. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the borough to be misrepresented thereby. 
(Code 1973, § 1-6) 
Sec. 1-7. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance or resolution of the borough any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in such Code, ordinance or resolution the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific fine or penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any provision of this Code or any such ordinance or resolution shall be punished by a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00); each day any violation of any provision of this Code or of any such ordinance or resolution shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  In addition to the fine or penalty hereinabove provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this Code or any such ordinance or resolution shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be, by the borough abated as provided by law, and each day that such condition continues shall be regarded as a new and separate offense. 
(c)  In all cases where the same offense may be made punishable, or shall be created by different clauses or sections of the ordinances of the borough, the prosecuting officer may elect under which to proceed; but not more than one (1) recovery shall be had against the same person for the same offense. 
(d)  Obedience to the provisions hereinafter set forth may be enforced by criminal information for the penalties herein prescribed as well as by prosecution of the offender as provided in this section or by civil action for a penalty, or by civil remedy at law or equity by way of injunction, or otherwise to abate or prevent a violation of the provisions of this Code of Ordinances. Neither a judgment in, nor the pendency of a criminal prosecution for an alleged violation of the provisions of this Code, nor a judgment in or the pendency of a civil action at law or in equity shall be a bar to the other form of proceeding. The imposition of a penalty for a violation of this Code shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue, and the remedies herein provided for penalties and civil action to enjoin or abate a violation shall be cumulative. 
(Code 1973, §§ 1-7-1-9) 
State Law reference- Penalty limitation, G.S. § 7-148(c)(10)(A). 
Sec. 1-8. - Amendments to Code. 
(a)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in substantially the following language: "That section ____________ of the Code of Ordinances, Borough of Naugatuck, Connecticut, is hereby amended to read as follows: ...." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(b)  If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "That the Code of Ordinances, Borough of Naugatuck, Connecticut, is hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered ____________ , which section reads as follows: ...." The new section shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(Code 1973, § 1-4) 
Sec. 1-9. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by borough personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the board of mayor and burgesses. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive parts of permanent and general ordinances passed by the board of mayor and burgesses during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ to ____________ " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but, in no case, shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-10. - Severability of parts of Code. 
    The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code. 
(Code 1973, § 1-10) 
Sec. 1-11. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code; 
(2)  Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the borough or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the borough or any evidence of the borough's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the borough; 
(3)  The administrative ordinances of the borough, not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of such Code; 
(4)  Any ordinance fixing salaries of officers or employees of the borough; 
(5)  Any appropriation ordinance; 
(6)  Any right or franchise granted by the board of mayor and burgesses of the borough to any person, firm or corporation; 
(7)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, closing, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the borough; 
(8)  Any ordinance establishing and prescribing the street grades of any street in the borough; 
(9)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements or assessing taxes therefor; 
(10)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the borough or providing regulations for the same; 
(11)  Any ordinance annexing property to the borough; 
(12)  Any zoning ordinance or regulations of the borough; 
(13)  Any ordinance regulating the erection, alteration, repair, demolition, moving or removal of buildings or other structures; 
(14)  Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes; 
(15)  Any regulations of the inland wetlands and water courses commission; 
(16)  Any regulations of the water pollution control authority; 
(17)  Any temporary or special ordinance; 
(18)  Any ordinance enacted after May 1, 1990; 
and all such ordinances and regulations are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length herein. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Estimate of amount required for departments, etc., § 3.8; board of public charities, § 3.12; town clerk, § 3.14; board of education, § 3.18; officers, § 5; annual meetings for transaction of other business than election of officers, § 6.2; mayor, § 11; clerk, § 12; treasurer, § 13; bailiffs, § 14; collector, § 15; assessor, § 15.1; removal of officers, § 19; board of relief, § 28; meetings of board of mayor and burgesses, § 32; filling of vacancies in board of burgesses, § 32.1; affairs of borough to be managed by mayor and burgesses, § 61; conflict of interest, § 61.1; power and authority of mayor and burgesses, § 63. 
Cross reference- Election, Ch. 8; planning, Ch. 15; taxation, Ch. 17. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Fiscal year. 
    The fiscal year of the borough shall begin on the first day of July of each year. 
(Code 1973, § 2-1; Ord. of 6-6-89) 
Charter reference- Fiscal year, § 16. 
State Law reference- Municipal uniform fiscal years, G.S. § 7-381 et seq. 
Sec. 2-2. - Consideration and fiscal impact of collective bargaining agreements. 
(a)  Fiscal impact note required. 
(1)  Prior to the presentation of any collective bargaining agreement to the board of mayor and burgesses for its consideration and ratification, the controller shall prepare an estimate of the fiscal impact such agreement would have if adopted. 
(2)  The fiscal impact note shall be an estimate, expressed in dollar amounts, of all proposed changes in wages, benefits, terms of employment or other language. It shall be prepared such that it will express the net (current vs. proposed language) impact, such agreement would have in each full fiscal year such agreement would be in effect. 
(3)  The fiscal impact note may also include any other information which the mayor may deem necessary for the proper consideration of such agreement. 
(4)  The mayor shall ensure that such estimates are prepared, and appended to any collective bargaining agreement presented to the board of mayor and burgesses for its consideration. 
(b)  Consideration of collective bargaining agreements. 
(1)  Final action on all collective bargaining agreements presented to the board of mayor and burgesses for its consideration and ratification shall be tabled for a period of not less than three (3) days following its initial presentation to such board. The board of mayor and burgesses may then take final action on such collective bargaining agreement at any meeting of the board duly called for that purpose. 
(2)  The provisions of this clause may be waived if, on the recommendation of the mayor and a two-thirds ( 2/3 ) affirmative vote of the board, immediate action is warranted or deemed to be in the best interests of the borough. 
(Amend. of 12-5-95) 
Secs. 2-3-2-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- Board of public charities, § 3.12; powers of board of charities and committees, § 3.13; board of education, § 3.18; board of relief, § 28; board of health, §§ 55-57. 
Cross reference- Board of ethics, § 2-116; parks commission, § 14-1; planning commission, § 15-16 et seq.; zoning commission, § 15-46 et seq.; inland wetlands and water courses commission, § 15-66 et seq.; economic development commission, § 15-86 et seq.; redevelopment agency, § 15-116 et seq.; streets commission, § 16-31 et seq.; water pollution control board, § 19-106 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-16. - Inland wetland commission designated town's aquifer protection agency. 
(a)  Designation and membership. 
(1)  In accordance with the provisions of Conn. Gen. Stat. 22a-354a, et seq., the zoning commission is hereby designated as the Aquifer Protection Agency (hereinafter the "agency") of the Borough of Naugatuck. The staff of the zoning commission shall serve as the staff of the agency. 
(2)  Members of the zoning commission shall serve coexisting terms on the agency. The membership requirements of the agency shall be the same as those of the zoning commission including, but not limited to the number of members, terms, method of selection and removal of members, and filling of vacancies. 
(3)  At least one (1) member of the agency or staff of the agency shall complete the course in technical training formulated by the Commissioner of Environmental Protection of the State of Connecticut, pursuant to section 22a-354v of Connecticut General Statutes. 
(b)  Regulations to be adopted. 
(1)  The agency shall adopt regulations in accordance with section 22a-354p of the Connecticut General Statutes and Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies (R.C.S.A.) 22a-354i-3. Said regulations shall provide for: 
a.  The manner in which boundaries of aquifer protection shall be established and amended or changed. 
b.  Procedures for the regulation of activity within the area. 
c.  The form for an application to conduct regulated activities within the area. 
d.  Notice and publication requirements. 
e.  Criteria and procedures for the review of applications. 
f.  Administration and enforcement. 
(c)  Inventory of land use. 
(1)  In order to carry out the purposes of the aquifer protection program, the agency will conduct an inventory of land use within the area to assess potential contamination sources. 
(2)  Not later than three (3) months after approval by the Commissioner of the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection of Level B Mapping of aquifers, the agency will inventory land uses overlying the mapped zone of contribution and recharge areas of such aquifers in accordance with guidelines established by the commissioner pursuant to section 22a-354f of the Connecticut General Statutes. Such inventory shall be completed not more than one (1) year after authorization of the agency. (Conn. Gen Stat. 22a-354e) 
(Ord. No. 96, §§ 1,2, 12-3-91; Ord. No. 116, §§ 1-3, 6-7-05) 
Editor's note- Being not specifically amendatory of the Code, the provisions of Ord. No. 96, adopted Dec. 3, 1991, have been codified herein as § 2-16 at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 2-17. - Police commission; alternates. 
(a)  There shall be four (4) alternate members of the police commission who shall be appointed by the mayor and shall each serve a term of five (5) years. The initial four (4) appointments will be staggered as follows: two-year, three-year, four-year and five-year term; after which time members will serve a five-year term. 
(b)  Alternate members of the police commission shall, when seated, have all the powers and duties conferred on regular members of the Naugatuck Police Commission. Such alternates may attend all meetings and executive sessions of the police commission. If a regular member of the police commission is absent or disqualified for any reason, the chairman of the police commission shall designate an alternate to so act, choosing alternates in rotation, so that they shall act as nearly equal a number of times as possible. If any alternate is not available in accordance with such rotation, such fact shall be recorded in the minutes of the police commission. 
(c)  Alternate members of the police commission shall be electors and taxpayers of the Borough of Naugatuck. No more than two (2) alternate members may be members of the same political party. Vacancies shall be filled by appointment by the mayor. Any such vacancy shall be filled from the same political party from which the former alternate was appointed. 
(Ord. No. 114, §§ A-D, 10-5-03) 
Editor's note- Sections A-D of Ord. No. 114, adopted Oct. 5, 2003, added provisions to the Code, but did not specify manner of inclusion. Therefore, at the discretion of the editor, said provisions have been included herein as § 2-17. 
Sec. 2-18. - Fire commission; alternates. 
(a)  There shall be two (2) alternate members of the fire commission who shall be appointed by the mayor and shall each serve a term of five (5) years. 
(b)  Alternate members of the fire commission shall, when seated, have all the powers and duties conferred on regular members of the Naugatuck Fire Commission. Such alternates may attend all meetings and executive sessions of the fire commission. If a regular member of the fire commission is absent or disqualified for any reason, the chairman of the fire commission shall designate an alternate to so act, choosing alternates in rotation, so that they shall act as nearly equal a number of times as possible. If any alternate is not available in accordance with such rotation, such fact shall be recorded in the minutes of the fire commission. 
(c)  Alternate members of the fire commission shall be electors and taxpayers of the Borough of Naugatuck. No more than one (1) alternate member may be a member of the same political party. Vacancies shall be filled by appointment by the mayor. 
(d)  Any such vacancy shall be filled from the same political party from which the former alternate was appointed. 
(e)  The original appointments will be on a two- and four-year term. The appointees will then serve a five-year term from that point forward. 
(Ord. No. 115, §§ A-E, 11-4-03) 
Editor's note- Sections A-E of Ord. No. 115, adopted Nov. 4, 2003, added provisions to the Code, but did not specify manner of inclusion. Therefore, at the discretion of the editor, said provisions have been included herein as § 2-18. 
Secs. 2-19-2-30. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MAYOR'S COMMISSION FOR THE HANDICAPPED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Handicapped parking, § 18-71 et seq. 

Sec. 2-31. - Established. 
    The borough hereby establishes the mayor's commission for the handicapped. 
(Ord. No. 64, § I, 10-2-79) 
Sec. 2-32. - Composition; terms of members. 
(a)  The mayor's commission for the handicapped shall be composed of seven (7) members, who shall be electors of the borough and who shall be appointed by the mayor without regard to political affiliation. 
(b)  The seven (7) members of the mayor's commission for the handicapped shall be appointed for terms of three (3) years. 
(Ord. No. 64, § I, 10-2-79; Ord. of 3-7-89, § I) 
Sec. 2-33. - Vacancies. 
    Any vacancy in the membership of the mayor's commission for the handicapped shall be filled for the unexpired term of such member by the mayor. 
(Ord. No. 64, § I, 10-2-79; Ord. of 3-7-89, § I) 
Sec. 2-34. - Ex officio members. 
    The mayor and health director shall serve as members ex officio of the mayor's commission for the handicapped. 
(Ord. No. 64, § I, 10-2-79; Ord. of 3-7-89, § I) 
Sec. 2-35. - Compensation of members. 
    The members of the mayor's commission for the handicapped shall receive no compensation for their services. 
(Ord. No. 64, § II, 10-2-79) 
Sec. 2-36. - Powers and duties. 
    The mayor's commission for the handicapped shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  To act as a liaison agency for the borough in determining the conditions, needs and problems of the handicapped persons in the borough in relation to public education, transportation, housing, employment, recreation, health and other matters; 
(2)  To monitor existing federal and state statutes intended to aid the handicapped; 
(3)  To act as an advocacy and coordinating agency to bring about new and expanded programs and services for the handicapped. 
(Ord. No. 64, § III, 10-2-79) 
Secs. 2-37-2-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ENVIRONMENTAL CONTROL COMMISSION[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Flood erosion and control board, § 2-76 et seq.; health and sanitation, Ch. 11; planning, Ch. 15; water pollution control board, § 19-106 et seq. 

Sec. 2-51. - Legislative intent. 
(a)  The preservation and improvement of the quality of the natural and manmade environment within the borough, in the face of population growth, urbanization, transportation, urban and rural planning and technologic change with their accompanying demands on natural resources, is found to be of increasing and vital importance to the health, welfare, and economic well-being of present and future inhabitants and requires forthright action by the governing body of the borough. 
(b)  Establishment of a commission for conservation of the environment is a necessary step in fostering unified action on environmental problems. 
(Code 1973, § 2-3) 
Sec. 2-52. - Established. 
    The borough, pursuant to section 7-131A of the general statutes, hereby creates a commission which shall be known as the environmental control commission. 
(Code 1973, § 2-4) 
Sec. 2-53. - Composition; vacancies; terms of members. 
(a)  The environmental control commission shall consist of seven (7) members all of whom shall be appointed by the mayor. Persons residing within the borough are eligible for appointment. 
(b)  Vacancies occurring other than by the expiration of term of office shall be filled only for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
(c)  The members of the environmental control commission shall be appointed as follows: One (1) member shall be appointed to serve a term of five (5) years; two (2) members, not more than one (1) from the same political party, shall be appointed for terms of four (4) years; two (2) members, not more than one (1) from the same political party, shall be appointed for terms of three (3) years; two (2) members, not more than one (1) from the same political party, shall be appointed for terms of two (2) years; at the expiration of their respective terms their successors shall be appointed for terms of five (5) years. 
(Code 1973, § 2-5) 
Sec. 2-54. - Quorum. 
    Four (4) members of the environmental control commission shall constitute a quorum. 
(Code 1973, § 2-5) 
Sec. 2-55. - Officers; meetings; ex officio members. 
(a)  At the first meeting of the environmental control commission the members shall elect a chairman, vice-chairman, secretary and treasurer. All officers shall be elected at their regular meeting in March of each year. Each member shall hold office until their successor has been appointed. 
(b)  There shall be one (1) meeting each month. 
(c)  The members may appoint, to assist them, as many ex officio members as required. 
(Code 1973, § 2-6) 
Sec. 2-56. - Powers and duties. 
    The powers and duties of the environmental control commission shall be as follows: 
(1)  Advise the mayor, borough board and the public on matters affecting preservation, development and use of the natural beauty, quality, ecologic integrity and other environmental factors as concerned and hold meetings according to section 2-55(6); 
(2)  Carry out such other duties as may be assigned from time to time by the board of mayor and burgesses. 
(Code 1973, § 2-7) 
Sec. 2-57. - Reports. 
    The environmental control commission shall submit an annual report to the board of mayor and burgesses concerning the activities and work of the commission. 
(Code 1973, § 2-8) 
Sec. 2-58. - Compensation. 
    The members of the environmental control commission including ex officio members, shall receive no compensation for their services as members thereof but may be reimbursed for reasonable and necessary expenses incurred in the appropriations made available therefor. 
(Code 1973, § 2-9) 
Sec. 2-59. - Alternate members-Appointment; terms; vacancies. 
(a)  There shall be three (3) alternate members of the environmental control commission. 
(b)  All alternates shall be appointed by the mayor. Vacancies shall be filled by the mayor for the unexpired period of the term. 
(c)  Alternate members of the environmental control commission shall be appointed for terms as follows: 
(1)  One (1) alternate shall be appointed for a term commencing on April 1, 1986 and ending on February 3, 1987; 
(2)  One (1) alternate shall be appointed for a term commencing on April 1, 1986 and ending on February 2, 1988; 
(3)  One (1) alternate shall be appointed for a term commencing on April 1, 1986 and ending on February 7, 1989. 
When each term expires, a new person shall be appointed or a person shall be reappointed for a term of three (3) years. 
(Ord. No. 72, §§ 1-3, 3-14-86) 
Secs. 2-60-2-75. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - FLOOD AND EROSION CONTROL BOARD[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Environmental control commission, § 2-51 et seq.; planning, Ch. 15; water pollution control authority, § 19-91 et seq.; subdivisions, App. A; zoning, App. B. 
State Law reference- Flood control and beach erosion, G.S. § 25-69 et seq.; municipal flood and erosion control boards, G.S. § 25-84 et seq. 

Sec. 2-76. - Created. 
(a)  Acting pursuant to the general statutes, a flood and erosion control board is hereby created. The board of mayor and burgesses shall act as the flood and erosion control board. 
(b)  The flood and erosion control board shall serve pursuant to provisions of sections 25-84 to 25-98 of the general statutes. 
(Code 1973, § 2-2) 
Sec. 2-77. - Powers and duties. 
    The flood and erosion control board shall have all the powers and duties granted a flood and erosion control board by the general statutes. 
(Code 1973, § 2-2) 
Secs. 2-78-2-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - BOARD OF FINANCE[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Board of finance, G.S. § 7-340 et seq. 

Sec. 2-91. - Alternate members-Appointment. 
    There shall be appointed alternate members to the board of finance in accordance with section 7-340a of the general statutes. 
(Ord. No. 60, § 1, 4-11-76) 
Sec. 2-92. - Same-Responsibilities. 
    The alternate members of the board of finance shall, when seated, have all the powers and duties set forth in the general statutes, any special act or the charter relating to the board of finance and its members. If a regular member of the board of finance is absent or is disqualified, the member shall designate an alternate to serve as a regular member of the board of finance. 
(Ord. No. 60, § 2, 4-11-76) 
Sec. 2-93. - Same-Terms; vacancies. 
(a)  The alternate members of the board of finance shall be electors and taxpayers of the borough and subject to the provisions of section 9-167a of the general statutes and no more than two (2) alternate members shall be members of the same political party. 
(b)  One (1) alternate member shall serve for a period of one (1) year; one (1) alternate member shall serve for a period of two (2) years; one (1) alternate member shall serve for a period of three (3) years. Thereafter, upon expiration of each of the original terms each member shall be appointed to serve for a term of three (3) years from the date of such expiration and until his successor shall be appointed and qualified. 
(Ord. No. 60, § 3, 4-11-76; Ord. of 4-1-86; Amend. of 7-7-09) 
Secs. 2-94-2-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - MUNICIPAL GOLF COURSE COMMISSION[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note- A charter revision amendment of Nov. 8, 1994 changed the charter; however, in order to provide for better classification, such provisions were included as Div. 6, § 2-101 at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 2-101. - Established; appointments. 
    There is established in the borough a municipal golf course commission to be composed of five (5) electors of such borough to be appointed by the board of mayor and burgesses. No more than three (3) such appointive commissioners shall at any time be from the same political party. Commencing in January of 1995, two (2) commissioners shall be appointed to terms which shall expire on June 30, 1996; two (2) commissioners shall be appointed to terms which shall expire on June 30, 1997 and one (1) commissioner shall be appointed to a term which shall expire June 30, 1998. Annually thereafter commissioners shall be appointed for terms of three (3) years to replace those whose terms expired. Such commission shall administer, maintain and control the municipal golf course of the borough. 
(Amd. of 11-8-94) 
Sec. 2-102. - Alternate members; appointment; terms; vacancies. 
(a)  There shall be three (3) alternate members of the golf course commission. 
(b)  All alternates shall be appointed by the board of mayor and burgesses. Vacancies shall be filled by the board of mayor and burgesses for the unexpired period of the term. 
(c)  Alternate members of the golf course commission shall be appointed for terms as follows: 
(1)  One (1) alternate shall be appointed for a term commencing on November 14, 2000 and ending on June 30, 2001; 
(2)  One (1) alternate shall be appointed for a term commencing on November 14, 2000 and ending on June 30, 2002; 
(3)  One (1) alternate shall be appointed for a term commencing on November 14, 2000 and ending on June 30, 2003. 
When each term expires, a new person shall be appointed or a person shall be reappointed for a term of three (3) years. 
(Mo. of 10-10-00) 
Secs. 2-103-2-104. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ADVISORY BOARD[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 110, §§ 1-7, adopted June 5, 2001, which pertained to establishment of a freedom of information advisory board, did not specify manner of codification; hence, inclusion herein as Div. 7, §§ 2-105-2-107, was at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 2-105. - Established. 
    There is hereby established a freedom of information advisory board. The purpose of the freedom of information advisory board is to foster compliance with the State Freedom of Information Act. 
(Ord. No. 110, § 1, 6-5-01) 
Sec. 2-106. - Membership; appointments; terms; vacancies. 
(a)  The freedom of information advisory board shall consist of three (3) members who shall be appointed in accordance with procedures adopted by the board of mayor and burgesses of the said borough and town. 
(b)  No more than two (2) members of the freedom of information advisory board shall be members of the same political party. 
(c)  The members of the freedom of information advisory board shall designate one (1) of its members to be the chairperson. 
(d)  Within thirty (30) days after the adoption of Ordinance No. 110, in accordance with procedures adopted by the board of mayor and burgesses of the town, the initial three (3) members of the freedom of information advisory board shall be appointed for the following terms: one (1) shall serve for a period of three (3) years from the date of appointment; one (1) shall serve for a period of two (2) years from the date of appointment of the person first appointed to serve a three-year term; and one (1) shall serve from the date of appointment for a period of one (1) year from the date of appointment of the person first appointed to serve a three-year term. Successor members of the freedom of information advisory board shall be appointed for three-year terms commencing on the day after the date on which the term of their predecessor expires. 
(e)  Any vacancies on the freedom of information advisory board by reason other than the expiration of the term of office shall be filled by appointment, in accordance with procedures adopted by the board of mayor and burgesses of the town for the remainder of the term within thirty (30) days after such vacancy occurs. Any vacancy on the freedom of information advisory board shall not impair the right of the remaining members to exercise all the powers of the board. 
(Ord. No. 110, §§ 2-6, 6-5-01) 
Sec. 2-107. - Duties. 
    The freedom of information advisory board shall have the following duties: 
(1)  The board, or a member thereof, shall act as liaison to the state freedom of information commission for educational purposes and the members of such board shall keep current of the requirements of the State Freedom of Information Act, as interpreted by the state freedom of information commission and courts, and any other laws, rulings and materials related to such act; 
(2)  Provide information and education to municipal officials and employees, and all other persons seeking information or education, concerning the State Freedom of Information Act, its interpretation by the state freedom of information commission and courts, and any other laws, rulings and materials related to such act; 
(3)  Facilitate the dissemination to municipal officials and employees, and all other persons, of any materials provided to such board by the state freedom of information commission; 
(4)  Make recommendations to municipal officials concerning the applications and implementation of the State Freedom of Information Act; 
(5)  Provide interested persons with information concerning the filing of complaints with the state freedom of information commission; and 
(6)  Make recommendations to the state freedom of information commission concerning proposed changes to state law relating to freedom of information. 
(7)  In addition, the freedom of information advisory board may attempt to facilitate the resolution of freedom of information disputes with agencies, but shall not impede in any way a person's right to a speedy appeal to the state of information commission or a speedy determination of such appeal by such commission. 
(Ord. No. 110, § 7, 6-5-01) 
DIVISION 8. - SAUNDERS TRUST FUND ADVISORY COMMITTEE 

Sec. 2-108. - Advisory committee. 
(a)  Membership and appointments. The advisory committee shall consist of five (5) residents of voting age, of the borough. The members of the advisory committee shall be selected by the board of mayor and burgesses. Preference shall be given to members from the clergy and to individuals with experience in healthcare and social services. 
Upon adoption of the division from which this section derives, there shall be appointed, two (2) members to serve for a terms of two (2) years and until his/her successor shall be appointed and qualified; three (3) members to serve for a term of three (3) years and until his/her successor shall be appointed and qualified. Thereafter, upon expiration of each, the said original terms, each member shall be appointed to serve for a term of two (2) years from the date of said expiration and until his successor shall be appointed and qualified. Vacancies, however created, shall be filled by nomination of the board of mayor and burgesses, for the unexpired portion of the term of the member creating the vacancy. 
(b)  Purpose and duties of advisory committee. The advisory committee shall work with the Connecticut Community Foundation in order to assist in the administration of the Saunders Trust Fund for the sick and infirm of Naugatuck. The advisory committee shall make recommendations for grants to be paid from the Connecticut Community Foundation in accordance with the terms of the Saunders Trust. The committee shall work with the Connecticut Community Foundation in order to establish appropriate guidelines for the distribution of funds in accordance with the Saunders Trust and shall work with the Connecticut Community Foundation to assure that said funds are properly administered. The advisory committee shall follow the grant-making process outlined in the agreement between the Connecticut Community Foundation and the Borough of Naugatuck dated October, 2008. 
(c)  Replacement of committee members. Any committee member who fails to participate in the affairs of the advisory committee for more than six (6) consecutive months shall be replaced by the board of mayor and burgesses. 
(d)  Duties of the board of mayor and burgesses. The board of mayor and burgesses shall review the activities of the advisory committee [on] a bi-annual basis to assure that the purposes of the Saunders Trust Fund as being properly administered. 
(Ord. No. 121, §§ I-IV, 12-2-08) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 121, §§ I-IV, adopted Dec. 2, 2008, did not specify manner of inclusion. To preserve the style of this Code, and to facilitate indexing, said provisions have been codified as Art. II, Div. 8, § 2-108. 
DIVISION 9. - INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY COMMISSION[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 126, adopted February 4, 2014, amended the Code by adding a new div. 9, §§ 2-111-2-115. In order to prevent the duplication of section numbers, the new provisions have been designated as §§ 2-109-2-110.3 at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 2-109. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the information technology commission is to create a sustainable commission of informed individuals to govern and evaluate the long-term needs of the borough's and board of education's information technology functions and capacity. 
(Ord. No 126, 2-4-14) 
Sec. 2-110. - Establishment. 
(a)  The commission shall consist of seven (7) members, who shall be appointed by the mayor and/or the superintendent, subject to the approval of both the board of mayor and burgesses and the board of education. There shall be no party affiliation requirements of any kind. Commission members shall serve without compensation. 
(1)  Members of the commission shall include at least three (3) members who have at least five (5) years of experience in computer-related fields or occupational experience of five (5) years overseeing information technology functions. 
(2)  All members shall be appointed for five-year terms. In the event of a vacancy in the commission's membership, the successor shall be appointed by the mayor and/or superintendent, subject to the approval of both the board of mayor and burgesses and the board of education, to serve the unexpired term of the vacating member. Any member may be removed by the mayor for cause, which shall include failure to attend three (3) meetings of the commission without reasonable cause within a calendar year. 
(3)  Commission members may be reappointed by the mayor and/or the superintendent, subject to the approval of both the board of mayor and burgesses and the board of education. 
(b)  Information technology staff members shall serve as ex officio, non-voting members of the commission. 
(Ord. No 126, 2-4-14) 
Sec. 2-110.1. - Organization. 
(a)  The chairperson of the commission shall be appointed by both the mayor and the superintendent. 
(b)  The commission may adopt such rules and regulations to govern its operation as it considers necessary to effectuate its purpose. 
(c)  A majority of all voting members of the commission shall constitute a quorum for conducting the commission's business. 
(Ord. No. 126, 2-4-14) 
Sec. 2-110.2. - Powers and duties. 
    The commission shall advise and formulate recommendations to the mayor, superintendent, board of education, and the information technology staff in the following respects: 
(1)  The commission shall establish and direct policy related to all aspects of information technology for municipal and board of education operation, subject to funding, applicable laws and provisions of collective bargaining agreements pertaining to information technology employees. 
(2)  The commission shall establish organizational operations for information technology employees, subject to applicable law and provisions of collective bargaining agreements. 
(3)  The commission shall advise and formulate recommendations concerning computerization, data processing, internet access, and telecommunications needs of the borough and the board of education. 
(4)  The commission shall prepare an annual report of information technology operations, goals and objectives and present the same to the tri-boards comprised of the board of education, board of finance and board of mayor and burgesses sitting together. 
(5)  The commission shall annually, through its chair or designee, recommend an annual budget to the board of education during the typical education budget process. 
(6)  The commission shall annually, through its chair or designee, recommend an annual, combined municipal and board of education information technology budget to the joint boards of mayor and burgesses and board of finance during the typical budget process. 
(7)  The commission chair or designee shall serve as liaison to the five-year capital committee and shall attend all applicable five-year capital committee meetings applicable to information technology subject matter. 
(Ord. No 126, 2-4-14) 
Sec. 2-110.3. - Limitations. 
(a)  Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed as conferring upon the commission any administrative authority over the staff or the operation of the information technology director. 
(b)  The commission's authority is limited to advice and recommendations to the information technology director, the mayor and the board of education. 
(c)  The commission shall have no authority to incur any expenses without the prior approval of the board of mayor and burgesses and the board of education. The commission shall have no fiscal authority. 
(Ord. No 126, 2-4-14) 
ARTICLE III. - CODE OF ETHICS[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
State Law reference- Authority of borough to adopt a code of ethical conduct, G.S. § 7-148(c)(10)(B). 

Sec. 2-111. - Declaration of policy. 
    There is hereby established a code of ethics for all town officers, employees and officials, whether elected or appointed, paid or unpaid. The purpose of this article is to establish suitable ethical standards for all such officers, employees and officials by prohibiting acts or actions incompatible with the discharge of their public duties and the best interests of the town, and by directing disclosure of private financial interest or personal interest in matters affecting the town by such officers, employees and officials. Any violations of this article may constitute a cause for suspension, removal from office or employment or other disciplinary action as more particularly set forth in section 2-116. 
(Ord. No. 74, § 1-2, 10-7-86) 
Sec. 2-112. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Confidential shall mean personal matters and financial matters which, if disclosed, would be of detrimental interest to the town and a violation of the trust placed in that person. 
    Employees shall include all employees of the town and all governmental bodies created under the provisions of the town Charter. 
    Interest shall include private financial benefit and interest other than financial, arising from blood or marriage relationships or close business or political associations. 
    Officials shall include elected and appointed officials and officers, whether paid or unpaid, and members of all governmental bodies created under the provisions of the town Charter, and all other town ordinances and applicable statutes. 
    Participating shall include the rendering of advice, or recommendation, investigation, approval, disapproval, or otherwise influencing a decision or action. 
(Ord. No. 74, § 1-1, 10-7-86) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 2-113. - Conflict of interest prohibited. 
(a)  No officer, employee or official shall engage in or participate in any business or transaction, or shall have an interest, direct or indirect, which is incompatible with the proper discharge of his official duties in the public interest or would tend to impair his independent judgment or action in the performance of his official duties. 
(b)  No former officer, employee, or official shall appear at any time before any town board or agency in which he was formerly employed, acting or participating on behalf of the town in connection with any matter or case with which he was associated while an officer, employee, or official at any time within a period of one (1) year after termination of his service with the town. Any such former officer, employee or official may, upon a written application to the board of ethics and filing with the town clerk, be released from this obligation after review of the written application and relevant facts of his case by the board of ethics. 
(c)  No officer, employee or official, or their spouse or minor child shall solicit or accept any substantial gift that exceeds fifty dollars ($50.00) in value, whether in the form of a service, loan, thing, or promise, from any person, firm, or corporation, which to his knowledge is interested in any manner in business dealings with the town. 
(d)  Any officer, employee or official who has a substantial or controlling financial or personal interest in any transaction or contract with the town or in the sale of real estate, materials, supplies, or services to the town, on which he may be called to act upon in his official capacity, shall refrain from voting upon or otherwise participating in the transaction on behalf of the town. Any such officer, employee or official shall also be required to disclose such interest to the town clerk and board of ethics in the manner, time and form set forth in section 2-115. 
(e)  No officer, employee or official shall appear in behalf of private interests before any board, agency or committee of the town; nor shall he represent private interest in any action or proceeding against the interest of the town in any litigation to which the town is a party. Nothing herein shall prohibit the officer, employee or official from appearing before any board or commission on his own behalf. No officer, employee, or official shall, without proper authorization, disclose confidential information concerning town affairs, nor shall he use such information to advance the financial interests or private interests of himself or others. 
(Ord. No. 74, § 1-3, 10-7-86) 
Charter reference- Conflict of interest, § 61.1. 
Sec. 2-114. - Nondiscrimination. 
(a)  No officer, employee or official shall discriminate or favor any individual, or cause based solely upon race, color, creed, sex or age. 
(b)  No officer, employee or official shall request or permit the use of town-owned vehicles, equipment, facilities, materials, or property for personal convenience or profit, except when such are available to the public generally or are provided as municipal policy for the use of such officer, employee or official in the interest of the town. 
(c)  No officer, employee or official shall grant any special consideration, treatment, favor, or advantage to any person beyond that which is generally available to residents or taxpayers of the town. 
(Ord. No. 74, § 1-4, 10-7-86) 
Sec. 2-115. - Written disclosure of interest. 
    Any officer, employee or official having any financial or private interest as designated in section 2-113(d) shall file written disclosures of such interest with the town clerk and the board of ethics as soon as he becomes aware of such interest. Such written disclosure shall set forth in detail the nature and extent of such interest. 
(Ord. No. 74, § 1-5, 10-7-86) 
Sec. 2-116. - Board of ethics. 
(a)  There is hereby created a code of ethics commission which shall be charged with the administration of this article. 
(b)  The code of ethics commission shall be composed of seven (7) resident electors, two (2) of whom shall be alternate members, and at no time shall more than three (3) members be of the same political party. The mayor shall appoint all members to the code of ethics commission. Of the five (5) members initially appointed, one (1) shall be appointed for a term of five (5) years, one (1) for a term of four (4) years, one (1) for a term of three (3) years, one (1) for a term of two (2) years, and one (1) for a term of one (1) year. Thereafter, upon the expiration of the initial term of any member of the code of ethics commission, or in the event a vacancy exists on the code of ethics commission, the mayor shall appoint a member to fill the vacancy. All subsequent appointments and alternate members to the code of ethics commission shall be for terms of two (2) years. In no event may any member of the code of ethics commission serve on the commission for a period of more than five (5) years in succession. Each member shall serve until his successor has been appointed. 
(c)  The commission shall promulgate and adopt reasonable rules and regulations for the administration of its proceedings. The rules and regulations so promulgated and all amendments thereto shall be made available at the office of the town clerk to any elector of the town. 
(d)  The commission shall receive complaints of any violations of the code of ethics and shall, upon such complaint investigate the same, and may hold private hearings thereon if, in the opinion of the majority of the commission, such complaint warrants a hearing. Any complaint by the commission must be in writing, signed and notarized by the individual making said complaint. This commission will issue a written reply to all such complaints within ten (10) days. Any investigation to determine whether or not there is probable cause that a violation of this article has occurred shall be concluded within seventy (70) days of the receipt of such complaint. Upon receiving such complaint, the commission shall privately notify the person against whom complaint has been filed, advising the concerned party of the specific nature of the complaint made and being investigated by the commission. Upon receipt of said notice from the commission the party so notified that a complaint has been filed against him shall have the right to demand a public or private hearing by the commission. If the commission decides that a hearing is required, or the person whose conduct is being called into question demands a hearing such hearing shall afford the person whose conduct is called into question the right to cross-examine anyone testifying against him or meet or answer any complaint made of his conduct; to present evidence in his own behalf; and to representation of his choice. All such testimony shall be under oath. No hearing, however may be conducted with less than four (4) members of the commission in attendance. 
(e)  If the code of ethics commission shall receive complaints against any officer, employee or official of the town, the investigation and disposition of which have been delegated to other boards or commissions created by the Charter, then in that event the code of ethics commission shall forward the complaint received to the appropriate board or commission to which such complaints are forwarded and shall thereafter notify the code of ethics commission of the disposition made of the complaint, and the commission shall review the disposition. 
(f)  The commission shall report to the board of mayor and burgesses its findings as to whether or not a violation of this article has occurred, together with recommendations as to disposition to be made. The board of mayor and burgesses shall thereupon take such action as they may deem appropriate or take action in accordance with the provisions of the Charter. In addition, the code of ethics commission may make public its findings and opinions with such deletions as may be justified, necessary, or desirable. 
(g)  The commission may upon the written request of any officer, employee or official, or resident of the town, or upon its own initiative render written advisory opinions concerning any matters relating to this article. 
(h)  All opinions and recommendations of the commission whether advisory or the result of a complaint, shall be kept on file with the commission. 
(i)  Such advisory opinion shall be promulgated within sixty (60) days of request. 
(j)  Officials and employees shall be given a copy at the time they are sworn in or at the time they commence their official duties. The provisions herein shall not limit the power of the borough to discipline their officials or employees nor limit the power of other town officers to discipline subordinates. 
(Ord. No. 74, § 1-6, 10-7-86) 
Cross reference- Boards, commissions and committees, § 2-16 et seq. 
Sec. 2-117. - Multiple commission positions prohibited; exception. 
(a)  No person shall hold any position on more than one (1) commission at a time. Exceptions to this would be stated and town mandates pertaining to town officials that must serve as members or liaisons to other commissions. 
(b)  Where conflicts with subsection (a) of this section are presently in existence, letters will be sent to such individuals asking such person to resign one (1) appointment. If they refuse, the grandfather clause will go into effect, until the end of the term on one (1) of his appointments. 
(Ord. No. 74, § 1-8, 1-7-86) 
Sec. 2-118. - Conflicts. 
    Should any provision of this article conflict with any provisions of federal law or the general statutes the provisions of the federal law or the general statutes shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 74, § 1-7, 10-7-86) 
Sec. 2-119. - Amendments. 
    This article may be amended only by ordinance in conformity with the provisions of the town Charter. 
Secs. 2-120-2-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-141. - Retiree health care trusts. 
(a)  In accordance with section 7-450(a) of the Connecticut General Statutes, the borough hereby establishes one (1) or more trust funds (collectively the "trusts") to hold and invest all contributions and assets of the borough's retiree health and life benefit plan or plans (the "plan"). The board of mayor and burgesses of the borough shall have the authority to amend or terminate the trusts. 
(b)  The trusts shall be for the purpose of funding current and future post-employment health care and life benefits for eligible retired employees in accordance with the plan. For purposes of this section, employee shall mean any employee and former employee entitled to participate in the plan. The trusts may also be used for the purpose of funding any other post-employment health and life benefit plans as the borough may establish. 
(c)  The trusts shall be administered by the trustees (the "trustees") appointed pursuant to a trust agreement (the "trust agreement") approved by the board of mayor and burgesses as soon as possible after the enactment of this section. The trustees shall have such powers and duties as set forth in the trust agreement, including directing the investment of the assets of the trusts and making payments or other disbursements in accordance with the plan and the terms of the trusts. 
(d)  After the enactment of this section, the board of mayor and burgesses shall appoint a borough representative to, among other things, provide all proper instructions and directions to the trustees regarding disbursements from the trusts on behalf of the borough. 
(Amend. of 12-1-09; Amend. of 3-2-10) 
Secs. 2-142-2-150. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PENSION PLAN FOR CERTAIN NONUNION EMPLOYEES[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 83, adopted April 2, 2013, amended the Code by repealing former div. 2, §§ 2-151-2-164, and adding a new div. 2. Former div. 2 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 83, adopted September 20, 1988. 

Sec. 2-151. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this division is to create a pension plan for certain nonunion employees, as defined in section 2-152 below, of the Borough of Naugatuck (hereinafter, "the borough"), the Naugatuck Board of Education (hereinafter, "the board of education"), the Naugatuck Day Care, Inc. (hereinafter, "day care") and the Naugatuck Human Resources Development Agency (hereinafter, "HRD"). Such pension plan shall be an alternative to the pension plan established by Special Laws 1949, Act 423 and to create a supplemental pension plan for certain former nonunion borough and board of education employees in order to correct any deficiencies which may have occurred in granting increased pension benefits above those benefits contained in Special Laws 1949, Act 423 (hereinafter, "Act No. 423"). 
(Ord. No. 83, 4-2-13) 
Sec. 2-152. - Definitions. 
    As used in this division, the terms below are defined as follows: 
    Date of participation shall mean the date on which an employee commences making contributions to the pension fund. 
    Employee(s) shall mean any person hired prior to June 13, 2011, who is employed by the employer in a full-time nonunion position, excluding elected officials and borough employees with employment agreements and excluding certified nonunion employees of the board of education. For the purpose of this definition, a person is a full-time employee if he is regularly employed by the employer for at twenty (20) hours per week and twelve (12) months per year or for at least twenty-five (25) hours per week and ten (10) months per year. 
    Employer when referenced collectively, shall mean the borough, the board of education, day care, and/or HRD. 
    Final average earnings shall mean the employee's average annual base salary earned by the employee during his final three (3) years of employment. "Annual base salary" excludes overtime payments, payments made for accumulated sick leave, and any other form of additional compensation from the employer, except that, for employees who were participants and commenced contributions to the pension fund before September 1, 1988, final average earnings shall include, in the last year of employment, any payment made for accumulated sick leave. 
    Participants shall mean an eligible employee who makes contributions to the pension fund as required by this division. 
    Pension board shall mean the board herein created for the administration of the pension plan. 
    Pension fund shall mean the pension fund created by Special Laws 1949, Act 423 which is comprised of employer and employee pension contributions. 
(Ord. No. 83, 4-2-13) 
Sec. 2-153. - Pension board. 
(a)  Membership . Members of the pension board shall be appointed by the board of mayor and burgesses. Recommendations shall be made by the mayor. The pension board shall be comprised of one (1) member from the board of mayor and burgesses, one (1) member from the board of finance, one (1) member from the board of education, one (1) nonunion employee and three (3) electors from the Borough of Naugatuck who shall have special experience and knowledge in the area of pension and/or financial planning and administration. The chief financial officer of the borough and/or the chief personnel officer of the borough shall be advisory members of the pension board, ex officio, without vote. 
(b)  Duties. The pension board shall have the following duties and responsibilities with respect to the pension plans created by this division: 
(1)  The pension board, in conjunction with the retirement board created by Act No. 423, shall be the trustee of the pension fund and shall have full control and management thereof, with the power to invest the same in accordance with the laws governing the investment of trust funds. 
(2)  The pension board shall receive and act upon employee pension applications and shall employ such medical, clerical, actuarial and other services as may be necessary for the proper administration of the pension plan pursuant to this division. 
(3)  As soon as possible after the enactment of this division, the pension board shall have a pension trust agreement drawn to the effect the benefits outlined in this division. Said pension trust agreement will prevail, after adoption, in deciding all benefit claims and all administrative procedures not outlined in this division. 
(4)  The pension board shall provide each employee with an annual statement of pension contributions and projected pension benefits. 
(5)  The pension board shall not have the authority to and is expressly prohibited from waving or altering in any fashion the requirements outlined in this division. 
(Ord. No. 83, 4-2-13) 
Sec. 2-154. - Eligibility and participation. 
(a)  Employees who meet the following criteria are eligible to become participants in the pension plan provided by this division: 
(1)  The employee meets the definition of "employee" set forth in section 2-152 above. 
(2)  The employee is not covered by any other pension plan to which the employee's specific employer (the borough, the board of education, day care or HRD), contributes, except the Federal Social Security System. 
(3)  The employee makes contributions to the pension fund as required by this division. 
(b)  Eligible employees employed on the date this division is enacted may elect to participate in the pension plan established by Act No. 423 or may elect to participate in the pension plan established by this division or may elect to participate in no pension plan. Such election must be within ninety (90) days of the enactment of this division and shall be irrevocable thereafter. No credit for past service shall be granted, except to employees who were participants and who commenced contributions to the pension fund before September 1, 1988. Eligible employees hired on or after the date of this division is enacted shall be required to become participants in the pension plan created by this division and shall commence contributions as of their date of hire. Benefit rights under this division are determined as of the employees' date of participation. 
(Ord. No. 83, 4-2-13) 
Sec. 2-155. - Contributions. 
(a)  Participants shall be required to contribute by payroll deduction the sum of four (4) percent of their base pay, except that employees who were participants and who commenced contributions to the pension fund before September 1, 1988 shall be required to contribute by payroll deduction the sum of three (3) percent of their base pay. 
(b)  The annual rate of interest credited to employee contributions returned to an employee leaving the pension plan shall be four (4) percent on all contributions made prior to the date of this division is enacted and five (5) percent on all contributions made on or after the date of this division is enacted. 
(c)  Pension contributions made to the pension fund before this division is enacted by any employee who elects to participate in the pension plan created by this division will, together with interest earned thereon, apply to fund years of past credited service for which said contributions were made. 
(d)  Employees shall not be allowed to buy back past service which occurred prior to their date of participation, except that participants, who commenced contributions to the pension fund and who were authorized to buy back past service under the terms of a prior arrangement approved by the board of mayor and burgesses before September 1, 1988, may complete the buy back in accordance with its authorized terms. 
(Ord. No. 83, 4-2-13) 
Sec. 2-156. - Credited service. 
(a)  Credited service means the years and months of continuous service the employee has rendered for the employer. Continuous service shall mean uninterrupted full-time employment, provided, however, that absence from employment for any reason, followed by reinstatement to active service within one (1) year thereafter, shall not be considered as breaking the continuity of service. Credited service shall be measured in years and completed months, each such completed month being one-twelfth ( 1/12 ) of a year. Credited service shall include all service except: 
(1)  Years of continuous service during which the employee did not perform at least twenty (20) or more hours of work per week for at least thirty-nine (39) weeks each year. The term "hours of work" as unused herein shall not include hours absence from work, except that the term "hours of work" shall include the following: 
a.  All hours during which the employee is actively performing work and is paid; 
b.  All hours during which the employee is receiving temporary total workers' compensation benefits; 
c.  All hours during which the employee is receiving long-term disability benefits; 
d.  All hours during which the employee is paid for vacation and holidays. 
(2)  Years of service during which the employee did not make contributions to the pension fund, except that employees receiving workers' compensation benefits or long term disability benefits totaling less than seventy-five (75) percent of pay at the time of disablement shall not be required to make contributions to the pension fund. 
(b)  Reemployed employees shall be considered new employees for the purposes of determining credited years of service under the plan, except that reemployed employees who have retained a vested interest in plan benefits shall retain the credited service which is vested. For the purpose of determining benefit rights under this division, the last date of participation shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 83, 4-2-13) 
Sec. 2-157. - Normal retirement. 
(a)  Normal retirement date . An employee's normal retirement date shall be the first day of the month coincident with or next following the employee's sixtieth birthday and the completion of fifteen (15) years of service. Employees who become participants after the date this division is enacted shall have an alternative normal retirement date which shall be the earlier of the first day of the month coincident with or next following: 
(1)  The employee's fifty-fifth (55) birthday and the completion of thirty (30) years of service or 
(2)  The employee's sixtieth (60) birthday and the completion of fifteen (15) years of service. 
(b)  Normal retirement benefit . The annual amount of normal retirement benefit payable to an employee who retires on his normal retirement date shall be equal to one and three-quarters (1.75) percent of the employee's final average earnings multiplied by the employee's number of years of credited service. 
(c)  Normal retirement benefit for employees who were participants and who commenced contributions to the pension plan before September 1, 1988. Employees who were participants and who commenced contributions to the pension fund before September 1, 1988, shall be entitled to the following minimum normal retirement benefit: 
(1)  If the employee is age sixty (60) at retirement with fifteen (15) or more years of credited service but less than twenty (20) years of credited service, a minimum benefit of forty (40) percent. 
(2)  If the employee is age sixty (60) at retirement with twenty (20) or more years of credited service, a minimum benefit of sixty (60) percent. 
(Ord. No. 83, 4-2-13) 
Sec. 2-158. - Early retirement. 
(a)  Early retirement date . An employee who becomes a participant after the date this division is enacted may elect to receive an early retirement benefit, provided he has completed at least ten (10) years of service and is at least fifty-five (55) years of age. The early retirement date will be the first day of any month between the date the election is made and the employee's normal retirement date as specified by the employee in his election. 
(b)  Early retirement benefit. The annual amount of early retirement payable to an employee who retires on his early retirement date shall be equal to one and three-quarters (1.75) percent of the employee's final average earnings multiplied by the employee's years of credited service and reduced by five (5) percent for each year that early retirement precedes the employee's sixtieth birthday. 
(Ord. No. 83, 4-2-13) 
Sec. 2-159. - Late retirement. 
(a)  Late retirement date. An employee's employment may continue after his normal retirement date. The late retirement date of any employee who is employed beyond his normal retirement date shall be the first day of the month coincident with or next following the employee's date of termination of employment. 
(b)  Late retirement benefit . The annual amount of late retirement benefit payable to an employee who retires on a late retirement date shall be equal to one and three-quarters (1.75) percent of the employee's final average earnings multiplied by the employee's years of credited service. 
(c)  Late retirement benefit for employees who were participants and who commenced contributions to the pension plan before September 1, 1988. For employees who were participants and who commenced contributions to the pension fund before September 1, 1988, the late retirement benefit shall not be less than the minimum normal retirement benefit set forth in section 2-157(c)(1) and shall not be greater than the maximum normal retirement benefit set forth in section 2-157(c)(2). 
(Ord. No. 83, 4-2-13) 
Sec. 2-160. - Benefits for disabled employees. 
(a)  Long term disability benefit. The borough, the board of education, day care and HRD, each on their own, shall establish an insured or self-insured long term disability benefit program which provides a disability benefit equal to fifty (50) percent of the employee's covered earnings to a maximum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) per month. 
(b)  Eligibility for long term disability benefits. In order to receive long term disability benefits, an employee must meet the specific definition of disability, the eligibility provisions, the qualifying provisions and any and all other qualifying terms and conditions set forth in the applicable long term disability plan in effect at the time of his/her disability. 
(c)  Termination of long term disability benefit. The long term disability benefit shall be terminated upon the occurrence any of the disqualifying events set forth in the applicable long term disability plan of the borough, the board of education, day care and HRD. 
(d)  Retirement benefit. An employee, who is receiving a long term disability benefit or workers' compensation benefits upon reaching his normal retirement date, shall apply for and receive his normal retirement benefit. The employee's final average shall be calculated as of the date of disability. Years of credited service shall include such years accrued prior to the date of disability and during the period the employee received a long term disability benefit or temporary total workers' compensation benefits. For employees who were participants and who commenced contributions to the pension fund before September 1, 1988, and who reach normal retirement date while disabled and for employees whose disability arose out of or in the course of employment, the minimum benefit at normal retirement shall be fifty (50) percent of final average earnings as of the date of disability. 
(Ord. No. 83, § 10, 9-20-88; Ord. No. 83, 4-2-13) 
Sec. 2-161. - Vesting, termination of employment, return of contributions. 
(a)  An employee who terminates his employment with ten (10) or more years of credited service prior to his normal or early retirement date and who does not elect a refund of his contributions with interest credited thereon shall be vested in his accrued pension benefit payable at his normal retirement date. 
(b)  An employee who is vested on his date of termination and who elects the refund of his contributions with interest credited thereon shall forfeit all rights to benefits under the plan. Such an election may be made any time prior to the employee's normal, early, or actual retirement date. 
(c)  An employee who terminates employment with less than ten (10) years of credited service shall forfeit all rights to benefits under the plan except for return of his contributions with interest credited thereon. 
(d)  Reduced early retirement benefits are available to terminated vested employees who have reached the age of fifty-five (55) and who became participants after the date of this division is enacted. 
(e)  Employees who were participants and who commenced making contribution to the pension fund before September 1, 1988, who terminate employment prior to age sixty (60) and meet the requirements for vesting and retention of contributions stated herein shall, at age sixty (60), be paid a pension benefit equal to two (2) percent of final average earnings multiplied by number of years of credited service. 
(Ord. No. 83, 4-2-13) 
Sec. 2-162. - Death benefits. 
(a)  Preretirement death benefit. If an employee with vested accrued benefit dies before the earlier of his normal retirement date or his actual retirement date or if a terminated employee with a vested accrued benefit dies subsequent to his date of termination and prior to the earlier of his normal retirement date or his actual retirement date, fifty (50) percent of his accrued pension benefit shall be payable to his spouse until the spouse's remarriage or death. If the spouse has died, the benefit shall be payable to the employee's minor children until they reach the age of eighteen (18), provided, however, for children who are legally dependent adults, there shall be no age limit. 
(b)  Postretirement surviving spouse benefit. Fifty (50) percent of the pension benefit being received by a retired employee shall be continued to his spouse upon his death provided the spouse of the employee is married to the employee and named at the time the employee retires. This benefit shall be payable to the spouse until her remarriage or death. 
(c)  Death benefit for employees who were participants and who commenced contributions to the pension fund before September 1, 1988. Upon death, while actively employed or after retirement, fifty (50) percent of the pension benefit payable at the date of death shall be paid to the surviving spouse until death or remarriage. In the event there is no surviving spouse, said amount shall be payable to the decedent's minor dependent children with twenty-five (25) percent of the pension benefit payable for one (1) child, thirty-seven and one-half (371/2) percent of the pension benefit payable for two (2) children and fifty (50) percent of the pension benefit payable for three (3) or more. If there is no surviving spouse or dependent children, fifty (50) percent of the pension benefit shall be paid to the decedent's dependent parents or parent. 
(d)  In the event the employee contributions made by the decedent exceed the benefit payments made to his and/or his survivors, the difference shall be paid to the appropriate beneficiary in a lump sum. 
(Ord. No. 83, 4-2-13) 
Sec. 2-163. - Nonunion employees who were participants in union pension plans. 
    Any employee who, without a break in service, becomes a nonunion employee entitled to participate in the pension plan created by this division and is, prior to that time, a participant in a pension plan established between the employer and a collective bargaining unit may elect to continue to participate under the terms of the bargaining unit pension plan. Said election must be made at the time the employee accepts the nonunion position and shall be irrevocable thereafter. 
(Ord. no. 83, 4-2-13) 
Sec. 2-164. - Relationship to Special Laws 1949, Act No. 423. 
    The pension plan established by Act No. 423 and the pension plan established by ordinance are mutually exclusive, that is, no provision of one (1) shall apply to the other. 
(Ord. No. 83, 4-2-13) 
Sec. 2-165. - Supplemental pension. 
    The following supplement pensions shall be awarded as of the retirement date of each individual entitled to receive a pension pursuant to this division. 
(1)  In exchange for contributions made during the course of her employment, Rebecca Schoeck shall receive the pension benefit provided in Act No. 423 plus a supplemental benefit which, when added to the benefit provided in Act No. 423, equals sixty (60) percent of her average salary for the last three (3) years of her employment with the board of Education. 
(Ord. No. 83, 4-2-13) 
Sec. 2-166. - Savings clause. 
    If any section is declared invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, said invalidity shall not affect the balance of this division. 
(Ord. No. 83, 4-2-13) 
Secs. 2-167-2-174. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - STANDARDS FOR FULL-TIME ELECTED OFFICIALS[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance of April 2, 2013 amended the Code by renumbering former div. 3, §§ 2-175-2-178, as new art. VI, § 18-134-18-137 in chapter 18. Subsequently, Ord. No. 124, adopted April 2, 2013, amended the Code by adding a new div. 3. 

Sec. 2-175. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this division is to clarify the benefits for full-time elected officials of the borough (i.e. the mayor, the town clerk and the tax collector). 
(Ord. No. 124, 4-2-13) 
Sec. 2-176. - Yearly compensation. 
    Full-time elected officials, as exempt employees under the Fair Labor Standards Act, will be paid an annual salary, as set forth by the non-union salary review board and approved by the joint boards of mayor and burgesses and board of finance. 
(Ord. No. 124, 4-2-13) 
Sec. 2-177. - Work year. 
    In order to be available to the public, full-time elected officials are expected to report to work fifty-two (52) weeks per year. Such individuals may, however, take, on an annual basis, up to twenty (20) days of paid time off ("PTO"). Such PTO days shall not be considered either an accrued benefit or cumulative from year-to-year. 
    Full-time elected officials shall not be eligible for compensatory time. 
(Ord. No. 124, 4-2-13) 
Sec. 2-178. - Medical coverage. 
    Full-time elected officials are eligible to participate in the borough group medical plan with premium share contributions set forth on an annual basis by the board of mayor and burgesses. Should a full-time elected official voluntarily elect to waive said participation in the borough group medical plan, he/she may be eligible for waiver reimbursement as set forth by the board of mayor and burgesses. 
    Upon either separation from employment or at the end of an elected term, full-time elected officials may be eligible to continue coverage under the provisions of the Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act ("COBRA"), in accordance with applicable federal and state laws and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 124, 4-2-13) 
Sec. 2-179. - Defined contribution plan. 
    Full-time elected officials are eligible to participate in the borough's defined contribution non-union program. Eligible participants may contribute the maximum amount as outlined in federal regulations each year. The borough may make a discretionary matching contribution of a percentage as approved by the board of mayor and burgesses. 
(Ord. No. 124, 4-2-13) 
Chapter 3 - ADVERTISING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 7; littering, § 10-16 et seq.; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 16; zoning, App. B. 
State Law reference- Outdoor advertising on highways, G.S. § 13a-123; church signs on state highways, G.S. § 13a-123a; exemption of certain areas, G.S. § 13a-123b; unauthorized signs, G.S. § 13a-124; removal or destruction of signs, G.S. § 13a-125; advertising signs, G.S. § 21-49 et seq.; posting or distributing advertisements, G.S. § 23-65; advertising with intent to injure competitor, G.S. § 42-114a. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 3-1. - Posting, etc., advertisements upon private property. 
    No person shall advertise, post, paste, paint, mark or place any advertisement upon any tree, building, wall, fence or elsewhere without the consent of the owner of the premises where the same is posted or attached. 
(Code 1973, § 3-1) 
Sec. 3-2. - Posting, etc., advertisements or notices upon public property. 
    No person shall advertise, post, paste, paint, mark or attach any advertisement or notice upon any public street, walk, tree, post, rail, wall, building or other structure without first obtaining permission from the board of mayor and burgesses. 
(Code 1973, § 3-2) 
Sec. 3-3. - Scattering, etc., handbills or advertising sheets. 
    No person shall scatter, throw or distribute handbills or advertising sheets on or over any sidewalk, street or public place within the borough. 
(Code 1973, § 3-3) 
Cross reference- Littering, § 10-16 et seq. 
Secs. 3-4-3-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SIGNS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Placing signs, etc., over streets, § 16-4; hanging signs, etc., over sidewalks, § 16-5; zoning, App. B. 
State Law reference- Authority of borough to establish lines beyond which billboards or advertising signs may be erected, G.S. § 7-148(c)(7)(A)(v); advertising signs, G.S. §§ 21-50-21-63; requirement of permit for erection of billboard, G.S. § 21-50. 

Sec. 3-16. - Definitions. 
    The following definitions shall apply in interpretation and enforcement of this article: 
    Ground sign. Any sign or device erected for the purpose of advertising, or for the identification of a business or a structure, supported from the ground and not attached to to any part of a building or structure. 
    Projecting sign. Any sign, bulletin, canopy or device for the purpose of advertising or for the identification of a business or structure which is attached to and projects from any part of a building or structure. 
    Roof sign. Any sign, bulletin or device erected for the purpose of advertising or for the identification of a business or structure, supported on the roof of a building or structure. 
    Wall sign. Any sign, bulletin or device erected for the purpose of advertising or for the identifying of a business or a structure, parallel to and as nearly against the face of a wall as projecting cornices, belt courses, or other ornamentations may permit. 
(Code 1973, § 3-14) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 3-17. - Enforcement of article. 
    The building inspector shall enforce the provisions of this article, but no oversight or dereliction of duty on the part of such officer shall legalize any action not in conformity with such provision. If any person fails to or refuses to comply with any requirement of this article after proper notification in writing, the building inspector may remove any sign, bulletin, canopy or device involved or correct any violation at the expense of such person. 
(Code 1973, § 3-15) 
Sec. 3-18. - Modification of article provisions. 
    In cases where manifest injustice would result from the enforcement of this article, the building inspector may modify any of its provisions except those in regard to encroachments beyond the street line. 
(Code 1973, § 3-16) 
Sec. 3-19. - Permit-Required; exception. 
    No person shall erect or maintain a sign, bulletin, canopy or advertising device of any kind which extends in front of an established building line, without obtaining a permit to erect or maintain same, issued by the building inspector; provided, however, no permit shall be required to erect or maintain a sign which is parallel to and against the face of a wall and extending not more than ten (10) inches in front of such wall providing no part of such sign shall be illuminated or used for sign purpose except the front or face thereof. 
(Code 1973, § 3-17) 
Cross reference- Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 12. 
Sec. 3-20. - Same-Application. 
    Any person desiring any permit required by this article shall file an application therefor on a form furnished by the building inspector. Such application shall be made by the owner, lessee of the property for which such permit is desired or by an authorized agent of the owner or lessee. There shall be filed in duplicate with such application plans showing clearly and completely all dimensions, kind and quality of materials, method of construction, location of sign, bulletin, canopy or device in relation to the building or structure or property lines and such other information as may be required by the building inspector. 
(Code 1973, § 3-18) 
Sec. 3-21. - Same-Fee; expiration. 
(a)  The fee for a permit under this article, payable at the time application is filed, shall be in accordance with the fees as set forth in section 7-2. The building inspector shall issue a receipt therefor and all fees so collected shall be turned over to the treasurer of the borough. 
(b)  Each permit shall expire three (3) months after issuance and may be extended by the building inspector. 
(Code 1973, § 3-19) 
Sec. 3-22. - Inspection; fee. 
    Each sign, bulletin, canopy or advertising device not exempt by this article shall be inspected at least once biennially by the building inspector or his agent. The fee for such inspection shall be in accordance with section 7-2 and shall be collected by the building inspector from the owner on the day of inspection. The building inspector shall issue a receipt therefor and all fees so collected shall be turned over to the treasurer of the borough. 
(Code 1973, § 3-20) 
Sec. 3-23. - Removal if in violation of article. 
    The building inspector may order the removal of any sign, bulletin, canopy or advertising sign erected, constructed or maintained in violation of the provisions of this article within five (5) days after written notice to the person responsible for the violation and to the owner of the property where such violation exists. 
(Code 1973, § 3-21) 
Sec. 3-24. - Repair or correction if insecure or unsafe. 
    The building inspector may order immediate repair or correction of any sign, bulletin, canopy or advertising sign which he deems insecure or otherwise unsafe upon written notice to the person, firm or corporation maintaining same or to the owner of the property where such sign is located. 
(Code 1973, § 3-22) 
Sec. 3-25. - Removal or correction at expense of violator. 
    The building inspector may remove or correct a violation of any sign, bulletin, canopy or advertising device at the expense of the person or of the owner of the property where such violation exists. 
(Code 1973, § 3-23) 
Sec. 3-26. - General regulations. 
(a)  All ground signs, roof signs and projecting signs shall be designed to withstand a wind pressure of not less than thirty (30) pounds per square foot of surface subject to such pressure. 
(b)  Every electrical sign or advertising device shall bear the label "Underwriters' Laboratories, Incorporated" but such label shall not obligate the building inspector to approve same. 
(c)  Every sign or device used for display of advertising matter shall be erected and maintained in a safe and substantial manner and at all times kept in a neat and clean condition. 
(d)  Banners, temporary signs of cloth or other material may be permitted, if approved by the building inspector, for a period of time not exceeding thirty (30) days in any one (1) calendar year for any one (1) place of business. 
(e)  No sign or advertising device of wood exceeding two (2) feet in height shall be permitted on any building, and when less than two (2) feet high shall be placed flat against a wall or the space back of same shall be firestopped when required by the building inspector. All other signs or advertising devices shall be of metal or shall have all exposed wood parts covered with metal except that wood letters, wood mouldings and small wood ornamentations may be allowed on the face of the sign or device and if the sign or device is flush tight against a fire resistive wall, with no openings back of such sign or device, the framework may be of wood providing all wood members shall have a minimum of two (2) coats of lead and oil point. 
(Code 1973, § 3-24) 
Sec. 3-27. - Projection of signs and canopies. 
(a)  No projecting sign overhanging a public street or public passway shall extend above the top of a cornice, parapet wall or wall, as the case may be, nor in front of the building line except as elsewhere provided in this article. 
(b)  No sign shall extend more than five (5) feet beyond the face of the building or structure and shall not be less than ten (10) feet in the clear above the level of the sidewalk beneath. 
(c)  No canopy shall extend beyond the curbline. 
(Code 1973, § 3-25) 
Sec. 3-28. - Effect of article and zoning regulations. 
(a)  No sign, bulletin, canopy or device which existed on June 5, 1956, shall be affected by this article except as otherwise set forth in this section. 
(b)  All signs, bulletins, canopies or devices which existed on June 5, 1956, shall conform to the requirements of this article concerning maintenance. 
(c)  No sign, bulletin, canopy or device shall be erected contrary to any provisions of the zoning regulations of the borough. 
(Code 1973, § 3-26) 
Cross reference- Zoning, App. B. 
Sec. 3-29. - Appeal. 
(a)  The board of mayor and burgesses shall be a board of appeals for any person who shall feel aggrieved by any act or order of the building inspector. Such appeal shall be filed with the borough clerk within ten (10) days from date of written notice or decision of the building inspector. 
(b)  The board of mayor and burgesses shall hold a hearing after notice to the person aggrieved at his or its present or last known address, stating time and place of hearing. 
(c)  The board of mayor and burgesses shall have the power to annul, modify, or affirm any act or order of the building inspector. 
(Code 1973, § 3-27) 
Sec. 3-30. - Penalty. 
    Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall be punished as prescribed in section 1-7. Each day, while such violation continues, shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1973, § 3-28) 
Chapter 3.5 - ALARM SYSTEMS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. of Dec. 28, 2010, repealed the former Ch. 3.5, §§ 3.5-1-3.5-11, and enacted a new Ch. 3.5 as set out herein. The former Ch. 3.5 pertained to alarm systems and derived from Ord. No. 87, 3-13-90; Amend. of 3-15-91, § 87-3(1), (2) and (5), § 87-4(3), (4), § 87-5(1), (2). 

Sec. 3.5-1. - Intent and purpose of chapter. 
It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to: 
(1)  Provide minimum standards and regulations applicable to owners, users, installers, and owners of property upon which are installed burglar, fire, or hold-up alarms within the borough; 
(2)  Provide penalties for noncompliance with such minimum standards and regulations and; 
(3)  Encourage the installation and proper maintenance and use of such protective alarm systems in all dwellings and commercial structures. 
(Ord. of 12-28-10) 
Sec. 3.5-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alarm administrator means a person or persons designated by the police chief and fire chief to administer, control and review false alarm reduction efforts and administers the provisions of this chapter. 
    Alarm company means a person or a company engaged in selling, leasing, installing, servicing or monitoring alarm systems; this person shall be licensed in compliance with borough and state laws. 
    Alarm permit means a permit issued by the borough or town allowing the operation of an alarm system within the borough or town. 
    Alarm signal means a detectable signal; audible or visual, generated by an alarm system, to which law enforcement or the fire department is requested to respond. 
    Alarm system means any single device or assembly of equipment designed to signal the occurrence of an illegal or unauthorized entry, fire alarms or other activity requiring immediate attention and to which law enforcement and or the fire department is requested to respond, but does not include motor vehicle or boat alarms, domestic violence alarms, or alarms designed to elicit a medical response. 
    Alarm user means any person, corporation, partnership, proprietorship, governmental or educational entity or any other entity owning, leasing or operating an alarm system, or on whose premises an alarm system is maintained for the protection of such premises. 
    Alarm user awareness class means a class conducted for the purpose of educating alarm users about the responsible use, operation, and maintenance of alarm systems and the problems created by false alarms. The police or fire departments will facilitate the awareness classes. 
    Borough or town means the borough or town of Naugatuck, Connecticut or its agent. 
    Cancellation means the process where response is terminated when the alarm company (designated by the alarm user) notifies the borough police department that there is not an existing situation at the alarm site requiring police response after an alarm dispatch request. If cancellation occurs prior to police arriving at the scene, this is not a false alarm for the purpose of civil penalty, and no penalty will be assessed. The borough fire department will continue response to any reported fire alarm, regardless if cancelled by the occupant or alarm company. The borough fire department officer on scene will make a determination as to whether an alarm is false or accidental. Refer to the definition of false fire alarm referenced below. 
    False burglar alarm means the activation of an alarm system through mechanical or electronic failure, malfunction, improper installation, or the negligence of the alarm user, his/her employees or agents, and signals activated to summon law enforcement personnel unless law enforcement response was canceled by the alarm user or his/her agent before law enforcement personnel arrive at the alarm location. An alarm is false within the meaning of this article when, upon inspection by the borough police department, evidence indicates that no unauthorized entry, robbery, or other such crime was committed or attempted in or on the premises which would have activated a properly functioning alarm system. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a false alarm shall not include an alarm which can reasonably be determined to have been caused or activated by unusually violent conditions of nature nor does it include other extraordinary circumstances not reasonably subject to control by the alarm user. 
    False fire alarm means activation of an alarm system through mechanical or electronic failure, malfunction, improper installation, malicious activation or the negligence of the alarm user, his/her employees or agents, and signals to summon the fire department to the premises. A fire alarm is considered false when, upon investigation by the fire department, it is found the there was no evidence of fire or smoke or a reasonable suspicion by an occupant that there may have been a fire. For the purposes of this chapter, smoke from cooking, steam, water or water vapor activating an alarm is not considered a false alarm. 
    Local alarm means an alarm system that emits a signal at an alarm site that is audible or visible from the exterior of a structure and is not monitored by a remote monitoring facility, whether installed by an alarm company or user. 
    Permit year means a twelve (12) month calendar year, beginning on January, or the remaining portion of the calendar year when a new alarm permit is issued. 
    Runaway alarm means an alarm system that produces repeated alarm signals that do not appear to be caused by separate human action. The borough police department may in its discretion discontinue police responses to alarm signals from what appears to be a runaway alarm. 
    SIA control panel standard CP-01 means the American National Standard Institute (ANSI) approved Security Industry Association (SIA) CP-01 control panel standard, as may be updated from time to time, that details recommended design features for security system control panels and their associated arming and disarming devices to reduce false alarms. Control panels built and tested to this standard by a nationally recognized testing organization, will be marked to state: "Design evaluated in accordance with SIA CP-01 Control Panel Standard Features for False Alarm Reduction". 
    Verify means an attempt by the monitoring company, or its representative, to contact the alarm site and/or alarm user by telephone and/or other electronic means, whether or not actual contact with a person is made, to attempt to determine whether an alarm signal is valid before requesting law enforcement dispatch, in an attempt to avoid an unnecessary alarm dispatch request. For the purpose of this chapter, telephone verification shall require, as a minimum that a second call be made to a different number if the first attempt fails to reach an alarm user who can properly identify themselves to attempt to determine whether an alarm signal is valid before requesting law enforcement dispatch. 
(Ord. of 12-28-10) 
Sec. 3.5-3. - Alarm permit. 
(a)  Permit required. No person shall use an alarm system without first obtaining a permit for such alarm system from the borough. A fee shall be required for the initial registration and annual renewals. Each alarm permit shall be assigned a unique permit number, and the user shall provide the permit number to the alarm company to facilitate law enforcement dispatch. For the purpose of fire or smoke alarms, a permit is only required for alarms that are monitored by a third party service that notifies the fire department upon alarm activation. 
(b)  Application. The permit shall be requested on an application form provided by the borough. An alarm user has the duty to obtain an application from the borough. 
(c)  Transfer of possession. When the possession of the premises at which an alarm system is maintained is transferred, the person (user) obtaining possession of the property shall file an application for an alarm permit within thirty (30) days of obtaining possession of the property. Alarm permits are not transferable. 
(d)  Reporting updated information. Whenever the information provided on the alarm permit application changes, the alarm user shall provide correct information to the borough within thirty (30) days of the change. In addition, each year after the issuance of the permit, permit holders will receive from the borough a form requesting updated information. The permit holder shall complete and return this form to the borough when any of the requested information has changed; failure to comply will constitute a violation and may result in a civil penalty. 
(e)  Multiple alarm systems. If an alarm user has one (1) or more alarm systems protecting two (2) or more separate structures having different addresses and/or tenants, a separate permit shall be required for each structure and/or tenant. 
(Ord. of 12-28-10) 
Sec. 3.5-4. - Duties of alarm users. 
(a)  Maintain the premises and the alarm system in a method that will reduce or eliminate false alarms. 
(b)  Provide the alarm company the permit number, (the number must be provided to the communications center by the alarm company to insure dispatch). 
(c)  Must respond or cause a representative to respond to the alarm system's location within thirty (30) minutes when notified by the borough police department to deactivate a malfunctioning alarm system. 
(d)  Not manually activate an alarm for any reason other than an occurrence of an event that the alarm system was intended to report or to perform routine maintenance as prescribed by alarm system provider. 
(e)  An alarm user must obtain a new permit and pay any associated fees if there is a change in address or ownership of a business or residence. 
(Ord. of 12-28-10) 
Sec. 3.5-5. - Duties of alarm companies. 
(a)  Any person engaged in the alarm business in the borough, shall comply with the following: 
(1)  Obtain and maintain the required state, city or town license(s). 
(2)  Be able to provide name, address, and telephone number of the license holder or a designee, who can be called in an emergency, twenty-four (24) hours a day; and be able to respond to an alarm call, when notified, within two (2) hours. 
(3)  Be able to provide the most current contact information for the alarm user. 
(b)  Ninety (90) days after enactment of this chapter the alarm installation companies shall, on all new installations, use only alarm control panel(s) which meet SIA control panel standard CP-01. 
(c)  Prior to activation of the alarm system, the alarm company must provide instructions explaining the proper operation of the alarm system to the alarm user. 
(d)  Provide written information of how to obtain service from the alarm company for the alarm system. 
(e)  An alarm company performing monitoring services shall: 
(1)  Attempt to verify, by calling the alarm site and/or alarm user by telephone, to determine whether an alarm signal is valid before requesting dispatch. Telephone verification shall require, as a minimum that a second call be made to a different number, if the first attempt fails to reach an alarm user who can properly identify themselves to attempt to determine whether an alarm signal is valid, except in the case of a panic or robbery-in-progress alarm, or in cases where a crime-in-progress has been verified by video and/or audible means. 
(2)  Provide alarm user registration number to the communications center to facilitate dispatch and/or cancellations. 
(3)  Communicate any available information about the alarm. 
(4)  Communicate a cancellation or false call to the police or fire department communications center as soon as possible following a determination that response is not of an emergency nature. 
(Ord. of 12-28-10) 
Sec. 3.5-6. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to activate an alarm system for the purpose of summoning law enforcement or the fire department when no burglary, robbery, or other crime or danger to life or property is being committed or attempted on the premises or there exists no actual or reasonable suspicion of a fire or any indication of smoke which may cause a false alarm. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to install, maintain, or use an audible alarm system which can sound continually for more than thirty (30) minutes. 
(Ord. of 12-28-10) 
Sec. 3.5-7. - Duration of audible signal limited. 
    All alarm systems which sound any signal that is audible outside the protected premises, shall be equipped with a device which will limit the duration of such audible signal to not more than thirty (30) minutes in accordance with section 22a-69-5.1 of the administrative regulations of the department of environmental protection of the state. 
(Ord. of 12-28-10) 
Sec. 3.5-8. - User fees for false alarms. 
(a)  Excessive false alarms/failure to register. It is hereby found and determined that three (3) or more false alarms within a permit year is excessive, constitutes a public nuisance, and shall be unlawful. Costs for excessive false alarms within a calendar year may be assessed against an alarm user as follows: 
(1)  Third, fourth and fifth false alarm ..... $50.00 
(2)  Sixth and seventh false alarm ..... $100.00 
(3)  Eighth and ninth false alarm ..... $250.00 
(4)  Tenth and over false alarms ..... $500.00 
(5)  Failure to register ..... $100.00 
(b)  Other fees. Violations will be enforced through the assessment of a fee in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per violation. 
(c)  Payment of fees. Fees shall be paid within thirty (30) days from the date of the invoice. 
(d)  Civil non criminal violation. A violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be a civil violation and shall not constitute a misdemeanor or infraction. 
(e)  Assessment of costs or fees for violations of the provisions of this chapter will be done on a biannual basis. 
(f)  Alarm systems owned and/or used by the borough shall be exempt from the user fee requirement. 
(Ord. of 12-28-10) 
Sec. 3.5-9. - Appeals. 
(a)  Appeals process. Assessments of civil penalties and other enforcement decisions made under this chapter may be appealed by filing a written notice of intent to appeal with the Naugatuck Board of Police Commissioners, 211 Spring Street, Naugatuck, CT 06770 or the Naugatuck Board of Fire Commissioners, 41 Maple Street, Naugatuck, CT 06770 within fifteen (15) days after the date of notification of the assessment of civil fees or other enforcement decision. The appellant shall then have an additional ten (10) days from the date the borough police department or borough fire department receives an intent to appeal notice to submit all appropriate supporting documentation to the appropriate board of commissioners for review. The failure to give notice of intent to appeal within this time period shall constitute a waiver of the right to contest the assessment of penalty or other enforcement decision. Appeals shall be heard through an administrative process established by the borough board of police commissioners and the borough board of fire commissioners. 
(b)  Appeal standard. The borough board of police commissioners or the borough board of fire commissioners shall review an appeal from the assessment of civil penalty or other enforcement decisions using a preponderance of the evidence standard. Notwithstanding a determination that the preponderance of the evidence supports the assessment of civil penalty or other enforcement decision, the borough board of police commissioners or the borough board of fire commissioners shall have the discretion to dismiss or reduce civil fees or reverse any other enforcement decision where warranted. 
(Ord. of 12-28-10) 
Sec. 3.5-10. - Confidentiality. 
    In the interest of public safety, all information contained in and gathered through the alarm registration applications, applications for appeals and any other alarm records shall be held in confidence by all employees and/or representatives of the borough. 
(Ord. of 12-28-10) 
Sec. 3.5-11. - Government immunity. 
    Alarm registration is not intended to, nor will it, create a contract, duty or obligation, either expressed or implied, of response. Any and all liability and consequential damage resulting from the failure to respond to a notification is hereby disclaimed and governmental immunity as provided by law is retained. By applying for an alarm registration, the alarm user acknowledges that the borough police department and/or borough fire department response may be influenced by factors such as: the availability of police or fire units, priority of calls, weather conditions, traffic conditions, emergency conditions, staffing levels and prior response history. 
(Ord. of 12-28-10) 
Sec. 3.5-12. - Severability. 
    The provisions of this chapter are severable. If a court determines that a word, phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, subsection, section, or other provision is invalid or that the application of any part of the provision to any person or circumstance is invalid, the remaining provisions and the application of those provisions to other persons or circumstances are not affected by that decision. 
(Ord. of 12-28-10) 
Chapter 4 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Monies received for licenses from persons licensed to sell intoxicating liquors, § 3.19. 
State Law reference- Liquor permits, G.S. §§ 30-14-30-62a; classes of liquor permits, G.S. § 30-15; liquor manufacturer's permit, G.S. § 30-16; liquor wholesaler's permit, G.S. § 30-17; hotel liquor permits, G.S. § 30-21; restaurant liquor permits, G.S. § 30-22; tavern permits, G.S. § 30-26; druggist liquor permit, G.S. § 30-36; storage of liquor; approval required, G.S. § 30-38; application for liquor permit, G.S. § 30-39; liquor permit fees, G.S. § 30-41; granting and denial of liquor permits, G.S. § 30-43; permit to specify location and revocability, G.S. § 30-52; revocation of liquor permit, G.S. §§ 30-55-30-59; prohibition against unauthorized sale of liquor, G.S. § 30-74; sales to minors, intoxicated persons and drunkards, G.S. § 30-86; hours and days of closing, G.S. § 30-91. 

Sec. 4-1. - Consumption and possession of alcoholic liquor within and upon public highways, sidewalks, parking areas restricted. 
(a)  Definitions. For the interpretation of this section: 
    Alcoholic liquor has the same meaning as set forth in section 30-1 of the general statutes. 
    Parked vehicle has the same meaning as set forth in section 14-1 of the general statutes. 
    Possession with intent to consume means having in one's possession or control alcoholic liquor in a glass, open bottle, open can or other open container so as to permit consumption. 
    Public highway means a highway, road, street, avenue, boulevard or other way within and under the control of the borough and open to public use, including the sidewalks of such highway. 
(b)  Prohibited acts. Except as permitted in subsection (c) of this section, no person shall consume any alcoholic liquor upon or within the limits of any public highway or sidewalk or parking area within the borough. For purposes of this section, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the consumption of alcoholic liquor or the possession with intent to consume alcoholic liquor in parked vehicles within or upon a public highway, sidewalk or parking area is a violation of this section. 
(c)  Exceptions. Exceptions to subsection (b) of this section are as follows: 
(1)  Consumption of alcoholic liquor and possession with the intent to consume alcoholic liquor is permitted during any public function, festival or celebration being conducted within a public highway, sidewalk or parking area pursuant to a written permit issued by the chief of police, or person designated by the chief to issue such permits, authorizing the sale, service or distribution of alcoholic liquor at or in connection with such function, festival or celebration. 
(2)  An application for a permit shall be in writing directed to the chief of police. The application shall state the name and address of responsible officials of the organization sponsoring the function, festival, celebration or event; specify the parts of the public highway, sidewalk or parking area to be used during the event; specify the beginning and ending time of the event and if it continues for more than one (1) day the hours in each day it is to be conducted; the number of people in attendance at the event and whether the event is open to the public. The application shall be filed at least ten (10) calendar days before the first day of the event and the permit shall be issued or denied in writing within four (4) calendar days of the receipt date of the application. The permit shall be issued if all of the required information is provided, the application is made at least ten (10) days before the event, the chief of police or his designee determines that the event will be open to the public and that all necessary permits, licenses, and approvals have been obtained from all government authorities having jurisdiction including but not limited to the state department of liquor control. 
(d)  Parked vehicles. Consumption of alcoholic liquor or possession with intent to consume alcoholic liquor shall not be permitted in parked vehicles within or upon public highways, streets or parking areas under any circumstances. 
(e)  Penalty. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be fined in accordance with section 1-7. 
(Ord. No. 76, §§ (a)-(d), 11-22-86) 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 16; traffic and motor vehicles, Ch. 18. 
Chapter 5 - AMUSEMENTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Advertising, Ch. 3; licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 12; parks and recreation, Ch. 14. 
State Law reference- Authority to provide for amusements, G.S. § 7-148(c)(4)(C); authority to regulate and license amusement parks and arcades, G.S. § 7-148(c)(7)(H)(vi); authority to prohibit, restrain, license and regulate sports, exhibitions, public amusements and performances and all places where games may be played, G.S. § 7-148(c)(7)(H)(vii); amusements, in general, G.S. §§ 29-129-29-143a. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 5-1-5-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - AMATEUR BOXING EXHIBITIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate all sports, G.S. § 7-148(c)(7)(H)(vii); amateur boxing exhibitions, G.S. § 21a-197 et seq. 

Sec. 5-16. - License-Required. 
    No amateur boxing exhibition shall be held within the limits of the borough unless the manager or person having charge thereof shall first have obtained a license therefor in writing from the mayor and such boxing exhibition shall be held only at the time and place specified in such license. 
(Code 1973, § 5-16) 
Cross reference- Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 12. 
Sec. 5-17. - Same-Application; fee. 
    No license required by this article shall be issued by the mayor for any boxing exhibition except upon written application therefor on a form approved by the board of mayor and burgesses and payment of the sum of one dollar ($1.00) for the use of the borough. 
(Code 1973, § 5-17) 
Sec. 5-18. - Prohibited on certain days and between certain hours. 
    No boxing exhibition shall be held on Sunday or any legal holiday; nor shall any such exhibition be held or continued between the hours of 11:30 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
(Code 1973, § 5-18) 
Sec. 5-19. - Boxers to be physically fit. 
    No person shall engage in any boxing exhibition as a boxer until he shall have been examined and found to be physically fit by a competent physician, licensed to practice under the laws of this state. Such physician shall certify in writing that the contestant is physically fit to engage in such contest. 
(Code 1973, § 5-19) 
Sec. 5-20. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- A motion held on May 7, 1996, repealed § 5-20 in its entirety. Formerly, such section pertained to minors prohibited from boxing and derived from § 5-20 of the 1973 Code. 
Sec. 5-21. - Gambling prohibited. 
    No person shall bet or wager upon the result of any such exhibition. 
(Code 1973, § 5-21) 
Sec. 5-22. - Admission of minors. 
    No person under eighteen (18) years of age shall be admitted to any such boxing exhibition, provided any person fourteen (14) years of age or over may be admitted when accompanied by his parent or guardian. 
(Code 1973, § 5-22) 
Sec. 5-23. - Rules and regulations. 
    All such boxing exhibitions shall be held and conducted in accordance with rules and regulations, not inconsistent herewith, and which may be prescribed by the Connecticut Association of the Amateur Athletic Union of the United States. 
(Code 1973, § 5-23) 
Sec. 5-24. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating any provision of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished in accordance with section 1-7. 
(Code 1973, § 5-24) 
Secs. 5-25-5-34. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CIRCUSES, SHOWS, ENTERTAINMENT, ETC.[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to prohibit, restrain, license and regulate sports, exhibitions, public amusements and performances and all places where games may be played, G.S. § 7-148(c)(7)(H)(vii); municipal licensing of exhibitions, G.S. § 21-6 et seq. 

Sec. 5-35. - Where admission fee is charged-License required; exception. 
    No circus, menagerie, tent show, theatrical or other exhibition, ball or entertainment to which an admission fee is charged shall be held within the limits of the borough unless the proprietor, manager, or person having charge of the same shall first have obtained a license therefor in writing from the mayor; and such exhibition or other entertainment shall be held only at the time and place specified in the license; provided, that this section shall not apply to exhibitions or other entertainments held by and for the exclusive benefit of any person living in the borough. 
(Code 1973, § 5-35) 
Cross reference- Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 12. 
Sec. 5-36. - Same-License fees. 
    No license shall be given by the mayor for any circus, menagerie, tent or other exhibition, ball or entertainment, as required by this article except on the payment to him of the following sums for the use of the borough, to wit: For each day's exhibition of a circus, menagerie or tent show, not less than ten dollars ($10.00), and two dollars ($2.00) for each side show. Any other exhibition or hall entertainment, not less than two dollars ($2.00) for each day's entertainment; and any entertainment in any store or building other than a public or private hall, not less than one dollar ($1.00) for each day, and such additional sum as the mayor may deem expedient. 
(Code 1973, § 5-36) 
Sec. 5-37. - Same-When license may be granted free of charge. 
    The mayor may grant a license free of charge for any exhibition when the proceeds of such exhibition are to be devoted to charitable, literary or religious purposes. 
(Code 1973, § 5-37) 
Sec. 5-38. - Same-Proprietors, managers or performers. 
    No person shall, as proprietor, manager or performer, have charge or take part in any exhibition or other entertainment which shall not have been licensed as required by this article. 
(Code 1973, § 5-38) 
Sec. 5-39. - License required where no admission fee is charged to grounds or enclosure. 
    Any nonresident or nontaxpayer of the borough shall not carry on any amusement or entertainment in or on any street, grounds, enclosure, building or store within the borough without obtaining a license from the mayor, who may issue a license therefor upon the payment of not less than one dollar ($1.00) per day for each merry-go-round, fakir show or similar entertainment, and fifty cents ($0.50) per day for any shooting gallery or similar amusement, where no admission fee is charged to the grounds or enclosure. 
(Code 1973, § 5-39) 
Sec. 5-40. - Boxing bouts or sparring exhibitions. 
    No license to hold or conduct any boxing bout or sparring exhibition shall be issued under the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1973, § 5-40) 
Sec. 5-41. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating any provision of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished in accordance with section 1-7. 
(Code 1973, § 5-41) 
Secs. 5-42-5-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PUBLIC DANCES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 

Sec. 5-51. - Definitions. 
    The term "public dance" or "public hall," as used in this article, shall be taken to mean any dance or hall to which admission can be had by payment of a fee or by the purchase, possession or presentation of a ticket or token in which a charge is made for caring for clothing or other property or any other dance to which the public generally may gain admission with or without payment of a fee. The term "public dance hall," as used herein, shall be taken to mean any room, place or space in which a public dance or public ball may be held, or hall or academy in which classes in dancing are held or instruction in dancing given for hire. 
(Code 1973, § 5-52) 
Sec. 5-52. - License required; fee. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to hold any public dance or public ball or to hold classes in dancing within the limits of the borough until the dance hall in which the same may be held shall first have been duly licensed for such purpose. 
(b)  Each license shall be posted in a conspicuous place within the hall in which the dance is held. 
(c)  The license fee shall be one dollar ($1.00). 
(d)  Classes in dancing carried on for any specific period or continuously shall require either a one-dollar permit per period, or if the class is to be held for more than six (6) months, one (1) permit for each six (6) months of classes. 
(Code 1973, § 5-53) 
Cross reference- Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 12. 
Sec. 5-53. - Prerequisites to issuance of license. 
    No license for a public dance shall be issued until it shall be found that such hall complies with and conforms to all ordinances, health, fire and police regulations of the borough. 
(Code 1973, § 5-54) 
Sec. 5-54. - Applications for licenses. 
    Applications for the licenses required by this article shall be obtained from the clerk of the borough. 
(Code 1973, § 5-55) 
Sec. 5-55. - Granting of application for license. 
    The application for the license required by this article shall be granted by the mayor only after approval by the chief of police and the fire marshal. 
(Code 1973, § 5-56) 
Sec. 5-56. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating any provision of this article shall, on conviction, be punished as prescribed in section 1-7. 
(Code 1973, § 5-57) 
Secs. 5-57-5-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - CASINO AND OTHER GAMING OPERATIONS 

Sec. 5-71. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
    Ancillary conduct. Conduct which is customarily connected with or incidental to the operation of a casino or pari-mutuel facility or to engaging in gaming or gambling including but not limited to storing of trash, rubbish, debris or building materials, parking of motor vehicles, driving of motor vehicles into and out of such facilities or into and out of areas where gaming and gambling occurs, allowing persons or vehicular traffic to congregate for purposes of gaining access to such facilities or areas where gaming or gambling occurs, erecting signs or illumination devices for purposes of attracting persons or assisting in gaining access to such facilities, or any other conduct which facilitates, accommodates or assists in the operation of a casino or pari-mutuel facility or in engaging in gaming or gambling. 
    Bazaar. Place as defined in section 7-170 of the general statutes. 
    Bingo. Activity defined in section 7-169(a) of the general statutes. 
    Borough. The Borough of Naugatuck, Connecticut. 
    Casino. Any room or rooms in which gaming is conducted and includes the area occupied by games and any bar, cocktail lounge or other facilities housed within such rooms or room. 
    Casino gaming. The conduct of gaming operations in a casino. 
    Company. A corporation, partnership, limited partnership, trust, association, joint stock company, joint venture or other form of business organization, but not including a natural person. 
    Game or gambling game. Any game played with cards, dice, equipment or any mechanical, electromechanical or electronic device or machine for money, property, checks, credit or any representative of value, including but not limited to faro, monte, roulette, keno, bingo, fan-tan, twenty-one, blackjack, seven-and-a-half, klondike, craps, poker, chuck-a-luck, Chinese chuck-a-luck, also known as dai shu, wheel of fortune, chemin de fer, baccarat, pai gow, beat the banker, panguingui, any banking or percentage game or any other similar game or games. 
    Gaming or gambling. To deal, operate, carry on, conduct, maintain or expose for play any game, race or exhibition of jai alai. 
    Gaming device. Any equipment or mechanical, electromechanical or electronic contrivance, component or machine used remotely or directly in connection with gaming or any game which affects the result of a wager by determining win or loss, including a system for processing information which can alter the normal criteria of random selection and which affects the operation of any game or which determines the outcome of a game. 
    Las Vegas Night. Activities as defined and allowed pursuant to sections 7-186a through 7-186q inclusive of the general statutes. 
    Pari-mutuel facility. A dog or horse race track or jai alai fronton. 
    Person. Any natural person or any company. 
    Video facsimile machine. Any device, contrivance or machine the play or operation of which is a facsimile or video facsimile of any of the following games of chance, but not limited to: roulette, blackjack, poker, chuck-a-luck, beat the dealer, dice, money wheels, baccarat, pan game, over and under, horse race game, acey-duecy or bouncing ball. 
    Wager. A sum of money or thing of value risked on an uncertain outcome. 
(Ord. No. 100, § 1, 12-6-94) 
Sec. 5-72. - Prohibition of casino and other gaming operations. 
(a)  No person or company shall operate a casino or engage in casino gaming in the Borough. 
(b)  No person or company shall engage in gaming or gambling in the Borough. 
(c)  No person or company shall operate a pari-mutuel facility in the Borough. 
(d)  No person shall place a wager in the Borough; provided natural persons shall be exempt from this provision for any game or wager or transaction which is incidental to a bona fide social relationship, is participated in by natural persons and in which no person is participating directly or indirectly in professional gambling, as that term is defined in section 53-278a(3) of the general statutes. 
(e)  No person or company shall possess or operate a gaming device, or video facsimile machine in the Borough. 
(f)  No person or company shall engage in ancillary conduct in the Borough which is incident to the operation of a casino, pari-mutuel facility or to gaming, gambling, placing wagers or to operating a gaming device or video facsimile machine. 
(Ord. No. 100, § 2, 12-6-94) 
Sec. 5-73. - Exceptions. 
(a)  The provisions of this article shall not apply to the conduct of bingo, bazaars, raffles or Las Vegas Nights by charitable, civic or social, educational, fraternal, veterans' or religious organizations, volunteer fire companies or ambulance corps, political parties or town committees, or any other nonprofit organization, association or corporation, as permitted and regulated pursuant to sections 7-169 through 7-186q inclusive of the general statutes. 
(b)  The provisions of this article shall not apply to the sale of lottery tickets within the Borough by agents licensed by the state pursuant to applicable state statutes and regulations relating to the operation of lotteries by the department of special revenue of the department of revenue services of the state. 
(Ord. No. 100, § 3, 12-6-94) 
Sec. 5-74. - Penalty. 
    Any person or company violating the provisions of this article shall be subject to the penalties provided for section 1-7 of the Code of Ordinances of the Borough of Naugatuck. 
(Ord. No. 100, § 4, 12-6-94) 
Chapter 6 - ANIMALS AND FOWL[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Health and sanitation, Ch. 11. 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate running at large of animals and to prohibit cruelty to animals, G.S. § 7-148(c)(7)(D)(i); authority to regulate and prohibit keeping of animals, G.S. § 7-148(c)(7)(D)(ii). 

Sec. 6-1. - Keeping of certain snakes. 
(a)  No person or persons shall keep or sell any snake over five (5) feet or any venomous reptile within the confines of the borough. 
(b)  No museum or the like having live snakes in its collection shall be maintained in a residential area. 
(c)  Any person violating this section shall be fined not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or imprisoned not more than thirty (30) days or be both fined and imprisoned. 
(d)  This section shall be retrospectively applied. 
(Ord. No. 81, §§ 1-4, 10-15-87; Mo. of 12-3-96) 
Sec. 6-2. - Keeping of bees. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any relevant state or federal law, no persons shall keep live bees of any type within the confines of the borough, unless the bee colonies, nests and/or hives are kept at least one hundred (100) feet from the beekeepers property line. 
(b)  Any person violating this section shall be fined not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or imprisoned not more than thirty (30) days or both fined and imprisoned. 
(c)  This section shall be retrospectively applied. 
(Mo. of 2-4-97) 
Chapter 7 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Erection or removal of buildings, § 33; use of buildings, § 34; failure to remove buildings, etc.; penalty, § 35. 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 9; garbage, trash and refuse, Ch. 10; planning, Ch. 15; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 16; utilities, Ch. 19; subdivisions, App. A; zoning, App. B. 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate the mode of using any building, G.S. § 7-148(c)(7)(A)(ii); authority to regulate and prohibit the moving of buildings, G.S. § 7-148(c)(7)(A)(iii); state building code applicable to all municipalities, G.S. § 29-253. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 7-1. - Setback lines on Rubber Avenue. 
(a)  The board of mayor and burgesses hereby establish building setback lines of twenty-five (25) feet along both sides of Rubber Avenue from Meadow Street to Gunntown Road, parallel from the right and left street lines or property lines of Rubber Avenue as presently existing. 
(b)  No building, porch, foundation, retaining wall, or other permanent structure shall be constructed within the area bounded by the above setback lines and the travelway. 
(Code 1973, § 8-1) 
Sec. 7-2. - Schedule of permit fees. 
    Pursuant to Sections 105 and 108 of the International National Building Code/2003 Portion of the 2005 State Building Code, any owner or authorized agent who intends to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, or change the occupancy of a building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, convert or replace any electrical, gas mechanical or plumbing system, the installation which is regulated by this code, or to cause any such work to be done, shall first make application to the building official and obtain the required permit. 
    Permits shall not be valid until the fees prescribed by law have been paid, nor shall an amendment to a permit be released until the additional fee, if any, has been paid. 
Permit fees: 
$25.00 for the first $1,000.00 
$12.00 each $1,000.00 thereafter 
Certificate of occupancy: 
Residential: $15.00 per each family unit 
Business: $25.00 per unit 
Mercantile:$25.00 per unit 
Industrial: $25.00 up to 40,000 square feet area 
Industrial: $35.00 over 40,000 square feet area 
(Code 1973, § 8-2; Ord. of 3-1-83; Mo. of 3-3-98; Mo. of 4-1-03; Mo. of 4-4-06) 
Cross reference- Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 12. 
Sec. 7-3. - Numbering buildings. 
(a)  The owner of any building or part of a building used for dwelling or business purposes within the limits of the borough shall cause all buildings or parts of buildings to be plainly numbered with figures two (2) inches or more in height, which shall be so placed as to be plainly seen from the highway, street or public way, and shall obliterate any different number previously placed thereon. 
(b)  No person shall affix to any building or retain thereon more than one (1) day any number not designated by the borough engineer. 
(c)  The numbers for buildings shall be designated by the borough engineer. 
(d)  Any person violating any provision of this section shall, on conviction, be punished as prescribed in section 1-7. 
(Code 1973, § 8-3) 
Sec. 7-4. - Building code violation penalties-Generally. 
    Any person who shall violate a provision of the state building code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or shall erect, construct, alter or repair a building or structure in violation of any approved plan or directive of the building official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of the state building code shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding one (1) year, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Code 1973, § 8-4) 
Sec. 7-5. - Same-Continuing violation of stop order. 
    Any person who shall continue any work in or about the building after having been served with a stop order, except such work as he is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable to a fine of not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) or more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Code 1973, § 8-5) 
Sec. 7-6. - Construction hours; regulation and penalty. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to engage in construction activities including but not limited to excavation, demolition, erection, alteration or repair of any building, structure or parcel of land other than between 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on weekdays and Saturdays, except in cases of urgent necessity in the interest of public safety and then only with a permit from the building inspector, which permit may be renewed for a period of three (3) days or less in the event the emergency continues. In no event shall construction commence on Sundays, unless there is an emergency. 
(b)  Any violation of this section shall result in a fine of one hundred fifty ($150.00) dollars. 
(Ord. No. 109, 10-6-98) 
Secs. 7-7-7-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DEMOLITION OF HAZARDOUS BUILDINGS 

Sec. 7-26. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to provide for the designation of buildings or structures as hazardous, or unsanitary and to provide the procedures for the demolition or repair of such buildings, which shall be carried out in compliance with the requirements of this article and/or requirements set forth under the general statutes. 
(Mo. of 7-5-94, § 1; Mo. of 7-1-97, § 1) 
Sec. 7-27. - Definition of hazardous buildings. 
    All buildings or structures which have any or all of the following defects shall be deemed to be "hazardous buildings" and to be subject to the provisions set forth hereinafter: 
(1)  Unsanitary buildings which constitute a hazard to the general health or safety because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation or neglect through abandonment, or because of a lack of proper sanitation, or otherwise which are dangerous to life and/or property; and/or 
(2)  Buildings or any part thereof which are in a dilapidated, structurally deficient or filthy condition which endanger the life or health of persons living in the vicinity. 
(Mo. of 7-5-94, § 2; Mo. of 7-1-97, § 2) 
Sec. 7-28. - Administration by building inspector. 
    This article shall be administered by the borough building inspector, who shall: 
(1)  Investigate and determine if a certain structure or building appears to be a hazardous building as defined above; 
(2)  Upon determining that a structure or building is hazardous, the building inspector shall give written notice to the owner, occupant, mortgagee, lessee, agent and all other persons having an interest in such building, as shown by the land records of the borough, to appear before him to show cause why the building or structure reported to be hazardous should not be repaired or demolished; 
(3)  In the event that there is no satisfactory resolution, explanation or other good cause, the building inspector shall hold a hearing to determine whether or not the structure is hazardous and whether or not the building should be demolished, repaired, or be deemed to be nonhazardous. At said hearing, the owner of the building and all other interested parties shall be afforded all rights of procedural due process afforded by the United States Constitution and the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut. Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be published in a newspaper having a general circulation in the borough at least twice at intervals of not less than two (2) days, the first not more than fifteen (15) days prior to the public hearing and the second not less than two (2) days prior to the public hearing. 
(4)  At such hearing, the building inspector shall solicit the testimony, either written or oral, of appropriate officials of the borough or other appropriate witnesses as to the condition of the buildings or structures and other relevant matters. 
(5)  The building inspector shall make written findings of fact from the testimony offered pursuant to subsections (3) and (4) above as to whether or not the building in question is hazardous within the meaning of section 7-27 hereof; 
(6)  Upon the conclusion of the hearing and after consideration of all evidence, the building inspector shall issue an order based upon the findings of fact made pursuant to the above noted sections commanding the owner, occupant, mortgagee, lessee, agent, and/or other persons having an interest in the building found to be hazardous to demolish or repair said building within a time to be specified in such order, which time shall not be less than twenty-five (25) days from the date service of the order was made upon those persons described above. 
(Mo. of 7-5-94, § 3; Mo. of 7-1-97, § 3) 
Sec. 7-29. - Service of notice, findings and orders. 
    All notices, findings and orders shall be served by registered mail, or by any proper officer and by posting a copy thereof on such building. 
    In the event any such owner or interested person cannot be located to receive any such notice, finding and/or order, then service shall be made by publication in a newspaper having general circulation in the borough. 
(Mo. of 7-5-94, § 4; Mo. of 7-1-97, § 4) 
Sec. 7-30. - Appeal of order. 
    Within twenty (20) days after the order is served, the owner, occupant, or other parties with an interest in such building may appeal the order as provided in section 7-28 to the local Building Code Board of Appeals for its review of the order, which order may be affirmed, modified, extended or otherwise altered by said Building Code Board of Appeals. 
    In the event the appellant is aggrieved by the decision of the Building Code Board of Appeals, the appellant may appeal such decision to the board of mayor and burgesses by filing his/her appeal within ten (10) days of receipt of the decision of the Building Code Board of Appeals with the office of the borough clerk. The board of mayor and burgesses shall review the decision of the Building Code Board of Appeals which decision may be affirmed, modified, extended or otherwise altered by the board of mayor and burgesses. 
    Nothing herein shall preclude an aggrieved party from appealing the decision of the board of mayor and burgesses to the superior court. 
(Mo. of 7-5-94, § 5; Mo. of 7-1-97, § 5) 
Sec. 7-31. - Demolition and recovery of costs. 
    If the owner, occupant or other parties fail to comply with the order provided for in section 7-28, and/or upon the expiration of the appeal period provided in section 7-30, the building inspector shall cause such building or structure to be repaired or demolished as the facts may warrant, and shall notify the interested persons of the costs of such repairs or demolition, which costs shall become a municipal lien against the land on which the building is or was situated, provided such lien is recorded on the land records within the time provided by and under chapter 847 of the general statutes as the same is currently enacted and as may be amended from time to time. The borough may recover the costs of such repair or demolition as provided by and under and within the limitations and power of chapter 847 of the general statutes as the same is currently enacted and as may be amended from time to time. the borough may also seek payment from the owner directly without the necessity of filing and/or foreclosing the municipal lien. 
(Mo. of 7-5-94, § 6; Mo. of 7-1-97, § 6) 
Sec. 7-32. - Penalties for violation. 
    Violation of the provisions of this article shall be punishable by a penalty of ninety-nine dollars ($99.00) per day. Each day a building or structure is in violation of this article shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Mo. of 7-5-94, § 7; Mo. of 7-1-97, § 7) 
Chapter 8 - ELECTIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Registrars of voters, § 3.25; biennial meetings for the election of officers, § 6.1; fraudulent voting; penalty, § 24. 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; election of members of planning commission, § 15-20. 
State Law reference- Elections, G.S. § 9-1 et seq. 

Sec. 8-1. - Election of justices of the peace. 
(a)  Section 9-183 of the general statutes provides that the number of justices of the peace for each town shall be equal to one-third the number of jurors to which such town is by law entitled, provided any town, by ordinance, may provide for the election of a lessor number. The borough is now entitled to one hundred eighty (180) jurors. 
(b)  There being no current need for the election of sixty (60) justices of the peace in the borough, and acting under the provisions of the above section thereof, the number, until further action by the legislative authority of the borough, will remain fixed at the present number of forty-five (45). 
(Code 1973, § 9-1; Mo. of 8-1-00) 
Sec. 8-2. - Voting districts. 
(a)  The borough is and shall continue to be divided into three (3) wards divided into seven (7) voting districts as follows: 
(1)  The first ward shall be divided into two (2) voting districts designated as "First Ward, Voting District 1" and "First Ward, Voting District 2." 
   First Ward, Voting District 1 shall be bounded and described as follows: 
  Commencing at a point at the intersection of the extension of Rubber Avenue, easterly, where it meets the center of Naugatuck River; thence northerly along the center of Naugatuck River until a point easterly of and opposite to the intersection of Church Street with Millville Avenue; thence westerly, southwesterly, westerly and northwesterly along the center line of Millville Avenue to the intersection of the center line of Millville Avenue with the center line of Field Street; thence southwesterly along the center line of Field Street to the intersection of the center line of Field Street with the center line of Rubber Avenue; and thence southeasterly along the center line of Rubber Avenue to the point of beginning. 
   First Ward, Voting District 2 shall be bounded and described as follows: 
  Commencing at a point at the intersection of the extension of Rubber Avenue, easterly, where it meets the center of the Naugatuck River; thence southerly along the center of the Naugatuck River to the Naugatuck-Beacon Falls Town Line; thence northwesterly; thence northerly; thence northeasterly; then northerly; and thence easterly along the Naugatuck Town Line to the intersection of the northerly Town Line with the center line of Allerton Road; thence southerly along the center line of Allerton Road to the intersection of the center line of Allerton Road with the center line of Field Street; thence southwesterly along the center line of Field Street to the intersection of the center line of Field Street with the center line of Rubber Avenue; and thence southeasterly along the center line of Rubber Avenue to the point of beginning. 
(2)  The second ward shall be divided into two (2) voting districts designated as "Second Ward, Voting District 1" and "Second Ward, Voting District 2." 
   Second Ward, Voting District 1 shall be bounded and described as follows: 
  Beginning at the intersection of the center line of Mulberry Street, extended easterly to the Town Line; thence westerly along the extension, easterly of the center line of Mulberry Street and thence westerly along the center line of Mulberry Street to the intersection of the center line of Mulberry Street with the center line of Maple Hill Road; thence westerly in a straight line and passing through the intersection of the center line of High Street with the center line of South Main Street to the center of the Naugatuck River; thence northerly along the center of Naugatuck River to a point westerly from and opposite to the center line of Calvin Street formerly called Cemetery Street; thence easterly to the center line of North Main Street and the center line of Calvin Street; thence easterly along center line of Calvin Street to the intersection of the center line of Calvin Street with the center line of High Street; thence northerly and northeasterly along the center line of High Street with the center line of City Hill Street; thence southeasterly along the center line of City Hill Street to the intersection of the center line of City Hill Street with the center line of May Street; thence easterly and northeasterly along the center line of May Street formerly known as Pond Hill Road to the Town Line; and thence southerly along the Town Line to the point of beginning. 
   Second Ward, Voting District 2 shall be bounded and described as follows: 
  Beginning at the intersection of the center line of Mulberry Street extended easterly to the Town Line; thence westerly along the extension easterly of center line of Mulberry Street and westerly along said line of Mulberry Street to the intersection of the center line of Mulberry Street with the center line of Maple Hill Road; thence westerly in a straight line and passing through the intersection of the center line of High Street with the center line of South Main Street to the center of Naugatuck River; thence southerly along the center of the Naugatuck River to the Naugatuck-Beacon Falls Town Line; thence easterly; southeasterly; easterly; northeasterly; and northerly along the Town Line to the point of beginning. 
(3)  The third ward shall be divided into three (3) voting districts designated as "Third Ward, Voting District 1," "Third Ward, Voting District 2" and "Third Ward, Voting District 3" as follows: 
   Third Ward, Voting District 1 shall be bounded and described as follows: 
  Beginning at a point at the intersection of the center of Hop Brook, so called, with the center of the Naugatuck River; thence northerly and northwesterly along the center of Hop Brook to the Town Line; thence westerly along the Town Line to the intersection of the north Town Line with the center line of Allerton Road; thence southerly along the center of Allerton Road to the intersection of the center line of Allerton Road with the center line of Field Street; thence southwesterly along the center line of Field Street to the intersection of the center line of Field Street with the center line of Millville Avenue; thence southeasterly; easterly; northeasterly; to the intersection of the center line of Millville Avenue with the center line of Church Street; thence easterly to the center of the Naugatuck River and thence northerly to the point of beginning. 
   Third Ward, Voting District 2 shall be bounded and described as follows: 
  Beginning at a point easterly from and opposite to the intersection of the center line of Millville with the center line of Church Street at the center of the Naugatuck River; thence northerly along the center of the Naugatuck River to the intersection of Hop Brook with the center of the Naugatuck River; thence northerly and northwesterly along the center of Hop Brook to the Naugatuck-Waterbury Town Line; thence easterly along the Naugatuck-Waterbury Town Line to the middle of State Highway Route 8; thence generally southerly along the mid line of said Route 8 to a point westerly from and at a right angle from the intersection of the center line of Calvin Street (formerly called Cemetery Street) and North Main Street; thence westerly to the center line of the Naugatuck River, and point and place beginning. 
   Third Ward, Voting District 3 shall be bounded and described as follows: 
  Beginning at the midline of State Highway Route 8 on the Naugatuck-Waterbury Town Line; thence easterly to the Naugatuck-Prospect Town Line; thence southerly along the Naugatuck-Prospect Town Line to the center line of May Street (formerly called Pond Hill Road); thence southwesterly and westerly along the center line of May Street to a point where it intersects the center line of City Hill Street; thence northwesterly along the center line of City Hill Street to a point where it intersects the center line of High Street; thence southwesterly and southerly along the center line of High Street to a point where it intersects the center line of Calvin Street (formerly called Cemetery Street); thence westerly along the center line of Calvin Street to a point where it intersects the center line of North Main Street; thence westerly to Route 8, where it meets the most southerly point of Third Ward, District 1; thence northerly on the center line of Route 8 to the Naugatuck-Waterbury Town Line, the point and place of beginning. 
(b)  The board of mayor and burgesses shall cause notice of the location of voting places in the voting districts in all wards to be published in a newspaper circulating in the borough at least six (6) days before any election to be held in the borough. 
(c)  Each elector of the borough shall vote in the voting district in which he continuously resided for at least one (1) calendar month next preceding an election. If an elector of the borough shall have removed from one (1) voting district of the borough into another district thereof and shall not have continuously resided for one (1) calendar month next preceding an election in the district in which he then resides at the time of such election, he shall be entitled to vote in the district in which he otherwise would have been entitled to vote, had he not so removed. 
(Code 1973, § 9-2) 
State Law reference- Voting districts, G.S. § 9-169; split voting districts, G.S. § 9-169a. 
Chapter 9 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Fire marshal, § 3.15; fire department, § 36. 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 7; garbage, trash and refuse, Ch. 10; health and sanitation, Ch. 11; utilities, Ch. 19. 
State Law reference- Authority to provide for fire protection, G.S. § 7-148(c)(4)(B); fire marshals and fire hazards, G.S. § 29-291 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 9-1. - Fireworks. 
(a)  No person shall set fire to, discharge, keep or display any firecracker, rocket, or other fireworks except at such times and under such conditions as may be designated by the board of mayor and burgesses and the laws of this state. 
(b)  No person shall keep or expose for sale any firecrackers, rockets or other fireworks within the limits of any street, highway or public grounds within the limits of the borough. 
(c)  No person shall expose for sale or other purpose any firecracker, rocket or other fireworks on or in any private premises without permission from the mayor, who may designate the conditions under which such permission may be granted. 
(Code 1973, § 10-1) 
State Law reference- Fireworks, G.S. § 29-356 et seq. 
Sec. 9-2. - False fire alarms. 
    No person shall willfully ring or cause to be rung in, any false alarm of fire within the borough. 
(Code 1973, § 10-2) 
Sec. 9-3. - Compounds more explosive than gunpowder; license required. 
(a)  No person shall manufacture, sell, deal in, procure, transport or use any compound more explosive than gunpowder within the limits of the borough without first obtaining a license therefor as required by the laws of this state. 
(b)  Any person violating this section shall, on conviction, be punished as prescribed in section 1-7. 
(Code 1973, § 10-3) 
Cross reference- Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 12. 
State Law reference- Explosives, G.S. § 29-343 et seq. 
Sec. 9-4. - Key boxes for certain properties. 
(a)  Authority of fire chief to require. When a property is protected by an automatic alarm system, or access to or within a structure or an area on that property is unduly difficult because of secured openings, and where immediate access is necessary for life saving or firefighting purposes, the fire chief may require a key box to be installed in an approved location, and may supervise the installation of the key box. The key box shall be a type approved by the fire chief. 
(b)  Contents. The key box shall contain: 
(1)  Keys to locked points of ingress whether on the interior or exterior of such buildings; 
(2)  Keys to locked mechanical equipment rooms; 
(3)  Keys to locked electrical rooms; 
(4)  Keys to elevator controls; 
(5)  Keys to other areas as directed by the fire chief. 
(c)  Approval by fire chief required. All key boxes shall be approved by the fire chief prior to installation. 
(d)  Penalty for violation. Any building owner violating this section ninety (90) days after receiving due notice by the fire chief or other fire department official, which notice may be extended by the fire chief or other fire department official, shall be subject to a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Ord. No. 85, §§ 1-4, 11-7-89) 
Secs. 9-5-9-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE ZONES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 16; traffic and motor vehicles, Ch. 18. 
State Law reference- Establishment of fire zones, G.S. § 29-293. 

Sec. 9-16. - Definition. 
    A fire zone is a designated unobstructed passageway sufficient in size to permit free passage of fire and other emergency equipment from a public highway to all necessary areas or portions of any private or public property. 
(Ord. No. 58, § 1, 8-14-74) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 9-17. - Established by fire marshal. 
    The fire marshal shall establish fire zones by written order and shall file one (1) copy with the borough clerk, one (1) copy with the board of police commissioners and one (1) copy shall be sent by certified mail to the owners or agents thereof, of any private land on which a fire zone is established. 
(Ord. No. 58, § 2, 8-14-74) 
Sec. 9-18. - Appeal by property owner of designation of fire zone. 
    Any private property owner aggrieved by the designation of a fire zone on his property may file with the borough clerk, within thirty (30) days after he received notice of the fire marshal's order, written notice of appeal, setting forth therein reasons of aggrievement. After hearing, the board of police commissioners may affirm, modify or recind such order. 
(Ord. No. 58, § 3, 8-14-74) 
Sec. 9-19. - Signs, markings, etc., to be erected; costs. 
    Upon establishment of a fire zone, the board of police commissioners shall cause to be erected or installed, adequate signs, markings and other devices to delineate the fire zone. Signs, markings and other devices erected or installed on privately- owned premises shall be at the cost of the owner and may be billed for and collected in the same manner as taxes, provided the board of police commissioners causes a notice of lien to be filed on the land records within sixty (60) days after such erection or installation. 
(Ord. No. 58, § 4, 8-14-74) 
Sec. 9-20. - Parking, standing within fire zone-Prohibited; penalty; exception. 
(a)  No person shall park or permit to stand, a motor vehicle in a fire zone which has been es-tablished in accordance with this article, except when actually picking up or discharging passengers. Any person violating this section, upon conviction, shall be punished in accordance with section 1-7. 
(b)  The registered owner of a motor vehicle shall be presumed to be the operator of such vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 58, § 5, 8-14-74) 
Cross reference- Stopping, standing and parking, § 18-31 et seq.; parking violations, § 18-91 et seq. 
Sec. 9-21. - Same-Fine. 
    Whenever a motor vehicle is found standing in violation of section 9-20 a police officer shall serve upon the owner or operator of such vehicle, or place upon such vehicle, a notice directing the owner or operator thereof to either appear in person and pay the fine specified in section 18-91(c) or mail a check or money order for that sum to the police department as required by section 18-93. When the appropriate payment is made, it shall act as a bar to prosecution for violation of section 9-20. 
(Ord. No. 58, § 7, 8-14-74) 
Sec. 9-22. - Towing of motor vehicles in fire zones. 
    Any motor vehicle found standing in a fire zone which has been established in accordance with this article, may be towed, upon the direction of a police officer, to a public or private parking facility, and all expense of such towing and any subsequent storage, shall be borne by the registered owner of such vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 58, § 6, 8-14-74) 
Cross reference- Traffic and motor vehicles, Ch. 18. 
Secs. 9-23-9-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MINIMUM STANDARD FOR FIRE PROTECTION IN PLANNED BUILDING GROUPS 

Sec. 9-41. - Intent and purpose. 
    It is the intent and purpose of this article to provide a minimum standard for fire protection in planned building groups being proposed for construction. This article is applicable to all proposed development of multiple structures on a parcel of land that is under the ownership, control, or development by one individual, corporation, partnership, or firm. 
    To establish a minimum standard this article will adopt, in it's full content NFPA standard 1141. 
(Ord. No. 106, § 1, 3-3-98) 
Sec. 9-42. - Definitions. 
    As listed in Chapter 2 of the text of NFPA 1141. 
    Alternative. A system, condition, arrangement, material, or equipment submitted for approval to the authority having jurisdiction and the fire chief as a substitute for a code requirement. 
    Approved.* Acceptable to the authority having jurisdiction. 
    Authority having jurisdiction.* The organization, office, or individual responsible for approving equipment, an installation, or a procedure. 
    Automatic fire extinguishing system. Any system that is designed and installed to detect a fire and subsequently discharge an extinguishing agent without human activation or direction. 
    Basement. A story with more than fifty (50) percent of its cubic volume below the average adjacent ground level. 
    Curb cut. Reduced curb height to facilitate vehicle passage over or across a curb. Curb cut can be an abrupt reduction or a tapering reduction for the length of the curb on each side of the means of access. 
    Dry hydrant. A permanent piping system, normally a drafting source, that provides access to a water source other than a municipal-type water system. 
    Dwelling. A single unit providing complete and independent living facilities for one (1) or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation. 
    Existing condition. Any situation, circumstance, or physical makeup of any structure, premise, or process that was ongoing or in effect prior to the adoption of this standard. 
    Farms. Those properties that are used primarily for agricultural purposes. 
    Fire department. The governmental or other organization that is responsible for providing fire protection services to an area. 
    Fire flow. The flow rate of a water supply, measured at 20 psi (137.9 kPa) residual pressure, that is available for fire fighting. 
    Fire hazard. Any situation, process, material, or condition that, on the basis of applicable data, can cause a fire or an explosion or provide a ready fuel supply to augment the spread or intensity of the fire or explosion and that poses a threat to life or the property of others. 
    Fire hydrant. A valved connection on a water supply system having one (1) or more outlets and that is used to supply hose and fire department pumpers with water. 
    Fire lane. A means of access or other passageway designated and identified to provide access for emergency apparatus where parking is not allowed. 
    Fire protection. All measures taken to reduce the burden of fire on the quality of life. Fire protection includes measures such as fire prevention, fire suppression, built-in fire protection systems, and planning and building codes. 
    Fire protection system. Any fire alarm device or system or fire extinguishing device or system, or their combination, that is designed and installed for detecting, controlling, or extinguishing a fire or otherwise alerting occupants, or the fire department, or both, that a fire has occurred. 
    Floor area, gross. The area of a building under the roof, multiplied by the number of floors, including the basement. 
    Ground elevation, adjacent. The reference plane representing the average elevation of the finished ground level measured at a distance of 10 ft. (3 m) from all exterior walls of the building. 
    Height. As applied to a building, the vertical distance from the adjacent ground elevation to the average elevation of the roof of the highest story. 
    Jurisdiction. Any governmental unit or political division or subdivision including but not limited to township, village, borough, parish, city, county, state, commonwealth, province, freehold, district, or territory over which the governmental unit exercises power and authority. 
    Labeled. Equipment or materials to which has been attached a label, symbol, or other identifying mark of an organization that is acceptable to the authority having jurisdiction and concerned with product evaluation, that maintains periodic inspection of production of labeled equipment or materials, and by whose labeling the manufacturer indicates compliance with appropriate standards or performance in a specified manner. 
    Listed.* Equipment, materials, or services included in a list published by an organization that is acceptable to the authority having jurisdiction and concerned with evaluation of products or services, that maintains periodic inspection of production of listed equipment or materials or periodic evaluation of services, and whose listing states that either the equipment, material, or service meets identified standards or has been tested and found suitable for a specified purpose. 
    Means of access. The method by which entry or approach is made by emergency apparatus to, for example, roadways, fire lanes, and parking lots. 
    Municipal-type water systems. A system having water pipes servicing hydrants and designed to furnish, over and above domestic consumption, a minimum of 250 gpm (950 L/min) at 20 psi (137.9 kPa) residual pressure for a 2-hour duration. 
    Planned building groups. Multiple structures constructed on a parcel of land, excluding farmland, under the ownership, control, or development by an individual, a corporation, a partnership, or a firm. 
    Private street. Any accessway normally intended for vehicular use not dedicated as a public street. 
    Public street. A thoroughfare that has been dedicated for vehicular use by the public. 
    Roadway. Any public or private street, including bridges. 
    Shall. Indicates a mandatory requirement. 
    Should. Indicates a recommendation or that which is advised but not required. 
    Standpipe.* A pipe and attendant hose valves and hose (if provided) used for conveying water to various parts of a building for fire-fighting purposes. 
    Story. That portion of a building between the upper surface of the floor and the upper surface of the next floor or roof above. 
    Structure. That which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner. 
*An asterisk (*) following the number or letter designating a paragraph indicates that explanatory material on the paragraph can be found in Appendix A of NFPA 1141. 
(Ord. No. 106, § 2, 3-3-98) 
Sec. 9-43. - Application. 
    This article is applicable to all developments that meet the definition of a planned building group, as defined in NFPA 1141. 
(Ord. No. 106, § 3, 3-3-98) 
Sec. 9-44. - Plans and approval. 
    Plans for all developments that meet the definition of a planned building group are to be submitted to the fire department for approval before issuance of the construction permit. All information required by NFPA 1141 shall be included with all submissions. 
(Ord. No. 106, § 4, 3-3-98) 
Chapter 10 - GARBAGE, TRASH AND REFUSE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 7; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 9; health and sanitation, Ch. 11; utilities, Ch. 19. 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate garbage, trash, rubbish, ashes or waste material collection and disposal, G.S. § 7-148(c)(4)(H). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 10-1-10-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LITTERING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Scattering advertising sheets or handbills, § 3-3. 

Sec. 10-16. - Short title. 
    This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Naugatuck Littering Ordinance." 
(Code 1973, § 12-16) 
Sec. 10-17. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein. 
    Garbage. The word "garbage" means putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food. 
    Litter. The word "litter" includes "garbage," "refuse," and "rubbish" as defined herein and all other waste material which, if thrown or deposited as prohibited in this article has the same meaning ascribed to such term in section 22a-248(4) of the general statutes, as amended, and also specifically includes furniture, automobiles or automobile parts, large appliances, tires, bulky waste, garbage bags or contents thereof, hazardous waste as defined in section 22a-115 of the general statutes, as amended, or any other similar materials. 
    Park. The word "park" shall include a park, reservation, playground, recreation center or any other public area in the borough, owned or used by the borough and devoted to active or passive recreation. 
    Private premises. The term "private premises" shall include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, or mailbox belonging or appurtenant to any dwelling, house, building or other structure. 
    Public place. The term "public place" includes any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or other public ways and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds and buildings. 
    Refuse. The word "refuse" means all putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except body wastes), including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, and solid market and industrial wastes. 
    Rubbish. "Rubbish" is nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery and similar materials. 
    Vehicle. The word "vehicle" means every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, including devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
(Code 1973, § 12-17; Ord. of 5-1-90) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 10-18. - Garbage containers. 
    All garbage shall be placed in a private container for collection. Such container shall be constructed of metal, shall have a handle, and shall be kept covered at all times. 
(Code 1973, § 12-18) 
Sec. 10-19. - Rubbish receptacles; bundling of newspapers, magazines, etc. 
(a)  All rubbish shall be deposited in authorized private receptacles. The placement of rubbish in authorized private receptacles to be collected shall be so as to prevent the rubbish from being scattered or from being carried by the elements. 
(b)  Authorized private receptacles for rubbish pickup shall be of galvanized iron or other material of substantial construction, with two (2) handles and of such size that, when filled, it can be easily handled by one (1) man. Each container shall have its own lid and be securely covered. Boxes containing rubbish and capable of being handled by one (1) man will be allowed, provided they are securely covered and tied. Newspapers, magazines and other such materials must be bundled and securely tied. No other type of container for rubbish will be allowed under this article, with the exception of authorized general cleanup collection. 
(c)  Rubbish will not be collected, unless put out for collection in accordance with this section. 
(Code 1973, § 12-19) 
Sec. 10-20. - Unlawful use of public litter receptacles. 
    No person shall deposit household rubbish or garbage in public litter receptacles. 
(Code 1973, § 12-20) 
Sec. 10-21. - Littering streets and other public places generally. 
(a)  No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon any street, sidewalk or other public place within the borough. 
(b)  No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within the borough the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or any litter from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. 
(Code 1973, § 12-21) 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 16. 
Sec. 10-22. - Littering parks. 
    No person shall throw or deposit litter in any park within the borough. Where public receptacles are not provided, all litter shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere. 
(Code 1973, § 12-22) 
Cross reference- Parks and recreation, Ch. 14. 
Sec. 10-23. - Throwing litter from vehicle. 
    No person, being the driver or a passenger in a vehicle shall throw or deposit litter upon any street or public place within the borough, or upon any private property. 
(Code 1973, § 12-23) 
Cross reference- Traffic and motor vehicles, Ch. 18. 
Sec. 10-24. - Transportation of ashes, rubbish, boxes, etc. 
    No person shall transport in any truck or other vehicle, or in any other manner, through the public streets of the borough, streets to which the public has access, or over any land owned or controlled by the borough, any ashes, waste material, rubbish, discarded boxes, barrels or other containers of merchandise or discarded material of any kind or description, consigned to a dump or to any other destination, unless the same is conveyed or transported in a truck, vehicle or other manner entirely covered or enclosed so that material cannot escape while being so transported. In the event the same shall be transported or conveyed other than in an entirely closed truck, vehicle or otherwise, such material being so transported and conveyed shall be covered by a canvas, or covering of a similar nature, securely fastened so as to prevent the material escaping from the truck, vehicle or otherwise onto the streets, sidewalks, ways, public land or private property. It shall be unlawful for any person to so convey and transport ashes, rubbish, waste or discarded material of any nature through the public streets of the borough, on ways open to the public or over land owned or controlled by the public, or wilfully to deposit or negligently allow such material to escape onto the streets and other places while being so transported and conveyed. It shall be the duty of every person transporting and conveying such material to stop and recover the same, in the event of any escape or loss thereof, irrespective of the cause of the escape or loss. 
(Code 1973, § 12-24) 
Cross reference- Traffic and motor vehicles, Ch. 18. 
Sec. 10-25. - Unlawful deposits in ponds, etc. 
    No person shall throw or deposit, in any pond, brook, or natural waterway within the limits of the borough, any dead animal, dead fish or fish waste, rubbish, filth, foul or offensive substance, or any refuse matter whatsoever, fuel, lubricating oil, fish oil or other greasy substance, so that the same shall create a danger to the public health, safety, and welfare. 
(Code 1973, § 12-25) 
Sec. 10-26. - Posting notices on utility poles, trees or public buildings. 
    No person shall knowingly post or affix any notice, poster, or other paper or device calculated to attract the attention of the public, to any lamppost, public utility pole or shade tree, or upon any public structure or building, except as may be authorized or required by law. 
(Code 1973, § 12-26) 
Sec. 10-27. - Deposit of litter on occupied private property. 
    No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied private property within the borough, in such a manner that it tends to create a danger to the public health, safety and welfare, whether owned by such person or not, except that the owner or person in control of private property may maintain private receptacles for collection, as authorized by this article. Litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements from any such occupied private property, to the street, sidewalk or other public place or upon any private property. 
(Code 1973, § 12-27) 
Sec. 10-28. - Deposit of litter on open or vacant private property. 
    No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant private property within the borough, whether owned by such person or not, so that the same shall create a danger to the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Code 1973, § 12-28) 
Sec. 10-29. - Duty to maintain private property free of litter. 
    The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all times maintain his premises free of litter so that the same does not constitute a danger to the public health, safety and welfare. This section shall not prohibit the storage of litter in authorized private receptacles for collection. 
(Code 1973, § 12-29) 
Sec. 10-30. - Notice to remove litter from open or vacant private property. 
    The board of health is hereby authorized and empowered to request the owner of any open or vacant private property within the borough, or the agent of such owner, to properly dispose of litter located on such owner's property which is dangerous to public health, safety or welfare. Such request shall be by registered mail, addressed to the owner at his last known address. 
(Code 1973, § 12-30) 
Sec. 10-31. - Duty of property owners or occupants to keep sidewalks free of litter. 
    Persons owning or occupying property shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free of litter. 
(Code 1973, § 12-31) 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 16. 
Sec. 10-32. - Violations of article; penalties. 
(a)  It is the intention of this section to impose municipal penalties for the violation of this article as permitted under section 7-148(c)(10)(A) of the general statutes, as amended, which penalties shall be in addition to and not in limitation of the borough's right to seek civil penalties and enforcement, including environmental remediation and the removal of dumped materials, under and as defined in section 22a-250 of the general statutes, as amended. 
(b)  The chief of police shall have the power to promulgate and enforce regulations with the same effect as this article, as deemed necessary by the chief of police for the adequate enforcement and administration of any of the mandatory provisions of this article, and shall have the power to amend such regulations. Such regulations shall include but shall not be limited to the following: 
(1)  A schedule of fines for violation of any mandatory provision of this article, including separate fines for the littering or dumping of specified materials, provided such fines do not exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each violation; 
(2)  Procedures for the clean-up and/or remediation of conditions resulting from violations of any of the mandatory provisions of this article, where such procedures are required or appropriate; 
(3)  An appeals process for any person charged with a violation of this article to appeal his fine or penalty before a single local hearing officer designated by the mayor who shall not be a member of the police department; and 
(4)  The form of the ordinance citation or ticket to be utilized to charge a person with a violation of this article. 
(c)  The regulations described in subsection (b) of this section and any amendments thereto shall become effective upon the presentment and ratification thereof by a majority vote of the board of police commissioners and shall thereupon be appended as Exhibit A to the ordinance from which this section is derived. 
(d)  The penalty and enforcement mechanisms set forth in section 1-7 shall apply with equal force to all provisions and sections of this article. 
(Ord. of 5-1-90) 
Secs. 10-33-10-44. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RECYCLING[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 92, adopted Dec. 4, 1990, was not expressly amendatory of the Code of Ordinances; therefore, inclusion herein as a new Art. III, §§ 10-45-10-50, to Ch. 10 has been at the editor's discretion. 

Sec. 10-45. - Purpose. 
    This article is adopted by the Borough of Naugatuck, Connecticut (the "borough") as part of the long-term plan for safe and sanitary disposal of solid waste, and to establish measures to assure compliance of persons within the borough boundaries and of collectors with the requirements of the laws and regulations of the State of Connecticut for separation, collection, purchasing and marketing of recyclable solid waste. 
(Ord. No. 92, § 1, 12-4-90; Amend. of Oct. 23, 1997) 
Sec. 10-46. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings herein defined: 
    Antifreeze. Used automobile coolant utilized in internal combustion engines. 
    Aseptic drink boxes. A plastic coated, aluminum foil lined, paperboard container used to package beverages for human consumption which has a minimum of contamination by food or other sources. 
    Board. The Board of Mayor and Burgesses of the Borough of Naugatuck, Connecticut. When used in reference to a voting body, it shall be taken to include the phrase "or a majority thereof." 
    Brush. Yard waste consisting of branches, sticks, and trimmings from trees or bushes, over three (3) feet in length and less than six (6) inches in diameter. 
    Cardboard. Corrugated boxes and similar material and kraft paper materials which are unwaxed and have a minimum of contamination by food or other materials. 
    CFC and HCFC. Chlorofluorocarbon and hydro-chlorofluorocarbon gas used as a coolant in refrigerators, freezers, air conditioners, and dehumidifiers, free from contamination from any other gas. 
    Christmas tree. Coniferous trees from seasonal holiday use free from contamination by any plastic, metal or other foreign objects. 
    Commingled. Mixed recyclables that are collected together. 
    Collector. Any person who holds himself out for hire to collect recyclables from residential, commercial, industrial or other sources. 
    CRRA. Connecticut Resources Recovery Authority. 
    DEP. The Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection. 
    Director. The director of public works of the municipality (as defined below) or his authorized representative. 
    Dry cell battery. Any device used in generating electric current through a chemical reaction including, but not limited to, nickel-cadmium batteries, carbon batteries and alkaline batteries. 
    Glass food container. A glass bottle or jar of any size or shape used to package food products suitable for human or animal consumption with a minimum of contamination by food or other sources. 
    Hauler. Any person which holds himself out for hire to pick up refuse (garbage) from residential, commercial, industrial, or other sources. 
    HDPE container. Any high-density polyethylene bottle or container one (1) gallon or less in size, in any shape used to store food, household laundry detergent, or other nonhazardous or nontoxic materials. Identified on the container as #2 plastic. 
    IPC. Intermediate processing center which receives, processes, and markets recyclables. 
    Leaves. Deciduous and coniferous seasonal deposition. 
    Magazines and catalogs. Used or discarded glossy periodicals and mail-order type catalogs which have a minimum of contamination by food or other material. 
    Oil filters. Steel oil filters utilized in internal combustion engines. 
    Optional recyclables. Those recyclables which may be designated to be recycled by the DEP or the board, to be recycled through a voluntary or mandatory pilot recycling program. Those items currently designated as optional recyclables are as follows: 
(1)  Dry-cell batteries. 
(2)  Grass clippings. 
(3)  Scrap tires. 
(4)  Telephone directories. 
(5)  Propane cylinders. 
(6)  Brush. 
(7)  Mixed paper. 
    Paperboard cartons. A plastic coated paperboard container used to package beverages and food for human consumption which has a minimum of contamination by food or other sources. 
    Person. Any individual, corporation, partnership, association, or other entity or organization, either public or private, of any kind. 
    PETE. Polyethylene terephthalate container one (1) gallon or less in size and any shape used to package beverages or other nonhazardous or nontoxic materials. Identified on the container as #1 plastic. 
    Propane cylinder. Metal propane gas storage tanks most often weighing twenty (20) pounds and used for gas grills, empty of all gas with valves intact. 
    Recyclables. Any item designated by the DEP or the Board which can be separated or diverted as defined below under "recycle." 
    Recycle. To separate or divert any item or items from the solid waste stream for the purposes of processing it, causing it to be processed, or storing it for later processing into a material product, including the production of compost, in order to provide for disposition of the item or items in a manner, other than incineration or land filling, which will best protect the environment. Nothing in this definition shall preclude the use of waste oil as a fuel in an oil burner, or scrap tires as fuel in an incinerator. 
    Recycling center. The municipality's recycling drop-off facility, area or areas as designated by the board. 
    Recycling container. Any container designated by the board for use as a residential (curbside) recycling container for the storage and (curbside) collection of recyclables. 
    Scrap metal. Used or discarded items which consist predominantly of ferrous metals, aluminum, brass, lead chromium, iron, nickel, or alloys thereof including but not limited to, white goods and metal furniture and other household items. 
    Scrap tires. Discarded rubber or synthetic rubber tires used by or manufactured for vehicles including, but not limited to, automobiles, trucks, busses, tractors and trailers. 
    Storage batteries. Lead acid batteries or other batteries used in motor vehicles such as automobiles, airplanes, boats, recreational vehicles, tractors and like applications. 
    Telephone directories. Annual telephone directories both yellow and white pages with a minimum of contamination by food or other materials. 
    Waste oil. Crankcase oil that has been utilized in internal combustion engines. 
(Ord. No. 92, § 2, 12-4-90; Amend. of Oct. 23, 1997) 
Sec. 10-47. - Authority and powers. 
(a)  Authority to designate where certain residential waste items are to be processed. The municipality is authorized to, by Public Act 90-220 and shall through its legislative body, designate where the following items generated from residential properties shall be taken for processing or sale: 
(1)  Cardboard; 
(2)  Glass food and beverage containers; 
(3)  Leaves; 
(4)  Metal food and beverage containers; 
(5)  Newspapers; 
(6)  Storage batteries; 
(7)  Waste oil; 
(8)  Plastic #1 and #2 food and beverage containers; 
(9)  Scrap metal; 
(10)  Magazines and catalogs; 
(11)  Aseptic drink boxes; 
(12)  Paperboard cartons; 
(13)  Antifreeze; and 
(14)  Oil filters. 
The processing or sale of such items at any other area shall be prohibited. 
(b)  Notification of licensed collectors. The board shall not give less than sixty (60) days' notice of its intent to designate where these items from the residential properties shall be taken for processing or sale to all licensed collectors hauling solid waste or such items of the municipality. At the conclusion of such period, the board shall cause notice of such designation to appear in two (2) newspapers of general circulation in the municipality, the Naugatuck Daily News and the Waterbury Republican-American, and shall conduct a public hearing thereon. 
(c)  Authority to enact regulations. The board is hereby authorized to enact, from time to time, by resolution such regulations as it shall deem in the public interest regarding separation, collection, recovery, removal and storage of recyclables and enforcement of this article. 
(d)  Authority of mayor to designate DEP contact person. The mayor shall, and is granted the authority to, designate a person to be contacted by the DEP with inquiries regarding the recycling program. 
(e)  Authority to contract. The board is hereby authorized to employ and make contracts with persons, including the CRRA, for the separation, collection, transportation, processing and/or marketing of recyclables as provided for in Public Act 90-220, section 2(d) of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended, to carry out the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 92, § 3, 12-4-90; Amend. of Oct. 23, 1997) 
Sec. 10-48. - Separation and collection. 
(a)  Separation. On or after January 1, 1998, (1) each person who generates solid waste from residential property within the municipality shall separate from other solid waste those items designated as mandatory recyclables and (2) every other person who generates solid waste shall make provision for the separation from other solid waste of those items designated as mandatory recyclables. 
(b)  Recyclables from outside the municipality. The dumping or disposal of recyclables at any location as designated by the board from a source outside of the municipality shall be prohibited. Any dumping or disposal of recyclables from a source outside the municipality at regionally designated IPC in the name of the municipality shall be prohibited. 
(c)  Right of persons to sell recyclables. Nothing in this article shall abridge the right of any person to give or sell their recyclables, including deposit beverage containers, to any person, provided that such materials have not been set out for residential curbside collection or delivered to any disposal location designated by the board. 
(Ord. No. 92, § 4, 12-4-90; Amend. of Oct. 23, 1997) 
Sec. 10-49. - Compliance. 
(a)  On or after January 1, 1998, any collector who has reason to believe that a person from whom such collector collects solid waste has discarded recyclable items with such solid waste in violation of the provisions of this article or of section 22a-241b of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended, shall promptly notify the municipal agent of the alleged violation. Upon the request of the municipal agent, a collector shall provide warning to any person suspected by the collector or the municipality of violating the separation requirements of state law or this article. 
(b)  Each collector shall also be required to assist the municipality in the identification of any person responsible for creating loads containing significant quantities of items subject to the separation requirements of state law or this article which are delivered to a resources recovery facility or solid waste facility by the collector and detected by the owner or operator of such a facility pursuant to subsection (b) of section 22a-220 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 92, § 5, 12-4-90; Amend. of Oct. 23, 1997) 
Sec. 10-50. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Any collector found to have violated the separation and collection requirements of this article shall be subject to a fine in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each offense. In addition, the municipality reserves the right to suspend or revoke the license of any such collector. Any collector whose license is either suspended or revoked as provided for herein shall be entitled to a hearing in accordance with the provisions of the Code of Ordinances. Any person who violates the provisions of this article shall be subject to the following penalties: 
(1)  Upon a first or second offense, the violator shall receive a written warning. 
(2)  Upon a third offense occurring within a period of one (1) year from the date of the original offense, the violator shall be subject to a fine in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(3)  Upon any subsequent offense occurring within the period of one (1) year from the date of the original offense, the violator shall be subject to a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) and, in addition, shall be refused recycling collection. 
(b)  In accordance with the authority provided in section 2 of Public Act 90-249, any commercial establishment that is found to have violated the provisions of subsection (c) of section 22a-241b of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended, shall be subject to a fine in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each such violation. 
(c)  Any person who violates any other provision of this article shall be subject to a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each such offense. 
(d)  Upon placement of municipal solid waste including recyclables set out for residential curbside collection or upon delivery to any disposal location designated by the borough, it shall be a violation of this section for any person other than the collector or the authorized agents of the borough acting in the course of their employment, to collect or pick up any such municipal solid waste and recyclables or cause the same to be collected or picked up. 
    Violators of this section will be subject to a one hundred dollar ($100.00) fine per offense. 
(Ord. No. 92, § 6, 12-4-90; Amend. of Oct. 23, 1997; Ord. No. 125, 2-4-14) 
Secs. 10-51-10-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - MANDATORY LEAF WASTE COLLECTION[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Article IV, consisting of §§ 10-61-10-64, is derived from Ord. No. 93, §§ 1-4, adopted Dec. 4, 1990. This ordinance was not specifically amendatory and has been included herein as Art. IV of Ch. 10 at the editor's discretion. 

Sec. 10-61. - Established; supervision. 
    There is hereby established a program for the mandatory separation of leaf waste material from garbage or rubbish by the residents of the borough and the collection of these leaf waste materials at curbside. The collection of separated leaf waste material shall be done under the supervision of the superintendent of streets. 
(Ord. No. 93, § 1(A), 12-4-90) 
Sec. 10-62. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this article the following definitions apply: 
    Leaf waste collection period. The month of November and/or such additional days as may be designated by the superintendent of streets. 
    Leaf waste stockpiling site. Any area operated and maintained or designated by the superintendent of streets for the purpose of storing and/or disposing of leaf waste material. 
    Leaves. Deciduous and coniferous seasonal deposition. 
    Paper leaf bag. A paper leaf bag shall be a sanitary kraft paper sack or equal of thirty-gallon capacity, two (2) ply, fifty (50) pound wet strength with decomposing glue and reinforced self-supporting square bottom closure. 
    Resident. All persons or entities who are served by the borough for the collection of solid waste. 
(Ord. No. 93, § 1(B), 12-4-90) 
Sec. 10-63. - Separation of leaf waste material and placement for removal. 
(a)  Placement of leaf waste and bags containing waste for collection. During the leaf waste collection period residents shall place their leaf waste material into paper leaf bags as defined in section 10-62 above. These paper bags shall be placed at curbside on the designated collection days in a manner a assuring access by borough employees collecting such bags. 
(b)  No other material. No material other than leaves shall be placed in these bags. 
(c)  Placement in plastic bags or mixing with refuse prohibite, penalty for violation. Leaf waste material shall not be placed in plastic trash bags during the leaf waste collection period. Leaf waste shall not be placed in the same refuse container as, or otherwise mixed with, other forms of solid waste for collection, removal or disposal during the leaf waste collection period. Any violation of this article shall be punishable by a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(d)  Authority of street superintendent to refuse collection. If any resident fails to comply with these requirements, the superintendent of streets, at his discretion, may refuse to collect the leaf waste materials of the resident and the resident shall remove such leaf waste material from the curb. 
(e)  Authority to institute legal action. The imposition of penalties herein prescribed shall not preclude the borough or its representatives from instituting appropriate legal action or proceedings to prevent a violation of the provisions of this aritcle. 
Sec. 10-64. - Ownership of leaf waste materials. 
(a)  Established. Upon placement of leaf waste materials for collection by the borough at curbside pursuant to this article, such materials shall become the property of the borough. 
(b)  Violations generally. It shall be a violation of this article for any person other than authorized agents of the borough, acting in the course of their employment, to collect or pick up or cause to be collected or picked up any leaf waste material so placed. Each and every such collection or pickup in violation hereof from or at more locations shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. 
(c)  Disposition. The leaf waste material collected by the borough shall be transported to and deposited at a leaf waste stockpiling site. 
(d)  Violation of this section. Any violation of any part of this section shall be punishable by a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(Ord. No. 93, § 1(D), 12-4-90) 
ARTICLE V. - BLIGHT AND NUISANCES 

Sec. 10-65. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to define, prohibit and abate blights and nuisances and to protect, preserve, promote public health, safety and welfare, and to preserve and protect property values. 
(Ord. No. 122, 11-1-10) 
Sec. 10-66. - Scope of provisions. 
    This article shall apply uniformly to the maintenance of all residential, nonresidential, and undeveloped premises now in existence or hereafter constructed, maintained, or modified but shall exclude agricultural lands, land dedicated as public or semipublic open space or preserved in its natural state through conservation easements, or areas designated as inland wetlands and watercourses. 
(Ord. No. 122, 11-1-10) 
Sec. 10-67. - Definitions. 
    The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article: 
    Abandoned vehicle: Any unregistered, inoperable car, truck, aircraft, camper, motorcycle or moped, recreational vehicle (e.g. golf cart, snowmobile, water sled, all-terrain vehicle, etc.) boat or other watercraft, tractor, cart, trailer, riding mower, or farming or construction equipment whether self-propelled or towed. It shall be a defense that the vehicle is not abandoned if it is currently registered with a state or federal licensing agency such as a department of motor vehicles, or other agency that licenses the particular type of vehicle. Inoperable shall mean that the vehicle is no longer being used for its intended purpose evidenced by two (2) or more of the following conditions: 
(1)  Engine no longer starts or is missing; 
(2)  Missing or flat tires or wheels, or other missing parts necessary for locomotion; 
(3)  Missing doors or windows; 
(4)  Close proximity of grass or other vegetation or debris, indicating immobility; 
(5)  Holes, rust, or other evidence of obvious physical decay or neglect, lack of maintenance or excessive use; or 
(6)  Use for another purpose (e.g. storage). 
State Law reference- C.G.S. § 7-152 c(f). 
    Accumulating refuse: Refuse that accumulates on any private premises, businesses, lots, or abandoned property, and is not completely contained within trash or refuse storage bins, racks or enclosures, or other containers as approved by the borough for such use. 
    Blight enforcement officer: The blight enforcement officer shall be an individual or individuals appointed by the mayor to enforce all provisions of this article. The blight enforcement officer is hereby authorized to take such enforcement actions as are specified in this article. 
    Capable individual: A person that can be reasonably expected to perform maintenance and yard work around a property or premises. This shall include children above sixteen (16) years of age without physical or mental disability as defined herein. 
    Connecticut General Statutes: Laws of the State of Connecticut, including any applicable amendments. 
    Debris: Material which is incapable of immediately performing the function for which it was designed including, but not limited to, abandoned, discarded, or unused objects; plastics, glass, papers, junk comprised of equipment such as automobiles, boats, and recreation vehicles which are unregistered and missing parts, not complete in appearance and in an obvious state of disrepair; parts of automobiles, furniture, appliances, cans, boxes, scrap metal, tires, batteries, containers, or garbage which is in public view. 
    Disabled individual: In the case of an owner occupied residence, an individual who has a disability meeting the definitions for the mental or physical disability as defined under the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, and does not have other household members capable of providing the necessary maintenance. 
    Dilapidated: In a physically deteriorating condition which, if left unabated, would cause an unsafe or unsanitary condition or a nuisance to the general public. 
    Disrepair: In poor working order, dilapidated, decrepit or in an imminent state of collapse. 
    Garbage: (Also see Refuse, Rubbish). Putrescible animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food or the keeping of pets or other animals. 
    Infestation: The presence of insects, rodents, vermin or other pests on the premises, which constitute a health hazard. 
    Junk: Any scrap, waste, reclaimable material, or debris, whether or not stored, for sale or in the process of being dismantled, destroyed, processed, salvaged, stored, baled, disposed or other use of disposition. Examples of which include tires, vehicle parts, equipment, paper, rags, metal, glass, building materials, household appliances, machinery, crush, wood and lumber. More than two (2) unregistered or inoperable vehicles constitute junk. 
    Junkyard: The storage or parking of two (2) or more unregistered or inoperable motor vehicles. 
    Legal occupancy: Occupancy that is legal by virtue of compliance with state building, state fire safety, local zoning, local housing, and all other pertinent codes, which, in the case of rental property, must be substantiated by a rental agreement, a rent receipt or a utility statement. 
    Mechanical equipment: Any apparatus designed to operate by an internal combustion engine, or designed to be towed by an apparatus propelled by an internal combustion engine. 
    Natural wooded state: Areas where trees and brush exist in their natural, un-landscaped state. 
    Nuisance: 
(1)  Any public nuisance as defined by statute or ordinance. 
(2)  Any attractive nuisance. An attractive nuisance is defined as the presence of any condition that may prove to be detrimental to the health or safety of children whether in a building, on the premises of a building or upon an unoccupied lot. This includes, but is not limited to, the presence of abandoned wells, shafts, basements, excavations, refrigerators, vehicles, lumber, and garbage, refuse, rubbish, and any structurally unsound fences or other structures. 
(3)  Physical conditions dangerous to human life or detrimental to the health of persons on or near the premises where the conditions exist. 
(4)  Whatever renders air, food or drink unwholesome or detrimental to the health of human beings. 
(5)  Fire hazards. Any situation, process, material, blocked/obstructed egress, or condition that can cause a fire or explosion or provide a ready fuel supply to augment the spread or intensity of the fire or explosion and that poses a threat to life or property as determined by the borough fire marshal or his duly authorized agent. 
    Operator: Any person who runs or manages a commercial or industrial establishment. 
    Orderly fashion: Arranged in conforming to or exhibiting some regular order; systemic in regular or proper order. 
    Overgrown: Overrun with weeds, plants or grasses that have grown too large or thick. 
    Owner/occupant: Any person, institution, foundation, entity or authority which owns, leases, rents, possesses, or is responsible for property within the borough. 
    Persistent: Existing or remaining in the same state for an indefinite period. 
    Person: Any individual, corporation, partnership, limited liability company. 
    Premises: A platted lot or part thereof or unplatted lot or parcel of land or plot of land, either occupied or unoccupied by any dwelling or non-dwelling structure and includes any such building, accessory structure or other structure thereon, or any part thereof. The term "premises" where the context requires, shall be deemed to include any buildings, dwellings, parcels of land or structures contained within the scope of this article. 
    Proximate property: Any premises or parcel of land within one thousand (1,000) feet of a blighted premises. 
    Public view: Visible from any public right-of-way or neighboring property, at grade level. 
    Putrescible: Liable to undergo decomposition or rotting by bacteria, fungi, and oxidation and/or may result in the formation of foul-smelling products. 
    Reasonable: Exercising the degree of caution and concern an ordinarily prudent and rational person would use in similar circumstances. 
    Rubbish, garbage, refuse: Non-putrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, plastics, glass, bedding, crockery, unused and scrap building materials, and similar materials. 
    Sanitary conditions: Free from filth and pathogens. 
    Structure: Any building, walls, dwelling, fence, swimming pool, or similarly constructed object. 
    Unit: Any space within a building that is or can be rented by tenant(s) for their sole use, and is intended to be a single and distinct space. 
    Vacant: A period of sixty (60) days or longer from date of complaint, during which a building or structure or any part thereof, or land that is not legally occupied. 
    Vacant parcel: A parcel of land with no housing units thereon. 
(Ord. No. 122, 11-1-10) 
Sec. 10-68. - Blighted premises. 
    No owner/occupant of real property within the borough shall cause or allow blighted premises to be created, nor shall any owner/occupant allow the continued existence of blighted premises. 
    A blighted premises is identified as any building or structure, or any part of a structure that is a separate unit, or a parcel of land, or any accessory structure, or fence, in which at least one (1) of the following additional conditions exists: 
(1)  It has been determined by the borough building official, director of health, borough engineer, or zoning enforcement officer, or other appropriate official as designated by the mayor acting within the scope of their authority, that a condition exists that poses a serious or immediate threat to the health, safety or general welfare of the persons in the borough; 
(2)  The fire marshal has determined that a building or structure is a fire hazard, and/or it is a factor in operating a substantial and unreasonable interference with the use and enforcement of other premises within the surrounding area as documented by neighbor complaints; 
(3)  The property is in a state of disrepair or is becoming dilapidated; 
(4)  The overall condition of the property is not being maintained which causes an unreasonable impact on the enjoyment of/or value of neighboring properties and stems from violations as expressed by adjoining property owners; or 
(5)  The property is dilapidated, attracting illegal activity; 
(6)  Persistent occurrences in a one-year period of any of the following: violations of building, fire, zoning, housing or health codes; or 
(7)  Persistent occurrence in a one-year period of the premises not being maintained as evidenced by the existence, to a significant degree: 
a.  The rubbish and recycling set-out is allowed eighteen (18) hours prior to the start of the designated collection day (7:00 a.m. start time). Container must be removed from curb/public sight within eighteen (18) hours after collection of materials; 
b.  Missing, broken or boarded windows or doors; collapsing or deteriorating exterior walls, roofs, stairs, porches, handrails, railings, basement hatchways, chimneys, flues, or floors; 
c.  Exterior walls containing holes, breaks, loose, missing or rotting materials; 
d.  Foundation walls containing open cracks and breaks; 
e.  Overhang extensions, including but not limited to canopies, marquees, signs, awnings, stairways, fire escapes, standpipes and exhaust ducts, which contain rust or other decay; 
f.  Unrepaired fire or water damage; 
g.  It has been vandalized, or otherwise damaged to the extent that it is a factor in depreciating property values in the neighborhood; 
h.  Swimming pools, spas or architectural pools that are not properly maintained or are in a state of disrepair; or the accumulation of stagnant or unsanitary water; 
i.  Display lights/fixtures or exterior signs in a broken or disassembled state; 
j.  Rodent harborage and/or infestation; 
k.  Garbage, trash or unused building materials improperly stored in dumpsters or accumulated on the premises; unauthorized outside storage or accumulation of junk, campers, trash, rubbish, boxes, paper, plastic or refuse of any kind; the parking of more than two (2) unregistered and inoperable cars, boats, motorcycles or other inoperable machinery on the property or the public right-of-way. For the purposes of this article "authorized" shall pertain to local, state or federal laws and/or regulations; 
l.  In the case of fence, broken or rotted boards or in an otherwise dilapidated condition; or any other exterior condition reflecting a level of maintenance or which constitutes a blighting factor for adjacent property owners or occupant or which is an element leading to the progressive deterioration of the neighborhood; 
m.  Abandoned motor vehicles on the premises unless properly permitted as a junkyard see definition of abandoned vehicle currently no distinction between front, side or back yard; 
n.  Overgrown brush, shrubs and weeds; 
o.  Dead trees deemed hazardous to the public or to adjacent property, or subject to vermin infestation; or 
p.  Parking lots left in a state of disrepair or abandonment. 
(Ord. No. 122, 11-1-10) 
Sec. 10-69. - Mowing, removal of weeds and similar vegetation; control of vegetation. 
    For the period of May 1 and continuing through the end of October of each year, it shall be unlawful for every owner/occupant of properties upon which a building exists, or who is in possession of a vacant lot in an approved subdivision which fronts on a paved public road in the borough to allow grass to grow more than one (1) foot in height, unless such grass is harvested as hay by a registered farmland or for ornamental purposes within six (6) feet of the street line of any paved public highway and within six (6) feet of any side yard property line adjoining a property on which a building or dwelling exists or to allow any weeds of similar growth to grow more than one (1) foot in height. Every owner/occupant of property shall keep his property free from vegetation of any type which, in the opinion of the director of health and/or a designated public official, is overgrown or injurious to public health. 
    Any violation of this section shall constitute a nuisance which may be abated by the borough at the expense of the owner, lessor, lessee or any other person in possession or any one (1) or more of them to whom the mayor or his representative has given not less than ten (10) days' written notice of intention to abate such nuisance. Such expense will be reimbursed to the borough in a civil action against any one (1) or more of the above-named persons responsible therefore. 
(Ord. No. 122, 11-1-10) 
Sec. 10-70. - Storage; accumulation restricted. 
    It shall be unlawful for an owner/occupant to store, house, accumulate or otherwise permit solid or liquid waste on a premises in the borough in such a manner as to create an offensive, unsightly or unsanitary condition. 
(Ord. No. 122, 11-1-10) 
Sec. 10-71. - Maintenance of exterior of premises; duties of owners, operators and occupants. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of all owners and occupants of premises to keep the exterior of the premises and all structures thereon free of all abandoned/unregistered vehicles (unless the premises are a legal junkyard), nuisances, garbage, refuse, rubbish, and infestations. The exterior of every structure or accessory structure (including fences and walls) shall be maintained free of broken glass, loose shingles, damaged siding, crumbling stone or brick, cracks or other condition reflective of deterioration or inadequate maintenance. The outside structure walls shall not have any holes, loose boards, or any broken, cracked or damaged siding that admits rain, cold air, dampness, rodents, insects or vermin. Every building shall be maintained as to be weather and watertight. 
(b)  Garbage, refuse and rubbish for weekly pickup must be stored to maintain sanitary conditions and to minimize its exposure to public view. 
(c)  Where weekly curbside pickup of garbage, refuse and rubbish is not available; it further shall be the duty of every dwelling owner or occupant to provide a place reasonably calculated to maintain sanitary conditions and to minimize its exposure to public view before transfer for safe and sanitary disposal. All dumpsters must maintain completely closed lids at all times; being opened only to allow deposit or withdrawal of refuse. All areas surrounding dumpsters shall be kept completely free from such refuse and debris. All dumpsters must be placed as far as possible from public view. 
(Ord. No. 122, 11-1-10) 
Sec. 10-72. - Applicability. 
    Every residential, nonresidential or mixed occupancy building and the land on which it is situated, used or intended to be used for dwelling, commercial, business or industrial occupancy shall comply with the provisions of this article. Such compliance is required whether or not such building shall have been constructed, altered or repaired before or after the enactment of this article. Such compliance further is required irrespective of any permits or licenses issued for the use or occupancy of the building or premises, for the construction or repair of the building, or for the installation or repair of equipment or facilities prior to the effective date of this article. This article shall also apply to mobile home parks. 
(Ord. No. 122, 11-1-10) 
Sec. 10-73. - Signs; awnings and marquees. 
    All signs and billboards, awning and marquees exposed to public view permitted by reason of other ordinances or laws shall be maintained in good repair. 
(Ord. No. 122, 11-1-10) 
Sec. 10-74. - Complaints, warning notice. 
(a)  Any individual, civic organization, municipal agency, or borough employee affected by the action or inaction of an owner/occupant of property subject to the provisions of this article may file a complaint of violation of this article with a blight enforcement officer. The blight enforcement officer, upon his or her determination whether there is a violation of this article, shall forward a warning notice to the owner/occupant at the time such determination has been made. 
(b)  Such a warning notice from a blight enforcement officer shall be issued prior to issuing a citation. 
(c)  Such warning notice shall include: 
(1)  A description of the real estate sufficient for identification, specifying the violation which is alleged to exist and the remedial action required; 
(2)  A period of not more than thirty (30) days shall be allowed for the performance of any act required; and 
(3)  The amount of the fines, penalties, costs or fees that may be imposed for noncompliance shall apply for each infraction per day in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(d)  The owner/occupant may not contest a warning before the citation hearing board. 
(e)  Delivery of a warning notice letter to the owner/occupant shall be by the following methods: 
(1)  By personal delivery to the owner/occupant; or 
(2)  By certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the owner/occupant at his last known address with postage prepared thereon; or 
(3)  By posting and keeping posted for twenty-four (24) hours a copy of the warning notice letter in placard form in a conspicuous place on the premises. 
(Ord. No. 122, 11-1-10) 
Sec. 10-75. - Enforcement. 
(a)  If the corrective actions specified in the warning notice letter are not taken, the blight enforcement officer shall issue a written citation to the owner/occupant. 
(b)  A citation shall be in writing and include: 
(1)  A description of the real estate sufficient for identification, specifying the violation which is alleged to exist and the remedial action required; 
(2)  Detailed information regarding the contents of the initial warning notice (which may be a copy of such warning notice) and the failure of the owner/occupant to take the corrective actions specified therein within the time prescribed in the warning notice; 
(3)  The amount of the fines, penalties, costs or fees due for noncompliance; and 
(4)  A statement that the owner/occupant may contest his liability and request a hearing before the citation hearing board by delivering in person or by mail written notice of objection within ten (10) days of the date of the citation. 
(Ord. No. 122, 11-1-10) 
Sec. 10-76. - Hearing. 
(a)  An owner/occupant may request a hearing after receiving a citation. Said owner/occupant must make his/her request for a hearing within ten (10) days of issuance of the citation. Said request shall be made in writing to the following: Citation Hearing Board, Borough of Naugatuck, 229 Church Street, Naugatuck, CT 06770. 
(b)  The citation hearing board is designated to conduct hearings in accordance with section 7-152c, subsections (a) through (f) of the Connecticut General Statutes, when requested by an owner/occupant who has been cited under this article. 
(c)  Any cited person who wishes to admit liability without requesting a hearing may pay the full amount of the fines, penalties, costs or fees admitted to in person or by mail to the blight enforcement officer. Such payment shall be inadmissible in any proceeding, civil or criminal, to establish the conduct of such person or other person making the payment. Any person who does not deliver or mail written demand for a hearing within ten (10) days of the citation shall be deemed to have admitted liability, and the blight enforcement officer or his/her designee shall certify such person's failure to respond. The citation hearing board shall thereupon enter and assess the fines, penalties, costs or fees provided for by the applicable ordinances and shall follow the procedures set forth in section 7-152c(f) of the Connecticut General Statutes. 
(d)  Any person who requests a hearing shall be given written notice of the date, time and place for a hearing to be held within thirty (30) calendar days from the date of the original request notice. The citation hearing board may grant a postponement or continuance for good cause. An original or certified copy of the citation and notice shall be filed and retained by the blight enforcement officer. 
(e)  Pending the hearing before the citation hearing board, no further enforcement activity as contemplated by subsections 10-78(b) or (c) of this article shall occur until either a hearing is held and the citation hearing board assesses fines, penalties, costs and/or fees or until the petitioner fails to appear for a scheduled hearing and the citation hearing board assesses fines, penalties, costs and/or fees. This section shall not preclude the accrual of fines during the period from the issuance of the notice until a hearing is held. 
(Ord. No. 122, 11-1-10) 
Sec. 10-77. - Appointment of citation hearing board. 
    The mayor shall appoint three (3) borough residents to serve as a citation hearing board and who shall collectively constitute the citation hearing officer. Such members shall serve staggered terms of three (3) years each. Proceedings of the citation hearing board shall be conducted in accordance with the laws of the state and any provisions of the charter or ordinances of the borough generally applicable to its boards and commissions. No zoning enforcement officer, police officer, building inspector or employee of the borough may be appointed to as a hearing officer under this article. 
(Ord. No. 122, 11-1-10) 
Sec. 10-78. - Penalties for offenses; prejudgment lien. 
(a)  The owner/occupant of premises where a violation of any of the provisions of this article shall exist or who shall maintain any building or premises in which such violations exist may: 
(1)  Be fined not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each violation. Each day that a violation exists after a citation as described in section 10-75 of this article is given to the owner/occupant shall constitute a new violation, and a fine may be imposed for each such violation; and/or 
(2)  Be required to abate the violation at the owner/occupant's expense. 
(b)  A prejudgment lien on real estate may be imposed where the fine for violation of the blighted premises provisions of this article not paid within thirty (30) days, despite proper notice to the person found liable. Any unpaid fine imposed by a municipality pursuant to the provisions of an ordinance regulating blight, adopted pursuant to section 7-148(c)(7)(H)(xv) of the Connecticut General Statutes, shall constitute a lien upon the real estate against which the fine was imposed from the date of such fine. Each such lien may be continued, recorded and released in the manner provided by the general statutes for continuing, recording and releasing property tax liens. Each such lien shall take precedence over all other liens and encumbrances filed after July 1, 1997, except for taxes. Each such lien may be enforced in the same manner as property tax liens, including foreclosure of the real property. 
(c)  In addition to all other remedies and any fines imposed herein, the provisions of this Code may be enforced by injunctive proceedings in superior court. The borough may recover from such owner/occupier or other responsible person any and all costs and fees, including reasonable attorneys' fees, expended by the borough in enforcing the provisions of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 122, 11-1-10) 
Sec. 10-79. - Appeals; special consideration. 
(a)  Any person aggrieved by any order, requirement or decision of the citation hearing board may take an appeal in accordance with section 7-152c(g) of the Connecticut General Statutes. 
(b)  Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, special consideration may be given to individuals who are elderly or disabled and who demonstrate that the violation results from an inability to maintain an owner-occupied residence and no person with that ability resides therein. 
(c)  Such special consideration shall be limited to the reduction or elimination of fines and/or an agreement that the borough or its agents may perform the necessary work and place a lien against the premises for the cost thereof in accordance with the provisions of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 122, 11-1-10) 
Sec. 10-80. - Assessor authorized to freeze assessment of rehabilitated buildings. 
    To better achieve the rehabilitation of blighted property the borough assessor is authorized to freeze the assessment of any building that was the object of an enforcement action by the citation hearing board, and has been substantially rehabilitated. Upon recommendation by the citation hearing board, blight enforcement officer, zoning enforcement officer and approval by the borough board of mayor and burgesses, the borough assessor shall freeze the assessment of any building that has been substantially rehabilitated to reflect the value of the structure prior to rehabilitation and shall be applicable for a period of five (5) years. No property owner shall receive this benefit if it was determined that the property owner caused any condition or violation of any code or regulation that required enforcement. If, however, the property becomes the object of an enforcement action by any member of the citation hearing board during the five (5)-year period, the adjusted assessment may be revoked by the borough assessor. 
(Ord. No. 122, 11-1-10) 
Sec. 10-81. - Severability. 
    In the event that any part or portion of this Code is declared invalid for any reason, all the other provisions of this Code shall remain in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 122, 11-1-10) 
Sec. 10-82. - Construal of terms and provisions. 
(a)  Where terms are specifically defined or the meaning of such terms are clearly indicated by their context, that meaning is to be used in the interpretation of this Code. 
(b)  Where terms are not specifically defined and such terms are defined in the Charter and Municipal Code of the borough, such terms shall have the same meaning for the interpretation and enforcement of this article. 
(c)  Where terms are not specifically defined in this chapter, they shall have their ordinarily accepted meaning or such meaning as the context may imply. 
(d)  The provisions of this Code shall not be construed to prevent the enforcement of other codes, ordinances or regulations of the borough. 
(e)  In any case where a provision of this Code is found to be in conflict with a provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety or health ordinance, regulation or other provision of the Charter and Municipal Code of the borough or the state, the provision which establishes the higher standard for the promotion and protection of the health and safety of the people of the Naugatuck shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 122, 11-1-10) 
Chapter 11 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Board of health, §§ 55-57. 
Cross reference- Environmental control commission, § 2-51 et seq.; garbage, trash and refuse, Ch. 10; sewers and sewage disposal, § 19-41 et seq. 
State Law reference- Authority to define, prohibit and abate nuisances and all things detrimental to health, G.S. § 7-148(c)(7)(E); authority to provide for the health of all inhabitants and promote the public health, G.S. § 7-148(c)(7)(H)(xi). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 11-1-11-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - AIR POLLUTION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate the emission of smoke, G.S. § 7-148(c)(8)(D); pollution control, G.S. § 22a-170 et seq. 

Sec. 11-16. - Emission of dense smoke. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person owning or in charge of any steam machine or contrivance, or of any smokestack, or chimney of any building or premises to allow the emission of dense smoke except for a period aggregating six (6) minutes in any one (1) hour at a time when the fire box is being cleaned out or a new is fire being built therein. Such emission of smoke except for the six-minute period referred to, is hereby declared to be a nuisance and shall be subject to the penalty provided in this article. 
(Code 1973, § 13-17) 
Sec. 11-17. - Escape of ashes, dust, etc. 
    No person shall cause or allow to escape from any smokestack or chimney into the open air, ashes, dust, soot, cinders, dirt or other materials in such quantities in such place or manner as to cause injury, detriment, nuisance, or annoyance to any persons or to the public or to endanger the comfort, health or safety of any such person or to the public, or in such a manner as to cause or have a natural tendency to cause injury or damage to business or property. Such escape of such materials is hereby declared to be a nuisance and shall be subject to the penalty provided in this article. 
(Code 1973, § 13-18) 
Sec. 11-18. - Ringelmann smoke chart. 
(a)  For the purpose of determining or calculating the density of smoke, the Ringelmann smoke chart as published by the Federal Bureau of Mines shall be the standard of comparison. 
(b)  Smoke shall be considered "dense" within the meaning of this article, when it is equal to or of greater density than No. 3 of the chart. 
(Code 1973, § 13-19) 
Sec. 11-19. - Exemptions. 
    Smokestacks and chimneys of buildings used solely for mercantile or residential purposes are exempt from the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1973, § 13-20) 
Sec. 11-20. - Penalty for violations. 
    Any person in control or in possession of any building or premises upon which any nuisance as defined in section 11-16, is allowed to exist or continue or who shall fail to abate the same within a reasonable time after notice of the existence of such nuisance is given following a complaint thereof, shall be punished as prescribed in section 1-7. 
(Code 1973, § 13-21) 
Secs. 11-21-11-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - HAZARDOUS MATERIALS REPORTING AND IDENTIFICATION PLAN[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 94, adopted Aug. 6, 1991, while intending that its provisions be included in the Code, did not provide for the exact nature of their inclusion; therefore, at the editor's discretion, §§ 94.1-94.16 and 94.18 of Ord. No. 94 have been included herein as a new Art. IV, consisting of §§ 11-31-11-47. 

Sec. 11-31. - Purposes. 
    The purpose of this article is to provide a continuing source of current information concerning hazardous substances and chemicals being utilized in the Borough of Naugatuck, to protect the general health and safety of the public, and to enable emergency personnel to respond safely and speedily to emergency situations which may arise. 
(Ord. No. 94, § 94.1, 8-6-91) 
Sec. 11-32. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article, the following terms shall be defined as follows: 
    Hazardous substances: Those substances identified by the U.S. Department of Transportation Title 49 Code of Federal Regulations (49 CFR) Part 172.101, "Hazardous Materials Table" and those substances identified by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency in Table 117.3, 40 C.F.R. section 117.3 (1982) or in any subsequent update thereto. Such term shall include oil and oil-based derivative as listed in 40 C.F.R. section 112.2 (1982) or in any subsequent update thereto. 
    Significant quantity: The amount of any hazardous substances equivalent to the "reportable quantity" of substance as listed in Table 117.3, 40 C.F.R. section 117.3 (1982) or in any subsequent update thereto. A significant quantity of oil or oil-based derivatives shall be any "quantity" of such substances exceeding those listed in 40 C.F.R. section 122.1(d)(2)(i), (ii) (1982) or in any subsequent update thereto. 
    Storage area: This term shall be as defined in 40 C.F.R. (1980) or in any subsequent update thereto and in accordance with all applicable borough and state fire code regulations. 
(Ord. No. 94, § 94.2, 8-6-91; Amend. of 10-1-91) 
Sec. 11-33. - Application. 
(a)  The provisions of this article shall apply to any person or entity, including government entities, storing, treating, mixing, using or producing a significant quantity of a hazardous substance or substances within the corporate limits of the Borough of Naugatuck. 
(b)  The provisions of this article shall not apply to any person or entity, including government entities, storing hazardous substances within the corporate limits of the borough for purposes of retail consumer sales or individual private use unless the fire marshal determines that such storage presents a real or potential danger to the public health and safety and notifies the person or entity of that determination in writing. 
(c)  Any person or entity subject to the provisions of this article may, for valid reasons, request an exemption from any or all provisions thereof on a form provided by the fire marshal's office. The fire marshal may, in his sole discretion, grant such exemption(s) based on the information provided by the applicant if the fire marshal determines valid reasons for such exemption(s) exist and that there is no significant health or safety hazard present. 
(Ord. No. 94, § 94.3, 8-6-91) 
Sec. 11-34. - Emergency response plan. 
    Any person or entity subject to the provisions of this article, upon its effective date, shall submit, as to such person or entity, an emergency response plan to the fire marshal's office on or before the effective date. The emergency response plan shall include the following elements: 
(1)  A map of the site showing the buildings thereon which shall describe hazardous substance storage areas and indicate their normal location; 
(2)  A hazard identification and emergency action statement which shall include a concise procedure for responding to emergency situations in each area; 
(3)  A procedure for the submitters for reporting fires, chemical spills or other emergency situations, including procedures for notifying police, fire, health and civil preparedness departments of the Borough of Naugatuck; 
(4)  A fire response plan, as required by OSHA, identifying the level of fire response which shall be implemented by personnel as outlined in 29 C.F.R. section 1910(L) (1981) or in any subsequent update thereto; and an evacuation plan including a list of those persons who are trained in the implementation of a response plan and in the supervision of evacuation procedures. The plan shall also include a system for accounting for all personnel in an evacuation; 
(6)  A spill prevention, control and countermeasure plan designed to prevent or minimize the release into the environment of any hazardous substance stored, treated, used, mixed or produced on the site. This plan shall be based on the types or quantities of hazardous substances which are on the property as well as the location and design of the major storage and use areas. The plan shall designate at least one person and an alternate, one of whom shall be on site during all working hours and who shall be responsible for implementing the spill control procedures. The plan shall also specify construction features designed to control and contain spills from hazardous substance storage areas. These control features shall include one or more of the following systems or their equivalents: 
a.  Dikes, berm or retaining walls which are sufficiently impervious to contain spills or hazardous substances; 
b.  Weirs, booms, curbing or other barriers; 
c.  Culverts, gutters or other drainage systems which leads to a contained impervious area; 
d.  Sorbent materials; 
e.  Sumps and collection ponds; and 
f.  Retention ponds. 
(7)  Each spill prevention, control and countermeasure plan required hereunder shall be implemented within ninety (90) days of receipt of approval from the fire marshal's office. 
(Ord. No. 94, § 94.4, 8-6-91) 
Sec. 11-35. - Rejection of plan. 
    The fire marshal may, in his sole discretion, reject any plan or plans found to be inappropriate when considering the types, quantities or locations of hazardous substances on the site. Any plan so rejected shall be returned to the submitter with written suggestions for compliance and specific reasons for rejection of the plan. Thereafter, a modified plan incorporating the fire marshal's suggestions shall be submitted to the fire marshal within thirty (30) days or receipt of a notice of rejection. If the revised plan is not agreeable to the fire marshal, it may also be rejected and the submitter shall thereafter comply with any and all orders imposed by the fire marshal subject to the appeal rights available herein. 
(Ord. No. 94, § 94.5, 8-6-91) 
Sec. 11-36. - To whom plans submitted. 
    The fire marshal may distribute all emergency response plans submitted in accordance with section 11-34 of this article to the director of civil preparedness, the borough engineer, the borough planner and/or the building official of the borough as needed. 
(Ord. No. 94, § 94.6, 8-6-91) 
Sec. 11-37. - When plan submitted. 
    Any person or entity that begins storing, treating, mixing, using or producing a significant quantity of a hazardous substance or substances within the corporate limits of the borough on or after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article derived [August 16, 1991] shall submit a plan as required in section 11-34 prior to the commencement of such activity and thereafter continue to comply within the other provisions of the article. 
(Ord. No. 94, § 94.7, 8-6-91) 
Sec. 11-38. - Inspection of hazardous sites. 
    The fire marshal or his designee may inspect any sites where a hazardous substance or substances are stored, treated, used, mixed or produced during all reasonable business hours to establish compliance with the provisions hereof. Emergency inspections may be made at any time where the fire marshal has reason to suspect imminent danger or an obvious infraction of the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 94, § 94.8, 8-6-91) 
Sec. 11-39. - Notification of hazardous substance storage areas. 
    Each submitter of emergency response plans shall identify the location of their hazardous substance storage areas using the National Fire Protection Association (N.F.P.A.) 704m marking system. The intent of this section is not to require labeling of individual barrels or small containers, but rather to require the labeling of large containers or areas on any given site. 
(Ord. No. 94, § 94.9, 8-6-91) 
Sec. 11-40. - Change in storage areas or types of hazardous substances. 
    In the event of either a change in the design or normal location of hazardous substance storage areas or a change in or addition to the type or types of a hazardous substance or substances being stored, treated, used, mixed or produced on a site by an amount equal to a reportable quantity for which an emergency response plan has been submitted, the plan shall be revised and resubmitted within thirty (30) days of any change and implemented within ninety (90) days of receipt of notice of approval. Upon the resubmittal of an emergency response plan, the fire marshal shall have the same powers and discretion, and shall follow the same procedures as set forth in section 11-38 of this article. Any person or entity exempted from any or all provisions of this article, having undergone a change as contemplated in this section, shall resubmit an emergency plan as required herein and/or a new request for exemptions pursuant to section 11-33(c) hereof. 
(Ord. No. 94, § 94.10, 8-6-91) 
Sec. 11-41. - Documentation of liability insurance. 
    After review of any emergency response plan submitted pursuant to this article, the fire marshal may require any submitter to submit, as part of the emergency response plan, documentation of appropriate liability insurance. 
(Ord. No. 94, § 94.11, 8-6-91) 
Sec. 11-42. - Emergency response plan shall be sworn to. 
    The emergency response plan shall be submitted together with an affidavit on a form provided by the fire marshal's office as to the truth and accuracy of the plan. This affidavit shall be signed under penalty of false statement by the person or, in the case of an entity, a duly authorized representative of the firm, partnership, corporation or other entity required to report hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 94, § 94.12, 8-6-91) 
Sec. 11-43. - Penalty. 
    Any person or entity required to report or act hereunder who does not comply with the provisions hereof within thirty (30) days of either the required reporting date or the date any act is required to be done shall be subject to a find or one hundred dollars ($100.00) per violation until such time as either the report is received by the fire marshal or the act is performed. Each day such report is not submitted or such act is not performed shall constitute a separate violation. No such fine shall be levied during the process of an appeal filed pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 94, § 94.13, 8-6-91) 
Sec. 11-44. - Appeal. 
(a)  Appeals board established. For purposes of this article, an appeals board is hereby created, consisting of the mayor, the building official, the borough planner, the borough engineer, two (2) members of the board of burgesses (one from the majority party, one from the minority party) who shall serve for his or her term, and one person selected by the mayor from nominees submitted by the persons or entities regulated by this article, who shall serve for one year. Any vacancy on this board shall be filed for the remainder of the original term. 
(b)  Procedure upon appeal. Any person or entity aggrieved by any order or decision made in accordance with the provisions of this article may, within fifteen (15) days of the date of mailing of the order or decision, appeal therefrom to the appeals board in writing. The appeal shall be filed with the fire marshal's office. The appeals board shall convene to hear the appeal within ten (10) days of its filing, shall hear the appeal de novo and shall render a written decision thereon within fifteen (15) days of conclusion of the hearing. At least a 72-hour notice of the date, time and place of an appeal hearing shall be given to the appellant. The appeals board shall act upon an appeal by a majority vote of its membership present and voting, so long as a quorum exists. Four (4) members shall constitute a quorum. 
(c)  Appeal to Superior Court. Any person or entity aggrieved by an appeals board decision may appeal the decision to the Superior Court for the judicial district of Waterbury within twenty (20) days of the date of the decision. 
(d)  Stay of enforcement The filing of an appeal to the appeals board shall stay enforcement of the fire marshal's order or decision. The filing of an appeal to the Superior Court for the judicial district of Waterbury shall not of itself stay enforcement of the appeals board decision. The reviewing court may order a stay upon appropriate terms. 
(Ord. No. 94, § 94.14, 8-6-91) 
Sec. 11-45. - Disclosure of information. 
    Nothing herein shall be construed to require disclosure of information which is deemed confidential or constituting a trade secret. Any information submitted in accordance with this article shall only be distributed or released on a need-to-know basis. 
(Ord. No. 94, § 94.15, 8-6-91) 
Sec. 11-46. - Conflict with state and/or federal law. 
    In the event this article or any part thereof is found to be in conflict with any state or federal law or regulation, the more stringent of the two (2) shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 94, § 94.16, 8-6-91) 
Sec. 11-47. - Annual report to board of mayor and burgesses. 
    The fire marshal shall submit a report to the board of mayor and burgesses on or before July 1 of every year. Such report shall delineate information gained from reports submitted pursuant to this article and recommendations and suggestions relative thereto. 
(Ord. No. 94, § 94.18, 8-6-91) 
Chapter 12 - LICENSES, PERMITS AND MISCELLANEOUS BUSINESS REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Authority of mayor and burgesses to regulate, license or prohibit auction sales, sales by transients, hawking and peddling, § 63(15). 
Cross reference- Sign permit required, § 3-19; license required for amateur boxing exhibitions, § 5-16; license required when admission fee is charged to circuses, etc., § 5-35; license required when no admission fee is charged to ground or enclosure relative to entertainment, § 5-39; license required for public dances, § 5-52; permit fees for building construction, § 7-2; license required for compounds more explosive than gunpowder, § 9-3; permit required for excavations, § 16-91; private disposal system permit, § 19-49; building sewer permits, § 19-50; industrial wastes permit, § 19-74. 
State Law reference- Licenses, G.S. Title 21. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 12-1. - Permits not to create perpetual right. 
(a)  No person shall gain any prescriptive or perpetual rights by reason of any permit or permission heretofore or hereafter granted by the board of mayor and burgesses or any official of the borough, and all such permits or permission may be revoked, cancelled or rescinded by a majority vote at any legal meeting of the board of mayor and burgesses. 
(b)  The mayor may cancel any permit granted under the ordinances or bylaws of the borough whenever the operation under such a permit becomes unlawful or a nuisance. 
(Code 1973, § 15-1) 
Secs. 12-2-12-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PEDDLERS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 16. 
State Law reference- Authority of borough to regulate the business of peddlers, G.S. § 7-148(c)(7)(H)(iv); hawkers and peddlers, G.S. § 21-36 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 12-16. - Peddling on Sunday restricted. 
    No person shall peddle newspapers, periodicals or any other article on Sunday between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m., within a distance of one hundred fifty (150) feet of any church or place of public worship. 
(Code 1973, § 19-1) 
Secs. 12-17-12-25. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 12-26. - Required; fee; exceptions. 
(a)  License required. No person shall sell, offer for sale, vend, hawk, peddle or barter or assist in selling, offering for sale, vending, hawking, peddling or bartering upon the streets, sidewalks or public places, or from house to house, in the borough any goods, wares or other merchandise unless he has obtained a license so to do from the chief of police. 
(b)  License fee. The fee for such license shall be as follows: 
1 Day\$ 50.00 
1 Week\100.00 
1 Month\200.00 
1 Year\250.00 
(c)  Exceptions. This section shall not apply to sales by farmers and gardeners of the produce of their farms and gardens, or to the sale, distribution, and delivery of milk, teas, coffee, spices, groceries, meats, and bakery goods, to sales on approval or to conditional sales of merchandise, nor shall it apply to persons conducting an established business in a store or shop. 
(d)  Prohibitions. No person shall sell or offer for sale upon a public street, sidewalk or other public place any spray string, stink bomb or other substantially similar article. 
(Ord. of 3-1-77, § 19-1; Amend. of Aug. 6, 1991, § 19-2; Amend of Mar. 2, 1993; Amend. of May 5, 1998) 
Sec. 12-27. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 12-27, setting out the fee for peddler's licenses, and derived from an ordinance of March 1, 1977, § 19-1, has been deleted as being superseded by the Aug. 6, 1991 amendment to the same March 1, 1977 ordinance set out above in § 12-26. 
Sec. 12-28. - Application-Contents generally. 
    Applications for peddler's licenses required by this division shall be made to the chief of police, shall be sworn and in writing and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Name and physical description of applicant; 
(2)  Address; 
(3)  A brief description of the nature of the business to be conducted and the goods to be sold, and, if the goods are farm or orchard products, a statement whether they are produced or grown by the applicant; 
(4)  If applicant is employed, the name and address of the employer, together with credentials establishing exact relationship; 
(5)  The length of time for which the right to do business is desired; 
(6)  If a vehicle is to be used, a description of the same together with the applicable state vehicle license number or other means of identification; 
(7)  A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of any crime, misdemeanor or violation of any municipal ordinance, and if so, the nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor; 
(8)  Such other information as the chief of police may deem necessary for the proper police protection of the borough. 
(Ord. of 3-1-77, § 19-3) 
Sec. 12-29. - Same-Fingerprinting, photographs required. 
    An applicant for a peddler's license required by this division shall be fingerprinted and shall supply the chief of police with one (1) photograph of himself within ten (10) days prior to the date of the filing of the application, which photograph shall be no smaller than two and one-half (21/2) inches by two and one-half (21/2) inches and no larger than three (3) inches by three (3) inches in size, showing the head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner. 
(Ord. of 3-1-77, § 19-3) 
Sec. 12-30. - Issuance. 
    The chief of police may issue the peddler's license required by this division upon application therefor at least ten (10) days before the date of issuance and the payment of the license fee provided therefor. 
(Ord. of 3-1-77, § 19-4) 
Sec. 12-31. - Transferability. 
    Every peddler's license issued in accordance with this division shall be a personal license to the licensee and shall not be transferable. 
(Ord. of 3-1-77, § 19-5) 
Sec. 12-32. - Number to be displayed on vehicle. 
    Every person licensed under the provisions of this division shall have the number of his license plainly inscribed on any vehicle which he uses under such license. 
(Ord. of 3-1-77, § 19-6) 
Cross reference- Traffic and motor vehicles, Ch. 18. 
Sec. 12-33. - Credentials. 
(a)  Upon compliance by an applicant for a peddler's license under the provisions of sections 12-28 and 12-29, the police department shall thereupon stamp the credentials of the applicant, which credentials shall set forth the name and address of the applicant and of his employer, if any, the nature of the goods, wares or merchandise which are to be sold and the period during which the applicant may sell, which shall not exceed one (1) year; provided, however, that the police department shall not be required to grant such permission to any person who shall have been convicted of any crime or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude or of any violation of this article. 
(b)  Stamped credentials shall be nontransferable and shall entitle the holder thereof, for the period indicated therein, unless revoked to sell, within the borough, goods, wares or merchandise specified in his application, provided that the holder shall have his stamped credentials in his possession at all times while selling and shall exhibit the same at any time upon request by any police officer of the borough or any purchaser or prospective purchaser. 
(Ord. of 3-1-77, § 19-4) 
Secs. 12-34-12-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - VENDORS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 16. 
State Law reference- Itinerant vendors, G.S. § 21-27 et seq. 

Sec. 12-51. - Vending generally. 
    In order to promote the welfare, health and safety of the citizens of the borough; to prevent congestion upon the public highways of the borough; to protect the children of the borough from the dangers and accidents due to congregating on the traveled highways; to promote the public health and sanitation without interfering with the convenient distribution of the necessities of life; and to render as nearly equitable as possible the conduct of the ordinary course of business in the borough; and to eliminate as far as practicable, all unfair competition in the ordinary course of business, it is hereby ordained that no person, except those exempted by the statutes of the state or as provided in this article shall vend upon public highways of the borough, on foot or from any type of vehicle or stand, any of the following commodities: Toys; candy; drinks or beverages, bottled or otherwise; tobacco in any form; frozen desserts; sweet meats; ice cream in any form; frankfurters; fruits; vegetables; furniture; drugs; pills or patented medicines; perfumes or extracts; dry goods, clothing, shoes or other footwear; hardware; and no person shall operate a mechanical slot vending machine, nor gaming machine or apparatus of any kind, style or type whatsoever within the borough. 
(Code 1973, § 19-17) 
Sec. 12-52. - License-Required; fee; expiration. 
    Any person, may obtain a license to vend the commodities specified in section 12-51 upon application to the clerk of the borough, and the payment of a license fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) for each team or vehicle used in connection with such vending, hawking or peddling for the privilege of so vending, hawking or peddling such merchandise. Such license shall expire on the first day of April succeeding the date of its issuance, and may be renewed within thirty (30) days thereafter for the succeeding year upon payment of an annual license fee of twenty dollars ($20.00). 
(Code 1973, § 19-18(a)) 
Sec. 12-53. - Same-Mechanical slot vending machine; fee. 
    Any person may obtain a license to operate a mechanical slot vending machine upon application to the borough clerk and upon payment of a license fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) to the borough clerk for each machine. Such license shall expire on the first day of April succeeding the date of issuance. 
(Code 1973, § 19-18(b)) 
Sec. 12-54. - Application of article. 
(a)  The provisions of this article, except section 12-53, shall not apply to: 
(1)  A bona fide resident of the borough; 
(2)  Persons engaged in a legitimate business enterprise, and whose intent is to permanently reside or conduct such business enterprise in the borough; or 
(3)  Sales by farmers or gardeners of the produce of their farms and gardens, or to the sale, distribution and delivery of milk, teas, coffees, spices, groceries, meat and bakery goods, to sales on approval or to conditional sales of merchandise. 
(b)  No person, not included within the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, shall be relieved or exempted from the provisions and requirements of this article by reason of associating himself temporarily with any person to whom the provisions and requirements of subsection (a) of this section shall apply. 
(Code 1973, § 12-54) 
Sec. 12-55. - Disposition of license fees. 
    The funds collected from the license fees required by this article shall be turned over to the treasurer of the borough by the borough clerk, for deposit in the general fund of the borough. 
(Code 1973, § 19-19) 
Sec. 12-56. - Bond to be posted by itinerant vendors. 
    No itinerant vendor, as defined in section 21-27 of the general statutes, shall engage in the sale of goods, wares or merchandise or in the performance of personal services, other than professional services in the borough unless he has posted a bond with the tax collector in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00), conditioned that he will pay as a fee for the municipal license required by section 21-29 of the general statutes a personal property tax upon such goods, wares, merchandise or equipment as determined by the assessor. 
(Ord. of 3-1-77, § 19-22) 
Sec. 12-57. - Obstruction of streets, sidewalks prohibited. 
    No vendor shall hold or make any sale upon or near any street or sidewalk in the borough in such manner as to obstruct or prevent the free and convenient use thereof by pedestrian and vehicular traffic. 
(Ord. of 3-1-77, § 19-23) 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 16. 
Sec. 12-58. - Records of chief of police. 
    The chief of police shall keep a record of all licenses issued by him under the provision of this article in a book maintained for such purpose, containing the number and date of such license; the name, age and residence of the person licensed and the amount of the license. 
(Ord. of 3-1-77, § 19-24) 
Sec. 12-59. - Penalty. 
    Any person who shall violate any provisions of this article shall be punished in accordance with section 1-7. 
(Code 1973, § 19-21) 
Secs. 12-60-12-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SOLICITORS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 16. 

Sec. 12-76. - Registration with police department required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person over sixteen (16) years of age to solicit orders of purchase for future delivery of any goods, wares or merchandise, including magazines and other printed matter, from door to door or on any street or highway within, or by telephone from and within the borough, without first registering with the police department of the borough and having his credentials stamped as provided in sections 12-33 and 12-34. Registration shall not constitute a permit to enter privately policed areas. 
(Code 1973, § 19-32) 
Sec. 12-77. - Application to solicit orders required. 
(a)  An applicant to solicit orders under the provisions of this article shall complete an application blank provided by the police department, which application blank shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name, home address and local address, if any, of the applicant; 
(2)  A physical description of the applicant, setting forth the applicant's age, height, weight, color of hair and eyes; 
(3)  The name and address of the person for whom or through whom orders are to be solicited or cleared; 
(4)  The nature of the goods, wares or merchandise for which orders are to be solicited; 
(5)  A statement as to whether the applicant has been convicted of any crime or misdemeanor and, if so, what; and where the conviction occured; 
(6)  A statement as to the period and time of day during which the applicant intends to solicit orders. 
(b)  The applicant, at the time of executing such application blank, shall also submit identification satisfactory to the police department which shall contain a specimen of the applicant's signature. 
(Code 1973, § 19-33) 
Sec. 12-78. - Credentials. 
(a)  Upon compliance by the applicant with the provisions of section 12-77, the police department shall thereupon stamp the credentials of the applicant, which credentials shall set forth the name and address of the applicant and of his employer, if any, the nature of the goods, wares or merchandise for which orders are to be solicited, and the period during which the orders are to be solicited, and the period during which the applicant may solicit orders, which shall not exceed one (1) year; provided, however, that the police department shall not be required to grant such permission to any person who shall have been convicted of any crime or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude or of any violation of this article. 
(b)  Stamped credentials shall be nontransferable and shall entitle the holder thereof, for the period indicated therein, unless revoked, to solicit orders within the borough for the purchase of the goods, wares or merchandise specified in his application, provided that the holder shall have his stamped credentials in his possession at all times while soliciting orders and shall exhibit the same at any time upon request by any police officer of the borough or any purchaser or prospective purchaser. 
(Code 1973, § 19-34) 
Sec. 12-79. - Police department to be informed as to period of soliciting, etc. 
    Upon entrance into the borough, each registered solicitor shall inform the police department as to the period during which he intends to be soliciting, and the police department will have the authority to limit the number of solicitors for any one (1) firm, and also to withdraw or cancel the solicitor's credentials for any period of time if deemed to be in the best interests of the borough. 
(Code 1973, § 19-35) 
Sec. 12-80. - Clerical functions of registering solicitors. 
    The police commission may appoint any person as agent of the police department to perform the clerical functions of registering solicitors under this article; provided, however, that such agent shall not receive any compensation from the borough and shall not refuse to stamp the credentials of any solicitor except upon the direction of the chief of police or some member of the police department designated by him, and the cancellation of the department's stamp shall be effected only by the chief of police or by some member of the police department designated by him. 
(Code 1973, § 19-36) 
Sec. 12-81. - Regulations. 
    Any person soliciting within the borough, whether or not required to register under the provisions of this article, shall conform to the following regulations: 
(1)  The solicitor shall conduct himself at all times in an orderly and lawful manner; 
(2)  The solicitor shall give a written receipt for all orders taken within the borough, which receipt shall be signed by the solicitor and shall set forth a brief description of the goods, wares or merchandise ordered, the total purchase price thereof, and the amount of the down payment received by the solicitor from the purchaser. 
(Code 1973, § 19-37) 
Sec. 12-82. - Application of article. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to salesmen selling goods to retail or wholesale stores for resale. Any person who has, and has had for the preceding twelve (12) months, a regular place of business within the borough shall not be required to register before soliciting orders, but all other provisions of this article shall apply to such persons. 
(Code 1973, § 19-38) 
Sec. 12-83. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this article or making any false statements or misrepresentations of fact for the purpose of obtaining permission to solicit orders shall, upon conviction thereof, and in addition to other penalties provided by law, be subject to a penalty as prescribed in section 1-7; each solicitation or sale shall be deemed a separate offense. Upon any registered person being convicted of any crime or misdemeanor under this article or involving moral turpitude, the stamped credentials of such person shall be delivered to the police department and the department's stamp thereon shall be cancelled, and such person shall not thereafter solicit orders in the borough without reregistering. 
(Code 1973, § 19-39) 
Secs. 12-84-12-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - AUCTIONS AND AUCTIONEERS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Authority of borough to regulate auctions, G.S. § 7-148 (c)(7)(H)(iii); authority of borough to regulate the business of auctioneers, G.S. § 7-148(c)(7)(H)(iv); auctioneers, G.S. § 21-1 et seq. 

Sec. 12-101. - Licensing generally. 
(a)  No person shall expose for sale by auction, or shall sell at auction, any goods or articles, except those specifically exempt under section 21-1 of the general statutes, unless licensed to expose for sale by auction and to sell at auction by the borough under the provisions of sections 21-1 and 21-2 of the general statutes, or unless licensed by the commissioner of state police under the provisions of section 21-3 of the general statutes. 
(b)  Any such person licensed under the provisions of section 21-3 of the general statutes shall, in addition thereto, secure a license from the borough clerk to expose such articles at auction and to sell such articles at auction and shall pay therefor a license fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) a day for the period covered by such license which shall not be for the period of over thirty (30) days; provided, however, that such local license shall not be granted for a period to exceed the time limit of the state license secured by such person from the commissioner of state police. The fee shall be paid to the borough clerk who shall deposit the same with the borough treasurer to the account of the borough. The fees may be used for the employment of police officers, and for a jewelry expert, to be appointed by the mayor of the borough, in order to prevent fraud from being perpetrated upon the public. 
(c)  Any person not licensed within the provisions of section 21-3 of the general statutes shall obtain a local license by paying therefor a license fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) a day for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days. The license may be renewed for further periods of not more than thirty (30) days for such period for the sum of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) a day. The license fee shall be paid to the borough clerk who shall deposit the same with the borough treasurer to the account of the borough. The fees may be used for the employment of police officers, and for a merchandise expert, appointed by the mayor of the borough, in order to prevent fraud from being perpetrated upon the public. 
(d)  No person, whether resident or nonresident, shall act as an auctioneer, unless licensed to do so by the borough, and unless he or his principal has obtained a license in accordance with the provisions of either subsection (b) or subsection (c) of this section. 
(e)  Any person requiring a license as an auctioneer under the provisions of subsection (d) of this section shall apply in writing to the borough clerk. The borough clerk shall, upon being satisfied that the person applying has not been convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude or a violation of this article, shall issue a license for the term of one (1) year to the applicant to carry on the business of any auctioneer upon payment of fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(f)  The provisions of subsection (d) and subsection (e) of this section shall not require the borough clerk to receive payment of the fee for an auctioneer's license if the person so applying for an auctioneer's license shall be conducting an auction for a local church or local religious organization, or a local bona fide nonprofit organization which comes under the provisions of section 12-104. 
(Code 1973, § 7-1) 
Sec. 12-102. - False representations, etc. 
    No auctioneer, whether licensed under the provisions of this article or not, shall make any false representations as to the character, quality, condition, value or ownership of any article offered for sale; substitute any of such articles sold; and no person shall act as an accomplice for the purpose of making mock bids at any auction. 
(Code 1973, § 7-2) 
Sec. 12-103. - No exemption from article by reason of temporary association. 
    No person shall be relieved or exempted from the provisions and requirements of this article by reason of associating himself temporarily with any person to whom the provisions and requirements of this article shall apply. 
(Code 1973, § 7-3) 
Sec. 12-104. - Application of article. 
    The provisions of this article, except section 12-102, shall not apply to any auction held under the direction of any qualified executor, administrator or conservator in the process of settling an estate, nor to any auction held according to order of any federal, state or municipal court, nor to any auction of personal effects held under the personal direction of the owner thereof, nor to any auction conducted by a local church, by a local religious organization or by a bona fide local nonprofit organization. 
(Code 1973, § 7-4) 
Sec. 12-105. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished as prescribed in section 1-7. 
(Code 1973, § 7-5) 
Chapter 13 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- General penalty for Code violations, § 1-7. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 13-1. - Abandoned iceboxes or refrigerators. 
(a)  Any abandoned icebox or refrigerator with one (1) or more doors attached thereto shall be deemed dangerous to life or to health and is hereby declared a nuisance. 
(b)  The owner of such icebox or refrigerator or the owner, lessee or occupier of the premises where it is located, shall, upon conviction, be punished as prescribed in section 1-7. 
(Code 1973, § 16-1) 
Sec. 13-2. - Spitting. 
(a)  The spitting upon the floor or steps of any public building, hall, church, opera house or theater shall be and hereby is prohibited; also on any public walks on which spitting shall be prohibited by order of the board of health and a proper notice to that effect posted. All officers in charge or control of such buildings, or public places, shall keep posted permanently a sufficient number of notices forbidding spitting upon the floor and walks, and the janitors of public buildings, or officers on duty in public places shall see that this section is enforced. 
(b)  The violation of any provision of this section shall be deemed a misdemeanor and punished as prescribed in section 1-7. 
(Code 1973, § 16-2) 
Sec. 13-3. - Discharging firearms, airguns, etc. 
    No person shall discharge any pistol, revolver, gun, cannon or other firearm, or airgun in any street, park or public ground; provided, that this section shall not apply to the use of such weapons in lawful defense of the person, family or property of anyone, or in the performance of any duty required by law. 
(Code 1973, § 16-3) 
Sec. 13-4. - Carrying firearms, etc. 
    No person shall carry on his person within the limits of the borough any firearm, brass or metal knuckles, slingshot or similar weapon without permission from the mayor. 
(Code 1973, § 16-4) 
Sec. 13-5. - Slingshots. 
    No person shall expose or use any sling for firing or throwing any substance, within the limits of any street, highway or public ground in the borough. 
(Code 1973, § 16-5) 
Sec. 13-6. - Noise. 
    No person shall utter any loud and indecent or loud and obscene language, or make any noise by outcry, or boisterous singing or shouting, or by blowing any horns, or using any megaphone, loudspeaker, or amplifier, whether electrically operated or otherwise, within any street or public place or adjoining the same, nor within hearing distance of any church or public meeting. 
(Code 1973, § 16-6) 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 16. 
Sec. 13-7. - Parades and processions. 
    All street parades and processions bearing banners or other conspicuous devices or accompanied with music or any disturbing sounds, excepting the fire department and funeral processions engaged in the burial of the dead, are prohibited, unless permission therefor be first obtained from the mayor or board of mayor and burgesses. 
(Code 1973, § 16-7) 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 16, traffic and motor vehicles, Ch. 18. 
Sec. 13-8. - Injuring or destroying property. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully, maliciously or negligently break, deface, injure or destroy any property within the borough, whether such property is owned by the state, county, borough or any other governmental body, or owned by any private person. 
(Ord. No. 62, § 2, 11-1-77) 
Cross reference- Defacing, etc., parking meters, § 18-53. 
Sec. 13-9. - Parental, guardian responsibility for minors. 
(a)  Definitions. As used in this section, unless the context otherwise requires, the following terms have the meanings ascribed to them: 
    Legal guardian means a person appointed guardian, or given custody of a minor by a court of the state, but does not include a person appointed guardian, or given custody of a minor under the Juvenile Court Act. 
    Minor means a person who is above the age of eleven (11) years, but not yet eighteen (18) years of age. 
(b)  Failure to exercise control. The parent or legal guardian of an unemancipated minor residing with such parent or legal guardian shall be presumed, in the absence of evidence to the contrary, to have failed to exercise proper parental responsibility and the minor shall be deemed to have committed the acts described below with the knowledge and permission of the parent or guardian, in violation of this section, upon the occurrence of the following events: 
(1)  An unemancipated minor residing with the parent or legal guardian shall either be adjudicated to be in violation of any ordinance, law or statute prohibiting wilful and malicious acts causing injury to a person or property or shall have incurred nonjudicial sanctions from another official agency resulting from an admission of guilt of violation of any ordinance, law or statute prohibiting wilful and malicious acts; 
(2)  Such parent or legal guardian shall have received a written notice thereof, either by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, or by personal service, with a certificate of personal service returned, from the police department of the borough following the adjudication or nonjudicial sanction; and 
(3)  If any time within one (1) year following receipt of the notice set forth in subsection (b)(2) of this section the minor is either adjudicated to be in violation of any ordinance, law or statute as described in subsection (b)(1) of this section, or shall have incurred nonjudicial sanctions from another official agency resulting from an admission of guilt of violation of any ordinance, law or statutes as described in subsection (b)(1) of this section. 
(c)  Penalty. Any person convicted of any violation of the provisions of this section shall be punished in accordance with section 1-7. 
(Ord. No. 62, § 1, 11-1-77) 
Sec. 13-10. - Display of obscene material to minors prohibited. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to prohibit the display of obscene material to minors in the borough. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Erotic fondling means touching a person's clothed or unclothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks, or, if such person is a female, breast. 
    Harmful to minors means that quality of any description or representation, in whatever form, of a prohibited sexual act, or sexually explicit nudity, when it predominantly appeals to the prurient, shameful or morbid interest of minors; it is patently offensive to prevailing standards in the adult community as a whole with respect to what is suitable material for minors; and taken as a whole, it lacks serious literary, artistic, educational, political or scientific value for minors. 
    Masturbation means the real or simulated touching, rubbing or otherwise stimulating a person's own clothed or unclothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks, or, if the person is female, breast, either by manual manipulation or with an artificial instrument. 
    Material means anything tangible which is capable of being used or adapted to arouse prurient, shameful, or morbid interest, whether through reading, observation, sound or any other manner. Material is "obscene as to minors" if it depicts a prohibited sexual act or sexually explicit nudity and, taken as a whole, it is harmful to minors. 
    Minor means any person less than eighteen (18) years old. 
    Nude performance means the showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering, or the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any portion thereof below the top of the nipple or the depiction of covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state in any play, motion picture, dance or other exhibition performed before an audience. 
    Prohibited sexual act means erotic fondling, nude performance, sexual excitement, sadomasochistic abuse, masturbation or sexual intercourse. 
    Sadomasochistic abuse means flagellation or torture by or upon a person clad in undergarments, a mask or bizarre costume, or the condition of being fettered, bound or otherwise physically restrained on the part of one so clothed. 
    Sexual excitement means the condition of human male or female genitals when in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal. 
    Sexual intercourse means intercourse, real or simulated, whether genital-genital, oral-genital, anal-genital or oral-anal, whether between persons of the same or opposite sex or between a human and an animal, or with an artificial genital. 
    Sexually explicit nudity means the showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering, or the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any portions thereof below the top of the nipple, or the depiction of covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. 
    Visibly displayed means that the material is visible on a billboard, viewing screen, marquee, newsstand, display rack, window, showcase, display case or other similar display area, that is visible from any part of the premises where a minor is or may be allowed or permitted or invited as part of the general public or otherwise, or that is visible from a public street, sidewalk, park, alley, residence, playground, school or other place to which minors have unrestrained and reasonably anticipated access and presence. 
(c)  Prohibited acts. A person is guilty under this section of displaying obscene material to minors when, having control or supervision of any business or commercial establishment or premises, with knowledge of the content and character of the material involved, he intentionally or recklessly does any of the following: 
(1)  Visibly displays, exhibits or otherwise exposes to view, in that part of the premises or immediately adjacent thereto, where a minor is or may be allowed, permitted or invited, as part of the general public or otherwise, all or any part of any material which is either of the following: 
a.  Obscene as to minors, when taken as a whole; or 
b.  Contains on its cover, package, wrapping or within the advertisement therefor, depictions or photographs of sexually explicit nudity or a prohibited sexual act; 
(2)  Hires, employs, or otherwise places, supervises, controls or allows in any business or commercial establishment or other place, any minor under circumstances which would cause, lead or allow such minor to engage in the business or activity of promoting or otherwise handling such material. 
(d)  Penalty. Violation of any of the provisions of this section shall be punished by a fine in accordance with section 1-7 for each separate item of material which is displayed in violation of this section. Each day that any violations of this section occur, or continue to occur, shall constitute separate offenses and shall be punishable as separate violations. 
(Ord. No. 75, §§ I-IV, 11-22-86) 
Sec. 13-11. - Tobacco sales to minors. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Cigarette vending machine means a machine or mechanical device used or intended to be used for the purpose of automatically merchandising packaged cigarettes, the operation of which is governed or controlled by the insertion of coins or tokens. 
    Person means any individual, firm, fiduciary, partnership, corporation, trust or association. 
(b)  Prohibited. No person shall sell cigarettes or tobacco in any form to any person under eighteen (18) years of age. 
(c)  Required notice on vending machines and cash registers. 
(1)  Any person who permits cigarette vending machines on his premises shall post or cause to be posted a notice on each machine, of a size not less than three (3) by five (5) inches, in the following form: 
By ordinance of the Borough of Naugatuck, cigarette and tobacco sales to persons under eighteen (18) years of age are prohibited. 
(2)  A person who sells cigarettes or tobacco in any form shall affix and display promptly on or near his cash register a notice as follows: 
By ordinance of the Borough of Naugatuck, cigarette and tobacco sales to persons under eighteen (18) years of age are prohibited. 
(3)  Such persons shall place the notice on cigarette vending machines in a conspicuous place, provided that the notice shall not obstruct other notices on the machines or cover the tax stamps on cigarette packages which must remain visible in accordance with state law. 
(d)  Enforcement. It shall be the duty of the chief of police or his designee to enforce the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 79, 3-3-87) 
Sec. 13-12. - School attendance; responsibilities of parent, guardian and youth; enforcement of truancy violations; infraction. 
(a)  Definitions. For the purpose of interpretation of this section: 
    Attendance officer shall have the same meaning as set forth in section 10-199 of the Connecticut General Statutes. 
    Child means a person under the age of sixteen (16) years of age. 
    Excused absence means when a child or youth does not attend school due to: a death in the immediate family, religious obligation, school sponsored activity, family wedding, illness or injury (written documentation from a physician must be provided to school officials to excuse the absence), including hospitalization and remedial health treatment, family hardship or emergency. 
    Habitually truant means a person between the ages of five (5) years to eighteen (18) years of age enrolled in the Borough of Naugatuck School System and who has twenty (20) unexcused absences in a school year. 
    Highway shall have the same meaning as set forth in section 14-1 of the Connecticut General Statutes. 
    Public place shall mean any place normally open to the public. 
    Truant means a person between the ages of five (5) years of age to eighteen (18) years of age enrolled in the Borough of Naugatuck School System and who (a) has four (4) unexcused absences in any month or (b) ten (10) unexcused absences in a school year or (c) is found to be absent from school, unexcused, during usual school hours and is found beyond school grounds of which the student is enrolled having no lawful occupation, is beyond the control of the parent or guardian and is not attending school. 
    Unexcused means any absence from school without a parent's, guardian's or person's having control of a child or youth knowledge and written verification of absence which has been provided to school officials. 
    Youth means a person sixteen (16) years of age to eighteen (18) years of age. 
(b)  Generally. It shall be the responsibility of all parents, guardians or persons in charge of the care of children living with them within the borough to bring them up in some lawful, honest employment and instruct or cause them to be instructed in proper education as set forth in Connecticut General Statutes section 10-184. Subject to section 10-15c of the Connecticut General Statutes, each parent, guardian or person having control of the care of any child or youth, shall cause such child or youth, to attend public school regularly during the hours and terms set by the Borough of Naugatuck Board of Education, at the school in the district in which they live, unless the child or youth is a high school graduate or the parent, guardian or person having control of the child or youth is able to show the child or youth is elsewhere receiving equivalent instruction in the studies taught in public school. 
(c)  Prohibited acts. 
(1)  No child or youth shall during the usual school hours set forth by the Borough of Naugatuck Board of Education, be: 
a.  Absent from school, unexcused, and beyond the control of the parent or guardian; or 
b.  Found beyond school grounds wandering about any highway or in any public places within the borough, having no lawful occupation and not attending school. 
(2)  No parent, guardian or person having control of a child or youth shall cause or allow said child or youth to be truant or absent, unexcused, from school: 
a.  Four (4) or more times in any month; 
b.  Ten (10) or more times within a school year; or 
c.  Habitually truant. 
(d)  Penalty (fine/infraction). 
(1)  Any youth who violates any of the provisions of this section shall be fined twenty dollars ($20.00) for each day's failure to comply or for any one (1) breach thereof. 
(2)  Any parent, guardian or person having the control of a child or youth who violates any of the provisions of this section shall be fined twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each day's failure to comply or for any one (1) breach thereof. 
(Ord. No. 112, 2-12-02) 
Secs. 13-13-13-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CURFEW FOR MINORS 

Sec. 13-26. - Purpose and findings. 
    The board of mayor and burgesses finds that the incidence of crime committed by and against minors or juveniles is increasing and has determined that a curfew ordinance is necessary and desirable for the following purposes: 
(1)  To protect minors from each other and other persons on the streets during nighttime hours; 
(2)  To assist the police in crime prevention; 
(3)  To encourage and promote parental supervision and authority over minors; 
(4)  To promote the furtherance of family responsibility and the general good, safety and welfare of the public. 
(Ord. No. 101, § 1, 3-7-95) 
Sec. 13-27. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivation shall have the meaning given in this section: 
    Borough is the Borough of Naugatuck. 
    Custodian is a person over the age of twenty-one (21) years who has been authorized by the parent or guardian of a minor to take the parent's or guardian's place in accompanying such minor for designated period of time and for a specified purpose at a specified place. 
    Guardian is any person other than a parent who has legal guardianship of a minor. 
    Minor is a person under sixteen (16) years of age. 
    Nighttime hours are the hours between 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., based on the prevailing time (i.e. Eastern Standard Time or Daylight Savings Time). 
    Parent is any person having legal custody of a minor as a natural or adoptive parent or as a person to whom legal custody has been given by order of a court. 
    Police department shall mean the police department of the borough. 
    Public place shall mean any street, alley, highway, sidewalk, park, playground or place to which the general public has access and a right to resort for business, entertainment or other lawful purpose. A public place shall include, but not be limited to, any store, shop, restaurant, tavern, bowling alley, cafe, theater, drugstore, pool room, shopping center or any other place devoted to amusement, entertainment or accommodation of the general public. Public place shall also include the front or other area which adjoins or provides access to such public place. 
(Ord. No. 101, § 2, 3-7-95) 
Sec. 13-28. - Establishment of curfew. 
    It shall be unlawful for any minor to remain, idle, wander, stroll or play in any public place either on foot or to cruise about without any set destination in any motor vehicle in, about or upon any public place during nighttime hours, unless accompanied by and under the supervision of a parent, guardian or custodian. 
(Ord. No. 101, § 3, 3-7-95) 
Sec. 13-29. - Parental responsibility. 
    It shall be unlawful for a parent, guardian or custodian of any minor to suffer or permit or by inefficient control to allow such minor to be on the streets, sidewalks or to be in or about a public place in the borough during nighttime hours; provided nothing herein shall apply to a minor accompanied by his or her parent, guardian or custodian or other adult person having responsibility for the care, custody or control of the minor. It shall not constitute a defense that such parent, guardian or custodian did not have knowledge of the presence of such minor in such public place. 
(Ord. No. 101, § 4, 3-7-95) 
Sec. 13-30. - Exceptions. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to minors who are in public places during nighttime hours when such minors are: 
(1)  On emergency errands or specific business or activity directed by his or her parent, guardian or custodian or other adult having the care and custody of the minor; 
(2)  Attending or returning home from by direct route and within a reasonable time following the termination of a special function, activity or entertainment conducted by a school, church, club, recreational or other organization sponsoring such activities for minors; 
(3)  Returning home by direct route, and within a reasonable time of leaving a public place where such minor is employed; 
(4)  Attending or travelling directly to or from an activity involving the exercise of first amendment rights of free speech, assembly or free exercise of religion; 
(5)  On the property or the sidewalk directly adjacent to where such minor has his or her permanent residence, provided the presence of such minors on such sidewalks does not interfere, block or otherwise obstruct pedestrian traffic thereon. 
(Ord. No. 101, § 5, 3-7-95) 
Sec. 13-31. - Police procedures. 
(a)  A police officer who has a reasonable suspicion to believe that a minor is in violation of this article shall ascertain the name and address of such minor and verbally warn the minor that he or she is in violation of this article and order the minor to proceed at once to his or her residence by a direct route. 
(b)  If such minor refuses to heed the order of the police officer or refuses to give such officer his or her name and address or if such minor has been warned within six (6) months previously that he or she is in violation of the curfew, he or she shall be taken into police custody and the parent, guardian or custodian of such minor shall be notified to come and take control of such minor. Such police officer shall advise the parent, guardian or custodian of such minor that such minor is in violation of this article and shall issue a warning to such parent, guardian or custodian that any subsequent violation will result in the enforcement of this article, including enforcement of parental responsibility and other applicable penalties. If such parent, guardian or custodian cannot be located or fails to come to take charge of the minor, such minor shall be turned over the appropriate juvenile authorities. 
(Ord. No. 101, § 6, 3-7-95) 
Sec. 13-32. - Penalties. 
(a)  If a warning is issued to the parent, guardian or custodian, as set forth in section 13-31(b) of this article, and within six (6) months after the issuance of such warning, such parent, guardian or custodian is again found to be in violation of section 13-29 of this article in connection with a second violation by such minor the police department may make a referral to the appropriate juvenile authorities of the state for an investigation with respect to whether such minor is: 
(1)  Beyond the control of his/her parent, guardian or custodian; or 
(2)  Neglected. 
(b)  Any parent, guardian or custodian of a minor in violation of this article shall, if such parent, guardian or custodian has been previously notified pursuant to section 13-31(b) and a subsequent violation hereof occurs within six (6) months after such notification to such parent, guardian or custodian, be fined in accordance with section 1-7 of the Code of Ordinances of the Borough of Naugatuck. 
(Ord. No. 101, § 7, 3-7-95) 
Secs. 13-33-13-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - POSSESSION OF ALCOHOL BY MINORS 

Sec. 13-51. - Purpose. 
    The Borough of Naugatuck seeks to protect, preserve and promote the health, safety, welfare and quality of life of all its residents by regulating the possession of alcoholic liquor by minors on both public and private property. 
(Ord. No. 118, § 1, 6-6-06) 
Sec. 13-52. - Definitions. 
    Alcoholic liquor shall have the same meaning as the same term defined in G.S. title 30, section 30-1 as amended from time to time. 
    Host means to organize a gathering of two (2) or more persons, or to allow the premises under one's control to be used with one's knowledge, for a gathering of two (2) or more persons for personal, social, or business interaction. 
    Minor means any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years old. 
    Person means any individual, firm, partnership, association, syndicate, company, trust, corporation, limited-liability company, municipality. Agency, or political or administrative subdivision of the state or other legal entity of any kind. 
(Ord. No. 118, § 2, 6-6-06) 
Sec. 13-53. - Possession of alcoholic liquor restricted. 
    No person under the age of twenty-one (21) shall be in possession of containers of alcoholic liquors, whether open or closed, within the Borough of Naugatuck, except when accompanied by or in the presence of his or her parent, legal guardian, or spouse, who has attained the age of twenty-one (21) years. This restriction shall apply to both public and private property. 
(Ord. No. 118, § 3, 6-6-06) 
Sec. 13-54. - Hosting an event or gathering restricted. 
    No person shall host an event or gathering at which the person knows or reasonable believes that alcoholic liquor will be consumed by or dispensed to any minor unless said minor is accompanied by or in the presence of his or her parent, guardian, or spouse who has attained the age of twenty-one (21) years. This restriction shall apply to any event or gathering within the Borough of Naugatuck, whether conducted on public or private property. 
(Ord. No. 118, § 4, 6-6-06) 
Sec. 13-55. - Exceptions. 
    The provisions of Sections 3 and 4 of this ordinance shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  A person over the age of eighteen (18) who is an employee or permit holder under G.S. section 30-90a and who possesses alcoholic liquor in the course of his employment or business. 
(2)  A minor who possesses alcoholic liquor on the order of a practicing physician. 
(Ord. No. 118, § 5, 6-6-06) 
Sec. 13-56. - Enforcement. 
    The chief of police or any other sworn member of the Naugatuck Police Department is charged with enforcing the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 118, § 6, 6-6-06) 
Sec. 13-57. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  Any person violating section 13-53 shall be subject to a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each such violation. 
(b)  Any person violating section 13-54 shall be subject to a fine of two hundred dollars ($200.00) for the first such violation and shall be subject to a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the second violation and shall be subject to a fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each violation thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 118, § 7, 6-6-06) 
Sec. 13-58. - Construction. 
    Whenever use, the singular number shall include the plural, the plural the singular, and the use of any gender shall include both genders. 
(Ord. No. 118, § 8, 6-6-06) 
Secs. 13-59-13-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - GRAFFITI 

Sec. 13-71. - Restricted. 
    No person shall write, paint, or place any paint, chalk or any other substance or substances or otherwise mark, scratch, carve or etch graffiti on the real or personal property of another, whether said real property is publicly or privately owned, unless the owner of the property had specifically consented to the same prior to the commission of such act or acts. 
(Ord. No. 119, § I, 9-5-06) 
Sec. 13-72. - Definitions. 
    Graffiti means any letters, numbers, words, writing or inscriptions, symbols, drawings, carving, etching or any other marking of any nature whatsoever which defaces, obliterates, covers, alters, damages or destroys real property or personal property of another. This shall not be construed to prohibit easily removed chalk markings on the public sidewalks and streets used in connection with traditional children's games. 
    Indelible marker means any felt-tip marker, china marker of similar device that is not water soluble, which has a flat or angled writing surface of one-half-inch or greater. 
(Ord. No. 119, § I, 9-5-06) 
Sec. 13-73. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person violating any provision of this chapter, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding three hundred dollars ($300.00) or by imprisonment for not more than thirty (30) days or both. 
(b)  Any person violating subsection 13-73(a) by committing such violation upon a town park or playground, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment for not more than forty-five (45) days or both. 
(c)  Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall also have the responsibility for cleaning, repairing, painting or otherwise restoring the damaged property to the condition it was in prior to being damaged. 
(Ord. No. 119, § I, 9-5-06) 
Sec. 13-74. - Responsibility of property owner. 
(a)  In the event that the person violating section 13-73 is not identified within thirty (30) days of such violation, the owner, agent or person in charge of any commercial property, vacant residential property or roadway shall thereupon remove any and all graffiti located on such property or roadway within thirty (30) days of notice to remove same by the Borough of Naugatuck. 
(b)  In the event of any violation under this article, the borough may cause such graffiti to be removed, and enter upon such property for that purpose, upon forty-eight (48) hours' notice and the expense thereof shall be charged to the person(s) whose duty it was to remove such graffiti and the debt thereof shall be collectible by the borough: provided, however that no such charge shall be made if such person agrees to allow the borough entry to remove such graffiti, pay the cost of materials necessary therefore, and agree to hold the borough harmless for any liability occasioned thereby. 
(c)  Any person violating section 13-75, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(Ord. No. 119, § I, 9-5-06) 
Chapter 14 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Amusements, Ch. 5; littering parks, § 10-22; planning, Ch. 15; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 16; zoning, App. B. 
State Law reference- Authority to provide for entertainment, amusements, concerts, celebrations and cultural activities, G.S. § 7-148(c)(4)(B); authority to establish, maintain, etc., parks, playgrounds, playfields, etc., G.S. § 7-148(c)(6)(A)(i). 

Sec. 14-1. - Park commission. 
(a)  The board of mayor and burgesses of the borough are hereby empowered to appoint from the electors of the borough a park commission consisting of three (3) members. The term of office of the members of the commission shall be for a period of six (6) years. One (1) member of the park commission shall be designated as the chairman of the commission by the board of mayor and burgesses. 
(b)  The members of the park commission shall serve without compensation and the duties, powers and authority of the commission shall consist of the general control, management, development and upkeep of all public parks within the confines of the borough. 
(Code 1973, § 17-1) 
Cross reference- Boards, commissions and committees, § 2-16 et seq. 
Chapter 15 - PLANNING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; environmental control commission, § 2-51 et seq.; flood and erosion control commission, § 2-76 et seq.; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 7; parks and recreation, Ch. 14; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 16; utilities, Ch. 19; subdivisions, App. A; zoning, App. B. 
State Law reference- Municipal planning commission, G.S. §§ 8-18-8-30a; creation of planning commission, G.S. § 8-19; plan of development, G.S. § 8-23; requirement that municipal improvement proposals must be referred to planning commission, G.S. § 8-24; requirement that proposals concerning subdivisions of land be approved by planning commission, G.S. § 8-26; appeals from planning commission, G.S. § 8-30; municipal redevelopment generally, G.S. §§ 8-124-8-139; authority for urban renewal projects, G.S. § 8-141; urban renewal plan, G.S. § 8-142; powers of redevelopment agency, G.S. § 8-144; state aid for city redevelopment and urban renewal, G.S. §§ 8-151-8-162; federal aid for city redevelopment and urban renewal, G.S. §§ 8-163-8-169. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 15-1. - Zone change petition fee. 
    The fee for filing a zone change petition shall be one hundred twenty-five dollars ($125.00). 
(Mo. of 1-5-88) 
Secs. 15-2-15-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PLANNING COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Boards, commissions and committees, § 2-16 et seq.; subdivisions, App. A. 

Sec. 15-16. - Created. 
    Acting pursuant to the authority granted by section 8-19 of the general statutes, there is hereby created an elected bipartisan planning commission for the borough. 
(Ord. No. 68, § 1, 11-10-80) 
Sec. 15-17. - Powers and duties. 
    The planning commission shall have all the powers and duties specified in section 8-19 et seq. of the general statutes. 
(Ord. No. 68, § 1, 11-10-80) 
Sec. 15-18. - Composition. 
    The planning commission shall consist of five (5) resident electors of the borough holding no salaried municipal office, not more than three (3) of whom shall be members of the same political party. 
(Ord. No. 68, § 1, 11-10-80) 
Sec. 15-19. - Compensation. 
    The members of the planning commission shall serve without compensation, but the necessary and reasonable expenses of the commission shall be paid by the borough. 
(Ord. No. 68, § 1, 11-10-80) 
Sec. 15-20. - Election of members. 
(a)  For the biennial election to be held in May, 1981 each political party may nominate five (5) resident electors for membership on the planning commission, three (3) for a four-year term and two (2) for a two-year term. From the persons nominated for the four-year term, the three (3) persons receiving the highest number of votes at such election shall be deemed elected; provided, if the three (3) persons receiving such highest number of votes are members of the same political party, only the two (2) receiving the highest number of votes shall be deemed elected and the third member for the four-year term of the planning commission shall be a member of another political party who received the next highest number of votes of the persons nominated by that party for the four-year term to the planning commission. From the persons nominated for the two-year term, the two (2) persons receiving the highest number of votes at such election shall be deemed elected; provided, if the two (2) persons receiving such highest number of votes are members of the same political party, only the person receiving the highest number of votes shall be deemed elected, and the second member for the two-year term shall be a member of another political party who received the next highest number of votes of the persons nominated by that party for the two-year term of the planning commission. 
(b)  At the election to be held in May, 1983 and biennially thereafter, members of the planning commission shall be elected in the manner provided in subsection (a) of this section for a term of four (4) years and until their successors are elected and have qualified to succeed those members whose terms shall expire. 
(Ord. No. 68, § 1, 11-10-80) 
Cross reference- Elections, Ch. 8. 
Sec. 15-21. - Ex officio members. 
    The mayor and the borough engineer shall serve as members ex officio of the planning commission without voting privileges and their attendance will not be a factor in determining a quorum. 
(Ord. No. 68, § 1, 11-10-80) 
Sec. 15-22. - Alternate members. 
(a)  There shall be appointed three (3) alternate members to the planning commission in accordance with section 8-19a of the general statutes. 
(b)  Alternate members of the planning commission shall, when seated, have all the powers and duties set forth in the general statutes or special act relating to the borough for the planning commission and its members. Such alternates may attend all meetings and executive sessions of the planning commission. If a regular member of the planning commission is absent or is disqualified, the chairman of the planning commission shall designate an alternate to so act, choosing alternates in rotation, so that they shall act as nearly equal a number of times as possible. If any alternate is not available in accordance with such rotation, such fact shall be recorded in the minutes of the meeting. 
(c)  Alternate members of the planning commission shall be electors and taxpayers of the borough and shall not be members of the zoning commission or zoning board of appeals. The alternate members shall be subject to the provisions of section 9-167a of the general statutes (no more than two (2) alternate members shall be members of the same political party). Members shall serve for a period of five (5) years, each of whom shall be appointed by the mayor subject to the approval of the board of mayor and burgesses. Vacancies shall be filled by the board of mayor and burgesses for the unexpired period of term. Any such vacancies shall be filled from the political party from which the former alternate was appointed. 
(Ord. No. 63, §§ 1-3, 2-7-78) 
Sec. 15-23. - Vacancies. 
    Any vacancy in the planning commission shall be filled by the planning commission, for the unexpired portion of the term, by appointment of an alternate member of the planning commission who shall be from the same political party as the member who vacated the office. The death, resignation, removal from the borough, or removal for cause, of any planning commission member shall be considered a vacancy. 
(Ord. No. 68, § 2, 11-10-80; Ord. of 9-10-87) 
Sec. 15-24. - Terms of present members. 
    The terms of all of the present members of the planning commission shall cease and terminate on the election of the members of the planning commission at the biennial election to be held on the first Monday of May, 1981. All regulations promulgated by the present planning commission prior to the new planning commission taking office shall continue in full force and effect until modified, repealed or superseded in accordance with the provisions of the general statutes. 
(Ord. No. 68, § 3, 11-10-80) 
Sec. 15-25. - Adoption of rules and regulations. 
    The planning commission shall adopt rules and regulations for the transaction of business. 
(Ord. No. 68, § 4, 11-10-80) 
Sec. 15-26. - Public record of activities. 
    The planning commission shall keep a public record of its activities. 
(Ord. No. 68, § 4, 11-10-80) 
Sec. 15-27. - Annual report. 
    The planning commission shall file an annual report with the board of mayor and burgesses. 
(Ord. No. 68, § 4, 11-10-80) 
Sec. 15-28. - Officers. 
    The planning commission shall annually elect from its voting membership a chairman and secretary and such other officers as it shall from time to time determine may be necessary. 
(Ord. No. 68, § 4, 11-10-80) 
Sec. 15-29. - Removal of members. 
    Upon reasonable notice and after due hearing, the board of mayor and burgesses may remove from office for malfeasance or for any neglect or refusal to properly perform his duties or for a conflict of interest, any voting member of the planning commission. Such removal shall require an affirmative vote by two-thirds of the board of mayor and burgesses. 
(Ord. No. 68, § 5, 11-10-80) 
Secs. 15-30-15-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ZONING COMMISSION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 107, adopted Mar. 3, 1998, repealed the provisions of §§ 15-47-15-52, and replaced them with the similar provisions of §§ 15-47-15-53 as currently set out herein. Former §§ 15-47-15-52 derived from Ord. No. 59, §§ 2-5, adopted June 3, 1975 and the Ord. of Sept. 1, 1987. 
Cross reference- Boards, commissions and committees, § 2-16 et seq.; zoning, App. B. 

Sec. 15-46. - Created. 
    Pursuant to the requirements of section 8-1 of the general statutes, the zoning commission of the borough is hereby created. 
(Ord. No. 59, § 1, 6-3-75) 
Sec. 15-47. - Composition. 
    The zoning commission shall consist of five (5) members with minority representation as determined under section 9-167a of the Connecticut General Statutes, and three (3) alternate members, all of whom shall be electors of the borough, each of whom shall be elected as set forth hereinafter. 
(Ord. No. 107, 3-3-98) 
Sec. 15-48. - Terms of members. 
    The regular term of appointment for each member of the zoning commission shall be for four (4) years, except that the terms of office for the first elected commission shall be as follows: Three (3) members for two (2) years and two (2) members for four (4) years. Alternate members shall be appointed for a four-year term by the board of mayor and burgesses. 
(Ord. No. 107, 3-3-98) 
Sec. 15-49. - Election. 
    The initial election of the commission shall be held on May 3, 1999 in accordance with the election laws of the State of Connecticut. 
(Ord. No. 107, 3-3-98) 
Sec. 15-50. - Removal of members. 
    No member or alternate member of the zoning commission shall be removed from office except for good cause shown and on request of such member, after public hearing. 
(Ord. No. 107, 3-3-98) 
Sec. 15-51. - Officers. 
    The zoning commission shall elect from among its members a chairman, vice-chairman and secretary. A full slate of elections shall be placed on the agenda of the first regularly scheduled meeting of the new year. 
(Ord. No. 107, 3-3-98) 
Sec. 15-52. - Vacancies. 
    Vacancies on the zoning commission shall be filled by the board of mayor and burgesses from the list of alternates within thirty (30) days for the unexpired period of the term in accordance with minority representation. 
(Ord. No. 107, 3-3-98) 
Sec. 15-53. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  The zoning commission shall have all the powers and duties granted to zoning commissions by the Connecticut General Statutes. 
(b)  The zoning commission shall hold a public hearing on all proposed zone changes pursuant to the Connecticut General Statutes. The zoning commission shall hear all requests for zone changes and shall have the power to amend the zoning regulations of the borough. All requests for zone changes shall be referred to the planning commission for its recommendation prior to the public hearing. Any action by the zoning commission which concurs with the recommendation of the planning commission shall be by a simple majority of the entire zoning commission. If the zoning commission approves the proposed change which has been disapproved by the planning commission, then such approval will require four (4) or more votes of the zoning commission. If the planning commission approves the proposed zone change and if a protest is filed at the public hearing before the commission that there is opposition to the proposed zone change of twenty (20) percent or more of the area of lots included in such zone change or of the lots within five hundred (500) feet in all directions of the property included in the proposed zone change, then the zoning commission shall not approve the zone change except by four (4) or more votes. The zoning commission shall transmit a report of each petition granted or denied to the board of mayor and burgesses for its knowledge and information. 
(c)  The current zoning commissioner shall retain full power and authority pursuant to law until the newly elected commissioners are sworn in. 
(Ord. No. 107, 3-3-98) 
Secs. 15-54-15-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - WETLANDS[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- At the minutes of the special meeting of the board of the mayor and burgesses held on Nov. 10, 1998, Ord. No. 57 was amended by repealing the provisions of former §§ 15-66-15-72 and replacing them with the similar provisions of §§ 15-66-15-70 as currently set out herein. Former §§ 15-66-15-72 derived from Ord. No. 57, §§ 1-4, adopted Apr. 2, 1974 and the Ord. of Oct. 15, 1987. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 120, adopted July 1, 2008, enacted provisions intended for use as Div. 2 of Art. IV. To preserve the style of this Code, and at the discretion of the editor, Art. IV, Inland wetlands and water courses commission, has been redesignated as Art. IV., Wetlands, Div. 1, Inland wetlands and water courses commission. 
Cross reference- Boards, commissions and committees, § 2-16 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - INLAND WETLANDS AND WATER COURSES COMMISSION 

Sec. 15-66. - Creation of inland wetlands commission. 
    There shall be an inland wetlands and water courses commission established in accordance with the Connecticut General Statutes and the Charter of the Borough of Naugatuck. 
(Mo. of 11-10-98) 
Sec. 15-67. - Responsibilities. 
    Said commission shall have all the powers and responsibilities authorized under said general statutes. 
(Mo. of 11-10-98) 
Sec. 15-68. - Membership. 
    The commission shall be composed of five (5) full members and two (2) alternates appointed by the board of mayor and burgesses. Not more than three (3) commissioners shall be members of the same political party and the two (2) alternates shall not be from the same political party as required by minority representation statutes. 
    The terms of office of the members of said commission are designated as follows: 
    Commencing on January 20, 1999, three (3) commissioners shall serve four-year terms and two (2) commissioners shall serve two-year terms. Commencing on January 20, 2001, the two (2) expiring two-year terms shall be reappointed to four-year terms. Thereafter, all terms shall be for four (4) years commencing on January 20, of each year. 
    Each alternate member of said commission shall serve for a period of four (4) years. 
    All terms shall commence on January 20, 1999. 
(Mo. of 11-10-98) 
Sec. 15-69. - Vacancies. 
    Any vacancy in the commission shall be filled by the board of mayor and burgesses for the unexpired portion of the term of the member whose office has become vacant, by appointment of an alternate member of said commission, which appointment shall be from the same political party as that of the member whose office has become vacant. The death, resignation, removal from the Borough of Naugatuck or removal for cause of any member of the commission shall be considered a vacancy. 
    Any vacancy of an alternate member of said commission shall be filled by the board of mayor and burgesses for the unexpired portion of the term of said alternate, which appointment will be from outside the commission. The death, resignation, removal from the Borough of Naugatuck or removal for cause of any alternate shall be considered a vacancy. 
    In the event that a commission member misses three (3) consecutive regularly scheduled meetings without just cause, the commission may remove such member and the board of mayor and burgesses shall fill the vacancy thus created, for the unexpired portion of the term of the member whose office has become vacant, by appointment of an alternate member of said commission, which appointment shall be from the same political party as that of the member whose office has become vacant. 
(Mo. of 11-10-98) 
Sec. 15-70. - Chairman and officers. 
    The commission shall annually elect from its voting membership a chairman and secretary and such other officers as it shall from time to time determine may be necessary. The commission shall adopt rules for the transaction of business and shall keep a public record of its activities. 
(Mo. of 11-10-98) 
DIVISION 2. - BOROUGH OF NAUGATUCK ORDINANCE ESTABLISHING A MUNICIPAL FINE FOR VIOLATION OF WETLAND REGULATIONS 

Sec. 15-71. - Purpose. 
    This division establishes a means by which the Borough of Naugatuck more effectively enforces the inland wetlands regulations of the borough, with the implementation of fines for violations of the regulations. This division shall not be construed to limit or alter the authority, duty and responsibility of the Inland Wetlands Commission as granted and established under Connecticut's Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Act, sections 22a-36 through 22a-45 of the Connecticut General Statutes, Naugatuck's inland wetlands regulations and other legislation that may apply. 
(Ord. No. 120, 7-1-08) 
Sec. 15-72. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases used in this division shall have the following meanings: 
    Agency. The Borough of Naugatuck Inland Wetlands Commission, acting as the inland wetlands agency under section 22a-42 of the general statutes. 
    Continuing violation. Ongoing work, which has not ceased to the satisfaction of the director within two (2) calendar days of receipt of a stop work order. 
    Director. The employee of the Borough of Naugatuck responsible for the supervision of the agency. The inland wetland enforcement officer shall act as director unless replaced by the legislative body of the borough. 
    Person. Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, limited liability company, company, organization or legal entity of any kind, including municipal corporations, government agencies or subdivisions thereof. 
    Regulations. The inland wetlands regulations of the Borough of Naugatuck as may be amended from time to time. 
    Violation. Any activity conducted without prior permit or approval of the agency which adversely impacts or potentially adversely impacts an inland wetland or watercourse. 
(Ord. No. 120, 7-1-08) 
Sec. 15-73. - Issuance of citations. 
(a)  The director, after consultation with the chairman of the inland wetlands commission, may issue a citation to any person who commits a violation or a continuing violation of the town's inland wetlands regulations. Any such citation may be issued either by hand delivery or by certified mail to the person named in such citation. In such instances, each citation will apply jointly and severally to the owner of the property in question and his/her agents, contractors and subcontractors. An original or certified copy of the initial citation issued by the issuing official shall be filed and retained by the borough and shall be deemed to be a business record within the scope of section 52-180 of the general statutes and evidence of the facts contained therein. In addition, a copy of the initial citation shall be reported to the state department of environmental protection, pursuant to sections 22a-31-14 of the general statutes. 
(b)  The citation shall inform such person: 
(1)  Of the allegations against him or her for which the citation is issued pursuant to this division and the amount of the fines, penalties and costs, as fees due; 
(2)  That the person has a period of thirty (30) days from the date of the citation (i.e., the date of hand delivery or the date the citation was mailed) to make an uncontested payment of the fines; 
(3)  That payments shall be submitted to the agency by check made payable to the borough; 
(4)  The citation notice shall also inform the person cited that he/she may contest his liability before a citation hearing officer by delivering in person or by mail written notice within ten (10) days of the date thereof. 
The notice shall also inform the person cited that if he/she does not demand such a hearing, an assessment and judgment shall be entered against him/her and that such judgment may issue without further notice. 
(c)  Each violation of the inland wetlands regulations shall be a separate and distinct offense. In the case of a continuing violation, at the discretion of the director, daily citations may be issued commencing two (2) calendar days from receipt of the stop work order. 
(d)  Preexisting violations. This division shall only apply to violations which occur after this division's effective date. 
(Ord. No. 120, 7-1-08) 
Sec. 15-74. - Establishment of fine. 
(a)  The fine shall not exceed the maximum permitted under state law, and the amount shall be determined in accordance with subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  Fine schedule. The fine for violations involving more than one (1) activity shall be equal to the sum of the fines for each applicable activity class. 
Activity class    Fine For activities that do not occur within inland wetlands, watercourses or their related established buffer areas    $500.00 For activities that occur within the established buffer area of an inland wetland or watercourse but not within its related inland wetland or watercourse    $750.00 For activities that occur within an inland wetland or watercourse    $1,000.00  
(c)  No such fine may be levied against the state or any employee of the state acting within the scope of his/her employment. 
(Ord. No. 120, 7-1-08) 
Sec. 15-75. - Hearing procedure. 
(a)  In accordance with section 7-152c of the general statutes, as the same may be amended from time to time, there is hereby established a wetland citation hearing procedure. 
(b)  The mayor shall appoint two (2) or more citation hearing officers, other than police officers or employees or persons who issue citations, to conduct the hearings authorized by this division. 
(c)  Admission of liability by payment of fine. 
(1)  If any person who is sent notice hereunder wishes to admit liability for any alleged violation, he/she may, without requesting a hearing, pay the full amount of the fines, penalties, costs or fees admitted to in person or by mail to the borough's inland wetlands commission. Checks should be made payable to the Borough of Naugatuck. 
(2)  Such payment shall be inadmissible in any proceeding, civil or criminal, to establish the conduct of such person or other person making the payment. 
(d)  Any person may demand a hearing by delivering a written request for the same to the director within ten (10) days of the date of the first notice provided for in hereunder. Any person who does not deliver such written request shall be deemed to have admitted liability, and the director shall certify such person's failure to respond to the hearing officer. The hearing officer shall thereupon enter and assess the fines, penalties, costs or fees provided for by this division and shall follow the procedures set forth herein. 
(e)  Any person who requests a hearing shall be given written notice by certified mail of the date, time and place for the hearing. Such hearing shall be held not less than fifteen (15) days nor more than thirty (30) days from the date of the mailing of the notice, provided that the hearing officer shall grant upon good cause shown a postponement or continuance for any reasonable request by any interested party. Once a hearing has been requested, no additional citations shall be issued. 
(f)  The presence of the issuing official shall be required at the hearing if such person so requests. A person wishing to contest his/her liability shall appear at the hearing and may present evidence in his/her behalf. 
(g)  If the person that demanded a hearing fails to appear, the hearing officer may enter an assessment by default against him/her upon finding of proper notice and liability under this division. 
(h)  A designated municipal official, other than the hearing officer, may present evidence on behalf of the municipality. 
(i)  The hearing officer may accept from the designated municipal official copies of police reports, investigatory and citation reports and other official documents by mail and may determine thereby that the appearance of such person is not necessary. 
(j)  The hearing officer shall conduct the hearing in the order and form and with such methods of proof as he/she deems fair and appropriate. The rules regarding the admissibility of evidence shall not be strictly applied, but all testimony shall be given under oath or affirmation. 
(k)  The hearing officer shall announce his/her decision at the end of the hearing. 
(1)  If the hearing officer determines that the person is not liable, he/she shall dismiss the matter and enter his/her determination, in writing, accordingly. 
(2)  If the hearing officer determines that the person is liable for the violation, he/she shall then enter and assess the fines, penalties, costs or fees against such person as provided by this division. 
(Ord. No. 120, 7-1-08) 
Sec. 15-76. - Failure to pay fine. 
    If such assessment is not paid on the date of entry, the hearing officer shall send first class mail a notice of the assessment to the person found liable and shall file, not less than thirty (30) days nor more than twelve (12) months after such mailing, a certified copy of the notice of assessment with the clerk of the superior court facility designated by the chief court administrator together with an entry fee of eight dollars ($8.00). The certified copy of the notice of assessment shall constitute a record of assessment. Within such twelve-month period, assessments against the same person may be accrued and filed as one record of assessment. The clerk of the court shall enter a judgment, in the amount of the assessment plus court costs of eight dollars ($8.00) against such person in favor of the borough. Notwithstanding any other provisions of the general statutes, the hearing officer's assessment, when so entered as a judgment, shall have the effect of a civil money judgment, and a levy of execution on such judgment may be issued without further notice to such person. 
(Ord. No. 120, 7-1-08) 
Sec. 15-77. - Appeals. 
    A person against whom an assessment has been entered pursuant to this division is entitled to judicial review by way of appeal. An appeal shall be instituted within thirty (30) days of the mailing of notice of such assessment by filing a petition to reopen assessment, together with an entry fee in an amount equal to the entry fee for a small claims case pursuant to section 52-259 of the general statutes, in the superior court, which shall entitle such person to a hearing in accordance with the rules of the judges of the superior court. 
(Ord. No. 120, 7-1-08) 
Sec. 15-78. - Public notification. 
Notice of: 
(1)  Issuance of an initial citation; 
(2)  Payment of a fine; and 
(3)  An appeal pursuant to this division shall be published by the director at least once in a newspaper having a general circulation in the borough. 
(Ord. No. 120, 7-1-08) 
Secs. 15-79-15-85. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Boards, commissions and committees, § 2-16 et seq. 

Sec. 15-86. - Established. 
    In accordance with section 7-136 and section 8-186 et seq., of the general statutes there is hereby established an economic development commission. 
(Ord. No. 56, § I, 12-4-73) 
Sec. 15-87. - Composition; appointment. 
(a)  The economic development commission shall consist of nine (9) residents of the borough of voting age, who shall be appointed to the commission by the mayor. 
(b)  All appointments to the economic development commission shall be made consistent with section 9-167a of the general statutes with terms of office to run from the date of their appointment or until their successors shall be appointed and qualified. 
(Ord. No. 56, § I, 12-4-73; Ord. of 11-14-78) 
Sec. 15-88. - Terms of members. 
    The terms of all the members of the economic development commission shall not exceed five (5) years and shall be so fixed that the terms of approximately one-fifth of the members shall expire each year in accordance with section 7-136 of the general statutes. 
(Ord. No. 56, § I, 12-4-73; Ord. of 11-14-78) 
Sec. 15-89. - Vacancies. 
    Vacancies on the economic development commission, however created, shall be filled by the mayor for the unexpired portion of the term of the member creating the vacancy. 
(Ord. No. 56, § I, 12-4-73) 
Sec. 15-90. - Ex officio members. 
    The mayor, controller and engineer shall serve as members ex officio, of the economic development commission without voting rights and their attendance will not be a factor in determining a quorum. 
(Ord. No. 56, § I, 12-4-73) 
Sec. 15-91. - Alternate members-Appointment; terms. 
(a)  There shall be two (2) alternate members of the economic development commission. 
(b)  All alternates shall be appointed by the mayor. 
(c)  Alternates shall be appointed for a term as follows: 
(1)  One (1) alternate shall be appointed for a term commencing on October 5, 1982 and ending on October 4, 1984; 
(2)  One (1) alternate shall be appointed for a term commencing on October 5, 1982 and ending on October 4, 1987. 
(d)  When each term expires, a new person shall be appointed, or a person shall be reappointed for a term of five (5) years. 
(Ord. No. 70, 9-7-82) 
Sec. 15-92. - Quorum. 
    A majority of the voting members of the economic development commission shall constitute a quorum. 
(Ord. No. 56, § I, 12-4-73) 
Sec. 15-93. - Officers. 
    The economic development commission shall annually elect from its voting membership a chairman and such other officers as it shall from time to time determine may be necessary. 
(Ord. No. 56, § II, 12-4-73) 
Sec. 15-94. - Removal of members. 
    Any member of the economic development commission may be removed by the mayor for cause, and on request of such member, after public hearing. 
(Ord. No. 56, § III, 12-4-73) 
Sec. 15-95. - Employees. 
    The economic development commission may appoint and engage employees, agents and consultants as may be necessary for the discharge of its duties obtaining the approval of the board of mayor and burgesses and within the limits of appropriations made therefor. 
(Ord. No. 56, § IV, 12-4-73) 
Sec. 15-96. - Duties and responsibilities. 
(a)  The economic development commission shall conduct research into the economic conditions and trends in the borough, shall make recommendations to appropriate officials and agencies of the borough regarding action to improve its economic condition and development, shall seek to coordinate the activities of and cooperate with unofficial bodies organized to promote such economic development and may advertise and may prepare, print and distribute books, maps, charts and pamphlets which in its judgment will further its official purposes. 
(b)  The economic development commission shall annually prepare and submit to the board of mayor and burgesses a report of its activities and of its recommendations for improving such economic conditions and development. 
(Ord. No. 56, § V, 12-4-73) 
Sec. 15-97. - State and federal grants. 
    The economic development commission shall have the authority to apply for and receive state and federal grants from state and federal agencies and other sources on behalf of the borough. 
(Ord. No. 56, § VI, 12-4-73) 
Sec. 15-98. - Budget. 
    The economic development commission shall submit each year a budget, at a time in accordance with the finance act for the forthcoming year, for approval of the board of finance and board of mayor and burgesses. 
(Ord. No. 56, § VII, 12-4-73) 
Sec. 15-99. - Meetings and reports. 
(a)  Meetings of the economic development commission shall be held at least six (6) times annually and at such other time as the chairman shall deem necessary. 
(b)  The economic development commission shall make a written report of its activities to the board of mayor and burgesses annually on or before the first day of April, and such other special reports as the board of mayor and burgesses may require from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 56, § VIII, 12-4-73) 
Secs. 15-100-15-115. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 117, §§ 1-5, adopted June 14, 2005, amended Art. VI in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. VI, §§ 15-116-15-122, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Code 1973, § 20-3; Ord. No. 80, adopted Oct. 15, 1987. 
Cross reference- Boards, commissions and committees, § 2-16 et seq. 

Sec. 15-116. - Redevelopment/development agency designated. 
    The Naugatuck Economic Development Corporation (the "NEDC") is hereby designated as the redevelopment agency and the development agency of the Borough of Naugatuck (the "agency") and shall exercise, on behalf of the borough, the powers, rights and responsibilities granted to such agencies under G.S. chapter 130, Revision of 1958, as amended ("chapter 130") and G.S. chapter 132, Revision of 1958, as amended ("chapter 132"), as applicable. 
(Ord. No. 117, § 1, 6-14-05) 
Sec. 15-117. - Purpose of the agency. 
    The purpose of the agency shall be: 
(1)  To encourage the involvement and growth of business and industry in the community and improve the public's understanding of the value of responsible economic development and redevelopment compatible with the character of the municipality. 
(2)  To preserve existing business and industry and foster appropriate opportunities for potential economic development. 
(3)  To encourage redevelopment through the rehabilitation or demolition of existing structures, the construction of new structures, improvements or facilities and the location of streets, parks and utilities. 
(4)  To perform such other functions contemplated for a redevelopment agency under G.S. chapter 130 and a development agency under G.S. chapter 132. 
(Ord. No. 117, § 2, 6-14-05) 
Sec. 15-118. - Duties and responsibilities. 
    The duties and responsibilities of the agency shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following duties in furtherance of the purposes noted above: 
(1)  Promote the overall continued growth of industry, business and housing accommodations and the initiation and administration of all aspects of any municipal redevelopment and development projects undertaken pursuant to G.S. chapter 130 and G.S. chapter 132; 
(2)  Conduct research into the economic conditions and trends in the borough, shall make recommendations to appropriate officials and agencies of the borough regarding action to improve its economic condition and development, shall seek to coordinate the activities of an cooperate with unofficial bodies organized to promote such economic development and may advertise and may prepare, print and distribute books, maps, charts and pamphlets which in its judgment will further its official purposes; and 
(3)  Annually prepare and submit to the board of mayor and burgesses a report of its activities and of its recommendations for improving such economic conditions and development. 
(4)  All duties, responsibilities, powers and rights conferred upon redevelopment agencies under G.S. chapter 130 and upon development agencies under G.S. chapter 132. 
(Ord. No. 117, § 3, 6-14-05) 
Sec. 15-119. - Conflicting resolutions, orders, rules and regulations suspended. 
    At all times when any orders, rules and regulations made and promulgated pursuant to this article shall be in effect, they shall supersede all existing resolutions, orders, rules and regulations insofar as the latter may be inconsistent therewith. 
(Ord. No. 117, § 4, 6-14-05) 
Sec. 15-120. - Conflict with state or federal statutes. 
    This article shall not be construed to conflict with any state or federal statute, rule or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 117, § 5, 6-14-05) 
Secs. 15-121-15-133. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - REGIONAL COUNCIL OF ELECTED OFFICIALS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2. 
State Law reference- Regional council of elected officials, G.S. § 4-124c et seq. 

Sec. 15-134. - Participation by borough. 
    The borough hereby joins with such of the towns, cities, within its planning region as defined by the director of the office of state planning, as may enact a similar article, to create a regional council of elected officials as the council is defined by general statutes. 
(Code 1973, § 20-1) 
Sec. 15-135. - Representative. 
    The representative to the regional council of elected officials shall be the mayor or duly elected member of the board of mayor and burgesses. 
(Code 1973, § 20-1) 
Sec. 15-136. - Powers, duties, responsibilities. 
    The regional council of elected officials shall have such powers, purposes, responsibilities and duties as stated in section 4-124c et seq., of the general statutes. 
(Code 1973, § 20-1) 
Chapter 16 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Public squares, streets, etc., §§ 39-46; streets, sidewalks, gutters, etc., §§ 47-50; macadamizing or paving streets or highways, § 51; superintendent of streets, § 62; obstructing streets, etc., § 63.1. 
Cross reference- Advertising, Ch. 3; consumption of alcoholic liquor on public highways, sidewalks, etc., restricted, § 4-1; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 7; fire zones, § 9-16 et seq.; littering streets, public places, § 10-21; duty of property owners or occupants to keep sidewalks free of litter, § 10-31; peddlers, § 12-16 et seq.; vendors, § 12-51 et seq.; solicitors, § 12-76 et seq.; noise on streets, public places, etc., § 13-3; parades and processions, § 13-7; parks and recreation, Ch. 14; planning, Ch. 15; traffic and motor vehicles, Ch. 18; utilities, Ch. 19; subdivisions, App. A; zoning, App. B. 
State Law reference- Power of borough to control the excavation of the highways and streets, G.S. § 7-148(c)(6)(C)(iii); to lay out, construct, etc., streets, sidewalks, etc., G.S. § 7-148(c)(6)(C)(i); to provide for lighting the streets, etc., G.S. § 7-148(c)(4)(F); to provide for the planting, etc., of shade and ornamental trees on the streets and public grounds, G.S. § 7-148(c)(6)(A)(v); to keep open, etc., the streets, sidewalks etc., G.S. § 7-148(c)(6)(C)(ii); to require owners or occupants of land adjacent to any sidewalk to remove snow, etc., G.S. § 7-148(c)(6)(C)(v); to regulate and prohibit the excavation, etc., of sidewalks, etc., G.S. § 7-148(c)(6)(C)(iv); to prohibit and regulate the discharge of drains from roofs of buildings over or upon the sidewalks, streets, etc., G.S. § 7-148(c)(6)(B)(iv); to keep the streets, sidewalks and public places free from undue noises and nuisances, etc., G.S. § 7-148(c)(7)(F)(i); highways and bridges, G.S. § 13a-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 16-1. - Playing ball games, etc. 
    No person shall play any game of ball or quoits, or throw stones, snowballs or any other thing liable to injure any person or frighten any animal, upon any walk, street or public grounds within the borough. 
(Code 1973, § 22-1) 
Sec. 16-2. - Coasting or sliding. 
    No person shall coast or slide on any walk, street or public grounds within the borough, except on such roadways or public grounds as may be designated by the board of mayor and burgesses and so posted by the mayor. 
(Code 1973, § 22-2) 
Sec. 16-3. - Erecting or placing merchandise, buildings, etc. 
    No person shall erect or place any merchandise, building, sign, gate, fence, post, pole or other thing in, upon or across any street, gutter, sidewalk or highway, without first obtaining permission therefor from the board of mayor and burgesses. 
(Code 1973, § 22-3) 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 7. 
Sec. 16-4. - Placing signs, banners, etc., over streets. 
    No person shall place any sign, banner, wire or any other thing over any street within a height of fifteen (15) feet above the ground or pavement of the street. 
(Code 1973, § 22-4) 
Cross reference- Advertising, Ch. 3. 
Sec. 16-5. - Hanging signs, etc., over sidewalks. 
    No person shall hang any sign, article of merchandise, awning or other thing whatsoever within a height of six and one-half (61/2) feet from the sidewalk. 
(Code 1973, § 22-5) 
Cross reference- Advertising, Ch. 3. 
Sec. 16-6. - Building materials. 
    No person shall place any building material, during the erection or repair of any building, in any street, highway or public ground without obtaining permission therefor, subject to such conditions as may be prescribed in each particular case, by the mayor or board of mayor and burgesses, in writing; and the charge for such use of the street shall be not less than one dollar ($1.00) for each day. 
(Code 1973, § 22-6) 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 7. 
Sec. 16-7. - Stands, etc., for sale of any article, etc. 
    No person shall make a stand in any street or any public grounds of the borough with a wagon, wheelbarrow or other vehicle, or erect any booth, box or stand for the sale of any article, or for the practice of any business or calling, without first obtaining written permission from the mayor, who may permit the same to be done under such conditions as he shall deem reasonable, and he may grant a license therefor upon the payment to him of not less than one dollar ($1.00) for each day, and such additional sum as to him may seem expedient; and such license shall be in force for one (1) week without renewal. 
(Code 1973, § 22-7) 
Sec. 16-8. - Removal of snow or ice from sidewalks. 
(a)  The owner or occupant of any premises fronting or adjoining any street or public place within the borough, where there is any sidewalk, shall after the fall of any snow, clean the same from all such sidewalks within six (6) hours after 7:00 a.m. if the snow has ceased falling before that hour, and if the snow has not ceased falling before 7:00 a.m. then the sidewalks shall be cleaned within six (6) daylight hours after the snow has ceased to fall. Whenever any ice may form on any such sidewalk from any cause, such ice shall be removed within one (1) hour after such formation, provided such hour is between 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.; and when the snow or ice cannot be wholly removed, the owner or occupant shall sprinkle sand or other substance thereon, keeping a sufficient quantity thereon at all times to make it safe for public travel. 
(b)  After the expiration of the time mentioned in subsection (a), the superintendent of streets shall proceed to clean or sand the sidewalks at the expense of the owner or occupant of the adjoining premises, charging them the prevailing borough street department hourly labor and equipment rates for each man and the equipment employed in cleaning or sanding the same; and the costs may be collected from the owner as provided in section 63, subdivision 33 of the Charter; but nothing in this subsection shall relieve the owner or occupant from the penalty or duties imposed by subsection (a). 
(Code 1973, § 22-8) 
State Law reference- Authority of borough to require owners and occupants of land to remove snow, ice, etc., from sidewalks, G.S. § 7-148(c)(6)(C)(v). 
Sec. 16-9. - Liability for ice and snow on public sidewalks. 
(a)  Notwithstanding the provisions of section 13a-149 of the general statutes or any other general statute or special act, the borough shall not be liable to any person injured in person or property caused by the presence of ice or snow on a public sidewalk unless the borough is the owner or person in possession and control of land abutting such sidewalk, other than land used as a highway or street, provided the borough shall be liable for its affirmative acts with respect to such sidewalk. 
(b)  The owner or person in possession and control of land abutting a public sidewalk shall have the same duty of care with respect to the presence of ice or snow on such sidewalk toward the portion of the sidewalk abutting his property as the borough had prior to December 12, 1981, and shall be liable to persons injured in person or property where a breach of the duty is the proximate cause of the injury. 
(c)  No action to recover damages for injury to the person or to property caused by the presence of ice or snow on a public sidewalk against a person who owns or is in possession and control of land abutting a public sidewalk shall be brought but within two (2) years from the date when the injury is first sustained. 
(Ord. No. 69, 12-21-81) 
State Law reference- Municipal liability for snow and ice on public sidewalks, G.S. § 7-163a. 
Sec. 16-10. - Posts or poles. 
(a)  No person shall erect any post or pole in the streets or public grounds of the borough without first obtaining written permission to do so from the mayor or board of mayor and burgesses. 
(b)  All posts or poles erected within the streets of the borough shall be set one-half within the curbline, unless otherwise ordered by the mayor or board of mayor and burgesses, and the curb, sidewalk or gutter disturbed by the erection or by the removal of any post or pole shall, as soon as possible, be replaced and repaired with the same kind of material as the adjoining curb, sidewalk or gutter, and the curb, sidewalk or gutter shall in all respects be placed in good condition and repair, subject to the approval of the superintendent of streets or board of mayor and burgesses. 
(c)  All stumps of posts or poles remaining after the removal of any post or pole from the streets or public grounds of the borough shall be removed at once and if such post or pole is not replaced by another post or pole, the person removing the same shall, in case the street is curbed, insert in lieu thereof a piece of curbing not less than four (4) feet in length, of the same quality, dimension and finish as the adjoining curb, leaving the adjoining pieces of curb not less than four (4) feet in length, and shall remove all other incumbrances or obstructions which shall have been placed in the streets or public grounds, in the process of erecting or removing such posts or poles, and as soon as the work of erecting or removing the same shall have been completed. 
(d)  The owner and every person having the care of any post or pole, except hitching posts, heretofore or hereafter erected in any street in the borough shall, within thirty (30) days after a written request from the board of mayor and burgesses, cause the post or pole and the fixtures thereon to be painted such color as the board may order, and shall mark the post or pole with the name of the owner thereof and keep the same, together with the fixtures and attachments thereon, at all times, in good repair. Should any person neglect or refuse to do any of the acts required of him, or it, by this section, the board of mayor and burgesses may cause the same to be done at the cost and expense of such person and such costs or expense may be collected in the manner provided by the borough Charter. 
(Code 1973, § 22-9) 
Sec. 16-11. - Excavations or obstructions to be enclosed by rail or fence; lanterns, etc. 
(a)  When any excavation or obstruction of any nature is made or placed in any street or public ground, the person, by or for whom such excavation or obstruction is so made or placed, shall cause a rail or sufficient fence to be placed and fixed so as to enclose such excavation or obstruction, and the earth, gravel, or other material thrown into the street from the excavation, and such fence shall be continued during the whole time such excavation or obstruction shall remain in the street or public ground. 
(b)  A sufficient number of lighted lanterns to provide for public safety shall be fixed to some part of such fence, or in some other proper manner over or near such excavation or obstruction, and the earth, gravel or other material taken from the excavation, and the lanterns shall be so kept from the beginning of twilight of the evening through the whole of the night, and shall be continued every evening and night during all the time such excavation or obstruction shall remain in such street or public ground. Such persons shall obey any order of the superintendent of streets or policemen with regard to the number or position of the lanterns, and in addition to the requirements of this section, such person shall employ and keep one (1) or more watchmen at or near such excavation or obstruction, whenever so directed by the mayor or board of mayor and burgesses. 
(Code 1973, § 22-10) 
Sec. 16-12. - Maintenance of sidewalks. 
(a)  The owner or occupant of any premises fronting or adjoining any street or public place within the limits of the borough, where there is any sidewalk, shall keep such sidewalk in a safe and convenient condition for the use of the public and shall remove therefrom without delay any and all dirt, stones, gravel, ashes, or any other rubbish or obstruction of any nature endangering or incommoding public travel that may be placed or found thereon, without obstructing the gutter or street adjoining the sidewalk. 
(b)  If such owner or occupant shall fail to so remove such dirt, stones, gravel, ashes, or other rubbish or obstruction within twenty-four (24) hours after the same has accumulated or been placed on the sidewalk, the superintendent of streets shall proceed to remove the same at the expense of the owner or occupant of the adjoining premises, and the owner or occupant shall pay to the borough the entire expense of such removal, and the same may be collected from the owner or occupant in the manner provided in section 63, subdivision 33 of the Charter, and such action by the superintendent of streets shall not relieve the owner or occupant from the duties or penalties imposed by this section. 
(Code 1973, § 22-1) 
Sec. 16-13. - Police protection required at certain construction sites. 
    For any of the following described activities resulting in blockage, fully or partially, of public highways or where a public highway is being excavated or obstructed, sworn personnel shall be hired by the person(s) and/or entity(ies) causing such excavation or obstruction through the borough in order to insure public safety in the area of the work being performed, provided however, the chief of police shall designate a specific zone in the borough wherein it will be mandatory that such police protection be secured. For areas of the borough which lie outside the mandatory zone the determination as to whether or not police protection is required at such site for the activities described herein shall be decided on a case by case basis by the chief of police and the superintendent of streets or in their absence their respective designees. 
(1)  Constructive/excavation permits. 
(2)  Power line installation/repair. 
(3)  Telephone line installation/repair. 
(4)  Cable television installation/repair. 
(5)  Any other activity in which a public highway is being excavated or obstructed. 
(Mo. of 9-6-94) 
Secs. 16-14-16-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STREETS COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Boards, commissions and committees, § 2-16 et seq. 

Sec. 16-31. - Established. 
    The borough hereby establishes the streets commission in accordance with section 7-148(c)(6)(C) of the general statutes and the Charter of the borough. 
(Ord. No. 71, § 1, 9-19-85) 
Sec. 16-32. - Duties. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this article, the streets commission shall be responsible for the care and management of all streets, avenues, highways, alleys and bridges, and the opening, grading improving, repairing and cleaning of the same; of the construction, protection, repair, furnishing, cleaning, heating, lighting and general care of all public streets and appurtenances, except such as are by the express terms of the Charter under the control of some other officer or department; of the construction, repair, cleaning and general care of all drains, culverts, sluiceways and catch basins, and the collection and disposing of ashes, garbage and refuse. The streets commission shall make all suitable rules and regulations in regard to the department and the conduct of its business. 
(Ord. No. 71, § 1, 9-19-85) 
Sec. 16-33. - Composition; terms of members; vacancies. 
(a)  The streets commission shall consist of five (5) residents of voting age who are domiciled in the borough and are electors therein, and shall be appointed to the streets commission by nomination of the mayor and confirmed by the board of mayor and burgesses. 
(b)  There shall be appointed two (2) members to serve for terms of two (2) years each and until their successors shall be appointed and shall have been qualified; two (2) members to serve for terms of four (4) years each and until their successors shall be appointed and qualified; one (1) member to serve for a term of five (5) years and until his successor shall be appointed and qualified. Thereafter, upon expiration of each of the original terms, each member shall be appointed to serve for a term of five (5) years from the date of the expiration and until his successor shall be appointed and qualified. 
(c)  Vacancies, however created, shall be filled by nomination of the mayor and confirmed by the board of mayor and burgesses for the unexpired portion of the term of the member creating the vacancy. 
(Ord. No. 71, § 2, 19-19-85; Ord. of 4-5-88) 
Sec. 16-34. - Ex officio members. 
    The mayor, the controller and the engineer shall serve as members ex officio of the streets commission without voting rights and their attendance will not be a factor in determining a quorum. 
(Ord. No. 71, § 2, 19-19-85) 
Sec. 16-35. - Alternate members. 
    The streets commission may also consist of two (2) alternate members nominated by the mayor and confirmed by the board of mayor and burgesses. The members shall meet all the requirements of the regular members. They shall fill temporary vacancies on the streets commission, and when so doing, shall have all the powers of regular members. They shall serve for five-year terms. 
(Ord. No. 71, § 2, 9-19-85) 
Sec. 16-36. - Quorum. 
    A majority of the voting members of the streets commission shall constitute a quorum. 
(Ord. No. 71, § 2, 9-19-85) 
Sec. 16-37. - Officers. 
    The streets commission shall biannually elect from its voting membership a chairman and such other officers as it shall from time to time determine may be necessary. 
(Ord. No. 71, § 3, 9-19-85) 
Sec. 16-38. - Removal of members. 
    Upon reasonable notice and after due hearing, the board of mayor and burgesses may remove from office for malfeasance or for any neglect or refusal to properly perform his duties, any voting member of the streets commission. Such removal shall require an affirmative vote of a majority of the members of the board of mayor and burgesses. 
(Ord. No. 71, § 4, 9-19-85) 
Sec. 16-39. - Compensation. 
    The members of the streets commission shall serve without compensation for their services, but shall be reimbursed for their necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their official duties, within the limits of any appropriations made for such purpose. 
(Ord. No. 71, § 5, 9-19-85) 
Sec. 16-40. - Preparation of budgets. 
(a)  The streets commission shall submit, on or before the fifteenth of January of each year, an annual operation and maintenance budget for its department for the forthcoming year for approval of the finance board. This budget will set forth estimated revenues and expenditures for the forthcoming year. 
(Ord. No. 71, § 6, 9-19-85) 
Sec. 16-41. - Rules and regulations. 
    The streets commission shall have the power to make and enforce regulations with the same effect as to ordinances for all its operations and shall have the powers to amend the same. 
(Ord. No. 71, § 7, 9-19-85) 
Sec. 16-42. - Meetings and reports. 
    Meetings of the streets commission shall be held at least once a month and at such other time as the chairman shall deem necessary. The streets commission shall make a written report of its activities to the board of mayor and burgesses annually, on or before the first day of April, and such other special reports as the board of mayor and burgesses may require from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 71, § 8, 9-19-85) 
Secs. 16-43-16-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CONSTRUCTION OF CURBS AND SIDEWALKS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference- Sidewalks, gutters, §§ 47-50. 
State Law reference- Authority of borough to construct, alter, etc., curbs and sidewalks, G.S. § 7-148(c)(6)(C)(i). 

Sec. 16-56. - Generally. 
    All curbs and sidewalks built within the limits of the borough shall conform to this article and the specifications in this article. 
(Code 1973, § 22-23) 
Sec. 16-57. - Kind of curb and width of sidewalk. 
    The kind of curb and width of sidewalk shall be specified by vote of the mayor and burgesses. 
(Code 1973, § 22-23) 
Sec. 16-58. - Slope. 
    The slope of the walk from the established curb elevation to property line shall be not less than one-eight inch per foot, nor greater than one-half inch per foot, except at street intersections. Where a new walk joins an old walk of different cross slope, the new walk shall be sloped up or down to join the old walk, but such slope shall not differ from the longitudinal slope of the curb by more than one-half inch per foot. 
(Code 1973, § 22-24) 
Sec. 16-59. - Corners. 
    At street intersections the corners shall be laid with circular curbing, having a radius equal to the width of the narrow walk. 
(Code 1973, § 22-25) 
Sec. 16-60. - Driveways. 
    At driveways the curb may be lowered, not to exceed three (3) inches, below the established curb grade, but the depression of walk to meet such lowered curb shall not extend more than twelve (12) inches from the curbline. That is, driveways shall have the same cross section as other parts of sidewalks except within twelve (12) inches of curb line. 
(Code 1973, § 22-26) 
Sec. 16-61. - Finish. 
    The finish of all walks shall be rough, that is, floated to a true surface but not troweled smooth. 
(Code 1973, § 22-27) 
Sec. 16-62. - Curbing. 
(a)  Curbing shall be sound granite or granite stone, of good color and texture; stone equal to Ansonia stone will be allowed. The stones shall be not less than four (4) feet in length, four (4) inches thick and at least eighteen (18) inches in minimum depth; the top and face shall be dressed to plain surface with edges to a true line with chisel draft; the ends shall be jointed to show, not to exceed three-sixteenths of an inch opening on top and face and for at least two-thirds the thickness of the stone. The top edges of curb shall be set to the established lines and grade. Curbstones shall be set to slope from the roadway with a batter of one and one-half (11/2) inches per foot as practical. 
(b)  The top edges shall be beveled so that when set the top surface of curb shall have same slope as the sidewalk. 
(Code 1973, § 22-28) 
Sec. 16-63. - Cement. 
    The cement shall meet the requirements of the specifications for Portland cement of the American Society for Testing Materials. 
(Code 1973, § 22-29) 
Sec. 16-64. - Sand. 
    The sand shall be clean and sharp and not too fine. 
(Code 1973, § 22-30) 
Sec. 16-65. - Gravel. 
    Gravel shall be clean and hard and of size to be passed by one-inch mesh screen, and retained on one-fourth-inch mesh. 
(Code 1973, § 22-31) 
Sec. 16-66. - Water. 
    Water shall be reasonably clean. 
(Code 1973, § 22-32) 
Sec. 16-67. - Forms. 
(a)  The forms shall be smooth, free from warp, and of sufficient strength to resist springing out of shape, and of a depth to conform to the thickness of the proposed walk. 
(b)  The forms shall be well-staked and set to the established lines, their upper edges conforming to the grade of the finish walk. 
(Code 1973, § 22-33) 
Sec. 16-68. - Subbase. 
    The subbase shall be thoroughly rammed, and all soft spots or unsuitable materials shall be removed and replaced by some suitable hard material. 
(Code 1973, § 22-34) 
Sec. 16-69. - Base. 
(a)  The concrete for the base shall be so proportioned that the cement shall overfill the voids in the sand by at least five (5) percent, and the mortar shall overfill the voids in the stone or gravel by at least ten (10) percent. 
(b)  The proportions shall not exceed one (1) part of cement to eight (8) parts of other materials. 
(c)  When the voids are not determined, the concrete shall have the proportions of one (1) part cement, three (3) parts sand or screenings and five (5) parts stone or gravel. A sack of cement ninety-four (94) pounds shall be considered to have a volume of one (1) cubic foot. Expansion joints shall be made at least equal to a three-fourths-inch joint every fifty (50) feet and the base of every block should be cut through with the trowel on the block line. 
(Code 1973, § 22-35) 
Sec. 16-70. - Top or wearing surface. 
(a)  The wearing surface shall not be less than one (1) inch thick, and shall consist of one (1) part Portland cement to two (2) parts sand, and shall be spread on the base within fifty (50) minutes after the base has been mixed. 
(b)  The wearing surface shall be floated to a true surface, and troweled as little as possible to avoid a smooth finish. 
(c)  The block markings shall be made over joints in base, and cut clear through to the base. 
(d)  Blocks shall not exceed six (6) feet in any dimension. 
(Code 1973, § 22-36) 
Sec. 16-71. - Mixing. 
(a)  The ingredients of the concrete shall be thoroughly mixed, sufficient water being added to obtain the desired consistency, and the mixing continued until the materials are uniformly distributed and each particle of the fine aggregate is thoroughly coated with cement and each particle of the coarse aggregate is thoroughly coated with mortar. 
(b)  Where a mechanical concrete mixer is used, the materials must be proportioned dry and then deposited in the mixer all at the same time. 
(c)  The mixer must produce a concrete of uniform consistency and color, with the stones thoroughly mixed with the water, sand and cement. 
(Code 1973, § 22-37) 
Sec. 16-72. - Placing concrete. 
    The concrete for base shall be deposited in a layer on the subgrade in such quantities that, after being thoroughly rammed in place, it will be of the required thickness and the upper surface shall be true, uniform and parallel with the surface of the finished sidewalk. The finished surface shall be a true plane, without depressions and of the required cross slope. 
(Code 1973, § 22-38) 
Sec. 16-73. - Edges. 
    The slabs shall be rounded on all surface edges to radius of about one-half inch. 
(Code 1973, § 22-39) 
Sec. 16-74. - Concrete curb. 
    Curbs shall be built in the same manner and of same materials and proportions as required for walks, with wearing surface at least one and one-half (11/2) inches thick on all exposed surfaces. The wearing surface shall be placed immediately after the base or backing course is laid. Concrete curb shall be at least five (5) inches thick and fifteen (15) inches deep and shall be jointed to compare with the blocks in the walk. 
(Code 1973, § 22-40) 
Sec. 16-75. - Concrete curbs and sidewalks to be separately formed and poured. 
    Concrete curbs and sidewalks shall be separately formed and poured. 
(Code 1973, § 22-41) 
Secs. 16-76-16-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - EXCAVATIONS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Utilities, Ch. 19. 
State Law reference- Authority of borough to control the excavation of highways and streets, G.S. § 7-148(c)(6)(C)(iii); to regulate and prohibit excavations, etc., of sidewalks, G.S. § 7-148(c)(6)(C)(iv). 

Sec. 16-91. - Permit required; fee. 
(a)  No person or entity shall cause to be made, or make any opening, aperture or excavation for any purpose whatsoever in any street or sidewalk in the borough, without written permission from the (borough engineer), upon written application, therefore, and upon payment of a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) made payable to the borough, for each opening, aperture or excavation. 
(b)  No persons or entity shall make connections with gas mains, (cable, communications, etc.) water mains, steam supply pipes, public sewers, or for any other lawful purpose without a permit issued in accordance with ordinances of the borough. 
(c)  No person or entity shall be provided with a permit until a road opening bond and appropriate liability insurance are provided in an amount determined by the borough engineer. 
(Code 1973, § 22-52; Ord. of 10-4-77; Mo. of 9-6-05) 
Cross reference- Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 12. 
Sec. 16-92. - Making excavations, etc. 
(a)  Whenever any person shall, after conformance with borough ordinances, take up any portion of any pavement or make any excavation of whatever nature, in any street, paved or unpaved, or on any sidewalk, or make any connection with any water main, gas main, steam supply pipe, public sewer, or for any other unlawful purpose, it shall become the duty of the person so taking up such pavement or making such excavation or connection, to puddle the earth placed therein so that the same will not settle. The filling shall be done in layers not more than six (6) inches deep, thoroughly tamped and flushed with water when necessary. In any case where the pavement to be repaired has a concrete base, such base shall be cut back eighteen (18) inches to undisturbed ground on each side. 
(b)  There shall be no tunnelling under streets or sidewalks without written permission of the superintendent of streets. 
(c)  All work shall be done to the satisfaction of the superintendent of streets, and, if he deems necessary, he shall cause the excavation to be filled or refilled and replace such pavement and collect the cost of same from the permittee. 
(d)  Before proceeding to fill any such excavation, such person shall give to the superintendent of streets at least four (4) hours' notice of the intention so to do and all such filling shall be done in conformance with the Charter and ordinances of the borough and regulations of the street superintendent. If such excavation has been made in an unpaved street, such person shall put the street in as good condition in all respects as it was before such excavation was made. 
(Code 1973, § 22-53) 
Sec. 16-93. - Excavations to be enclosed by rail or fence; lanterns, etc. 
    When any excavation has been made in any street or sidewalk, the person for whom such excavation is made shall cause a rail or other sufficient fence to be placed and fixed so as to enclose such excavation and the earth, gravel or other material thrown into the street therefrom; and such fence shall be continued during the whole time such excavation shall be exposed or be opened. Such person shall provide a sufficient number of lighted lanterns to provide for public safety, to be affixed to some part of such fence, or in some other proper manner over or near such excavation and over or near the earth, gravel or other material taken from the same, and so kept from the beginning of the twilight of the evening through the whole of the night and continued every evening and night during all the time such excavation shall be open, exposed or in state of repair and such person shall comply with any order of the superintendent of streets with regard to the number or position of the lanterns. 
(Code 1973, § 22-54) 
Sec. 16-94. - Safe and convenient passage to be provided, etc. 
    Any person, duly permitted to make any excavations in any street or sidewalk for any purpose, shall provide safe and convenient passage around or over the same for public travel, and shall keep such passage free from earth, stone, trenches or any other materials which shall hinder travel of pedestrians or vehicles of any kind and shall comply with any order of the superintendent of streets in relation thereto, shall not obstruct the street gutters in any manner so as to prevent or retard flow of water therein and shall be responsible to the borough for any damages to person or property, occasioned by any neglect so to do. 
(Code 1973, § 22-55) 
Sec. 16-95. - Liability insurance. 
    No person, excepting firms or corporations subject to the jurisdiction of the public utilities commission of the state, shall be granted a permit to make and shall not make any excavation or opening in any street, highway or sidewalk in the borough to install a sewer, water main, steam supply pipes, gas mains or any other lawful purposes, unless such person shall at his expense furnish to the borough, a certificate of public liability insurance issued to him or to it by an insurance company approved by the insurance commissioner of the state and registered and authorized to do business in this state. The insurance policy shall be for a period for at least one (1) year and shall contain a fifteen-day written notice requirement to the borough before it can be cancelled and it shall be stipulated therein that at all times during such period of one (1) year, there shall be a coverage for personal injuries of not less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for one (1) person and three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) for each accident and for property damages of not less than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for each accident and twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) aggregate. The insurance coverage shall embrace liability of the named insured for bodily injury and damage to property caused by the negligence of the insured in making excavations, openings, connections or in refilling any such excavations, openings, or connections in any street, highway or sidewalk in the borough for a period of not less than one (1) year after such excavation, opening, connection or refilling is completed. Each insurance policy shall be approved as to form by the borough attorney. All such work shall be done in accordance with ordinances of the board of mayor and burgesses. 
(Code 1973, § 22-56) 
Sec. 16-96. - Penalty. 
    Any person or any agent or employee of such person violating any provision of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished as prescribed in section 1-7. 
(Code 1973, § 22-57) 
Chapter 17 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Borough divided into two districts for purposes of taxation, § 3.4; taxation to defray burdens and expenses etc., § 3.5; power of borough to levy taxes, § 3.7. 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2. 
State Law reference- Taxation, G.S. Title 12. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 17-1. - Tax exemption for solar energy systems. 
(a)  The state legislature has provided for partial relief from municipal real estate taxes for new construction using alternate energy systems as particularly set forth in section 12-81(56)(a)-(c) of the general statutes, subject to authorization by the individual municipality. 
(b)  The tax exemption for buildings using solar energy heating and cooling systems as that term is defined in the statute is hereby authorized, subject to the limitations, terms and conditions specified in the statute. 
(Ord. No. 61, 8-10-77) 
Sec. 17-2. - Tax exemption for passive or hybrid solar energy systems. 
(a)  There is hereby authorized a tax exemption on any building, the construction of which is commenced on or after October 1, 1980 and before October 1, 1991, which is equipped with a passive or hybrid solar energy heating or cooling system, or any building to which such a system is added on or after October 1, 1980 and before October 1, 1991, to the extent of any amount by which the assessed valuation of such real property equipped with such a system exceeds the valuation at which such real property would be assessed if built using conventional construction techniques in lieu of construction related to such a system, as determined by the assessing officer of the borough. This exemption shall only apply to the first fifteen (15) assessment years following construction of such building or addition of any such system to a building. Any portion of a hybrid solar energy heating or cooling system which is allowed an exemption under section 17-1 shall not be eligible for exemption under this section. 
(b)  On or before October 1, 1980, the secretary of the office of policy and management shall adopt regulations in accordance with chapter 54 of the general statutes to define and set standards for passive and hybrid solar energy heating or cooling systems. Any such passive system shall include a solar energy heating or cooling system which utilizes the structural elements of a building to provide for the collection, storage or distribution of energy for water heating or space heating or cooling. Any such hybrid system shall include a solar energy heating or cooling system which consists of both active and passive elements. 
(c)  Any person who desires to claim the exemption provided in this section shall file with the assessor or board of assessors in the borough in which such real property is located, within thirty (30) days following the annual assessment date, written application claiming such exemption on a form as prescribed by the commissioner of revenue services. Failure to file such application in such manner and form within the time limit prescribed shall constitute a waiver of the right to such exemption for the assessment year. 
(Ord. No. 66, 4-1-80) 
Sec. 17-3. - Delinquent taxes, fees and denial of permits, town contracts and vendor payments. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply: 
(1)  Delinquent amounts shall refer to any delinquent real or personal property taxes, any delinquent sewer assessments or usage charges, or any delinquent water assessments or usage charges, any delinquent fees owed to the police department, fire department or any other borough department, and any interest, fees and charges thereon. 
(2)  Person shall mean any individual, firm, company, partnership, association, society, corporation, group, or other entity. 
(b)  (1)  No official or agent of the Borough of Naugatuck or any member of any board, office, department, commission or agency thereof shall issue a certificate of occupancy, zoning, building, inland wetlands, driveway or any other permit for the use of or improvements to real property to any owner thereof or other applicant from whom any delinquent amounts are owed to the Borough of Naugatuck or for any real property for which any delinquent amounts are owed to the borough, except as provided in subsection (d) of this section. 
(2)  At the time any such application for a certificate or permit is filed, the applicant shall submit to the appropriate borough official having authority to issue such certificate or permit, sufficient written evidence from the borough tax collector that there are no delinquent amounts due to the borough from the owner of the real property for which said application is made and from the applicant if other than the owner. 
(3)  This section shall not be deemed to apply to those applications for permits which involve repair or construction work ordered by a public agency or for emergency work to be performed for public health and/or safety concerns, nor shall it apply to those applicants who are making improvements to their real property with loans or grants received under any State and/or Federal rehabilitation programs. 
(c)  No payment shall be made by the treasurer of the Borough of Naugatuck or by any other borough official, department head, employee, board, commission or agency to any person who has sold goods or provided services to the borough or to any board, office, department, commission or agency thereof, if, at the time said payment is due, it is determined that said person owes delinquent amounts to the borough, provided that no such payment to be withheld shall exceed the delinquent amounts owed at the time of withholding. 
Any such sums withheld pursuant to this section shall be paid to the tax collector and applied against the outstanding delinquent amounts owed by such person, first to any outstanding interest, fees and charges and then to the outstanding principal balance. This section shall not apply to the payment of wages to employees of the Borough of Naugatuck or any board, office, department, commission or agency thereof. 
(d)  (1)  Notwithstanding anything provided hereinbefore to the contrary, no certificate or permit under subsection (b) of this section hereof shall be withheld if the person owing said delinquent amounts has entered into a written agreement with the Borough of Naugatuck, by and through the Naugatuck Tax Collector, which shall provide for an immediate payment to the borough of all outstanding interest, fees and charges included in said delinquent amounts and at least one-half (1/2) of the principal balance owed, and a payment plan requiring the balance of said delinquent amounts to be paid in equal monthly installments over a period of no greater than twenty-four (24) months from the date of said agreement. In the event any person owing delinquent amounts is unable to enter into such agreement with the tax collector as a result of severe financial hardship, such person may propose to said tax collector an alternate method for paying said delinquent amounts which, if acceptable to the tax collector, shall be subject to the approval of the borough board. In either event, interest shall continue to accrue on said delinquent amounts at the rate allowed by law. Any such payment agreement shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, any and all other collection methods and remedies available to the tax collector as allowed by law. 
(2)  In the event any person enters into a written agreement with the tax collector as provided hereinbefore, or proposes an alternate method of paying said delinquent amounts which proposal is acceptable to the tax collector and approved by the borough board, proof of any such agreement or approval shall be delivered to the appropriate borough official having authority to issue such certificate or permit prior to the issuance of such certificate or permit. 
(3)  The exception provided in subsection (d)(1) of this section and any agreement entered into pursuant thereto shall be for the sole purpose of allowing a person owing delinquent amounts to obtain a certificate or permit and shall not in any way constitute, or to be construed to constitute, an agreement by the Borough of Naugatuck or the tax collector to forebear the collection of said delinquent amounts during the period of the approved monthly payment plan. 
The tax collector shall continue to have the right to exercise all powers allowed by law to collect said delinquent amounts sooner than set forth in said agreement and at no time shall the borough be required to stay or forestall any other collection methods or remedies during such period. 
(e)  The treasurer and tax collector of the Borough of Naugatuck shall coordinate their activities so that the purpose and intent of this section may be carried out. All other officials, department heads and employees of the borough shall coordinate their activities with those of the tax collector and treasurer in a like manner. 
(f)  Any person entering into any contract with the Borough of Naugatuck or doing business with the borough shall be deemed to have expressly consented and agreed to the terms of subsection (c) of this section which terms shall become an integral part of the contract or agreement between such person and the borough, even if not specifically set forth in said contract or agreement. 
(g)  All invitations to bid extended to prospective bidders in the award of municipal contracts subject to the public bidding procedure provided in the Borough of Naugatuck Charter shall include a reference to this section provided, however, that the failure of any invitation to bid to include such reference shall in no way affect the validity of the invitation or the applicability of this section. 
(Ord. No. 99, §§ 1-7, 7-5-94; Ord. No. 108, §§ 1-7, 9-1-98) 
Secs. 17-4-17-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COMMERCIAL TAX ABATEMENTS 

Sec. 17-21. - Purpose. 
    In an effort to attract, retain and expand businesses, the borough has adopted this tax incentive policy in accordance with G.S. §§ 12-65b and 12-65h. This policy establishes a tax incentive program for the borough and allows the borough to enter into written agreements with the owners and/or lessees of certain real and/or personal property located within the Borough of Naugatuck in order to set specific tax assessments of real and/or personal property in the manner set forth by this policy. 
(Ord. No. 123, 11-1-12) 
Sec. 17-22. - Eligibility. 
(a)  In accordance with the provisions of G.S. § 12-65b and 12-65h, the board of mayor and burgesses may enter into written tax agreements with the owners and/or lessees of real and/or personal property. 
(b)  Only legally existing uses, businesses relocating to the borough, new business development and business expansion in a commercial or industrial zone are eligible to participate in a tax incentive program under this policy. Residential only occupants and all other land uses are not eligible to participate in a tax incentive program under this policy. 
(c)  Application for tax abatement must be made within six (6) months of receipt of borough certificate of occupancy for use of building. 
(d)  Consideration may be given to those applicants who incorporate environmentally friendly ("green") improvements. 
(e)  Any applicant who is delinquent in any taxes, interest or liens that are due to the borough shall be ineligible to enter into any such tax agreement under this policy until such delinquencies or liens are remedied. 
(Ord. No. 123, 11-1-12) 
Sec. 17-23. - Abatement schedule. 
    The board of mayor and burgesses may enter into a tax agreement with any party owning or proposing to acquire an interest in real and/or personal property in the borough to set the assessment of the real and/or personal property which is the subject of the agreement and all improvements thereon or therein and to be constructed thereon or therein, subject to the cost of the project improvements exceeding the following thresholds: 
Borough of Naugatuck Tax Abatement Schedule 
Cost of Improvements 1st year Abatement 2nd year Abatement 3rd year Abatement 4th year Abatement 5th year Abatement Term Greater than $3,000,000.00 100% 80% 60% 40% 20% Up to 5 years $500,000.00 up to $2,999,999.99 100% 50% 0 0 Up to 2 years $25,000.00 up to $499,999.99 50% 25% 25% 0 Up to 3 years  
    This table lists the minimum value of an improvement that qualifies a project for abatement, the maximum abatement amount and the maximum abatement period. The Naugatuck Economic Development Corporation (NEDC) shall recommend to the board of mayor and burgesses the specific abatement for each project based upon the benefits to the borough. 
(Ord. No. 123, 11-1-12) 
Sec. 17-24. - General requirements. 
(a)  The borough may enter into a tax agreement under this policy only if the agreement will: 
(1)  Cause a business to locate in the borough; or 
(2)  Cause a business to replace, construct, expand or remodel existing buildings; or 
(3)  Cause a business to construct new buildings; or 
(4)  Cause an increase in employment opportunities; or 
(5)  Preserve existing employment opportunities. 
(b)  If the applicant is a tenant or if an owner is applying on behalf of a tenant, tax benefits shall be reflected in the lease and shall be so demonstrated to the borough. 
(Ord. No. 123, 11-1-12) 
Sec. 17-25. - Application procedure. 
    Any eligible owner and/or lessee may apply under this policy in writing to the borough through the CEO of the Naugatuck Economic Development Corporation (NEDC) on application forms provided by the economic development office. The applicant shall provide all required information in sufficient detail to allow the borough to determine costs and benefits associated with the implementation of a requested tax agreement. 
(1)  Upon receipt of the completed application, the CEO shall review the application for appropriateness. After thorough review and within thirty (30) days of receipt of the application, the recommendation, along with a written analysis, shall be referred to the NEDC board of directors and the development incentives subcommittee. 
(2)  The NEDC board of directors, in its sole discretion shall approve, approve with modifications or conditions, or deny the application within thirty (30) days from the date of the first regularly scheduled meeting at which the referral appears on the NEDC agenda. Granting of the tax abatement shall be subject to a majority vote of the NEDC board of directors. The NEDC's decision shall be based upon the General Statutes, the information provided in the application package and the recommendation from the NEDC and the NEDC development incentives subcommittee. 
(3)  The NEDC decision shall be forwarded to the board of mayor and burgesses and shall be advisory only. 
(Ord. No. 123, 11-1-12) 
Sec. 17-26. - Agreement. 
(a)  If approved by the board of mayor and burgesses, the borough will enter into a written agreement with the owner or lessee of real and/or personal property, setting the assessment of the real and/or personal property for the terms of the agreement. 
(b)  After approval of any such tax agreement, construction or acquisition shall commence within twelve (12) months and shall be completed within twenty-four (24) months unless the projected timeframe to complete the project is stated to be more than twenty four (24) months at the time of application. In the event that construction is not commenced and/or completed within the specified timeframe, then any agreement entered into pursuant to this policy shall immediately terminate and the full amount of the tax (including accrued interest) that would otherwise be due shall immediately become due and payable, unless alternative arrangements are authorized by the board of mayor and burgesses. 
(c)  If an applicant fails to comply with the payment of tax upon the due date required, then any agreement entered into pursuant to this program shall immediately terminate and the full amount of the tax, including accrued interest that would otherwise by due, shall immediately become due and payable. 
(d)  Any person or firm in violation of any borough permit is subject to termination of abatement. 
(e)  All agreements shall contain a provision that any applicant granted a tax abatement shall repay the borough the dollar amount abated, plus interest, if the business leaves Naugatuck before the ten (10) year anniversary of the execution of the agreement. 
(f)  Any tax assessed and levied upon motor vehicles shall not be subject to any such agreement pursuant to this program and shall remain due and owing. 
(Ord. No. 123, 11-1-12) 
Sec. 17-27. - Transferability. 
    Any tax agreement entered into pursuant to this policy shall not be subject to assignment, transfer or sale unless approved by the board of mayor and burgesses. 
(Ord. No. 123, 11-1-12) 
Sec. 17-28. - Tax abatement agreement authority. 
    Nothing in this policy shall require NEDC and the board of mayor and burgesses to enter into a tax agreement. 
(Ord. No. 123, 11-1-12) 
Sec. 17-29. - Policy not to be retroactive. 
    This policy shall not be retroactive. 
(Ord. No. 123, 11-1-12) 
Chapter 18 - TRAFFIC AND MOTOR VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Consumption and possession of alcoholic beverages in parked vehicles prohibited, § 4-1; fire zone, § 9-16 et seq.; throwing litter from vehicle, § 10-23; transportation of ashes, rubbish, etc., § 10-24; peddler's license number to be displayed on vehicle, § 12-32; parades and processions, § 13-7; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 16. 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate traffic generally, G.S. § 7-148(c)(7)(B)(i); authority to regulate speed of vehicles, G.S. § 7-148(c)(7)(B)(ii); authority restricted, G.S. § 14-162. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 18-1. - Definitions. 
    The word "vehicle" and other words and terms used in this chapter shall have and take the meaning as described and defined in the Connecticut Motor Vehicle Act. 
(Code 1973, § 24-1) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Secs. 18-2-18-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OPERATION OF VEHICLES 

Secs. 18-16-18-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Consumption and possession of alcoholic beverages in parking areas, parked vehicles, § 4-1; fire zones, § 9-16 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-31. - Parking for purposes of demonstrating or offering cars or vehicles for sale. 
    No person shall park any car or vehicle upon the public highway for the purpose of demonstrating or offering it for sale. 
(Code 1973, § 24-63) 
Sec. 18-32. - Standing in front of entrance of theaters, schools, etc. 
    No vehicle shall be permitted to stand in front of the entrance of any theater or church, during hours of service, schools, fire engine house, driveway (public or private), except for the purpose of stopping to take on passengers or merchandise. 
(Code 1973, § 24-64) 
Secs. 18-33-18-45. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PARKING METERS 

Sec. 18-46. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Operator. The word "operator" shall mean and include every individual who shall operate a vehicle as the owner thereof or as the agent, employee or permittee of the owner. 
    Street. The word "street" shall mean any public street, avenue, road, boulevard, highway or other public place located in the borough and established for the use of vehicles. 
    Vehicle. The word "vehicle" shall mean any device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported upon a highway, except a device which is operated upon rails or tracks. 
(Code 1973, § 24-80) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 18-47. - Parking meter zones established. 
    The chief of police is hereby authorized, insofar as such authority may be necessary from the board of mayor and burgesses, to establish from time to time as traffic conditions require, zones to be known as "parking meter zones" upon such streets in the borough as are selected for the location of such zones. In the parking meter zones the chief of police shall cause parking meters to be installed and shall cause parking meter spaces to be designated provided in this division, and shall fix the time limitations for legal parking in such zones. 
(Code 1973, § 24-81) 
Sec. 18-48. - Installation; construction; adjustment. 
    Parking meters installed in the parking meter zones established as provided in section 18-47 shall be placed upon the curb adjacent to the individual parking places described in this division. Each parking meter shall be placed or set in such manner as to show or display by signal that the parking space adjacent to such meter is or is not legally in use. Each parking meter installed shall indicate by a proper legend the legal parking time established by the borough and when operated shall indicate on and by its dial and pointer the duration of the period of legal parking and on the expiration of such period shall indicate illegal or overtime parking. 
(Code 1973, § 24-82) 
Sec. 18-49. - Vehicles to be parked within lines or markings. 
    The chief of police having provided for lines or markings painted or placed upon the curb or upon the street adjacent to each parking meter for the purpose of designating the parking space for which the meter is to be used, each vehicle parked adjacent or next to any parking meter shall park within the lines or markings so established. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this section to park any vehicle across any such lines or markings or to park the vehicle in such position that the same shall not be entirely within the area so designated by such lines or markings. 
(Code 1973, § 24-83) 
Sec. 18-50. - Parking of vehicles in parking spaces. 
    When a parking space in any parking meter zone is parallel with the adjacent curb or sidewalk, any vehicle parked in such parking space shall be parked so that the foremost part of such vehicle shall be nearest to the parking meter; when a parking space in any parking meter zone is diagonal to the curb or sidewalk, any vehicle parked in such parking space shall be parked with the foremost part of such vehicle nearest to such meter. 
(Code 1973, § 24-84) 
Sec. 18-51. - Deposit of coin; overtime parking; parking adjacent to expired meter. 
(a)  When any vehicle shall be parked in any space adjacent to which a parking meter is located in accordance with the provisions of this division, the operator of the vehicle shall upon entering the parking space immediately deposit or cause to be deposited coins of the United States in such parking meter in accordance with the charge therefor of the particular meter as indicated on the device or upon notices posted for that purpose. Upon the deposit of such coins and placing the meter in operation, the parking space may be lawfully occupied by the vehicle during the period of parking time which has been prescribed for the part of the street in which the parking space is located. If the vehicle shall remain parked in any such parking space beyond the parking time limits fixed for such parking space, the parking meter shall by its dial and pointer indicate such illegal parking, and in that event, such vehicle shall be considered as parked overtime and beyond the period of legal parking time in any such part of the street where such meter is located and shall constitute a violation of this section and the operator of the vehicle shall be punished as set out in this division. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this section for any person to cause, allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in the name of, or operated by, such person to be parked overtime or beyond the period of legal parking time established for any parking meter space as described in this division. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this section for any person to deposit or cause to be deposited in a parking meter coins for the purpose of increasing or extending the parking time of any vehicle beyond the legal parking time which has been established for the parking space adjacent to which the parking meter is placed. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this section for any person to permit a vehicle to remain or be placed in any parking space adjacent to any parking meter while the meter is displaying a signal indicating that the vehicle is occupying such parking space has already been parked beyond the period of time prescribed for such parking space. 
(Code 1973, § 24-85) 
Sec. 18-52. - Deposit of slugs, etc., prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this section for any person to deposit or cause to be deposited in any parking meter any slug, device, or other substitute for a coin of the United States. 
(Code 1973, § 24-86) 
Sec. 18-53. - Defacing, etc., parking meters. 
    It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this section for any person to deface, injure, tamper with, open or wilfully break, destroy, or impair the usefulness of any parking meter installed under the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1973, § 24-87) 
Cross reference- Injuring or destroying property, § 13-8. 
Sec. 18-54. - Purpose of required deposit. 
    The coins required to be deposited in parking meters as provided in this division are hereby levied and assessed as fees to provide for the proper regulation and control of traffic upon the public streets and also the cost of supervising and regulating the parking of vehicles in the parking meter zones created by this division and to cover the cost of the purchase, supervision, protection, inspection, installation, operation, maintenance, control and use of the parking meters described in this division. 
(Code 1973, § 24-88) 
Sec. 18-55. - Violation of division. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the police officers of the borough, acting in accordance with instructions issued by the chief of police, to report: 
(1)  The number of each parking meter which indicated that the vehicle occupying the parking space adjacent to such parking meter is or has been parked in violation of any of the provisions of this division; 
(2)  The state license number of such vehicle; 
(3)  The length of time during which such vehicle is parked in violation of any of the provisions of this division; 
(4)  Any other facts, a knowledge of which is necessary to a thorough understanding of the circumstances attending such violation. 
(b)  Each such police officer shall also attach to such vehicle a notice to the owner thereof that such vehicle has been parked in violation of a provision of this division and instructing the owner to report to the police station of the borough in regard to such violation. Each owner may, within twenty-four (24) hours of the time when such notice was attached to such vehicle, pay to such police station, as a penalty for and in full satisfaction of such violation, the sum of one dollar ($1.00). The failure of such owner to make such payment at the police station within the twenty-four hour period shall render such owner subject to the penalties provided for violation of the provisions of this division. 
(c)  Every person who violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this division shall be punished as prescribed in section 1-7. 
(Code 1973, § 24-89) 
Secs. 18-56-18-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - HANDICAPPED PARKING[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 98, adopted Nov. 12, 1993, repealed former div. 3, §§ 18-71-18-76, which pertained to similar subject matter, and added a new div. 3 to read as herein set out. 
Cross reference- Mayor's commission for the handicapped, § 2-31 et seq. 
State Law reference- Parking privileges of handicapped persons generally, G.S. § 14-253a; parking privileges of handicapped veterans, G.S. § 14-254. 

Sec. 18-71. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this division is to provide for the availability of reserved parking spaces to handicapped individuals and sanctions for violations involving misuse of said reserved parking spaces. 
(Ord. No. 98, 11-12-93) 
Sec. 18-72. - Authorization for creation. 
    Handicapped parking privileges shall be allowed in the borough to all handicapped persons pursuant to the provisions of G.S. § 14-253a with the exception of violation provisions which will be in accordance with the penalties imposed below. 
(Ord. No. 98, 11-12-93) 
Sec. 18-73. - Violations. 
(a)  Any person violating the provisions of these handicapped parking provisions shall be issued a parking violation by the borough police department in the amount of one hundred sixteen dollars ($116.00) per violation which amount shall be doubled to two hundred thirty-two dollars ($232.00) if not paid within seven (7) days of issuance. 
(b)  Further, any violating vehicle not removed from parking spaces reserved for handicapped individuals within two (2) hours shall be subject to being towed at the expense of the owner of the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 98, 11-12-93; Mo. of 4-2-96) 
Sec. 18-74. - Identity of violator. 
    Whenever there occurs a violation of these handicapped parking provisions, proof of the registration number of any motor vehicle therein concerned shall be prima facia evidence that the owner was the operator thereof, except in the case of a leased or rented motor vehicle where such proof shall be prima facia evidence that the lessee was the operator thereof. 
(Ord. No. 98, 11-12-93) 
Sec. 18-75. - Fines to be deposited in the general fund. 
    All funds recovered by the borough police department due to violations of these provisions shall be segregated from other parking violations monies and deposited in the general fund of the borough. 
(Ord. No. 98, 11-12-93) 
Sec. 18-76. - Applicability. 
    This article shall apply to all new and existing nonresidential sites, including but not limited to, shopping centers, office buildings, commercial buildings, mercantile buildings, warehouses, storage buildings, convalescent homes, schools and public buildings. In addition, the board of police commissioners may designate handicapped parking spaces on borough roads which shall be of size and location as they may specify. 
(Ord. No. 98, 11-12-93) 
Sec. 18-77. - Number of spaces to be provided; location. 
(a)  On each site having six (6) to twenty-five (25) parking spaces, at least one (1) space shall be specially designated and reserved for handicapped parking. Additional spaces for handicap parking shall be in accordance with the following table: 
Total 
Parking 
on Site Required Number of Handicapped 
Parking Spaces  26-50 2  51-75 3  76-100 4 101-150 5 151-200 6 201-300 7 301-400 8 401-500 9 501-1000 2% of total over 1000 20 plus 1 for each 100 over 1000  
(b)  Parking spaces for the handicapped shall be located as close as possible to elevators, ramps, walkways and entrances, and so located that the handicapped person is not compelled to wheel or walk behind parked vehicles to reach entrances, ramps, walkways and elevators. 
(c)  The exact location of the parking spaces shall be designated by the board of police commissioners or their designee. 
(d)  All sidewalks and entrances shall be made accessible through the installation of ramps or by making curb cuts in such sidewalks and entrances. 
(Ord. No. 98, 11-12-93) 
Sec. 18-78. - Marking of spaces. 
(a)  Each such space designated for handicapped parking shall be not less than fifteen (15) feet in width, including three (3) feet of cross hatch. Each space shall be designated by a sign with a blue background and white lettering. The sign shall bear the international symbol of accessibility and the words "violators will be fined." The signs shall be aboveground. Such signs shall be erected, installed and maintained by and at the expense of the owner, operator, lessee or tenant of the site. Furthermore, each space designated for handicapped parking shall be designated by painting the space with a blue background and a white international symbol of accessibility. 
(b)  Any owner or operator of a parking facility that does not provide adequate handicapped parking, or does not provide appropriate aboveground marking of handicapped parking spaces within thirty (30) days after written request by the board of police commissioners shall be issued a violation by the borough police department in the amount of two hundred dollars ($200.00), plus an additional twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each day the violation exists. 
(c)  All funds recovered by the borough police department due to violations of these provisions shall be segregated from other parking violations monies and deposited in the general fund of the borough. 
(Ord. No. 98, 11-12-93) 
Secs. 18-79-18-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PARKING VIOLATIONS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Parking, standing within fire zone prohibited, § 9-20; penalty for unauthorized parking in handicapped parking place, § 18-76. 

Sec. 18-91. - Parking violations and penalties. 
(a)  Parking in any of the following ways is prohibited and a penalty of five dollars ($5.00) shall be imposed for each of the following violations: 
(1)  Overtime parking. In excess of the time posted by official sign. 
(2)  Meters. In violation of any parking meter regulation. 
(3)  Too far from curb. More than twelve (12) inches from the curb. 
(4)  Occupying more than one (1) space. 
(b)  Parking in any of the following ways is prohibited and a penalty of ten dollars ($10.00) shall be imposed for each of the following violations: 
(1)  In opposite direction of traffic. Facing against oncoming traffic on the side of the street on which the vehicle is parked. 
(2)  Intersection. Within twenty-five (25) feet of an intersection. 
(3)  Stop sign. Within twenty-five (25) feet of a stop sign. 
(4)  Restricted area. In a restricted area. 
(5)  Bus stop. Within a bus stop. 
(6)  Loading zone. Within a loading and reloading zone. 
(c)  Parking in any of the following ways is prohibited and a penalty of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) shall be imposed for each of the following violations: 
(1)  Traffic hazard zone. In such a manner as to constitute a traffic hazard or to obstruct the free movement of traffic. 
(2)  Double parking. Upon a traveled portion of the highway adjacent to parked cars. 
(3)  Driveway. In such a manner as to obstruct a driveway. 
(4)  Curb and sidewalk. Within the area between the curb and the sidewalk and on the sidewalk. 
(5)  Fire hydrant. Within ten (10) feet of a fire hydrant. 
(6)  Crosswalk. Within ten (10) feet of a marked crosswalk. 
(7)  Fire lane. Within a fire lane as set out in section 9-16 et seq. 
(d)  Parking in a handicapped parking space in violation of section 18-71 et seq. is prohibited and a penalty of eighty-five dollars ($85.00) shall be imposed for each of violation. 
(e)  Parking in any area that is a temporary no-parking area so as to permit the removal of snow or ice is prohibited and a penalty of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) shall be imposed for each such violation. 
(f)  Parking by trespassing on private property is prohibited. The penalty for violation of this paragraph is twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(Ord. No. 88, § 1, 4-3-90; Amend. of Nov. 2, 1993) 
Sec. 18-92. - Prima facie evidence of ownership. 
(a)  In any prosecution or proceeding under this division, the registration plate displayed on the motor vehicle shall constitute a prima facie presumption that the owner of such vehicle was the person who parked such vehicle at the place where such violation occurred. 
(b)  Whenever a violation of a parking ordinance occurs, proof of the registration number of the motor vehicle involved shall be prima facie evidence in all proceedings provided for in this division that the owner of such vehicle was the operator thereof; provided the limitation on the liability of a lessee under section 14-107 of the general statutes shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 88, §§ 2, 8, 4-3-90) 
Sec. 18-93. - Citations or notices of violation; payment of fines. 
    Wherever any vehicle is found parked or stopped in violation of any of the provisions of this division or rule or regulation concerning parking, a police officer shall attach to such vehicle a notice to the owner or operator stating that the vehicle has been parked unlawfully. The notice or citation shall state the time, place and nature of the violation and the registration number of the vehicle involved. The citation or notice shall require the registered owner of such vehicle to answer the charge against him within fourteen (14) days during the hours stated and at a place specified in the citation or notice, or pay in person or remit by mail in the form of a check or money order to the Borough of Naugatuck the sum specified in accordance with section 18-91 as a penalty for and in full satisfaction of such violation. The failure of such owner to make such payment or appearance within the time specified, shall make such owner liable to a penalty equal to three (3) times the amount of the penalty provided in section 18-91, in addition to the original fine. 
(Ord. No. 88, § 3, 4-3-90) 
Sec. 18-94. - Removal of vehicle in violation of division; reclamation of removed vehicle. 
(a)  Whenever any vehicle shall be found parked in violation of any provision of this division, in addition to the issuance of a parking citation or notice, such vehicle may be removed under the direction of a member of the police department to a public garage in the city, and such removal shall be at the risk of the owner. 
(b)  Before the owner or person in charge of such vehicle shall be permitted to reclaim his vehicle, he shall furnish evidence of his identity and ownership or right to possession to the police department and shall sign a receipt for such vehicle. 
(c)  Any person claiming any vehicle under the provisions of subsection (b) of this section shall pay, in addition to any fines levied under section 18-91, a fine of three dollars ($3.00) for the first violation and five dollars ($5.00) for subsequent violations, plus storage charges and towing charges. 
(Ord. No. 88, § 4, 4-3-90) 
Sec. 18-95. - Appointment of hearing officer. 
    In accordance with section 7-152b of the general statutes, the following procedure is established for the enforcement of parking ordinances of the town: The mayor of the town is hereby authorized to appoint one (1) or more parking violation hearing officers to conduct hearings as authorized by this division. One (1) of such hearing officers shall be designated as chief hearing officer. No such hearing officer shall be a police officer, a person working in a police department or a person authorized to issue parking tickets, but any other municipal employee may be appointed as a parking violation hearing officer in addition to his other duties. No such hearing officer or person working under the direction of such hearing officer may otherwise directly or indirectly engage in the private business of collecting the fines, assessments or judgments imposed pursuant to this division. All parking violation hearing officers shall serve for terms of two (2) years. 
(Ord. No. 88, § 5, 4-3-90) 
Sec. 18-96. - Notice to violators who have failed to pay fines. 
    Within two (2) years after the expiration of the final period for the uncontested payment of fines, penalties, costs or fees for any alleged violation of any parking ordinance duly adopted by the town pursuant to the general statutes, the town shall send notice to the motor vehicle operator, if known, or the registered owner of the vehicle, by first class mail at his address according to the registration records of the state department of motor vehicles. Such notice shall inform the operator or owner: 
(1)  Of the allegation against him and the amount of the fines, penalties, and costs of fees due; 
(2)  That he may contest his liability before a parking violation hearing officer by delivering in person or by mail written notice within ten (10) days of the date thereof; 
(3)  That if he does not demand such a hearing, an assessment and judgment shall enter against him; and 
(4)  That such judgment may issue without further notice. 
(Ord. No. 88, § 6, 4-3-90) 
Sec. 18-97. - Failure to respond to notice issued pursuant to section 18-96. 
    If the person receiving the notice required pursuant to section 18-96 does not either pay the full amount of the fines, penalties, costs or fees without requesting a hearing or request a hearing as provided in this division within ten (10) days after the date of such notice, such person shall be deemed to have admitted liability and the mayor or his designee shall certify such person's failure to respond to the chief hearing officer. The chief hearing officer shall thereupon enter and assess the fines, penalties, costs or fees provided for by the applicable ordinance and shall follow the procedures set forth in this division. 
(Ord. No. 88, § 7, 4-3-90) 
Sec. 18-98. - Request for hearing. 
    Any person receiving a notice pursuant to section 18-96 may request a hearing by mailing or delivering such request in writing to the chief hearing officer at the place designated within ten (10) days after the date of such notice. The chief hearing officer shall promptly schedule a hearing and give notice of the date, time and place of such hearing to the person requesting it. Such hearing shall be held not less than fifteen (15) nor more than thirty (30) days from the date of the mailing of notice, provided the chief hearing officer shall grant any reasonable request by any interested party for postponement or continuance upon good cause shown. The presence of the police officer or issuing officer shall be required at the hearing if the person requesting the hearing so requests. A designated city official, other than the hearing officer, may present evidence on behalf of the town. If such person requesting a hearing fails to appear at a hearing for which correct notice has been duly sent, the presiding hearing officer may enter an assessment of default against him, in the amount of the fines, penalties, costs or fees provided for by the applicable parking ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 88, § 9, 4-3-90) 
Sec. 18-99. - Decision of hearing officer; failure to pay assessment. 
(a)  The hearing officer presiding at any hearing convened in accordance with the provisions of this division shall announce his decision at the end of the hearing. If he determines the person is not liable, he shall dismiss the matter and enter his determination in writing accordingly. If he determines the person is liable for the violation, he shall forthwith enter and assess the fines, penalties, costs or fees against such person as provided by the applicable ordinance. 
(b)  If such assessment is not paid on the date of its entry, the hearing officer shall send by first class mail a notice of assessment to the person found liable and shall file, not less than thirty (30) days or more than twelve (12) months after such mailing, a certified copy of the notice or assessment with the clerk of the superior court for the geographical area, together with an entry fee of eight dollars ($8.00), or such other amount as may from time to time be required by law, and request that such clerk enter judgment against such person in favor of the town as provided in this division. 
(Ord. No. 88, § 10, 4-3-90) 
Sec. 18-100. - Right to judicial review. 
    The person against whom an assessment has been entered in accordance with this division is entitled to judicial review by way of appeal within thirty (30) days of the mailing of notice of assessment. The appeal shall be filed in accordance with section 7-152b of the general statutes. 
(Ord. No. 88, § 11, 4-3-90) 
Sec. 18-101. - Issuance of infractions in lieu of citations. 
    In lieu of the procedures of this division and in lieu of attaching a notice or citation to the owner or operator according to the terms of this division as set out herein, a police officer shall be authorized to attach a notice of infraction or infraction ticket to any vehicle found parked or stopped in violation of any of the provisions of this division or rule or regulation concerning parking, which such infraction procedure for enforcement and collection shall be governed by Connecticut General Statutes Annotated section 51-164m relative to the issuance and collection of infractions. It shall be the police officer's discretion as to whether to issue a citation as described in prior sections of this division or an infraction according to the terms set out in this section. 
(Amend. of 8-6-91) 
Secs. 18-102-18-105. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - WINTER PARKING BAN[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Sheet 1 tabling all night parking and odd/even side of street parking allowed on streets can be found in Ordinance No. 103 adopted December 3, 1996. 

Sec. 18-106. - Purpose. 
    It is hereby declared to be in the best interest of the public safety, convenience and welfare of the borough to regulate and restrict parking of vehicles on public highways within the control and limits of such borough, during period of snow or ice, so as not to impede the orderly removal of snow or ice; or the transportation and movement of food, fuel, medical care, fire, health, police protection and other vital facilities of the borough. 
(Ord. No. 103, § 1-1, 12-3-96) 
Sec. 18-107. - Definitions generally. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Highway shall mean and include any public street, road, avenue, highway, alley, driveway, parkway or place, under the control of the borough, dedicated, appropriated or open to public travel or other use; 
    Operator shall mean the person using, operating or having the care, custody or control of a vehicle being used, operated or found upon a highway; 
    Owner shall mean any person, firm, corporation or association holding title to a vehicle having a legal right to register same; 
    Park shall mean standing of a vehicle otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading merchandise or passengers on a public highway, whether occupied or not; 
    Penalties shall mean the issuance of fines listed in section 1-9 in addition to the towing fee or storage fee. 
    Vehicle shall mean any device used for conveyance, drawing or other transportation of person or property, whether operated on wheels or runners or by other means, when upon a public highway, public square or other public place under the control of the borough, except those which are propelled or drawn by human power or exclusively operated on rails or tracks. 
(Ord. No. 103, § 1-2, 12-3-96) 
Sec. 18-108. - Parking during periods of snow or ice. 
    No vehicle may park on any highway of the borough from the beginning of snow or ice fall, or other dangerous ice conditions until twelve (12) hours after the cessation of such conditions. 
(Ord. No. 103, § 1-3, 12-3-96) 
Sec. 18-109. - Additional parking restrictions. 
    In addition to the period from November 1 until May 1 the mayor or his designee can impose additional parking restrictions by executive decree whenever the safety conditions of public roadways are adversely affected by weather condition. 
(Ord. No. 103, § 1-4, 12-3-96) 
Sec. 18-110. - Vehicles subject to towing. 
    Any vehicle which is found to be standing or parked on the side of the street not designated during the winter parking ban shall be in violation of section 1-3. Violations including towing and storage will be under the direction of the borough police department. 
(Ord. No. 103, § 1-5, 12-3-96) 
Sec. 18-111. - Impoundment of vehicle. 
    Such motor vehicle, having been so removed, shall continue to be impounded until the towing and storage charges as determined by the borough police department, shall have been paid by the owner or person entitled to possession of such vehicle. Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting a clergyman, physician, medical personnel or utility serviceman from parking a motor vehicle on any side of the street in the town while engaged in the performance of his duties during such an emergency. 
(Ord. No. 103, § 1-6, 12-3-96) 
Sec. 18-112. - Parking in driveway. 
    Any person having access to a driveway shall not permit his or her motor vehicle to be parked on any public street during a snow/ice fall. 
(Ord. No. 103, § 1-7, 12-3-96) 
Sec. 18-113. - Snow or ice deposits. 
    No person shall cause snow or ice to be deposited by him on any public street or sidewalk within the borough. 
(Ord. No. 103, § 1-8, 12-3-96) 
Sec. 18-114. - Penalty. 
    Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall be subject to the following fines: 
Parking fine\$25.00 
Shoveling or plowing onto street\25.00 
Towing and storage fee according to the borough's prevailing rates. 
(Ord. No. 103, § 1-9, 12-3-96) 
Sec. 18-115. - Appeal. 
    Any person who violates any of the provisions of the winter parking ban is subject to a penalty and may appeal through the borough's board of police commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 103, § 1-10, 12-3-96) 
Secs. 18-116-18-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES 

Sec. 18-121. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Motor vehicle means any vehicle propelled or drawn by any nonmuscular power whether passenger, commercial or agricultural and used for transportation or whether the motor vehicles displayed are unfit for reconditioning and whether the sum of parts or material is equal in bulk to the motor vehicle, depending on the opinion of the commissioner of motor vehicles or his representative. 
(Ord. of 9-10-87) 
Sec. 18-122. - Authority of officer to apply for arrest warrant. 
    Any officer mentioned in this article may make application to the superior court for issuance of an arrest warrant for any violation of this article. 
(Ord. of 9-10-87) 
Sec. 18-123. - Owner subject to fine and costs. 
    Any owner who has his motor vehicle removed and stored pursuant to this article shall be subject to a fine of ninety-nine dollars ($99.00) and any costs related to the storage, removal and any other costs related to the abandoned or unregistered motor vehicle that may apply. 
(Ord. of 9-10-87) 
Sec. 18-124. - Abandonment prohibited. 
    Any person who abandons any motor vehicle within the limits of the borough upon any highway or upon property other than his own without the consent of the owner thereof for a period longer than twenty-four (24) hours shall have committed a violation of this article. The last owner of record of a motor vehicle found abandoned, as shown by the files of the state motor vehicle department, shall be deemed prima facie incidence that the owner of such motor vehicle at the time it was abandoned was the person who abandoned the motor vehicle or caused or procured its abandonment. 
(Ord. of 9-10-87) 
Sec. 18-125. - Immediate removal of vehicles deemed menace to traffic. 
    Any officer attached to the police department or any zoning enforcement officer of the borough or his deputies, upon discovery of any motor vehicle, whether situated within or without any highway of the borough, which is a menace to traffic, shall immediately take such motor vehicle into his custody and may cause the same to be taken and stored in a suitable place. 
(Ord. of 9-10-87) 
Sec. 18-126. - Notification sticker affixed to abandoned vehicle; removal of vehicle after twenty-four hours. 
(a)  Any officer attached to the police department or any zoning enforcement officer of the borough or his deputies, upon discovery of any motor vehicle apparently abandoned or a motor vehicle without proper registration, whether situated within or without any highway of the borough, shall affix to such motor vehicle a notification sticker in a manner so as to be readily visible. Such notification sticker shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The date and time such notification sticker was affixed to the motor vehicle; 
(2)  A statement that pursuant to this article, if such motor vehicle is not removed within twenty-four (24) hours of the time the notification sticker was affixed to such motor vehicle, it may be taken into custody and stored at the owner's expense; 
(3)  The location of such motor vehicle at the time such notification sticker is affixed; 
(4)  The identity of the officer affixing such notification sticker; and 
(5)  The location and telephone number where additional information may be obtained. 
(b)  The registration number of the abandoned motor vehicle shall be placed on the notification sticker, if available, and if not, said officer affixing the notification sticker shall indicate the lack of a registration number on the notification sticker. 
(c)  If the motor vehicle is not removed within the twenty-four-hour period, any officer attached to the police department or any zoning enforcement officer of the borough or his deputies may take such motor vehicle into custody and cause it to be stored in a suitable place. 
(Ord. of 9-10-87) 
Sec. 18-127. - Motor vehicle valued at less than one hundred dollars; unusable motor vehicles. 
(a)  If the motor vehicle has no registration marker plates or invalid registration marker plates, or valid registration marker plates, and if such officer makes a determination in good faith that: 
(1)  The motor vehicle is apparently abandoned; and 
(2)  The market value of such motor vehicle in its current condition is one hundred dollars ($100.00) or less; and/or 
(3)  The motor vehicle is so vandalized, damaged, or in disrepair as to be unusable as a motor vehicle, 
title to such motor vehicle shall, upon taking custody of such motor vehicle, immediately vest in the borough. Within forty-eight (48) hours of the time that such motor vehicle is taken into custody, the department to which the affixing officer is attached shall notify the state commissioner of motor vehicles, in writing, of the vehicle identification number and a description of the motor vehicle. 
(b)  Upon sale or other disposition of the motor vehicle, the department to which the affixing officer is attached shall give written notice by certified mail or by police department form TMV-48EB to the person who was the owner of such motor vehicle at the time of abandonment, if known, which notice shall state that the motor vehicle may be sold or otherwise disposed of. The proceeds of the sale or disposition, or the fair market value of the motor vehicle in its current condition, whichever is greater, less the towing and sale or disposal expenses, shall be paid to such person or his representatives, if claimed by him or them within one (1) year from the date of sale. If such balance is not claimed within such period, it shall escheat to the borough. If the expenses incurred by the borough for towing and the sale or disposition of such motor vehicle exceeds the proceeds of such sale or disposition, such person shall be liable to the borough for such excess amount. 
(Ord. of 9-10-87) 
Sec. 18-128. - Notification of owner of removal and storage of vehicle. 
(a)  Within forty-eight (48) hours of the time that a motor vehicle is taken into custody and stored pursuant to section 18-125 or 18-126, the police department or zoning enforcement officer shall give written notice by certified mail or by personal delivery or service to the owner of such motor vehicle, if known, which notice (form TMV-48EB) shall state: 
(1)  The motor vehicle has been taken into custody and stored; 
(2)  The location of storage of the motor vehicle; 
(3)  That, unless title has already vested in the borough pursuant to section 18-127, such motor vehicle may be sold after fifteen (15) days if the market value of such motor vehicle does not exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) or after ninety (90) days if the value of such motor vehicle exceeds five hundred dollars ($500.00); and 
(4)  That the owner has a right to contest the validity of such taking by application, in written form, as contained and set forth on the rear of the ordinance violation ticket issued to the owner, to be sent to the office of the mayor of the borough within ten (10) days from the date of notice. 
(b)  The chief executive officer of the borough, namely the mayor, shall appoint a suitable person, who shall not be a member of any state or local police department, to be a hearing officer to hear applications to determine whether or not the towing within the borough of such motor vehicle was authorized under provisions of this article. A hearing shall be held within two (2) weeks of any such request for the hearing. If it is determined at such hearing that the vehicle was not a menace to traffic, abandoned or unregistered, as the case may be, the owner of such motor vehicle shall not be liable for any expenses incurred as a result of the taking and storage of such motor vehicle, the lien provisions of this article shall not apply to such owner, and the borough which took and stored such motor vehicle shall be liable for such expenses. If the owner, prior to such determination, pays such expenses and the storage charges of such motor vehicle, and it is determined at such hearing that the motor vehicle was not a menace to traffic, abandoned or unregistered, as the case may be, the borough which took such motor vehicle shall be liable to such owner for the amount paid by such owner. Any person aggrieved by the decision of such hearing may, within fifteen (15) days of the notice of such decision, appeal to the Superior Court for the Judicial District of Waterbury. 
(Ord. of 9-10-87) 
Sec. 18-129. - Vehicles subject to sale. 
(a)  If the current market value of a motor vehicle removed and stored pursuant to this article as determined in good faith does not exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) and such motor vehicle has been stored for a period of not less than fifteen (15) days, such borough may, unless an application, filed by the owner pursuant to section 18-128 is pending and the owner of such motor vehicle has notified the borough that such application for a hearing has been filed, or unless title has already vested in the borough pursuant to section 18-127, sell the motor vehicle for storage and towing charges owed thereon, plus any fine that may be required to be paid, provided a notice of intent to sell shall be sent to the state commissioner of motor vehicles or his designee and the owner of such motor vehicle, if known, five (5) days before the sale of such vehicle. 
(b)  If the current market value of such motor vehicle as determined in good faith exceeds five hundred dollars ($500.00) and such motor vehicle has been so stored for a period of not less than ninety (90) days, the borough shall, unless an application filed by the owner pursuant to section 18-128 is pending and the owner of such motor vehicle has notified the borough that such application for a hearing has been filed, sell the same at public auction for cash, in a manner prescribed by the mayor of the borough, and apply the proceeds of such sale toward payment of storage and removal charges and payment of any fine that may be due, as well as any costs of running the auction, provided such sale shall be advertised in a newspaper published or having circulation in the borough three (3) times commencing at least five (5) days before the sale and, if the last place of abode of the owner of such motor vehicle is known to or may be ascertained by the town by the exercise of reasonable diligence, notice of the time and place of sale shall be given him by mailing such notice to him in a registered or certified letter, postage paid, at such last usual place of abode, at least five (5) days before the time of sale. The borough shall report the sales price; storing, towing and repair charges, if any; buyer's name and address; and identification of the vehicle to the state commissioner of motor vehicles or his designee within fifteen (15) days after the sale of the motor vehicle. The proceeds of such sale, after deducting the amount owed for storage, cost of sale and fines and all expenses connected with such sale shall be paid to the owner of such motor vehicle or his legal representatives, if claimed by him or them at any time within one (1) year from the date of the sale. If the balance is not claimed within the period, it shall escheat to the borough. Failure to comply with the provisions of this subsection shall be deemed a violation of this article. 
(Ord. of 9-10-87) 
Sec. 18-130. - Unclaimed vehicles valued at more than five hundred dollars. 
    In the case of a motor vehicle the value of which exceeds five hundred dollars ($500.00), and the owner of the motor vehicle placed in storage in accordance with the provisions of this article does not claim such motor vehicle within thirty (30) days, the borough shall within forty (40) days of the date such motor vehicle was placed in storage, send a written notice to the state commissioner of motor vehicles or his designee stating the make, engine number, if legible and if not legible, section 14-149b of the general statutes shall apply; and chassis number of the motor vehicle, the date the motor vehicle was removed for storage and by whom and the registration number thereof if any numbered plates are on the motor vehicle. Any sale under the provisions of this article shall be void unless notice required by this section has been given to the state commissioner of motor vehicles or his designee. 
(Ord. of 9-10-87) 
Sec. 18-131. - Applicability of section 14-149(b) of the general statutes. 
    If the motor vehicle taken into custody pursuant to this article has no registration marker plates and no legible identification mark or number, section 14-149(b) of the general statutes currently in effect and as amended from time to time shall apply, which section is incorporated in this article by reference. As used in section 14-149b of the general statutes, the term "officer" shall mean for purposes of this article, any officer attached to the police department and any zoning enforcement officer of the borough or his deputies. 
(Ord. of 9-10-87) 
ARTICLE V. - TOWING OF MOTOR VEHICLES 

Sec. 18-132. - Purpose. 
    The borough has determined that a towing policy for disabled motor vehicles is necessary in order to ensure public safety. 
(Ord. of 12-17-92) 
Sec. 18-133. - Rules and regulations established. 
    The office of the mayor with the consent of the board of mayor and burgesses is hereby empowered to establish reasonable rules and regulations for the towing of disabled motor vehicles found or situated within the borough. Said rules and regulations may be amended from time to time by the office of the mayor with the prior consent of the board of mayor and burgesses. 
(Ord. of 12-17-92) 
ARTICLE VI. - TRAFFIC SAFETY PATROL[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance of April 2, 2013 amended the Code by renumbering former ch. 2, art. IV, div. 3, §§ 2-175-2-178, as a new ch. 18, art. VI, §§ 18-134-18-137. 

Sec. 18-134. - Intent and purpose. 
    It is the intent and purpose of this division to provide for the creation of a volunteer traffic-safety patrol. Such patrol shall be assembled by and under the exclusive control and direction of the mayor or the mayor's designee. The patrol shall be available to perform their duties, as defined below, during specified emergency situations, such as automobile accidents or natural disasters, or at other times for nonprofit and/or charitable organizations that request their services for the safe operation of such events as fundraising sales or bazaars, charitable events, functions and promotions, and similar nonprofit undertakings. 
(Ord. No. 90, § 90-1, 8-7-90; Ord. of 4-2-13) 
Sec. 18-135. - Appointment. 
    The mayor or the mayor's designee may appoint such number of volunteer traffic-safety patrol members as he shall deem required in emergencies or as necessary to provide adequate service to those specified organizations which may from time to time request their use. The members shall serve for a term of office to be determined by the mayor or the mayor's designee or during any time at which their services have been requested. They shall be removed from the patrol in the sole discretion of the mayor or the mayor's designee. 
(Ord. No. 90, § 90-2, 8-7-90; Ord. of 4-2-13) 
Sec. 18-136. - Duties and powers. 
(a)  The volunteer traffic-safety patrol shall have the power to and it shall be their duty to provide traffic control and such other services as the mayor or the mayor's designee shall designate to them. Such authority may be exercised only at the direction of the mayor or the mayor's designee and only for the following specified purposes: 
(1)  Providing such services during emergencies or times of natural disaster; 
(2)  Providing such services to non-profit or charitable organizations which ordinarily and customarily would not hire or pay for such services. 
(b)  The members of the patrol shall have no power to arrest or issue tickets or infractions. 
(c)  The members of the patrol shall be equipped with traffic safety vests or a similar safety item, which item shall be supplied by the borough and which shall remain borough property. When the members of the patrol are required to report for performance of their duties after nightfall, they shall carry a flashlight capable of projecting a clear light for the purpose of illumination, which item shall be supplied and maintained in working order by the member. 
(d)  The volunteer traffic-safety patrol shall be summoned by the Town Plectron Alarm System when deemed necessary under existing circumstances and for immediate response. They shall be summoned by other adequate means when immediate response is not required. 
(e)  It shall not be a bar to service in the volunteer traffic-safety patrol that a member also serves in another volunteer capacity within the borough, including, but not limited to, service in the borough fire-police or as a borough special constable. 
(f)  For those members of the patrol who are also members of the borough fire-police, wearing the fire-police uniform during performance of traffic-safety patrol duties, may be permitted in the sole discretion of the mayor or the mayor's designee. 
(Ord. No. 90, § 90-3, 8-7-90; Ord. of 4-2-13) 
Sec. 18-137. - Reports. 
(a)  Within ninety (90) days of the effective date of this division, the mayor or the mayor's designee shall establish a written procedure for administering the assignment of and for regulating the volunteer traffic-safety patrol. Regulations promulgated in accordance with this section shall specify the emergency situations during which the members of the patrol may be summoned. Such regulations shall also specify the criteria to be applied to organizations seeking the services of the patrol in order to ascertain whether such organizations qualify as nonprofit or charitable in nature and/or operation. 
(b)  In January of each year the mayor or the mayor's designee may submit a report to the board of mayor and burgesses regarding the effectiveness of this division and any recommendations for the furtherance thereof. 
(Ord. No. 90, § 90-4, 8-7-90; Ord. of 4-2-13) 
Chapter 19 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Drains and common sewers, §§ 37, 38. 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 7; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 9; garbage, trash and refuse, Ch. 10; health and sanitation, Ch. 11; planning, Ch. 15; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 16; subdivisions, App. A; zoning, App. B. 
State Law reference- Power of borough to lay out, construct, etc., sewer and drainage systems and sewage disposal plants, G.S. § 7-148(c)(6)(B)(i); power of borough to contract for the furnishing of water, G.S. § 7-148(c)(4)(G); power of borough to create, etc., all things in the nature of public works and improvements, G.S. § 7-148(c)(6)(A)(ii); power of borough to regulate the laying, etc., of water pipes, drains, sewers, etc., in the streets and public places, G.S. § 7-148(c)(6)(B) (iii); power of borough to regulate and prohibit the construction, etc., of sinks, cesspools, G.S. § 7-148(c)(7)(C); municipal waterworks systems, G.S. § 7-234 et seq.; municipal sewerage systems, G.S. § 7-245 et seq.; sewer districts, G.S. § 7-324 et seq.; water resources, G.S. § 25-1 et seq.; sewer revenue bonds, G.S. §§ 7-259-7-266. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 19-1-19-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Flood erosion control board, § 2-76 et seq.; water pollution control authority, § 19-91 et seq. 
State Law reference- Municipal waterworks systems, G.S. § 7-234 et seq. 

Sec. 19-16. - Emergency water conservation. 
(a)  Definitions. For the purpose of this section the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words, in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
    Person is any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind. 
    Town is the Borough of Naugatuck. 
    Town water is water from the Connecticut Water Company or any of its successors or assigns which might provide water to the Town as a public water supply company. 
(b)  The board of mayor and burgesses of the borough, with recommendations from the State of Connecticut regional authorities, Connecticut Water Company and/or the fire chief is hereby authorized to declare a state of water emergency in and for the town at any time upon its determination that continuing drought conditions threaten the water supply of the Town. In the event of such declaration, the board of mayor and burgesses may immediately impose such water conservation regulations from amongst those set forth in subsection (c) below as it shall deem necessary to deal with said water emergency. The board of mayor and burgesses may lift said regulation as when it determines the water emergency no longer requires their imposition. Imposition shall become effective twenty-four (24) hours after publication in a daily newspaper having a general circulation in the town. 
(c)  Water conservation regulations. 
(1)  No person shall use any hose, sprinkler or other device whatsoever, except a water can receptacle, which utilizes the town water supply system for the purpose of watering lawns or gardens. 
(2)  No person shall use any hose, sprinkler or other device whatsoever which utilizes town water for the purpose of washing any motor vehicle in the town, unless said person has a system of recirculating water used for such purpose. 
(3)  No person shall use the town water for ornamental or display fountains of any kind. 
(4)  No town fire hydrants are to be used except by the fire department, or other persons with permission granted by the board of mayor and burgesses, or with the fire department's permission. 
(5)  No person shall use any air conditioning system which utilizes the town water unless such air conditioning system has a system of recirculating water. 
(6)  No person shall use the town water for spraying or wetting down any roofs of any buildings in the town. 
(7)  No person shall use the town water by flushing or wetting down any streets, sidewalks, driveways, or parking areas in the town. 
(8)  The escape of water through defective plumbing is hereby prohibited and the same shall mean the knowing permission for defective plumbing to remain out of repair. 
(9)  In the event of a declared state of water emergency, the mayor may impose mandatory water conservation measures upon all commercial and industrial consumers. 
(10)  No person shall use the town water for the filling of pools. 
(11)  No person shall use the town water for the watering of town fields. 
(d)  Penalty. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section shall on conviction thereof, be punished by the imposition of a fine in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(Ord. No. 113, 5-14-02) 
Secs. 19-17-19-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Garbage, trash and refuse, Ch. 10; health and sanitation, Ch. 11; excavation, § 16-91 et seq. 
State Law reference- Authority of borough to construct, maintain, etc., sewers and sewage disposal plants, G.S. § 7-148(c)(6)(B)(i); municipal sewerage systems, G.S. § 7-245 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 19-41. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    BOD (denoting biochemical oxygen demand) shall mean the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard labortory procedure in five (5) days at twenty (20) degrees Celsius, expressed in milligrams per liter. 
    Borough clerk shall mean the appointed clerk of the borough. 
    Borough engineer shall mean the appointed engineer of the borough. 
    Building drain shall mean that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, such building sewer beginning three (3) feet outside the outer face of the building wall, or on the street side of the trap installed in accordance with the borough's plumbing code. 
    Building sewer shall mean the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal. 
    Combined sewer shall mean a sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage. 
    Garbage shall mean the solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of produce. 
    Health officer shall mean the appointed health officer of the borough or his authorized representative. 
    Industrial wastes shall mean the liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing process, trade, or business as distinct from sanitary sewage. 
    Natural outlet shall mean any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other body of surface or ground water. 
    pH shall mean the logarithm of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions in moles per liter of solution. 
    Plumbing inspector shall mean the appointed plumbing inspector of the borough or his authorized representative. 
    Properly shredded garbage shall mean the wastes from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particals will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch. 
    Public sewer shall mean a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights, and is controlled by public authority. 
    Sanitary sewer shall mean a sewer which carries sewage and to which storm, surface and ground waters are not admitted. 
    SD shall mean the sewer operation and maintenance group of the street department. 
    Sewage shall mean a combination of water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, together with such ground and surface waters as may be unintentionally present. 
    Sewage treatment plant shall mean any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating domestic wastes plus approved quantities of industrial wastes. 
    Sewer shall mean pipe or conduit for carrying sewage. 
    Sewerage system shall mean all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage. 
    Slug shall mean any discharge of water, sewage, or industrial waste which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than five (5) times the average twenty-four-hour concentration or flows during normal operation. 
    Storm drain (sometimes termed "storm sewer") shall mean a pipe or conduit which carries storm and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial wastes, other than unpolluted cooling water. 
    Superintendant shall mean the superintendent of water pollution control of the borough, or his authorized representative. 
    Suspended solids shall mean the solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids, and which are removable by laboratory filtering. 
    Toxic substances shall mean any substance, whether gaseous, liquid or solid, which, when discharged to the sewer system in sufficient quantities may tend to interfere with any sewage treatment process to constitute a hazard to human beings or animals, or to inhibit aquatic life in receiving waters of the effluent from the sewage treatment plant. 
    Watercourse shall mean a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
(Code 1973, § 26-61) 
Sec. 19-42. - Protection from damage. 
    No person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is a part of the sewage system. 
(Code 1973, § 26-66) 
Sec. 19-43. - Powers and authority of inspectors. 
(a)  The plumbing inspector, the borough engineer, the health officer, the superintendent, members of the sewer authority, and other duly authorized employees of the borough bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing in accordance with the provisions of this article. The borough shall have no authority to inquire into any processes beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or waterways or facilities for waste treatment. 
(b)  While performing the necessary work on private property referred to in subsection (a) of this section the superintendent or other duly authorized employees or representatives of the borough shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company and the company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the borough employees or representatives and the borough shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to its property by borough employees or representatives and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions as required in section 19-72. 
(c)  The superintendent and other duly authorized employees or representatives of the borough bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the borough holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the sewage system lying within the easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. 
(Code 1973, § 26-67) 
Sec. 19-44. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person found to be violating any provision of this article, except section 19-42, shall be served by the borough with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. 
(b)  Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided for in subsection (a) of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and on conviction thereof shall be fined in accordance with section 1-7. 
(c)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the borough for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned the borough by reason of such violation. 
(Code 1973, § 26-68) 
Secs. 19-45-19-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PUBLIC SANITARY SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS 

Sec. 19-61. - Use of public sewers required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the borough or in any area under the jurisdiction of the borough, any human or animal excrement, garbage, or other objectionable waste. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the borough, any sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1973, § 26-62 (a), (b)) 
Sec. 19-62. - Privies, privy vaults, etc. 
    Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage. 
(Code 1973, § 26-62(c)) 
Sec. 19-63. - Connection to public sewer required. 
(a)  The owner of any house, building, or property used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes, situated within the borough and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary sewer of the borough, is hereby required at his expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper sewer in accordance with the provisions of this division, within ninety (90) days after the date of official notice to do so, provided that the public sewer is within one hundred (100) feet of the property line. 
(b)  The developer of any property or subdivision of three (3) or more building lots situated within the borough whose property line, at any point, is within five hundred (500) feet of an existing or future public sanitary sewer is hereby required, at his expense, to install suitable toilet facilities in all houses or buildings located on such building lots, and to connect such facilities directly to the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this division. Prior to installation of the required sewers, the developer shall apply to the borough clerk for a permit, and apply to the borough engineer for an inspector. There shall be a one-week notice to the borough engineer prior to the need for an inspector. The inspector shall be on the job at all times during construction. The application shall be supplemented by plans, specifications, and other information as deemed necessary by the borough engineer. Upon approval of the permit, the applicant shall enter into a contract with the borough to reimburse the borough for inspection by the borough engineer. 
(c)  The discharge of sewage, industrial, and other wastes generated on or discharged from real property lying outside the bounds of the borough into the borough sewage system shall be made only with express consent of the borough and upon issuance of a permit setting forth the terms and conditions for such discharge. 
(Code 1973, § 26-62(d)-(f)) 
Sec. 19-64. - Private disposal systems. 
(a)  Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of section 19-48(a) the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewer disposal system complying with the provisions of this section. 
(b)  Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the health officer. The application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the borough, which the applicant shall supplement by plot plans, certified by a professional engineer or a licensed land surveyor, specifications, and other information as are deemed necessary by the health officer. A permit and inspection fee shall be paid to the borough at the time the application is filed. 
(c)  Use of private sewage disposal system shall not commence until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the health officer. He shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction and in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the health officer when the work is ready for final inspection, and before any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within forty-eight (48) hours of the receipt of notice by the health officer. 
(d)  The type, capacity, location, and layout of a private sewage disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the state department of health. No permit shall be issued for any private sewage disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot is less than fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet. 
(e)  At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewer disposal system, as provided in section 19-48(a), a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer within ninety (90) days, and any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material. 
(f)  The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the borough. 
(g)  No statement contained in this section shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the borough. 
(Code 1973, § 19-63) 
Cross reference- Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 12. 
Sec. 19-65. - Building sewers and connections. 
(a)  No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the borough clerk. 
(b)  There shall be two (2) classes of building sewer permits for residential and commercial service, producing only sanitary sewage, and for service to establishments producing industrial wastes. In either case, the owner or his agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the borough. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the borough engineer. A permit and inspection fee for either class of building sewer permit shall be paid to the borough at the time the application is filed. 
(c)  All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the borough for any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. 
(d)  A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building, except where an industrial complex, commercial or multiple dwelling installation has provided a private sewer system on its own property to drain several buildings to an interceptor for discharge by gravity or pumping to the borough sewer. This type of building sewer connection shall be approved by the borough engineer. 
(e)  Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the borough engineer, to meet all requirements of this division. 
(f)  The size, slope, alignment, materials or construction of a building sewer shall be as follows: 
(1)  All underground building sewers shall be abestos cement building sewer pipe class 1500 (American-made only) or extra heavy cast-iron soil pipe or extra strength vitrified-clay pipe with rubber ring gaskets, and the type of pipe used in the existing public sewer shall be used in the building sewer provided it meets the above class of pipe. If the public sewer is ABS, the contractor may use ABS for the building sewer or asbestos cement, extra heavy cast-iron or vitrified-clay pipe provided that the adaptor used is approved by the borough engineer. If the public sewer is concrete, asbestos cement pipe may be used for the building sewer. 
(2)  All pipe must conform with the latest specifications for sewer pipe as established by the borough engineer. The connection of the building sewer to the building drain shall be made with a rubber ring or adaptor fitting so as to have a watertight and rootproof joint. No other joint shall be approved. 
(3)  Building sewers four (4) inches in diameter shall have a minimum slope of one-fourth inch per foot. Building sewers six (6) inches in diameter shall have a slope of one-eighth inch per foot. 
(g)  Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer. 
(h)  No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer. 
(i)  The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the borough engineer or other applicable rules and regulations of the borough. All such connections shall be made gastight, watertight, and rootproof. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the borough engineer before installation. 
(j)  The applicant for a building sewer permit shall notify the borough engineer when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the borough engineer. 
(k)  All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the borough. 
(l)  House connection detail shall be in accordance with Appendix I. 
(Code 1973, § 19-50) 
Editor's note- Appendix I is included at the end of this division. 
Cross reference- Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 12. 
PU Diagram 673 goes here 
  
    If soft bottom is encountered, 3/4;inch; stone will be used to stabilize bed of pipe as directed. Pipe to be bedded on suitable material to line and grade. No voids will be permitted under pipe during installation. 
  
Secs. 19-66-19-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PUBLIC SANITARY SEWER DISCHARGE RESTRICTIONS 

Sec. 19-81. - Discharge of unpolluted waters to sanitary sewers prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer. 
(b)  Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such drains as are specifically designated as storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the borough engineer. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, on approval of the borough engineer, to a storm sewer or natural outlet. 
(Code 1973, § 26-65(a), (b)) 
Sec. 19-82. - Prohibited discharges to public sewers. 
    No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewers: 
(1)  Any gasoline, benezene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas; 
(2)  Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant, including but not limited to cyanides in excess of 1 mg/l as CN and chromium VI in excess of mg/l in the wastes as discharged to the public sewer; 
(3)  Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 6.5 or higher than 9.6 or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, or personnel of the sewage works; 
(4)  Solid or viscous substances in quantities of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, pauch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders. 
(Code 1973, § 26-65(c)) 
Sec. 19-83. - Discharge of certain wastes restricted. 
    No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described substances, materials, waters, or wastes if it appears likely in the opinion of the borough that such wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage treatment process or equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving stream, or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance. In forming an opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the borough will give consideration to such factors as the quantity of the waste in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials and construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant, and other pertinent factors. The substances prohibited are: 
(1)  Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty (150) degrees Farenheit or sixty five (65) degrees Celsius; 
(2)  Any waters or wastes containing fats, wax, grease, or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred (100) mg/l or containing substances which may solidify or become vicious at temperatures between thirty-two (32) and one hundred fifty (150) degrees Farenheit or zero and sixty five (65) degrees Celsius; 
(3)  Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and operation of any garbage grinders equipped with a motor of three-fourths horsepower or greater shall be subject to review and approval of the borough engineer; 
(4)  Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, and similar objectionable or toxic substances which exceed the limits established by the borough. Any waters or wastes containing an aggregate of ten (10) mg/l of the above heavy metals shall be raised to a pH of between 8.0 and 9.5; 
(5)  Any waters or wastes exerting an excessive chlorine requirement to such a degree that any such material received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment plant exceeds the limits established by the borough; 
(6)  Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste- or odor-producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding the limits which may be established by the borough as necessary, after treatment of the composite sewage, to meet the requirements of the state, federal, or other public agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters; 
(7)  Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed the limits established by the borough in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations; 
(8)  Materials which exert or cause: 
a.  Unusual concentration of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to, fuller's earth or lime residues) or dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride or sodium sulfate); 
b.  Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions); 
c.  Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment works; 
d.  Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting a slug; 
(9)  Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such a degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters. 
(Code 1973, § 26-65(d)) 
Sec. 19-84. - Action of borough upon discharge of wastes having deleterious effect upon sewerage works, etc. 
    If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, discharging to the sewage treatment plant contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in section 19-68 and which in the judgment of the borough may have a deleterious effect upon the sewerage works, processes, equipment or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the borough may: 
(1)  Reject the wastes; 
(2)  Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition before discharge to the public sewers; 
(3)  Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; or 
(4)  Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the provisions of section 19-74 of this section. 
(Code 1973, § 26-65(e)) 
Sec. 19-85. - Pretreatment equipment, facilities. 
(a)  If the borough permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plans and equipment shall be subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances, and laws. 
(b)  Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense. 
(Code 1973, § 26-65(g)) 
Sec. 19-86. - Interceptors. 
    Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided by the owner at his expense when, in the opinion of the borough, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand, or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the borough and shall be located as to be ready and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. 
(Code 1973, § 26-65(f)) 
Sec. 19-87. - Control manholes. 
    When required by the borough, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the wastes. An approved valve or gate shall also be provided in the manhole to prevent the industrial waste from being discharged into the borough sewerage system if it becomes necessary for the borough to reject the industrial waste in accordance with section 19-69. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the borough. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense, and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times. 
(Code 1973, § 26-65(h)) 
Sec. 19-88. - Measurements, tests and analyses. 
    All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this division shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples taken at the control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by the borough with such assistance as is necessary for the industry using customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb, and property. 
(Code 1973, § 26-65(i)) 
Sec. 19-89. - Permit required for industrial wastes. 
    All establishments discharging industrial wastes into the borough's sewerage system shall obtain a permit from the borough. Acceptable average and peak rates of flow and concentrations of pollutants shall be as determined by the borough. 
(Code 1973, § 26-65(j)) 
Cross reference- Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 12. 
Sec. 19-90. - Special agreement with industrial concerns. 
    No statement contained in this division shall be construed as preventing any special agreement between the borough and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength, volume or character may be accepted by the borough for treatment, subject to payment therefor, by the industrial concern. 
(Code 1973, § 26-65(k)) 
Secs. 19-91-19-105. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - WATER POLLUTION CONTROL AUTHORITY[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 111, adopted Feb. 5, 2002, repealed §§ 19-106, 19-115-19-118, and 19-120 of Div. 4, and enacted new §§ 19-122, 19-123, 19-125-19-127, and 19-129, 19-130 as set out herein. The former §§ 19-106, 19-115-19-118, and 19-120 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1973, §§ 26-49, 26-53-26-57; and Amend. of Aug. 4, 1998. Prior to the adoption of Ord. No. 111, Amend. of Aug. 4, 1988: changed the title of Div. 4 from Water Pollution Control Board to Water Pollution Control Authority; repealed §§ 19-107-19-114, which pertained to the composition, terms of members, vacancies, ex officio members, quorum, chairman and officers, removal of members, and compensation of the water pollution control board and derived from Code 1973, §§ 26-50-26-53; and repealed § 19-119, which pertained to the meetings and reports of the water pollution control board and derived from Code 1973, § 26-59. 
Cross reference- Environmental control commission, § 2-51 et seq.; flood and erosion control board, § 2-76 et seq.; unlawful deposits in waterways, § 10-25; air pollution, § 11-16 et seq. 

Sec. 19-106-19-120. - Reserved. 
Sec. 19-121. - Repealing clause. 
(a)  The water pollution control board is hereby abolished and all the powers, duties and authority, whether enumerated or implied are herewith transferred to the board of mayor and burgesses. 
(b)  The borough clerk is hereby directed to ensure immediate publication of this division in any newspaper having circulation in the borough. 
(Amend. of Aug. 4, 1998) 
Sec. 19-122. - Establishment and designation. 
    The borough hereby reestablishes and designates the water pollution control authority as the Water Pollution Control Authority in said Borough of Naugatuck in order to replace the board of mayor and burgesses which was designated as the water pollution control authority on August 4, 1998. Said water pollution control authority shall be empowered with all powers and duties conferred upon water pollution control authorities by the Connecticut General Statutes and said authority shall have all other powers and duties reasonably necessary to oversee the management of the Borough wastewater facility and sludge incinerators and to administer and manage the sewer collection system as set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. 111, 2-5-02) 
Sec. 19-123. - Members. 
(a)  The Naugatuck Water Pollution Control Authority shall consist of five (5) residents of voting age, of the borough, whom shall be appointed to said authority by nomination of the mayor and confirmed by the board of mayor and burgesses. 
(b)  Upon adoption of the ordinance from which this section derives, there shall be appointed, one (1) member to serve for a term of one (1) year and until his successor shall be appointed and shall have been qualified; one (1) member to serve for term of two (2) years and until his successor shall be appointed and qualified; one (1) member to serve for a term of three (3) years and until his successor shall be appointed and qualified; one (1) member to serve for a term of four (4) years and until his successor shall be appointed and qualified; one (1) member to serve for a term of five (5) years and until his successor be appointed and qualified. Thereafter, upon expiration of each of the said original terms, each member shall be appointed to serve for a term of five (5) years from the date of said expiration and until his successor shall be appointed and qualified. Vacancies, however created, shall be filled by nomination of the mayor and confirmed by the board of mayor and burgesses for the unexpired portion of the term of the member creating the vacancy. 
(c)  The borough controller and the borough engineer shall serve as member's ex officio of the water pollution control authority without voting rights and their attendance will not be a factor in determining a quorum. A majority of the voting members of the water pollution control authority shall constitute a quorum. 
(Ord. No. 111, 2-5-02) 
Sec. 19-124. - Reserved. 
Sec. 19-125. - Specific powers. 
(a)  The water pollution control authority shall oversee the management of the borough wastewater facility and sludge incinerators and shall also be charged with administration of all facilities used for collection of wastewater received form residential, commercial, and industrial establishments within the borough, from the Towns of Middlebury and Oxford and from such other areas as are or may be connected to the pollution control facilities of the borough in the future. 
(b)  The water pollution control authority shall also have all other powers vested in water pollution control authorities by the Connecticut General Statutes except that a sewer tax cannot be imposed by the authority without the approval of the borough. 
(Ord. No. 111, 2-5-02) 
Sec. 19-126. - Preparation of budgets. 
(a)  The water pollution control authority shall submit, on or before February 1st of each year, capital expenditure budgets for the collection, treatment, and disposal system for the forthcoming year for approval of the borough finance board. 
(b)  The board of mayor and burgesses shall submit, on or before February 1st of each year, an annual operation and maintenance budget for the collection, treatment and disposal system for the forthcoming year for approval of the borough finance board. This budget will set forth estimated revenues and expenditures for the forthcoming year. 
(c)  Expenditures for purposes designated in the annual budget shall not exceed the estimate for that item, but the water pollution control authority shall have the power to make additional expenditures for any item from the contingency fund of the water pollution control authority budget or transfer of unexpended funds from any item included in the budget to any other item. 
(d)  The water pollution control authority shall honor the following agreements which pre-exist its formation: 
(1)  Interim service contract for wastewater treatment system asset management between the borough, the water pollution control authority and U.S. Filter Operating Services dated April 12, 2001. 
(2)  Service contract for wastewater treatment system, capital improvements and asset management between the borough, the water pollution control authority and U.S. Filter Operating Services dated October 25, 2001. 
(3)  Incineration facilities lease agreement between the borough, the water pollution control authority and Naugatuck Environmental Technologies, LLC dated October 25, 2001. 
(Ord. No. 111, 2-5-02) 
Sec. 19-127. - Rules and regulations. 
(a)  The water pollution control authority shall have the power to make and enforce regulations with the same effect as do ordinances for the operation of the sewage system and shall have the power to amend the same. 
(b)  The water pollution control authority shall not have the power to discontinue or otherwise dispose of parts of the sewage system except for the purpose of replacement due to wear and obsolescence. 
(c)  The water pollution control authority shall have the power to cause any person or municipality to discontinue operation and discharge into the sewer system if that person or municipality fails to comply with rules or regulations for the operation of the sewage system. 
(Ord. No. 111, 2-5-02) 
Sec. 19-128. - Reserved. 
Sec. 19-129. - Hiring of personnel. 
    The water pollution control authority may appoint, engage or contract with professionally qualified personnel for such services as it may deem necessary to oversee the management of the wastewater facility and sludge incinerators and to construct and operate a sewage system, within the limited of appropriations made therefore by the borough. 
(Ord. No. 111, 2-5-02) 
Sec. 19-130. - Repealing clause. 
    The water pollution control board created on August 4, 1998 is hereby abolished and all the powers, duties and authority, whether enumerated or implied are herewith transferred to the water pollution control authority of the borough. 
(Ord. No. 111, 2-5-02) 
Secs. 19-131-19-135. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - RATES AND CHARGES 

Sec. 19-136. - Sewer use charge; connection charge. 
(a)  Any single-family dwelling unit owner shall pay to the borough an original sewer use charge for the privilege of connecting to the borough sanitary system the sum of sixty dollars ($60.00) for the unit, which sum shall be payable to the borough clerk before any connection is made to the borough sewer system, and before any plumbing permit is issued or fee paid under the provisions of this Code. 
(b)  Any owner of multiple dwellings, whether condominium units or apartments, shall pay for each unit connection the sum of two hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00) under the same terms and conditions as set out in subsection (a) of this section, with the provision, however, that the first such connection shall be sixty dollars ($60.00). 
(c)  Any owner of a building or structure not considered a single-family or a multiple dwelling shall pay for each unit connection the sum of three hundred and seventy-five dollars ($375.00) under the same terms and conditions as set out in subsection (a) of this section. 
(d)  The word "connection" shall mean each pipe installed either on the premises of the owner or in the streets, which piping either directly from the unit, or by pipes running through private property from the unit, is tied into a borough sanitary sewer, regardless of whether the unit be tied directly by one (1) line between the unit and the sewer or indirectly through a system of sewage pipes that may combine sewage pipe effluent from other units as well. 
(Code 1973, § 26-33) 
APPENDIX B - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein are the zoning regulations of the borough adopted by the borough zoning commission on August 15, 1983. The original arrangement has been retained. Amendments have been added and are indicated by a history note following the amended sections. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is derived unchanged from the original regulations. Material enclosed in brackets [ ] has been added to the text where necessary to correct errors or to clarify ambiguities. In addition, a uniform system of capitalization and treatment of numbers has been adopted. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. Ordinances zoning or rezoning specific property or granting specific use permits are not included, but are on file in the borough clerk's office. 
Cross reference- Advertising, Ch. 3; effect of zoning regulations on signs, § 3-28; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 7; parks and recreation, Ch. 14; planning, Ch. 15; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 16; utilities, Ch. 19; subdivisions, App. A. 
State Law reference- Procedure for enacting zoning regulations, G.S. § 8-18 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Section 1. - Jurisdiction. 
    1.1  Jurisdiction: Within the Borough of Naugatuck, no land, building or other structure shall be used and no building or other structure shall be constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, extended, moved or structurally altered except in conformity with these regulations. No lot or land shall be subdivided, sold, encumbered or conveyed so as (1) to make said lot or land nonconforming or more nonconforming to these regulations, (2) to make any use, building or other structure nonconforming or more nonconforming, (3) to reduce any setback, yard, open space or off-street parking and loading spaces to less than is required by these regulations or (4) to make any nonconforming setback, yard, open space or off-street parking and loading spaces more nonconforming. 
Section 2. - Certificate of zoning compliance. 
    2.1  Certificate: No building or other structure, or part thereof, shall be constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, extended, moved or structurally altered until an application for a certificate of zoning compliance has been approved by the zoning enforcement officer. No land, building or other structure, or part thereof, shall be used or occupied or changed in use, until an application for a certificate of zoning compliance therefor has been approved by the zoning enforcement officer and until a certificate of zoning compliance therefor has been issued by the zoning enforcement officer certifying conformity with these regulations. No certificate of zoning compliance, however, is required for a farm, forestry, truck garden or nursery use when no building or other structure is proposed and when no livestock is to be kept. All applications for a certificate of zoning compliance shall be submitted and approved in accordance with the provisions of section 52, and all certificates of zoning compliance shall be issued in accordance with said section. 
Section 3. - District and boroughwide provisions. 
    3.1  Districts: As provided in section 21, the Borough of Naugatuck is divided into classes of districts. Such districts are established on the zoning map specified in section 22 for the uses specified in section 32 [23]. The area, location and bulk standards applicable to uses noted in section 23, schedule A permitted uses, are specified in section 24. 
    3.2  Performance standards: The use of land, buildings and other structures, wherever located, shall be established and conducted so as to conform to the performance standards specified in section 41. 
    3.3  Off-street parking and loading: Parking and loading spaces shall be provided off the street for any use of land, buildings and other structures as specified in section 42. 
    3.4  Signs: All permitted signs shall be established in accordance with the requirements of section 43. 
    3.5  Nonconformity: Any use, building or other structure or any lot which existed lawfully, by variance or otherwise, on the date these regulations or any amendment hereto became effective, and fails to conform to one (1) or more of the provisions of these regulations or such amendment hereto, may be continued subject to the provisions and limitations of section 44. 
    3.6  Interpretation of zoning regulations: When a question arises as to the exact intent of these regulations, the zoning commission shall by resolution determine the precise meaning giving due consideration among other factors to all applicable sections of these regulations and previous interpretations made by the commission. All interpretations, and reasons for adopting said interpretations, shall be maintained in perpetuity in the minutes of the zoning commission and shall be indexed in said minutes under the heading "interpretations" as well as under the heading of the specific item under interpretation. (See appeals [section] 51.2.1, regarding decision of zoning enforcement officer). (5-30-86) 
Section 4. - Definitions. 
    4.1  General: Certain words used in these regulations are defined and explained in paragraphs which follow and the other words in these regulations shall have the meaning commonly attributed to them. Doubts as to the precise meaning of words in these regulations shall be determined by the zoning commission by resolution, giving due consideration to the express intent and purposes of the regulations. 
    4.2  Commission: The term "commission" shall mean the zoning commission of the Borough of Naugatuck. 
    4.3  Customary home occupation: The term "customary home occupation" shall mean one (1) or more of the following activities: 
4.3.1 The preparation and sale of those products customarily produced in the home, garden or farm, including clothing, baked goods, needlework and preserved foods, provided such products are created entirely on the premises. 
4.3.2 The preparation and sale of the products of arts and crafts activities, including painting, portrait photography, illustrating, woodcarving, ceramics, sculpture, ornamental glass and writing, provided that such products are created entirely on the premises. 
    4.4  Dwelling: A "dwelling" is a building containing one (1) or more "dwelling units." 
    4.5  Dwelling units: A "dwelling unit" is a building or a part of a building designed for occupancy, and so occupied, by one (1) "family." Accommodations occupied for transient lodging in a hotel or motel shall not be considered to be a "dwelling unit." 
    4.6  Family: A "family" is a person or a group of related persons, plus guest and domestic servants thereof, or a group of not more than six (6) persons who need not be so related who are living as a single housekeeping unit maintaining a common household. A roomer or boarder to whom rooms are let and/or board is furnished as permitted by these regulations shall not be considered a member of a "family" for the purpose of this definition. 
    4.7  Floor area, dwelling unit: In determining compliance with maximum floor area requirements for an office in a "dwelling unit" of a "customary home occupation" in a "dwelling unit," only finished livable floor area having a ceiling height of a least seven (7) feet shall be counted and shall exclude garages, terraces, outside vestibules, bay windows, any basement rooms except a basement "story" as defined in paragraph 4.23, utility rooms for heating apparatus, attics, open porches, enclosed porches not heated by a central heating system for the "dwelling," and hallways and other space designed for common use by occupants of two (2) or more "dwelling units." Measurements of floor area for any "dwelling" or "dwelling unit" shall be taken from the inside surfaces of exterior walls or partitions enclosing the floor area. Any floor other than a ground floor must have access thereto by a permanent inside stairway to be included in computing floor area. 
    4.8  Floor area, maximum: In computing the total floor area of all buildings and other structures on any lot to determine compliance with maximum floor area provisions of paragraph 24.5 and schedule B, measurements of floor area shall be taken to the outside surfaces of exterior walls enclosing the floor area. 
    4.9  Frontage: "Frontage" is defined as [a] property line that is also a "street line." 
    4.10  Height: In measuring the height of a building or other structure to determine compliance with maximum height provisions of paragraph 24.3 and schedule B, measurements shall be taken from the average ground level within ten (10) feet of the building or structure to the level of the highest roof of the building or highest feature of the structure. 
    4.11  Junk yard: The term "junk yard" shall be construed to include any "junk yard," "motor vehicle junk business" and "motor vehicle junk yard," as defined in the general statutes of the State of Connecticut. The term shall also include any place of storage or deposit, whether in connection with a business or not, for two (2) or more unregistered, used motor vehicles which are either no longer intended or in condition for legal use on the public highways and shall also include any place, lot or structure of storage or deposit of used parts of motor vehicles, old metals, iron, glass, paper, cordage and other waste materials which on any lot have an aggregate bulk equal to two (2) automobiles. (5-30-86) 
    4.12  Livestock: The term "livestock" shall include one (1) or more horses, ponies, cattle, sheep, goats, pigs or other large animals. 
    4.13  Lot: A "lot" is defined as a parcel of land which is either (1) owned separately from any contiguous parcel as evidenced by fee conveyance recorded in the land records of the Borough of Naugatuck, or (2) is a building lot shown on a subdivision map approved by the borough planning commission and filed in the office of the Naugatuck town clerk. 
    4.14  Lot, corner: A "corner lot" is a "lot" having lot lines formed by the intersection of two (2) streets, whether public or private, and where the interior angle of such intersection is less than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees. A "lot" fronting on a curved street shall also be considered a "corner lot" if the central angle of the curve is less than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees. 
    4.15  Lot area and shape: In determining compliance with minimum lot area and shape requirements of these regulations land subject to easements for drainage facilities and underground public utilities may be included, but no street or highway, easement of vehicular access, private right-of-way for vehicles or easement for aboveground public utility transmission lines may be included. Area[s] consisting of ponds, lakes or marsh[es] shall not be used for compliance with more than twenty-five (25) percent of the minimum lot area requirement. Land in two (2) or more zoning districts may be used to satisfy a minimum lot area requirements provided that the requirement [sic] of the district requiring the largest lot area is met, but no land in a residence district shall be used to satisfy a lot area requirement in any other district. 
    4.16  Modular home: A manufactured dwelling which is assembled in one (1) or more sections on the site, is attached to a permanent foundation with living and sleeping accommodations for permanent occupancy. 
    4.17  Motor home: A self-propelled vehicle which is intended or designed primarily for office work, living quarters or recreational purposes and which is not fixed to a permanent foundation. 
    4.18  Multi-family dwellings: The term "multi-family dwelling" shall mean a dwelling containing three (3) or more dwelling units and shall include apartments, condominiums, cluster housing and all other attached dwellings. (5-30-86) 
    4.19  Nonconforming use, building, structure or lot: See paragraph 44.2 of section 44. 
    4.20  Off-street parking or loading space: See paragraph 42.2 of section 42. 
    4.21  Outside storage: See paragraph 24.6 of section 24. 
    4.22  Property line, rear: A "rear property line" is any property line which is parallel to or within forty-five (45) degrees of being parallel to a street line, except for a lot line that is itself a street line, and except that in the case of a "corner lot," only one (1) lot line shall be considered a "rear property line." 
    4.23  Property line, side: A "side property line" is any property line which is not a "rear property line" or a "street line." 
    4.24  Public water supply: The term "public water supply" shall mean a piped water supply system owned by a public utility or the Borough of Naugatuck. 
    4.25  Scale: Proportion in dimensions between a map and that area being represented. A "one (1) inch equals two hundred-foot" scale shall be less than one (1) inch equals forty-foot, etc. 
    4.26  Sign: See paragraph 43.2 of section 43. 
    4.27  Story: A "story" is that portion of a building between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor, ceiling or roof next above. Attics not used for human occupancy shall not be considered a story. When the ceiling of a basement is four (4) feet or more above the average ground level within ten (10) feet of the building, the basement shall be considered a "story." 
    4.28  Street: A "street" shall mean any borough street or state highway except limited access state highway, or any street shown on a subdivision map approved by the borough planning commission and filed in the office of the Naugatuck town clerk. 
    4.29  Street line: The term "street line" shall mean the right-of-way easement or taking line of any "street" or of any easement of vehicular access or private right-of-way twenty-five (25) feet or more in width. 
    4.30  Street width: The "width" of a "street" shall mean the distance between the "street lines." 
    4.31  Structure: Anything constructed or erected which requires location on the ground, or is attached to something having a location on the ground. 
    4.32  Trailer: Any vehicle designed to be pulled by motor power and which is not permanently secured to a foundation or anchored to the ground. A trailer includes trailers used for human habitation for recreational purposes or as a place in which a person(s) may eat, sleep or congregate. A trailer shall include mobile homes, boat trailers, utility trailers, camping trailers and recreational vehicles. 
    4.33  Small water company: Any person, company or corporation owning, operating, managing, leasing or controlling water from a pond, lake, reservoir, stream, well or distribution system designed to provide water to fifteen (15) to two hundred fifty (250) service connections or twenty-five (25) to one thousand (1,000) persons on a regular basis. (5-30-86) 
    4.34  Watercourses: Rivers, streams, brooks, waterways, lakes, ponds, marshes, swamps, bogs and all other bodies of water, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow through, or border upon this state or any portion thereof, not regulated pursuant to sections 22a-28 to 22a-35, inclusive of the Connecticut General Statutes. 
    4.35  Wetlands: Land, including submerged land, not regulated pursuant to sections 22a-28 to 22a-35, inclusive of the Connecticut General Statutes, which consists of any of the soil types designated as poorly drained, very poorly drained, alluvial, and flood plain by the National Cooperative Soils Survey, as may be amended from time to time, of the Soil Conservation Service of the United Stated Department of Agriculture. 
ARTICLE II. - DISTRICT REQUIREMENTS 

Section 21. - Districts. 
    21.1  Districts: For the purposes of these regulations, the Borough of Naugatuck is hereby divided into the following classes of districts: 
Districts    Map Code Residence R-45 district R-45 Residence R-30 district R-30 Residence R-15 district R-15 Residence R-8 district R-8 Residence RA-1 district RA-1 Residence RA-2 district RA-2 Residence RO-1 district RO-1 Business district #1 B-1 Business district #2 B-2 Business district #3 B-3 Business district #4 B-4 Industrial district #1 I-1 Industrial district #2 I-2 Planned development district PDD appropriately numbered and included in these regulations. Regional shopping center district RSC  
    21.2  District definitions: When making zone changes or extensions of zoning districts, the commission shall be guided by the purposes of the districts set forth below: 
21.2.1  Residence R-45 district. The purpose of the R-45 district is to allow single family residences on forty-five-thousand-square-foot lots. The R-45 district provisions are intended to regulate development that does not require public sewer or public water supply service. The R-45 district provisions are intended to protect water sources as set forth by Public Act 85-279 and to protect delicate environmental areas. 
21.2.2  Residence R-30 district. The purpose of the R-30 district is to allow single family residences on thirty-thousand-square-foot lots. The R-30 district provisions are intended to regulate development that does not require public sewer or public water supply service. The R-30 district provisions are intended to protect water sources as set forth by Public Act 85-279. 
21.2.3  Residence R-15 district. The purpose of the R-15 district is to allow single family residences on a minimum of fifteen-thousand-square-foot lots where public sewer and public water are available. The R-15 district provisions are intended to regulate residential moderate density development. 
21.2.4  Residence R-8 district. The purpose of the R-8 district is to allow single family residences on a minimum of eight-thousand- square-foot lots. The R-8 provisions are intended to regulate higher density development in areas served by public sewer and public water supply service. The R-8 district shall be restricted to those areas already designated R-8 or approved for development as R-8, except that further expansion of R-8 shall be permitted in those areas of the borough that are presently developed in such a manner consistent with R-8 standards and are nonconforming under their existing zoning district designation. The expansion of the R-8 district shall serve exclusively to bring developed single family, higher density, residential areas into or closer to conformity. 
21.2.5  Residence RA-1 district. The purpose of the RA-1 district is to allow single family, two-family, three-family and multi-family dwellings to be developed in areas served by public sewer and public water supply service. The RA-1 provisions are intended to regulate high density multi-family development in areas of Naugatuck most capable of offering urban public services and facilities. The RA-1 districts shall be restricted to those areas already designated RA-1 or approved for development as RA-1, except that further expansion of the RA-1 shall be permitted in those areas of the borough that are presently developed in a manner consistent with RA-1 standards and are nonconforming under their existing zoning district designation. The expansion of the RA-1 district shall serve exclusively to bring developed high density areas and/or multiple family residential areas into or closer to conformity. 
21.2.6  Residence RA-2 district. The purpose of the RA-2 district is to allow two-family, three-family and multi-family dwellings to be developed in areas served by public sewer and public water supply service. The RA-2 provisions are intended to regulate moderate density multi-family development. 
21.2.7  Residence office RO-1. The purpose of the RO-1 district is to allow single family, two-family, three-family and multi-family dwellings and professional, commercial or business offices in areas served by public sewer and public water supply service. The purpose of RO-1 is to allow high density mixed residential and office use adjoining the core area of the borough. 
21.2.8  Business district #1. The purpose of the B-1 district is to allow general commercial and office development in designated areas located on core area streets with adequate off-street parking and at higher urban densities of development. Area must have pedestrian access walkways. 
21.2.9  Business district #2. The purpose of the B-2 district is to allow general commercial and office development in suitable locations for automotive and drive-in type establishments which serve the needs of motorists. The B-2 district provisions are intended to provide general commercial development along arterial streets of Naugatuck. 
21.2.10  Business district #3. The purpose of the B-3 district is to allow neighborhood oriented commercial services. The B-3 district provisions allow for smaller-scale development and exclude motor vehicle service repair stations. 
21.2.11  Business district #4. The purpose of the B-4 district is to allow low intensity commercial development and to serve as a transitional zone between residential and existing higher intensity commercial districts. 
21.2.12  Industrial district #1. The purpose of the I-1 district is to provide for the location of heavy industry. The I-1 district is also suitable for the open storage of goods, heavy commercial activities and freight terminals. 
21.2.13  Industrial district #2. The purpose of the I-2 district is to provide suitable locations for light industry, wholesaling, warehousing and research laboratories in a lower density atmosphere. Light industry includes activities that create minimal levels of noise, air pollution, and water pollution, and is generally involved in secondary or tertiary manufacturing, assembling, packaging, fabrication or treatment of goods and merchandise. 
21.2.14  Planned development district. A planned development district is a class of districts established in accordance with section 33. 
21.2.15  Flood plain districts. A flood plain district is a class of district in addition to and overlapping one (1) or more of the other districts. For purposes of these regulations, the flood plain district shall include all areas of special flood hazard, designated as zones A1-A30, zone B and floodway areas as shown on the maps entitled: "Flood Insurance Rates Map, Borough of Naugatuck, Connecticut," prepared by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, Federal Insurance Study for the Borough of Naugatuck. Said maps and any amendments thereto are hereby declared to be a part of these regulations and shall be on file in the town clerk's office. 
21.2.16  Regional shopping center district. The purpose of the RSC district is to provide suitable locations for major commercial development subject to the special standards in section 32.11. 
Section 22. - Zoning map. 
    22.1  Map: The boundaries of the districts specified in section 21 hereby established as shown on a map entitled "Zoning Map of the Borough of Naugatuck, Connecticut," dated May 4, 1983 including any special maps and boundary descriptions supplementary thereto and any amendments thereof, which map is hereby declared to be a part of these regulations and is herein referred to as "zoning map." 
    22.2  Interpretation of map: Where a question arises as to exact boundaries of a district shown on the zoning map, the zoning commission shall by resolution determine the boundaries, giving due consideration, among other factors, to the indicated location of the boundary on the zoning map, the scale of the zoning map and the expressed intent and purposes of these regulations. 
    22.3  Extension of use: Where the boundary of a district divides a lot, the existence of which lot is evidenced by deed or deeds recorded in the land records of the Borough of Naugatuck on the effective date of these regulations or on the effective date of any amendments of these regulations establishing such boundary, the borough planning commission may grant a special permit to authorize a use of land, buildings and other structures permitted in one (1) district for a distance of not more than fifty (50) feet in accordance with the provisions of section 32. 
Section 23. - Permitted uses. 
    23.1  Schedule A: "Schedule A-Permitted Uses" is hereby declared to be a part of these regulations and is herein referred to as "schedule A." Land, buildings and other structures in any district may be used for one (1) or more of the uses, and no other, specified in schedule A as permitted in the district. Uses in schedule A are permitted or prohibited in accordance with the following designation and procedure: 
"P" means a use permitted in the district as a matter of right; 
"S" means a use permitted subject to the administrative site plan review by the Naugatuck planning or zoning commission as provided in section 37; 
"SP" means a use permitted in the district, subject to the securing of a special permit from the borough planning commission in accordance with section 32; 
"X" means a use prohibited in the district. 
    23.2  Regulated activities: The development to which this section applies includes any of the following activities: 
23.2.1 To erect, construct, reconstruct, move, enlarge, or alter any structure or part thereof; or 
23.2.2 To use or occupy or arrange or design for use or occupancy any land or structure or part thereof; or 
23.2.3 To do any grading preparatory to any of the activities in section[s] 23.2.1 through 23.2.2; or 
23.2.4 To do any removal of earth materials. 
    23.3  Prohibited uses: Any use not specified in schedule A as permitted is prohibited. To further assist in the interpretation of schedule A, the following uses, the listing of which is not intended to be exhaustive, are specifically prohibited: 
23.3.1 The use or occupancy of a trailer or tent as a permanent dwelling. 
23.3.2 The outdoor storage in any residence district of any unregistered motor vehicle. 
23.3.3 The outdoor accumulation or storage of trash, rubbish, debris, building materials, inoperable motor vehicles, parts of motor vehicles or construction equipment in such a manner as to (1) be offensive to the sight of the general public or to adjoining owners, or (2) depreciate the value of property other than the lot where the accumulation or storage is located. 
SCHEDULE A 
PART A-RESIDENTIAL AND RELATED USES 
P = Permitted SP = Special Permit X = Not Permitted S = Site Plan  
PERMITTED USES R-45 R-30 R-15 R-8 RA-1 RA-2 RO-1 B-1 B-2 B-3 B-4 I-1 I-2 RSC A-1. A single detached dwelling for one (1) family and not more than one (1) such dwelling per lot. P P P P P X P X X X P X X X A-2. Dwellings containing two (2) dwelling units. X X X X P P P X X X X X X X A-3. Dwellings containing three (3) or more dwelling units. X X X X SP SP SP SP X X X X X X A-4. A professional or business office in a dwelling unit, subject to the following conditions: P P P P P P P P P P P P P X a. The person or persons conducting the office shall reside in the dwelling unit, and there shall be no more than two (2) nonresident persons engaged in the conduct of the office. X b. The office shall not impair the residential character of the premises, and there shall be no evidence of the office outside the dwelling unit except permitted signs. P P P P P P P P P P P P P X c. The floor area used for the office shall not exceed one third of the floor area of the dwelling unit. X d. The portion of the dwelling unit used as an office shall be located on the ground level. X e. The office shall not generate excessive vehicular traffic. X A-5. Customary home occupations in a dwelling unit, including home industries and service occupations, subject to the following conditions: P P P P SP SP SP SP P P P P P X a. The person or persons conducting the occupation shall reside in the dwelling unit, and there shall be no more than two (2) nonresident persons in the conduct of the occupation. X b. The occupation shall not impair the residential character of the premises, and there shall be no evidence of the occupation outside the dwelling unit except permitted signs. P P P P SP SP SP SP P P P P P X c. The floor area used for the conduct of the occupation shall not exceed one third of the floor area of the dwelling unit. X d. On-the-premises sales shall be limited to products created entirely on the premises, and any display of such goods shall be housed in the dwelling or in a structure accessory thereto and shall not be visible from the street or from another lot. X e. The occupation shall not cause excessive traffic. X A-6. The letting of rooms and/or the furnishing of board in a dwelling unit to a total of not more than three (3) persons subject to the following conditions: P P P P P P P P P P P P P X a. The person or persons letting the rooms and/or furnished board shall reside in the dwelling unit. X b. The letting of rooms shall not include the provisions of cooking facilities for such rooms but may include sharing of the cooking facilities of the dwelling. X c. No accessory building shall be used for letting of rooms or furnishing of board. X A-7. Farms, truck gardens, forestry, the keeping of livestock and poultry and nurseries (including greenhouses incidental thereto) subject to the following conditions: P P P P P P P P P P P P P X a. No livestock, poultry or rabbits shall be kept on a lot of less than three (3) acres and any buildings, enclosures, feed yards or runs therefor shall be located not less than one hundred (100) feet from any property or street line, except that not more than five (5) poultry or five (5) rabbits or a combination totaling five (5) may be kept in an enclosure on a lot with a dwelling. X b. In Residence Districts, any greenhouse shall be located not less than one hundred (100) feet from any property or street line. P P P P P P P P P P P P P X A-7.1. Stands for the display and sale of farm, truck garden, forestry and nursery produce grown on the premises, provided that such stand does not exceed two hundred (200) square feet in area and is located not less than twenty (20) feet from any property or street line. SP SP SP SP X X X P P P P P P X A-8. Commercial kennels, livery and boarding stables and riding schools, subject to the following conditions: X a. The use shall be located on a lot of not less than four (4) acres. SP SP SP SP X X X X SP X X X SP X b. Dogs shall be kept in buildings, enclosures or runs located not less than one hundred fifty (150) feet from property or street line. X c. Any building, enclosure or feed yard for livestock shall be located not less than one hundred (100) feet from any property or street line. X  
SCHEDULE A 
PART B - COMMUNITY FACILITIES AND SERVICES 
P = Permitted SP = Special Permit X = Not Permitted S = Site Plan  
PERMITTED USES R-45 R-30 R-15 R-8 RA-1 RA-2 RO-1 B-1 B-2 B-3 B-4 I-1 I-2 RSC B-1. Buildings, uses and facilities of the Borough of Naugatuck. SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP X B-2. Buildings, uses and facilities of the State of Connecticut, Federal Government or any other government unit. SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP X B-3. Churches and places of worship, parish halls, schools, colleges, universities, educational, religious, philanthropic and charitable institutions, membership clubs, lodges, community houses. X X X X X X SP SP SP SP SP SP SP X B-3.1. The following uses when not conducted as a business or for profit: Churches and places of worship, parish halls, schools, colleges, universities, educational, religious, philanthropic and charitable institutions, membership clubs, lodges, community houses, nature preserves, wildlife sanctuaries, and recreation facilities. SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP X B-4. Cemeteries. SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP X B-5. Day nurseries and child day care centers. SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP X B-6. Summer day camp, excluding furnishing of rooms. SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP X B-7. Golf, tennis, swimming or similar clubs, whether operated as a business or for profit or not, including customary accessory services and eating facilities incidental to the conduct of a club, but not including a commercial golf driving range or miniature golf. SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP X B-8. Hospitals, convalescent homes, nursing homes and sanitaria licensed by the State of Connecticut, subject to the following conditions: a. The use shall be served by public water supply and by borough sanitary sewers. SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP X b. The use shall be located on a lot containing not less than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet for each patient accommodation. B-9. Public utility company electric, gas and telephone substations, switching stations, equipment buildings and maintenance and service facilities. X X X X X X X S S S S S S X B-9.1. Public utility company electric, gas and telephone substations, switching stations and equipment buildings, excluding maintenance and service facilities and provided that there is no outside storage yard or outside storage of supplies. SP SP SP SP SP SP SP S S S S S S X B-10. Public utility company electric power plants and generating facilities and gas storage. X X X X X X X X X X X SP X X B-11. Public utility company water supply reservoirs, wells, pump stations, storage facilities and treatment facilities. SP SP SP SP SP SP SP P P S S S S X B-12. Transmission and communication towers in excess of the maximum permitted height of buildings or structures. SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP X  
SCHEDULE A 
PART C - COMMERCIAL USES 
P = Permitted SP = Special Permit X = Not Permitted S = Site Plan  
PERMITTED USES R-45 R-30 R-15 R-8 RA-1 RA-2 RO-1 B-1 B-2 B-3 B-4 I-1 I-2 RSC C-1. Stores and other buildings and structures where goods are sold or service is rendered primarily at retail, except as may be limited by the listing or similar uses in Part C of this schedule. X X X X X X X S S S X S X X C-1.1. Stores and other buildings and structures where goods are sold or service is rendered at retail when accessory and subordinate to another permitted use on the same lot. X X X X X X X S S X X S S X C-1.2. Stores and other buildings and structures where goods are sold or service is rendered at retail when each use, permitted herein, occupies not more than ten thousand (10,000) square feet of floor area. X X X X X X X S S S X S S X C-2. Business and professional, banks and other financial institutions, medical and dental clinics. X X X X X X SP S S X S S S X C-2.1. Business and professional, banks and other financial institutions, medical and dental clinics when each use permitted herein occupies not more than ten thousand (10,000) square feet of floor area. X X X X X X SP S S S S S S X C-3. Undertaker's establishments. X X X X X X SP S S X SP X X X C-4. Veterinary hospitals. X X X X X X X S S X SP S S X C-5. Restaurants and other food and beverage service establishments. (See C-5.1 and C-5.2) X X X X X X X S S X X X X X C-5.1. Restaurants and other food and beverage service establishments where customers are served only when seated at tables or counters and at least three-quarters of the customer seats are located within an enclosed building. Such uses may include a food take-out service incidental to the primary permitted use but shall not include establishments where customers are served in motor vehicles or served primarily at food take-out counters. X X X X X X X S S X X S X X C-5.2. Restaurants and other food and beverage establishments where customers are served only when seated at tables within an enclosed building when occupying not more than ten thousand (10,000) square feet of floor area. Such uses may include a food take-out service incidental to the primary permitted use but shall not include establishments where customers are served in motor vehicles or served primarily at food take-out counters. X X X X X X X S S S X S S X C-6. Hotels and motels, restaurants and recreation facilities accessory and subordinate thereof. X X X X X X X S S X X S S X C-7. Indoor theaters and assembly halls. X X X X X X X S S X X SP SP X C-7.1. Indoor theaters and assembly halls when accessory and subordinate to another permitted use on same lot. X X X X X X X S S X X S X X C-8. Bowling alleys, billiard or pool halls and indoor commercial recreation businesses. X X X X X X X S S X X S X X C-9. Outdoor theaters, golf driving ranges, skating rinks and other commercial outdoor recreation businesses. X X X X X X X X S X X X X X C-10. Motor vehicle service stations, motor vehicle repair garages including automobile, truck trailer and farm equipment, repairing, painting and upholstering, establishments for motor vehicle washing and establishments for the sale of new or used automobiles, trucks, trailers or farm equipment or the rental thereof. X X X X X X X X S X X S X X C-10.1. Motor vehicle service stations having no repair services or having only a limited repairer's license issued by the State of Connecticut. X X X X X X X S S X X S X X C-10.2. Motor vehicle repair garages including automobile truck, trailer and farm equipment repairing when accessory and subordinate to another permitted use on the same lot. X X X X X X X S S X X S S X C-11. Commercial and nonaccessory off-street parking facilities. X X X X X X X S S X X S S X C-12. Painting, plumbing, electrical, woodworking, sheetmetal, blacksmith, welding, tire recapping, machine and other trades shops. X X X X X X X X X X X S S X C-12.1. Painting, plumbing, electrical, woodworking, sheetmetal, blacksmith, welding, tire recapping, machine and other trades shops when occupying not more than five thousand (5,000) square feet of floor area. X X X X X X X S S X X S S X C-13. Printing establishments and binderies. X X X X X X X X S X X S S X C-13.1. Printing establishments and binderies when occupying not more than five thousand (5,000) square feet of floor area. X X X X X X X S S X X S S X C-14. Warehousing and wholesale businesses, commercial storage, sale and distribution of heating fuel. X X X X X X X X S X X S S X C-15. Freight and materials trucking businesses and terminals, bus maintenance terminals. X X X X X X X X S X X S S X C-15.1. Freight and materials trucking businesses and terminals when accessory and subordinate to another permitted use on the same lot. X X X X X X X S S X X S S X C-16. Lumber and building materials yards, building contractors' yards. X X X X X X X X S X X S X X C-17. Manufacture, processing or assembling of goods, research laboratories. X X X X X X X X X X X S S X C-17.1. Manufacture, processing or assembling of goods, when accessory and subordinate to another permitted use on the same lot and when located within an enclosed building. X X X X X X X S S X SP S S X C-17.2. Research laboratories provided that there is no manufacture, processing or assembling of goods except as incidental to research. X X X X X X X S S X SP S S X C-18. Bulk storage of cement and petroleum products, concrete mixing plants. X X X X X X X X X X X S X X C-19. Junk yards when conducted entirely within an enclosed building when accessory to another permitted use on that lot. X X X X X X X X X X X SP SP X C-20. Railroad rights-of-way, passenger stations and services. S S S S S S S S S S S S S X C-21. Signs as provided in section 43. P P P P P P P P P P P P P X C-22. Regional shopping center. X X X X X X X X X X X X X SP  
SCHEDULE A 
PART D - ACCESSORY USES table below for 3 column. ms 205 
P = Permitted SP = Special Permit X = Not Permitted S = Site Plan  
PERMITTED USES R-45 R-30 R-15 R-8 RA-1 RA-2 RO-1 B-1 B-2 B-3 B-4 I-1 I-2 USES D-1. Accessory uses customary with and incidental to the aforesaid permitted uses, subject to the securing of a special permit or variance, if required for such permitted uses and subject to the following additional standards and conditions applicable in residence districts. a. The accessory use shall be located on the same lot with the permitted use to which it is accessory. P P P P P P P P P P P P P X b. Accessory uses may include off-street parking spaces and private garages. c. No part of a lot shall be used for vehicular access to a use permitted only in a business or industrial district.  
SCHEDULE A 
PART E - TEMPORARY USES 
P = Permitted SP = Special Permit X = Not Permitted S = Site Plan  
PERMITTED USES R-45 R-30 R-15 R-8 RA-1 RA-2 RO-1 B-1 B-2 B-3 B-4 I-1 I-2 RSC E-1. The use of a trailer as a temporary dwelling unit for a maximum period of six (6) months during rebuilding of structure destroyed by fire or an act of God with written authorization of the Zoning Enforcement Officer stating the expiration of approval. P P P P P P P P P P P P P X E-1.1. One extension of the use of a trailer as permitted in E-1 for an additional maximum period of six (6) months provided that the construction is not complete, but is being diligently carried out on a regular basis. SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP X  
Section 24. - Area, location and bulk standards. 
    24.1  Schedule B: "Schedule B-Standards" is hereby declared to be a part of these regulations. 
    24.2  Lot area, shape and frontage: Each lot shall have at least the minimum area as specified in schedule B. Each lot to be used for a dwelling containing two (2) or more dwelling units shall have at least the minimum area per dwelling unit specified in schedule B. Each lot shall be of such shape that a square with the minimum dimension specified in schedule B will fit on the lot, and in residence districts some portion of such square shall lie within less than the required building setback distance from a street line. Each lot shall have the minimum frontage on a street specified in schedule B. (See section 24.10, buildable lot standards.) 
24.2.1  Exceptions: The requirements of paragraph 24.2 shall not be construed to prohibit the following: 
a.  Condominium ownership of a building or buildings meeting the requirements of such paragraph, the requirements of ownership of a portion of a building and its related lot provided that a special permit therefor has been granted by the borough zoning commission in accordance with section 32 and a subdivision map therefor has been approved in accordance with the standards of the subdivision regulations and the zoning regulations of the Borough of Naugatuck and recorded in the land records of the Borough of Naugatuck. 
a.  Interior lots provided that all requirements of paragraphs 24.9 are met. 
[Any submittal for development on property solely serviced by private accessways or intended to be a closed private development shall not be presented to any borough land use board unless factual proof is submitted in writing that these properties shall not receive any borough services (excluding fire and police protection)]. 
    24.3  Height: No building or other structure shall exceed the number of stories and/or the maximum height, whichever is less, as specified in schedule B. This limitation, however, shall not apply to the following when not used for human occupancy: spires, ornamental cupolas, towers[,] chimneys, flagpoles and silos as well as such features plus tanks and elevators, heating, ventilating, air conditioning and similar equipment that are located on the roof of a building and do not occupy more than twenty (20) percent of the area of the roof. 
    24.4  Setbacks: No building or other structure shall extend within less than the minimum distances of any street line, rear property line, other property line or residence district boundary line as specified in schedule B, subject to the following exceptions and additional limitations: 
24.4.1  Signs: Certain permitted signs, as specified in section 43, may extend within lesser distances of property or street line. 
24.4.2  Projections: Pilasters, belt courses, sills, cornices, marquees, canopies, eaves and similar architectural features and fire escapes may project two (2) feet into the area required for setback from a property or street line except that a canvas canopy for a restaurant or funeral home in a business district #1 or #2 may extend from the main entrance to the street line. 
24.4.3  Additional setbacks: In residence districts and business district #1 any portion of a building or other structure, which portion exceeds thirty (30) feet in height, shall be set back from any property or street line by two (2) additional feet for each foot or fraction thereof by which such portion exceeds thirty (30) feet in height. 
24.4.4  Narrow streets: The required setback from a street line of a street having a width of less than fifty (50) feet shall be increased by one-half of the difference between fifty (50) feet and the actual width of the street. 
24.4.5  Arterial streets: No building or other structure shall extend within less than fifty (50) feet of the street designated on the zoning map for "arterial street setbacks." 
24.4.6  Railroads and channel lines: In business and industrial districts, no setback is required from a railroad right-of-way or an established channel line. 
24.4.7  Guard houses: In industrial districts, a building not exceeding one hundred fifty (150) square feet in floor area and a height of fifteen (15) feet and used solely as a guard house, gate house or security building may extend to within ten (10) feet of any street line. 
24.4.8  Form of ownership: The requirements of paragraph 24.4 shall not be construed to prohibit condominium ownership of a building or buildings, the requirements of paragraph 24.4 shall not be construed to prohibit other ownership of a portion of a building and its related lot provided that a special permit therefor has been granted by the borough planning commission in accordance with section 32 and a subdivision map therefor has been approved by such commission in accordance with the standards of the subdivision regulations of the Borough of Naugatuck and recorded in the land records of the Borough of Naugatuck. 
24.4.9  Accessory buildings in residence districts: An unattached accessory building or structure, not exceeding fifteen (15) feet in height and five hundred seventy-six (576) square feet in floor area, may extend as follows: 
a.  In residence R-8, RA-1 and RA-2 districts, to within five (5) feet of any property line other than a street line; and 
b.  In residence R-45, R-30 and R-15 districts, to within ten (10) feet of any property line other than a street line. 
24.4.10  Fences, walls and terraces: The required setback shall not apply to fences or walls six (6) feet or less in height or to necessary retaining walls or to unroofed terraces, but no fence, wall or terrace shall be located within the right-of-way of any street. 
24.4.11 Reception/transmission devices. Any devices (antennae) for the reception or transmission of radio or television "signals" shall be considered to be a structure and shall conform to all the setback requirements for a structure applicable in the district that the structure (per section 24, schedule B), is located in, except that at no time shall a receiving/transmitting device be located less than ten (10) feet from a side or rear property line. The height of said device shall be restricted according to Federal Communications Commission (FCC) regulations except that in no case shall any adjacent property be subjected to damage by the possible dislodgement of the reception/transmission device from its mooring. 
24.4.12 Pools, (recreational, swimming, hot tubs). Any aboveground or inground pool of five hundred seventy-six (576) square feet or less shall be considered accessory an [sic] building and subject to the setback requirements of section 24.4.9. Any pool in excess of five hundred seventy-six (576) square feet shall be subject to requirements of section 24, schedule B, number 6, regarding minimum setbacks. 
    24.5  Coverage and bulk: The aggregate lot coverage of all buildings and other structures on any lot shall not exceed the percentage of the lot area as specified in schedule B, and the total floor area of all buildings and other structures on any lot, excluding basements, shall not exceed the percentage of the lot area as specified in schedule B, which coverage and floor area provisions are subject to the following exceptions and additional limitations: 
24.5.1  Form of ownership: The requirements of paragraph 24.5 shall not be construed to prohibit condominium ownership of a building or buildings, the requirements of paragraph 24.5 shall not be construed to prohibit other ownership of a portion of a building and its related lot provided that a special permit therefor has been granted by the borough planning commission in accordance with section 32 and a subdivision map therefor has been approved by such commission in accordance with the standards of the subdivision regulations of the Borough of Naugatuck and recorded in the land records of the Borough of Naugatuck. 
24.5.2  Business district #1: In business district #1 the limitations on total floor area shall not apply to floor area in or on a building or structure used for off-street parking or loading spaces. 
    24.6  Outside storage: Outside storage, which is hereby defined to be the outside storage or display of merchandise, supplies, machinery and other materials and/or the outside manufacture, processing or assembling of goods, but excluding areas for parking of registered motor vehicles in daily use, shall be limited as follows: 
24.6.1  Business districts #1, #3 and #4: There shall be no outside storage areas in business districts #1, #3 and #4. 
24.6.2  Business district #2: In business district #2, outside storage areas shall not extend into the area required for setback from a street line or residence district boundary line, or any other property line. 
24.6.3  Industrial district #2: In industrial district #2, outside storage areas shall not extend into the area required for setback from a property line, street line, shall not exceed fifteen (15) percent of the lot area and shall be enclosed (except for necessary access drives) by buildings and/or by fences, walls, embankments or even evergreen shrubs or trees so as to screen the storage area from view from any other lot or from any street. 
    24.7  Site development and landscaping: On any lot that is to be used in business or industrial districts, site development and landscaping shall be established as follows: 
24.7.1  Off-street parking and loading: All off-street parking and loading spaces shall conform to the standards of section 42. 
24.7.2  Driveways: There shall be no more than two (2) driveways entering any lot from any one (1) street, except that there may be one (1) additional driveway for each additional three hundred (300) feet of lot frontage, or fraction thereof, in excess of three hundred (300) feet. Driveways shall not exceed thirty (30) feet in width at the street line unless a greater width is required by the State of Connecticut. 
24.7.3  Business districts: In business districts no part of the area required for setback from a residence district boundary line shall be used for off-street parking or loading. A strip of land, not less than ten (10) feet in width in business district #1 and not less than twenty (20) feet is [in] width in business district #2 and business district #3, along and adjacent to any residence district boundary line shall be suitably landscaped with lawns and with trees and/or shrubs. 
24.7.4  Industrial district #2: In industrial district #2 no part of the area required for setback from a residence district boundary line shall be used for off-street parking or loading spaces or driveways in connection therewith. No part of the area required for setback from a street line shall be used for off-street loading spaces and no more than fifty (50) percent of such area shall be used for driveways and/or off-street parking, the area required for setback from a street line shall be suitably landscaped with lawns, trees and/or shrubs, washed gravel or ornamental brick or stone pavement except for sidewalks and permitted driveways and off-street parking spaces. Along and adjacent to any residence district boundary line a strip of land not less than thirty (30) feet in width shall be left in its natural state if already wooded or shall be landscaped with lawns and/or shrubs. 
    24.8  Courts and windows: In addition to the setback requirements specified in paragraph 24.4, rooms used for human occupancy in a dwelling containing two (2) or more dwelling units shall have windows which open onto yards, setback areas, courts or other open spaces, except that windowless, interior kitchens and bathrooms shall be permitted. The least horizontal dimension of any court between opposing walls shall be not less than twice the average height of such opposing walls. In the case of a court formed by walls on three (3) sides and open on the fourth side, the distance between the open end and the opposite wall shall not exceed the distance between the other two (2) walls, unless such latter distance is greater than fifty (50) feet. On any lot, no window in one (1) dwelling unit shall face the window of another dwelling unit at a distance of less than twenty-five (25) feet. In any lot, no dwelling shall be nearer to another dwelling in another structure than the average height of such dwellings. 
    24.9  Accessways: In residential districts, no certificate of zoning compliance will be issued for the construction of a dwelling or building or the conversion of any existing accessory building used in connection therewith, unless the required minimum street frontage for the district involved, as set forth in schedule B shall be upon a public street, except that where a parcel of land is of sufficient area to afford division thereof into two (2) lots, of which [one] does not have the required minimum street frontage for the district involved on a public street, a certificate of zoning compliance may be issued for the lot not having the required minimum street frontage for the district involved on a public street, provided that all of the following requirements are met: 
24.9.1 That the lot has access to a public street by means of an accessway serving only that lot not having the required minimum width for the district involved and such accessway is not less than thirty (30) feet in horizontal width. 
24.9.2 The accessway has a travelway of not less than eighteen (18) feet in width and is constructed with a graveled base of at least eight (8) inches on rolled subgrade. 
24.9.3 Such interior lot shall conform to one and one-half (11/2) times the minimum lot area for the district involved, without including the area of such accessway. The accessway shall be that portion of the lot leading to the street, which has less than one-half the required street frontage for that district in which the lot is located. 
24.9.4 No accessway shall be included in determining the minimum dimensions on the square for the district involved of such interior lot. 
24.9.5 The minimum setback from any property line shall be equal to or greater than the minimum setback from the street for the district involved. 
24.9.6 Accessways serving an interior lot shall be permitted as follows: 
a.  In residence R-45, R-30 and R-15 districts provided that a subdivision or resubdivision therefor has been approved by the borough planning commission in accordance with the subdivision regulations of the Borough of Naugatuck and the endorsed map recorded in the land records of the Borough of Naugatuck. 
b.  In residence R-8, RA-1 and RA-2 districts provided that a special permit therefor has been approved by the borough planning commission in accordance with the subdivision regulations of the Borough of Naugatuck and the endorsed map recorded in the land records of the Borough of Naugatuck. 
c.  In residence R-45, R-30, R-15, R-8, RA-1 and RA-2 districts where the division of a tract or parcel of land does not constitute a subdivision or resubdivision, as defined in the general statutes of the State of Connecticut, provided that a special permit therefor has been granted by the borough planning commission in accordance with section 32. 
24.9.7 Connection to public sanitary sewer and/or public water is required where an accessway, serving such interior lot, adjoins a street having such facilities. 
24.9.8 Each such interior lot shall be restricted to single family residence and such interior lot shall not be further subdivided or resubdivided. 
    24.10 Buildable lot standards: Criteria for establishing buildable lot standards shall be subject to the following: 
1.  Schedule B #1 and #1.1: In computing minimum lot area any combination of: ponds, marshes, wetlands and slopes in excess of thirty-percent gradient, shall not constitute more than twenty (20) percent of the minimum lot area, for the purpose of determining minimum lot size. However, in no case shall any ponds, marshes, or wetlands exceed ten (10) percent of the minimum lot size requirement. 
2.  Schedule B #7: In computing maximum lot coverage for all zones, ponds, marshes, wetlands, waterbodies and slopes in excess of thirty-percent gradient (subsection 24.10[1] ), shall be excluded from the determination of lot coverage. 
3.  See section 31.2.5, subdivisions. 
SCHEDULE B 
  
DISTRICTS - MAP CODE STANDARDS R-45 R-30 R-15 R-8 RA-1 RA-2 RO-1 RSC 1. MINIMUM LOT AREA (IN SQUARE FEET) 1 (SINGLE UNIT ONLY) 45,000 30,000 15,000 8,000 5,000 N/A 5,000 See 
32.11.2 1.1 MINIMUM SQUARE FOOTAGE OF LOT AREA FOR EACH DWELLING UNIT IN EXCESS OF ONE (1) (IN SQUARE FEET) N/A N/A N/A N/A 5,000 10,000 5,000 N/A 2. MINIMUM DIMENSION OF SQUARE ON LOT 130;ft; 110;ft; 95;ft; 70;ft; 40;ft; 70;ft; 40;ft; N/A 3. MINIMUM STREET FRONTAGE FOR EACH LOT 130;ft; 110;ft; 95;ft; 70;ft; 40;ft; 70;ft; 40;ft; 100;ft; 4. MAXIMUM NUMBER OF STORIES FOR A BUILDING 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3+ 5. MAXIMUM HEIGHT OF A BUILDING OR STRUCTURE 40;ft; 40;ft; 40;ft; 40;ft; 40;ft; 40;ft; 40;ft; 60;ft; 6. MINIMUM SETBACKS: 6.1 FROM STREET LINE OR LINES*** 40;ft; 40;ft; 30;ft; 25;ft; 25;ft; 25;ft; 25;ft; 75;ft; 6.2 FROM REAR PROPERTY LINE 40;ft; 30;ft; 30;ft; 30;ft; 25;ft; 25;ft; 25;ft; 75;ft; 6.3 FROM SIDE OR OTHER PROPERTY LINE** 30;ft; 20;ft; 20;ft; 10;ft; 10;ft; 10;ft; 10;ft; 75;ft; 6.4 FROM RESIDENCE DISTRICT BOUNDARY LINE, ADDITIONAL SETBACK**** 
FROM R-45; R-30; R-15 N/A N/A N/A N/A *35;ft; *35;ft; *35;ft; 75;ft; 7. MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE AS PERCENT OF LOT AREA 2 10% 15% 20% 25% 25% 20% 40% 25% 8. MAXIMUM FLOOR AREA AS PERCENT OF LOT AREA 20% 30% 40% 50% 50% 40% 100% N/A 9. MINIMUM NATURAL COVERAGE AS PERCENT OF LOT AREA N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 25%++ 10. SETBACK FROM WETLANDS OR 
WATERCOURSE 50;ft; 50;ft; 50;ft; 50;ft; 50;ft; 50;ft; 50;ft; 50;ft;  
1 See also Section[s] 24.9 and 24.10 
2 See also [Section] 24.10 #2 
   *To be within RA-1; RA-2; RO-1 Zones 
  **Not applicable when said line is also a street line 
 ***See Section 32.12.1(f)(1) for Elderly Continuing Care Facility and/or Elderly Housing 
****See Section 32.12.1(f)(2) for Elderly Continuing Care Facility and/or Elderly Housing 
N/A=Not Applicable 
 ;sd;Excluding all or any portion of any parking garages or decks as stories 
;sd;;sd;For the purposes hereof, natural coverage shall include landscaping coverage 
  
DISTRICTS - MAP CODE STANDARDS B-1 B-2 B-3 B-4 I-1 I-2 1. MINIMUM LOT AREA (IN SQUARE FEET) 1 5,000 20,000 20,000 30,000 20,000 40,000 1.1 MINIMUM ADDITIONAL LOT AREA FOR EACH DWELLING UNIT IN EXCESS OF ONE (1) (IN SQUARE FEET) 1,000 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2. MINIMUM DIMENSION OF SQUARE ON THE LOT 50;ft; 100;ft; 100;ft; 100;ft; 100;ft; 125;ft; 3. MINIMUM STREET FRONTAGE FOR EACH LOT 40;ft; 85;ft; 100;ft; 100;ft; 50;ft; 50;ft; 4. MAXIMUM NUMBER OF STORIES FOR A BUILDING 6 3 2 2 6 3 5. MAXIMUM HEIGHT OF BUILDING OR STRUCTURE 60;ft; 40;ft; 30;ft; 30;ft; 60;ft; 40;ft; 6. MINIMUM SETBACKS: 6.1 FROM STREET LINE OR LINES 10;ft; 25;ft; 25;ft; 50;ft; 25;ft; 50;ft; 6.2 FROM REAR PROPERTY LINE 10;ft; 25;ft; 30;ft; 50;ft; 25;ft; 25;ft; 6.3 FROM SIDE OR OTHER PROPERTY LINE* NONE 15;ft; 30;ft; 30;ft; 15;ft; 20;ft; 6.4 FROM RESIDENCE DISTRICT BOUNDARY LINE ADDITIONAL SETBACK 25;ft; 25;ft; N/A 40;ft; 50;ft; 50;ft; 7. MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE AS PERCENT OF LOT AREA 2 75% 40% 30% 7% 50% 40% 8. MAXIMUM FLOOR AREA AS PERCENT OF LOT AREA 200% 100% 60% 14% 200% 100% 9. MINIMUM NATURAL COVERAGE AS PERCENT OF LOT AREA N/A N/A N/A 50% N/A N/A 10. SETBACK FROM WETLANDS OR WATERCOURSE 50;ft; 50;ft; 50;ft; 50;ft; 50;ft; 50;ft;  
*Not applicable when said line is also a street line 
1 See also Section[s] 24.9 and 24.10 
2 See also [Section] 24.10 #2 
N/A = Not Applicable 
ARTICLE III. - SPECIAL PERMITS AND PLANNED DEVELOPMENT 

Section 31. - Topsoil, sand and gravel. 
    31.1  General: No contours of any land shall be altered by the excavation, removal or relocation of earth, loam, topsoil, sand, gravel, clay, stone or minerals, or by the depositing of any material, natural or otherwise, contours shall be permitted only as a special exception, unless such alteration falls into an exempt classification specified in paragraph 31.2. 
    31.2  Exemptions: The following are specifically exempt from the requirement to obtain a special exception: 
31.2.1  Building construction: Alteration of contours directly related to, necessary for and in conjunction with bona fide construction or alteration of a building or structure, when such construction or alteration is authorized under an approved application for a certificate of zoning compliance, subject to the requirements of paragraph 31.2.6. 
31.2.2  Landscaping and agricultural definitions: For purposes of this section (a), "landscaping operation" shall mean the movement of earth on, from or to a parcel of land which is incidental to and necessary for the intended use of the property; (b) "agricultural operation" shall mean the movement of earth on, from or to a parcel of land which is incidental to and necessary for the use of the property as land upon which crops or foodstuffs may be grown; (c) "parcel of land" shall mean all contiguous pieces of land owned by the applicant. 
31.2.2.1  Landscaping and agriculture: Any bona fide landscaping or agricultural operation as defined in section 31.2.2 shall be subject to the requirements of paragraph 31.2.6. 
31.2.2.2  Earth removal: In the event that a landscaping operation or an agricultural operation as defined in section 31.2.2 should require the removal of earth off premises as well as the movement of earth on premises, then said removal shall not exceed five hundred (500) cubic yards of earthen material nor exceed twenty (20) days in total duration. 
31.2.3  Driveways: Alteration of contours directly related to the necessary and reasonable construction of an accessway or driveway and subject to the requirements of paragraph 31.2.6. 
31.2.4  Backfilling: Removal of unsuitable material and depositing of suitable material for the necessary and reasonable construction or reconstruction of sewage systems, accessways and driveways, subject to the requirements of paragraph 31.2.6. 
31.2.5  Subdivisions: Alteration of contours in accordance with subdivision construction plans and contour maps approved by the borough planning commission, provided that approval was granted within three (3) years preceding such change in contours. 
31.2.5.1  Subdivision: Necessary filling, earth removal, or grading in connection with construction or alteration on a lot in accordance with a subdivision or resubdivision plan involving the removal off the premises of no more than two hundred (200) cubic yards of earthen material per building lot. 
31.2.6  Other requirements: Any operation made exempt from the requirements of this section 31 through inclusion of paragraphs 31.2.1 through 31.2.4 shall not adversely affect adjacent property and shall satisfy the following requirements: 
a.  Natural drainage onto or from adjacent property shall not be adversely affected and natural watercourses shall not be obstructed; 
b.  Elevations at property lines shall not be changed and changes in elevation within ten (10) feet of the property line shall not exceed two (2) feet; and 
c.  Artificial slopes shall not exceed thirty (30) degrees to the horizontal and shall be suitably seeded or planted to prevent erosion. 
    31.3  Application: Application for a special permit shall be submitted in writing to the zoning enforcement officer, shall be accompanied by an application for a certificate of zoning compliance and shall also be accompanied by maps and plans prepared by an engineer or surveyor licensed to practice in the State of Connecticut and showing the following: 
31.3.1 The boundaries of the property where the excavation is proposed and the area to be excavated; 
31.3.2 Existing contours in the area to be excavated and proposed contours after completion of the work, which contours shall be prepared from an actual field or aerial survey, shall be based on a bench mark noted and described on the map and shall be drawn to a scale of not less than one hundred (100) feet to the inch and with a contour interval not to exceed two (2) feet; 
31.3.3 Existing and proposed drainage on the premises; 
31.3.4. Surrounding streets and property lines; 
31.3.5 Principal wooded areas and any rock outcrops; 
31.3.6 Existing and proposed structures on the premises; 
31.3.7 Proposed truck access to the excavation area; 
31.3.8 A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan (see section 35); and 
31.3.9 Certification of soil erosion and sedimentation control plan. (See section 35.) 
Upon receipt, the zoning enforcement officer shall transmit copies of the special permit application and application for a certificate of zoning compliance to the borough planning commission. The commission may require the submission of such additional information, including data on soil conditions, locations and depth or rock ledge and groundwater conditions that it deems necessary to make a reasonable review of the application. 
    31.4  Procedures and approval: Within sixty-five (65) days after receipt of a complete application, the borough planning commission shall hold a public hearing thereon. Notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published in a newspaper having a substantial circulation in the borough at least twice, at intervals of not less than two (2) days, the first not more than fifteen (15) days, nor less than ten (10) days, and the last not less than two (2) days before the date of such hearing. The borough planning commission shall decide upon such application within sixty-five (65) days after the hearing. The applicant may consent in writing to any extension of the time for hearing or decision on the application. The borough planning commission may grant a special permit, subject to appropriate conditions and safeguards, to permit the proposed alteration or contours over a limited period of time, if it shall find that the following conditions and requirements have been met: 
31.4.1 That at all stages of operations, proper drainage shall be provided to prevent the collection and stagnation of water and to prevent harmful effects upon surrounding properties; 
31.4.2 That no sharp declivities, pits, depressions or soil erosion problems will be created, and that no slopes or banks will exceed one (1) foot of vertical rise in two (2) feet or [of] horizontal distance nor exceed whatever lesser slope is necessary to maintain stability under the particular soil conditions; 
31.4.3 That where any excavation, while in process, shall have a depth of ten (10) feet or more and create a slope of more than 1 or 2, there shall be a substantial fence, at least six (6) feet in height, which may have suitable gates. Such fence shall be located fifty (50) feet or more from the edge of the excavation. All operations shall be screened if located near residential areas or highways; such screening shall meet the approval of the commission; 
31.4.4 That the proposed excavation will not impair the future use of the property in accordance with the zoning regulations, and that the slopes and banks will not impair good development and safe use of the property after the excavation; 
31.4.5 That the proposed excavation will not depress land values or adversely affect surrounding property in the neighborhood; 
31.4.6 That there will be no excavation or removal within fifty (50) feet of a property or street line except to an elevation equal with or above grade of the adjoining property or street; 
31.4.7 That there will be no excavation to a depth of less than six (6) feet above any ledge, rock or the natural water table; 
31.4.8 That when excavation and removal operations or either of them are completed, the excavated area shall be steeper than a slope of one (1) foot or [of] vertical rise to three (3) feet of horizontal distance. A layer of arable topsoil, of a quality approved by the borough engineer, shall be spread over the excavated area, except exposed rock surfaces, to a minimum depth of six (6) inches in accordance with the approved contour plan. The area shall be seeded with a perennial rye grass and maintained until the area is stabilized and approved by the commission. 
31.4.9 That no screening, sifting, washing, crushing or other forms of processing shall be conducted upon the premises unless within an industrial district; 
31.4.10 That the portion of access road within the area of operation shall be provided with a dustless surface which shall be maintained in good condition at all times; 
31.4.11 That the proposed truck access will not create safety or traffic hazards; 
31.4.12 That the applicant shall pay an inspection fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) for one (1) acre or less of area to be excavated plus twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each additional acre or fraction thereof to be excavated; 
31.4.13 That the applicant shall post a performance bond with the treasurer of the Borough of Naugatuck, in form and amount approved by the commission, to guarantee faithful performance of the work in accordance with plans as approved and conditions of approval, which bond shall cover a period of time not less than two (2) months beyond the period during which the special exception permit is effective. 
    31.5  Time limit: Each special permit granted under this section shall be valid for a period of two (2) years or for such lesser period requested by the applicant or fixed by the commission. Upon application and after public hearing on due notice, the commission may extend the time period for periods of not more than one (1) year, provided that there exists no violation of the terms of the original special permit. 
    31.6  Enforcement and penalties: As a condition for granting a special permit, the commission may require the applicant to submit periodic reports of progress with excavation or removal including contours and cross sections, prepared and certified by an engineer or land surveyor licensed to practice in the State of Connecticut. If at any time the commission finds that the excavation or removal is not being conducted or cannot be conducted in accordance with plans as approved, the commission may order the applicant to cease operations. 
Section 32. - Special permit. 
    32.1 General. In accordance with the procedures, standards, and conditions hereinafter specified, the borough zoning commission may grant a special permit for the establishment of one (1) or more uses for which a special permit must be secured from the commission as specified in schedule A of these regulations. All requirements of this section are in addition to other requirements applicable, in the district in which the special permit use is to be located. 
    32.2 Special permit objectives. In evaluating a special permit, the zoning commission shall take into consideration the public health, safety and welfare of the public in general, and the immediate neighborhood in particular, and may prescribe reasonable conditions and safeguards to insure the accomplishments of the following objectives: 
32.2.1 Harmony with development: That the proposed use is of such location, size and character that, in general, it will be in harmony with the appropriate and orderly development of the district in which it is proposed to be situated and will not be detrimental to the orderly development of adjacent properties in accordance with the zoning classification of such properties. 
32.2.2 Traffic circulation: That the location and size of such use, the nature and intensity of operations involved in connection therewith, its site layout and its relation to access streets shall be such that both pedestrian and vehicular traffic to and from the use and the assembly of persons in connection therewith will not be hazardous or inconvenient, or incongruous with, any residential district or conflict with the normal traffic of the neighborhood. 
32.2.3 Impact on environment: That the location and size of such use, the nature and intensity of operations involved in connection therewith, and the site layout and development will not have a negative impact on any environmental and natural resource areas on or adjacent to the site or within the neighborhood. 
    32.3 Application. Application for a special permit shall be submitted in writing to the zoning enforcement officer, shall be accompanied by an application for a certificate of zoning compliance and shall also be accompanied by the following: 
32.3.1 Statement of use: A written statement describing the proposed use in sufficient detail to determine compliance with these regulations, five (5) copies shall be submitted; 
32.3.2 See section 37, site plan review, site plan section 37.2.1. 
32.3.3 Architectural plans: Preliminary architectural plans for all proposed buildings, structures and signs, including general exterior elevations, perspective drawings and generalized floor plans and including drawings for proposed signs; four (4) copies shall be prepared by and bear the seal of an architect or professional engineer licensed to practice in the State of Connecticut. 
32.3.4 Inland wetlands report: A written report from the Naugatuck Inland Wetlands Commission indicating its recommendations concerning the impact of development on wetlands property. 
32.3.5 Fire protection report: It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to submit a written report from the Naugatuck fire marshall and the Naugatuck fire commission commenting and/or recommending on fire protection provisions affecting the development or the abutting properties. 
32.3.6 Water pollution control report: If the proposed development is to be dependent upon the existing municipal sewer system, the applicant shall be responsible for the submission of a written report from the Naugatuck Water Pollution Control Board commenting on the availability and timing of sewage disposal services for the proposed development. 
32.3.7 Police report: It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to submit a written report from the Naugatuck police commission commenting and/or recommending on traffic safety and access provisions affecting the development and the surrounding area. 
32.3.8 Architectural and landscaping review board report: Where new buildings, structures or alteration to existing structures are proposed, the applicant shall include with the application the written comments and recommendations of the advisory architectural and landscaping review board concerning site plan, landscaping and architectural design of all buildings and other structures so that they are of such character as to harmonize with the neighborhood and to preserve and improve the appearance and beauty of the community. 
32.3.9 Water company report: If the proposed development is to be dependent upon the existing public water company, the applicant shall be responsible for the submission of a report from the applicable water company commenting on the availability and timing of water services for the proposed development. 
32.3.10 Soil erosion and sedimentation control plan: See section 35, soil erosion and sedimentation control plan. 
32.3.11 Other: The zoning commission may also request the submission of such additional information that it deems necessary in order to decide on the application or waive the requirements of any information deemed unnecessary by a two-thirds vote of the zoning commission. 
32.3.12 Application fee: An application fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
    32.4 Procedure: Upon receipt, the zoning enforcement officer shall transmit copies of the special permit application and application for a certificate of zoning compliance to the borough zoning commission. Within sixty-five (65) days after receipt of a complete application, the zoning commission shall hold a public hearing thereon, providing that the public hearing on said application shall be held on a date that falls after the date of the first regularly scheduled meeting of the zoning commission which follows the date of transmittal of the application from the zoning enforcement officer to the zoning commission. Notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published in the newspaper having a substantial circulation in the borough at least twice, at intervals of not less than two (2) days, the first not more than fifteen (15) days, nor less than two (2) days before the date of such hearing. The borough zoning commission shall render a decision of such application within sixty-five (65) days of the conclusion of such hearing. The commission may approve, approve subject to modification, or disapprove the application. The applicant may consent in writing to one (1) or more extensions of the sixty-five-day time periods specified in this paragraph. Upon receipt of said application for special permit, the zoning commission shall provide the applicant with a sign to be conspicuously posted on the property. Said sign shall indicate the date and time of a public hearing and remain in place until said hearing has been held. 
32.4.1 Referral to planning commission: The planning commission shall, at the first regular meeting of the commission following the transmittal of the application by the zoning enforcement officer, review the application and issue a report to the zoning commission. The failure of the planning commission to report at or prior to the public hearing, shall be taken as an approval of the application. A statement of the planning commission's vote approving or disapproving or proposing modification of such proposal and reasons for the vote shall be publicly read at the public hearing and incorporated into the record of the public hearing. An application disapproved by the planning commission may be adopted by the zoning commission by a vote of not less than four-fifths of all members of the zoning commission. 
    32.5  General considerations: In addition to the general standards and any special standards for particular uses that may be hereinafter specified, the borough zoning commission shall consider the following before acting on any special permit application: 
32.5.1 The size and intensity of the proposed use and the size of the lot on which it is to be located; 
32.5.2 The effect of the proposed use on any adopted plan of development for the borough; 
32.5.3 The capacity of adjacent and feeder streets to accommodate peak traffic loads, and any traffic hazards that may be created by the use; 
32.5.4 The effect upon property values and appearance in the neighborhood, taking into account the topography of the lot and the character, location and height of proposed buildings and structures and the site plan and proposed landscaping; 
32.5.5 The number, location and arrangement of off-street parking and loading spaces and the vehicular access to the lot; 
32.5.6 Fire and police protection needs; 
32.5.7 Water supply, sewage disposal facilities and drainage and erosion problems; 
32.5.8 The availability of recreation areas; 
32.5.9 The effect of the lighting system in terms of location and type of display signs and lighting, loading zones, landscaping and pedestrian walkways; 
32.5.10 The height, location, orientation of main and accessory buildings in relation to other structures in the vicinity; and 
32.5.11 The degree to which the proposed use fosters an energy efficient building layout and landscaping plan through the use of building orientations and vegetation; 
32.5.12 Drainage considerations shall include effects on land which the drainway passes through and also the effects on those off-site areas ultimately receiving said drainage whether within the development or not. 
    32.6  Approval: Subsequent to the public hearing, the borough zoning commission may approve the application or approve it subject to modifications, granting the special permit. In approving the application or approving it subject to all modifications, the commission shall make a finding that all applicable requirements of this section have been met in addition to other requirements applicable in the district in which the special permit use is to be located and that the special permit will be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of these regulations. The grounds for disapproval of a special permit application shall be stated by the borough planning commission in its records. The special permit shall become effective at such time as is fixed by the borough planning commission, provided a copy thereof shall be filed in the office of the Naugatuck town clerk. 
    32.7  General standards: The following general standards shall apply to all special permit uses: 
32.7.1  Access: Provisions shall be made for vehicular access to the lot in such a manner as to avoid undue hazards to traffic and undue traffic congestion on any public highway; 
32.7.2  Neighborhood: The site plan and architectural plans shall be of a character as to harmonize with the neighborhood, to accomplish a transition in character between areas of unlike character, to protect property values and to preserve and enhance the appearance and beauty of the community. 
32.7.3  Plan of development: The site plan and architectural plans shall be in conformance with the purpose and intent of any plan of development adopted by the borough planning commission for the area in which the use is to be located, and the site plan shall provide for appropriate continuation and improvement of streets terminating at the lot where the use is to be located. 
32.7.4  Bond: The zoning commission may authorize the chairman to endorse the record map of approval, if applicable, to permit filing with the town clerk, but such endorsement shall not be executed until all conditions of approval have been met, all required improvements have been completed in accordance with the plans as approved. In lieu of completion of all or part of required improvements prior to endorsement of the record map of approval, the applicant shall execute an agreement and file a bond with the zoning commission to guarantee such completion within two (2) years. The bond shall be in form and amount acceptable to the zoning commission and to the borough attorney, shall be a cash or a savings account bond. 
32.7.5  Release: Before release of any site bond, or before the zoning commission endorses any site map to permit filing with the town clerk when no bond has been posted, the building inspector and borough engineer shall inspect the premises and notify the zoning commission in writing that all work has been completed according to plans. If necessary, the zoning commission shall require an "as-built" site plan from the applicant's engineer or land surveyor, licensed to practice in the State of Connecticut or a certification that all work has been completed according to site plan submitted. 
32.7.6  Certification of erosion and sedimentation control plan: The commission shall certify that the soil erosion and sedimentation control plan complies with the requirements of paragraph 32.3.10 and furthermore, site development shall not begin unless the soil erosion and sedimentation control plan and those control measures and facilities in the plan scheduled for installation prior to site development are installed and functional. All control measures and facilities shall be maintained in effective condition to ensure compliance with the certified plan. (5-30-86) 
    32.8  Additional conditions and safeguards: In granting any special permit the zoning commission shall attach such additional conditions and safeguards as are deemed necessary to protect the neighborhood, such as, but not limited to: 
32.8.1 Requirement of setbacks greater than the minimum required by these regulations; 
32.8.2 Requirement of screening of parking areas or other parts of the premises from adjoining premises or from the street, by walls, fences, planting or other devices as specified by the zoning commission; 
32.8.3 Modification of the exterior features or appearance of any structure where necessary to be in harmony with the surrounding area; 
32.8.4 Limitation of size, number of occupants, methods of time of operation or extent of facilities; 
32.8.5 Regulation of number, design and location of access drives or other traffic features including pedestrian ways; 
32.8.6 Requirement of off-street parking or other special features beyond the minimum required by these regulations or other applicable codes or regulations; 
32.8.7 Regulation of the number, type and location of outdoor lighting facilities; 
32.8.8 Requirement that the proposed use be approved in phases; 
32.8.9 Regulation of the orientation and spacing of buildings; and 
32.8.10 Requirement that a certificate of public convenience approved by the Connecticut department of health services and public utility control commission be demonstrated to the commission whenever the development is to be supplied with water from a small water company. (See section 4.33.)(5-30-86; 5-1-90) 
    32.9 Conditional approval. 
32.9.1 Approval of an application for a special permit under this section shall constitute approval conditional upon completion of the proposed development, in accordance with plans as approved within a period of two (2) years after approval is given. Approval of the application shall become null and void in the event of failure to complete the proposed development within the two-year period. The extension of such period for an additional period not to exceed one (1) year may be granted by the borough zoning commission after public hearing for good cause demonstrated to the satisfaction of the commission. All special permits may be granted subject to appropriate conditions and safeguards necessary to conserve the public health, safety, convenience, welfare and property values in the neighborhood. 
    32.10 Special standards for multi-family dwellings: The following special standards shall apply to particular special permit uses and shall be in addition to the standards found in schedule B of section 24 of these regulations: 
32.10.1 Dwelling containing three (3) or more dwelling units as set forth in schedule A-5 of section 23, permitted uses, subject to the following mandatory conditions: 
(a)  Qualifying standards: No tract of land shall be considered for multiple dwelling units unless it meets the following minimum requirements: 
1.  The tract shall meet the following minimum size requirements: 
B-1 district-7,000 square feet 
RO-1 district-15,000 square feet 
RA-1 district-15,000 square feet 
RA-2 district-30,000 square feet 
2.  The development shall be served by public sewers and public water. 
3.  Minimum frontage requirements for the entire tract shall not be less than one hundred (100) feet. 
(b)  Design standards: The following standards shall apply to the design and development of multiple dwelling units. 
1.  Maximum density: The maximum density shall be in accordance with schedule B, section 24 of these regulations. 
2.  Building separation: All principal buildings shall be a minimum fifty (50) feet from all other principal buildings. 
3.  Off-street parking: Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with section 42.5. Off-site parking within a three-hundred-foot radius of site may be provided in the B-1, RA-1 and RO-1 districts, if the off-site parking area is maintained in common ownership with the dwellings. No parking shall extend within less than fifteen (15) feet from any dwelling. 
4.  Setbacks: As per section 24, in B-1, RO-1 and RA-1. In RA-2, no structure or parking area shall extend within one hundred fifty (150) feet of any property line. 
5.  Two accessways mandated: Any development providing six (6) or more units and having on-site parking, shall provide a minimum of two (2) accessways to a public street. 
6.  Maximum floor area: The maximum floor area of dwellings and buildings shall not exceed the standards set forth in schedule B of section 24. 
7.  Maximum lot coverage: The maximum area covered by dwellings and buildings shall not exceed the standards set forth in schedule B of section 24. 
8.  Maximum length of dwelling and staggering of dwelling units: No dwelling shall exceed a length of one hundred fifty (150) feet and no exterior wall of any dwelling shall exceed fifty (50) feet in length in an unbroken plane without an offset of at least six (6) feet. 
9.  Buildable height: No dwelling shall exceed a height of forty (40) feet. 
10.  Utilities: All utilities, including electric, cable T.V, and telephone shall be underground. In addition, utility meters shall be screened from view. 
11.  Usable outdoor recreation space: All land not utilized for dwellings and private outdoor space shall be considered common land. Such land shall be in such condition, size and shape as to be readily usable for circulation, parking, recreation or conservation. For any special permit regarding six (6) or more units, a minimum of twenty (20) percent of the tract shall be used to provide active and passive recreational activities to residents of the development. However, when more than ten (10) percent of all dwelling units in the development containing [contain] three (3) or more bedrooms, a minimum of forty (40) percent of the tract shall be designated open space. 
12.  Community building: Whenever thirty (30) or more dwelling units are proposed, there shall be provided one (1) community building suitably located and buffered from any dwellings providing at least fifty (50) square feet of floor area per dwelling unit. This shall not include any office space. 
13.  Street standards: Each dwelling shall be served by an approved private street built to town construction standards and designed to discourage through traffic. Such street shall not extend within less than thirty (30) feet of any dwelling. All private streets shall have at least a twenty-four-foot pavement width. The commission shall have the discretion to require that streets be public and be built, designed and dedicated to the Borough of Naugatuck whenever a proposed street would serve to improve the circulation system of the Borough of Naugatuck. 
14.  Specification: Standards for sidewalks, drainage, sewers, landscaping, parking, and other site improvements shall be included in the site plan application submitted to and subject to the approval of the borough zoning commission. 
(c)  Phased development: The commission shall require that any development involving the creation of fifty (50) or more dwelling units be approved in phases. Each phase shall be capable of independent existence without the completion of succeeding phases. No phase shall be in excess of fifty (50) units. 
(d)  Procedure: An application for multiple dwellings must be approved as a special permit pursuant to section 32 of these regulations. Thereafter, parts or phases of the approved tract may be approved for development by filing a site plan application therefor to be processed by the commission. 
(e)  Additional submission requirements: The applicant shall submit the following documents in addition to those specified in sections 32.3.1 through 32.3.11: 
1.  Traffic impact report: A traffic impact report from a traffic expert setting forth his/her findings and conclusions on the impact of traffic to be generated by the proposed development on the neighborhood and the adequacy of the prospective traffic. 
2.  Landscaping plan: A landscaping plan prepared by a Connecticut registered landscape architect at a reasonable scale showing the location of buildings upon the site, off-street parking, circulation layout, lighting standards, proposed landscaping and planting layout and pedestrian walks. The landscape plan shall show the location of all existing trees over eight (8) inches in caliper measured at twelve (12) inches above the ground to be retained or removed. The landscaping and design of recreation and open space areas and the perimeter buffer area shall also be shown on the plan. 
3.  Homeowner association or condominium association legal documents: Including a copy of the declaration of covenants, by-laws and rules and regulations of the association, a map identifying the private and common areas, including legal documents identifying responsibility for maintenance of private and common recreation areas, documents specifying procedures for assuring financing of essential community services and activities over time ie. (1) automatic membership; (2) mandatory payment of common expenses; (3) personal obligation of lot/unit owner for payment, a covenant providing the municipality with the right to take over (in the event the association fails), and appoint a receiver to assess each unit owner fees in order to meet the expenses of the development and a financial report estimating the annual costs to maintain and operate the services and facilities provided within the development. 
4.  The commission may by resolution, waive the required submission of all or part of the information required under paragraphs 32.10.1(e) through 32.10.1(e.3), above if the commission finds that the information is not necessary in order to decide on the application. 
(f)  Site plan submission on approved application: Once the special permit application has, in concept, been approved, or approved with conditions, the applicant shall thereafter submit a final site plan and construction plans incorporating any and all modifications or conditions imposed by the zoning commission. The final site plan and construction plans for all or a phase of the entire tract shall be approved, approved subject to modification, or disapproved within sixty-five (65) days after the site plan application has been reviewed at a regular meeting and determined to be complete. Failure of the commission to act thereon, shall be considered as an approval and a certificate to that effect shall be issued by the zoning commission upon written demand by the applicant received within thirty (30) days after the expiration of the sixty-five-day period. The failure of the applicant to submit a final site plan and construction plans timely shall constitute reason for mandatory denial. 
(g)  Certificate of public convenience: Requirement that a certificate of public convenience approved by the Connecticut department of health services and public utility control commission be demonstrated to the commission whenever the development is to be supplied with water from a small water company. (See section 4.33.) 
    32.11 Special standards for regional shopping centers: The following special standards shall apply to a special permit for a regional shopping center. To the extent that any other provisions of the zoning regulations are inconsistent with these special standards, these special standards shall apply. 
32.11.1 A regional shopping center shall be a commerical development consisting of some or all of the following uses as permitted uses: 
(a)  Stores and other buildings and structures where good[s] are sold or services rendered primarily at retail. 
(b)  Business and professional, banks and other financial institutions, medical and dental clinics. 
(c)  Restaurants and other food and beverage establishments where customers may be seated at tables, counters or common seating areas, which may include food take-out service incidental to such establishments. 
(d)  Indoor theaters and assembly halls. 
(e)  Bowling alleys, billiard or pool halls and indoor commerical recreation businesses. 
(f)  Sales and services for tires, batteries and other motor vehicle accessories but excluding gas stations. 
(g)  Drive-through service windows for banks and restaurants provided the service windows are incidental to such bank or restaurant. 
(h)  Accessory uses customary with and incidental to any of the foregoing permitted uses and to regional shopping centers. 
32.11.2 Qualifying and design standards. In addition to the standards for the RSC district contained in schedule B of section 24, a regional shopping center shall meet the following requirements: 
(a)  A regional shopping center shall have a minimum total lot area of fifty (50) acres, however, the lot comprising the regional shopping center may be divided into separate parcels of land containing a minimum lot area of five (5) acres each. For purposes of this section, lot area shall mean the gross horizontal area contained within the lot; 
(b)  A regional shopping center shall contain a minimum of four hundred thousand (400,000) square feet of building area and a minimum of seven hundred thousand (700,000) square feet of floor area. For purposes of this subparagraph, building area shall mean the ground area enclosed by the walls of a building together with the area of all covered porches and other roofed portions; and floor area shall mean the sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of all buildings on the lot, measured from the exterior faces of exterior walls or from the center line of walls separating two (2) buildings, and shall include the area of basements when used for commerical purposes but need not include a basement or portion of a basement used for storage or housing of mechanical or central heating equipment. 
(c)  A regional shopping center shall be located in close proximity to a limited access highway. 
(d)  A regional shopping center shall be served by public sewer and water. 
(e)  A special permit approval for a regional shopping center shall become null and void in the event of failure to complete the proposed development within five (5) years, unless further extended by the borough zoning commission. 
(f)  A regional shopping center shall be allowed to have one (1) business premises with a liquor permit, wherever located, for each fifty thousand (50,000) square feet of floor area (as floor area is defined in subparagraph (b) above). The provisions of section 45.1.1 shall not apply to a regional shopping center. 
32.11.3 Off-street parking. The parking requirements shall be one (1) space for each two hundred (200) square feet of gross leasable area, excluding theaters, and the parking requirement for theaters shall be one (1) space for each four (4) seats in excess of the first seven hundred fifty (750) seats. These requirements are in lieu of the requirements of section 42.5. 
32.11.4 Off-street loading. Off-street loading spaces shall be provided at the rate of four (4) for the first one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet of gross leasable area and one (1) space for each additional fifty thousand (50,000) square feet of gross leasable area. These requirements are in lieu of the requirements of section 42.7. 
32.11.5 Signs. In lieu of any standard in section 43 which may be contrary, the following shall be permitted: 
(a)  Wall signs on any buildings face shall not exceed ten (10) percent of any building face where the sign is located. 
(b)  One (1) ground sign at each point of ingress from a public street. 
(c)  Directional signs not to exceed one hundred (100) square feet at each point of ingress from a public street. 
(d)  Directional signs not to exceed fifty (50) square feet within the property at each point of intersection. 
(e)  All permits for a permanent sign over forty (40) square feet in size shall be automatically renewed, every three (3) years, without necessity of any reapproval, unless any such sign is structurally unsafe. 
32.11.6 Performance standards. The use of land, buildings and other structures shall conform to the performance standards specified in section 41 of the zoning regulations. 
32.11.7 Other. 
(a)  Along and adjacent to any residential zoning district boundary line, a strip of land not less than thirty (30) feet in width shall be left in its natural state or shall be landscaped with lawns and/or shrubs. This area shall be included for computation of the qualifying and design standards of this section (including schedule B). 
(b)  For purposes of this section, gross leasable area shall mean the total floor area permanently constructed for the exclusive occupancy and use of tenants, including basement, mezzanine, and upper floor areas. Gross leasable area does not include areas such as public toilets, corridors, stairwells, elevators, machine and equipment rooms, utility rooms, lobbies, enclosed malls and parking garages. 
(c)  A special permit for a regional shopping center may include or may be amended to permit a division or divisions of the land comprising a regional shopping center, except each separate parcel need not comply with frontage, setbacks, lot coverage, minimum building area and floor area, off-street parking and off-street loading requirements of the zoning regulations, including this section, provided that all of the parcels continue to function as integrated parts of the approved regional shopping center. 
(d)  For purposes of compliance with the zoning regulations, including this section, and regardless of ownership, all land comprising a regional shopping center, including any portions located in an adjoining town, shall be considered as if all such land was entirely located within the Borough of Naugatuck. 
32.11.8 Additional submission requirements. The applicant shall submit the following documents in addition to those specified in sections 32.3.1 through 32.3.11: 
1.  Traffic impact report: A traffic impact report from a traffic expert setting forth his/her findings and conclusions on the impact of traffic to be generated by the regional shopping center on the neighborhood and the adequacy of the prospective traffic improvements. 
2.  Landscaping plan: A landscaping plan prepared by a Connecticut registered landscape architect at a reasonable scale showing the location of buildings upon the site, off-street parking, circulation layout, lighting standards, proposed landscaping and planting layout and pedestrian walks. 
3.  Environmental impact study: A report setting forth his/her findings and conclusions on the impact that the regional shopping center will have on any environmental and natural resource areas on or adjacent to the site or within the immediate area. 
Section 33. - Planned development districts. 
    33.1  Purpose: Planned development districts may be established by the zoning commission in accordance with the procedures hereinafter specified when it is found to be in the public interest to create an integrated industrial development in which buildings, structures and facilities may be constructed and used for different and mixed uses to use for industrial, public, municipal, office and commercial. Moreover, it is the purpose of this district to consider all land as a single unit of development for the purpose of site planning and utilities so that there is a coordinated and orderly plan of development while maintaining the option of individual ownership of lots within the district. (5-30-86) 
    33.2  Qualifying standards: The zoning commission upon the application of the owner(s) or owner(s) of contiguous land totaling at least ten (10) acres may establish such a district. Prior to establishment of a planned development district, the zoning commission shall determine: 
33.2.1 That such development is desirable for the physical and economic growth of the community. 
33.2.2 That such development will not detract from the character and value of the adjoining property. 
33.2.3 That such development has direct access to the major state highways; Route 8 and its egresses and ingresses, Route 63, Route 68 and also Water Street and Rubber Avenue from the intersection of Old Firehouse Road to the intersection of Newman Street. 
33.2.4 That such development shall be served by public sewer and public water facilities. 
33.2.5 That such development meet all section 24 standards pertaining to an I-2 district. (5-30-86) 
    33.3  Petition: A petition for the establishment of a planned development district shall be submitted in writing to the zoning commission and simultaneously to the borough planning commission and shall be signed by the owners of all parcels within the proposed district. The petition shall be accompanied by the following: 
33.3.1  Statement: A written statement specifying in detail the particular provisions of these regulations which are proposed to be applicable or inapplicable within the district and the special or additional provisions which are proposed to be applicable to the use of land, buildings and other structures, the location and bulk of buildings and other structures, and the area, shape and frontage of lots within the district. Ten (10) copies shall be submitted to each commission. 
33.3.2  Development plans: A development plan for the proposed development, including site plans, architectural plans and other drawings as relevant, in sufficient detail to show the precise boundaries of the proposed district and the character and location of existing and proposed contours, uses, building and other structures, signs, outdoor illumination, streets, driveways, off-street parking and loading spaces, outside storage areas, watercourses, storm drainage, sewage disposal facilities, water supply facilities, and landscaping. Four (4) copies shall be submitted to each commission. 
33.3.3  Soil erosion and sedimentation control plan: A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan drawn to a scale of not less than one hundred (100) feet to the inch containing proper provisions to adequately control erosions [erosion] and sedimentation and reduce the danger from stormwater runoff on the proposed site. The plan shall show existing and proposed topography, cleaned and graded areas, proposed area alterations and the location of the detailed information concerning erosion and sediment measures and facilities. The narrative shall describe the project, the schedule of major grading and construction activities on the land. The application of conservation practices, design criteria, construction detail and the maintenance program for the installed erosion and sediment control facilities. Five (5) copies shall be submitted. The erosion and sedimentation control plan shall be prepared by and bear the seal of a professional engineer, architect or landscape architect licenses [licensed] to practice in the State of Connecticut. (Also, see section 35.) (5-30-86) 
33.3.4  Fee: A petition fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
    33.4  Procedure: After receipt of complete petitions for a planned development district and after receipt of the borough planning commission report or the lapse of the sixty-five-day period, the commission shall hold a public hearing on the petition in the same manner and with the same notice as required for amendment of these regulations. The report, if any, of the borough planning commission shall be read at such public hearing. The zoning commission may adopt the planning development district thereby amending these regulations and the zoning map. If the planned development district is adopted by the zoning commission, notice of such adoption shall be given as required for amendment of these regulations, and the planned development district, appropriately numbered, shall be shown on the zoning map. Before or after adoption of the planned development district and prior to approval of an application for a certificate of zoning compliance by the zoning enforcement officer, the zoning commission may require the petitioner to submit detailed specifications for particular aspects of the proposed development in order that such specifications may be reviewed and may be approved by the zoning commission after finding that they are consistent with the qualifying standards and development plan and are made a part of the conditions under which an application for a certificate of zoning compliance is approved. 
    33.5  Additional limitations: Adoption of a planned development district by the zoning commission shall constitute authorization to establish the uses, buildings, structures and site development in accordance with the standards and development plan adopted by such commission for the district and in accordance with detailed specifications approved by such commission. The development authorized by the district shall be completed within four (4) years from the effective date of the district, except that the zoning commission may extend the time for completion for one-year periods after public hearing for good cause demonstrated to the satisfaction of the commission; otherwise the commission shall be deemed authorized by the owner or owners of land within the district to amend these regulations and the zoning map, deleting the planned development district and establishing for such land the previous or another zoning district. 
    33.6  Change of plans: Any change of plans shall require the approval of the zoning commission. Moreover, where the commission determines that the proposed change of plans will significantly alter the character, density, size, design and/or spacing of land and buildings so as to make the proposed plans inconsistent with the purposes of the planned development district, as specified in section 33.1. Another public hearing shall be required in accordance with section 33.4. 
33.6.1  Fee: A petition fee for a change of plans shall be one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). 
    33.7  Certification of soil erosion and sedimentation control plan: The commission shall certify that the soil erosion and sedimentation control plan complies with the requirements of paragraph 32.3.10 and furthermore, site development shall not begin unless the soil erosion and sedimentation control plan and those control measures and facilities in the plan scheduled for installation prior to site development are installed and functional. All control measures and facilities shall be maintained in effective condition to ensure compliance with the certified plan. (5-30-86) 
    33.8  Certificate of public convenience: A certificate of public convenience approved by the Connecticut department of health services and public utility control commission [shall] be demonstrated to the commission whenever the development is to be supplied with water from a small water company. (See section 4.33.) (5-30-86) 
Section 34. - Open space subdivision plans. 
    34.1 General: The borough planning commission may approve an open space plan simultaneously with the approval of a subdivision plan under the subdivision regulations of the Borough of Naugatuck, to permit establishment of an open space subdivision plan involving reduction of lot area and lot shape requirements and reduction of certain yard and setback requirements applicable in any residence R-45 or R-30 district in order to accomplish one (1) or more of the open space purposes specified in paragraph 34.2 of this section. Before the planning commission shall approve an open space subdivision, an application shall be submitted to such commission in accordance with the procedures, standards and conditions herein specified. Such commission shall follow the procedures herein specified, and before approving any open space subdivision, shall find that the standards and conditions herein specified have been met and that the open space subdivision will accomplish one (1) or more of the open space purposes stated and will be in harmony with the purposes and intent of the zoning regulations. 
    34.2 Purpose: The borough planning commission may approve an open space subdivision to permit establishment of an open space subdivision plan if it finds that the plan will accomplish one (1) or more of the following purposes: 
34.2.1 To preserve land as unsubdivided and undeveloped open space which preserves or enhances the appearance, character and natural beauty of an area; 
34.2.2 To preserve land for parks and recreational purposes; 
34.2.3 To preserve land for purposes of conserving natural resources; 
34.2.4 To preserve land and protect particular areas and terrain having qualities of natural beauty or historic interest; 
34.2.5 To protect streams, rivers and ponds so as to avoid flooding, erosion and water pollution. 
    34.3 Application: Application for an open space subdivision shall be submitted in writing to the borough planning commission and shall be accompanied by the following: 
34.3.1 A written statement describing the open space purpose to be accomplished and the proposed method of preservation and disposition of the open space land. Four (4) copies shall be submitted. 
34.3.2 A preliminary subdivision map as specified in the subdivision regulations of the Borough of Naugatuck and showing a proposed subdivision of the land in conformity with the regular residence R-45 or R-30 district requirements as applicable. Four (4) copies shall be submitted. 
34.3.3 A subdivision map as specified in the subdivision regulations of the Borough of Naugatuck, and showing the proposed subdivision of the land as an open space subdivision plan. Four (4) copies shall be submitted. 
34.3.4 Such additional information that such commission may deem necessary to make a reasonable decision on the application. 
34.3.5 An application fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). 
    34.4 Standards and conditions: The application for open space subdivision plan shall conform to the following standards: 
34.4.1 Area of subdivision: The acreage covered by the open space subdivision plan shall consist of not less than twenty-five (25) acres if located within the residence R-45 district and not less than fifteen (15) acres if located within the residence R-45 or R-30 district. 
34.4.2 Location: The area covered by the proposed open space subdivision plan shall be located entirely within the residence R-30 district. 
34.4.3 Number of lots: The number of building lots shown on the open space subdivision plans shall not exceed the number that could be created in conformity with the regular residence R-45 or R-30 district requirements, as applicable, and the subdivision regulations of the Borough of Naugatuck as indicated on the preliminary subdivision plan submitted under paragraph 34.3.2. 
34.4.4 Lot area, shape and other requirements: In the residence R-45 district, each lot shall have a minimum area of thirty thousand (30,000) square feet; in the residence R-30 district, each lot shall have a minimum area of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet. In residence R-45 district, each lot shall be of such shape that a square with one hundred fifteen (115) feet on each side will fit on the lot and shall have a minimum frontage of one hundred fifteen (115) feet on a street. In a residence R-30 district, each lot shall be of such shape that a square with ninety-five (95) feet on each side will fit on the lot and shall have a minimum frontage of ninety-five (95) feet on a street. In residence R-45 district, buildings and other structures may extend to within thirty-five (35) feet of any street line or rear property line and to within twenty-five (25) feet of any side or other property line. In residence R-30 district, buildings or other structures may extend to within thirty (30) feet of any street line or rear property line and to within twenty (20) feet of any side or other property line. 
34.4.6 Open space, land: The open space subdivision plan shall result in preservation of open space land with suitable access, shape, dimension, character, location and topography to accomplish one (1) or more of the open space purposes specified in paragraph 34.2. Such open space land shall be shown on the open space subdivision plan and shall be labelled in a manner approved by the borough planning commission and is not to be used for building lots. 
34.4.7 Disposition: The method of preservation and disposition of the open space land shall accomplish the open purposes and shall be subject to the approval of the borough planning commission. The open space land shall first be offered to the Borough of Naugatuck as permanent community-owned open space. Should forty-five (45) days elapse after such offer without the borough electing to accept transfer of title to the land, another method may be used to preserve and dispose of the open space land. The method used may include, but is not limited to: 
a.  Establishment of a neighborhood association to own and maintain the land for the open space purposes intended; or 
b.  Transfer of the land to an institution, person, organization or other entity to own and maintain the land for the open space purposes intended. 
34.4.8 Area of open space land: The area of the open space land shown on the open space subdivision plan shall not be less than twelve thousand five hundred (12,500) square feet in residence R-45 districts, and seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet in residence R-30 districts, times the number of building lots indicated on the preliminary subdivision plan submitted under paragraph [34.3]. 
    34.5 Action: 
34.5.1 Hearing: The borough planning commission shall hold a public hearing on the application. Notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published in a newspaper having a substantial circulation in the borough at least twice, at intervals of not less than two (2) days the first not more than fifteen (15) days, nor less than ten (10) days, and the last not less than two (2) days before the date of such hearing. 
34.5.2 Park commission review: A copy of the proposed open space subdivision map shall be forwarded to the park commission for its review. No open space subdivision shall be approved until a written report from said commission is received by the planning commission. 
34.5.3 Approval: Within sixty-five (65) days after close of the public hearing, such commission shall approve or disapprove the application. Such commission may approve the application if it finds that one (1) or more of the open space purposes specified in paragraph 34.2 will be accomplished, that the standards and conditions of paragraph 34.4 have been met and that the open space subdivision plan will not be detrimental to the health, safety and property values in the neighborhood. In granting the open space subdivision, the commission may attach such conditions that it deems necessary to preserve the purpose and intent of these regulations. 
34.5.4 Endorsement: The approval of the open space subdivision shall be noted on the subdivision map to be recorded in the office of the Naugatuck town clerk. The map shall be signed by the chairman of the borough planning commission with the date of approval indicated on the map. 
34.5.5 Expiration: Any open space subdivision granted under these provisions shall become null and void ninety (90) days from the date the open space subdivision was granted if the subdivision map for which the subdivision was granted has not been recorded in the office of the Naugatuck town clerk. 
    34.6 Permitted uses: Any building lot on an approved open space subdivision plan shall be used only for a single family house and accessory structures and customary home occupations as specified in schedule A of these regulations. 
    34.7 Area, location and bulk requirements: Except for the variations specified in section 34.4.4, any building lot shown on an approved open space subdivision plan shall be subject to all of the requirements of section 24 and schedule B ordinarily applicable to building lots in residence R-45 and R-30 districts. 
    34.8 Open space land: The open space land shown on an approved open space subdivision plan shall not be used for any other purpose other than that contained in section 34.2 and shall remain as open space. 
Section 35. - Soil erosion and sedimentation control plan. 
    35.1 Soil erosion and sedimentation control plan: As required in sections 31, 32, 33 and 37 is a soil erosion and sedimentation control plan from the inland wetlands commission of the Borough of Naugatuck. A written report from said commission approving the applicant's erosion and sedimentation control plan. The applicant shall also submit five (5) copies of the approved control plan drawn to a scale of not less than one hundred (100) feet to the inch, containing proper provisions to adequately control erosion and sedimentation and reduce the danger from stormwater runoff on the proposed site. The plan shall show existing and proposed topography, cleared and graded areas, proposed area alterations and the location of and detailed information concerning erosion and sedimentation measures and facilities. The narrative shall describe the project, the schedule of major grading and construction activities on the land, the application of conservation and the maintenance program for the installed erosion and sediment control facilities wherever one-half acre or more of land will be disturbed. The erosion and sedimentation control plan shall be prepared by and bear the seal of a professional engineer, architect or landscape architect licensed to practice in the State of Connecticut. 
    35.2 Definitions: 
35.2.1 Certification: A signed, written approval by the inland wetlands commission that a soil erosion and sediment control plan complies with the applicable requirements of these regulations; 
35.2.2 Commission: The inland wetlands commission of the Borough of Naugatuck; 
35.2.3 Development: Any construction or grading activities to improved or unimproved real estate; 
35.2.4 Disturbed area: A disturbed area is any area where the ground cover is or will be destroyed or removed thereby leaving the land subject to accelerated erosion; 
35.2.5 Erosion: The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by water, wind, ice or gravity; 
35.2.6 Grading: Any excavating, grubbing, filling (including hydraulic fill), or stockpiling of earth materials or any combination thereof, including the land in its excavated or filled condition; 
35.2.7 Inspection: The periodic review of sediment and erosion control measures shown on the certified plan; 
35.2.8 Sediment: A solid material, either mineral or organic, that is in suspension, is transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by erosion; 
35.2.9 Soil: Any unconsolidated mineral or organic material of any origin; 
35.2.10 Soil erosion and sediment control plan: A scheme that minimizes soil erosion and sedimentation resulting from development and includes, but is not limited to, a site plan map and narrative. 
    35.3 To be eligible for certification, a soil erosion and sediment control plan shall contain provisions to adequately control accelerated erosion and sedimentation and reduce the danger from stormwater runoff on the proposed site based upon the best available technology. Such principles, methods and practices necessary for certification are found in the Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control (1985), as amended. Alternative principles, methods and practices may be used providing that prior approval of the commission has been received. 
    35.4 Said plan shall contain, but is not limited to: 
35.4.1 A narrative describing: 
a.  The proposed development; 
b.  The proposed schedule for grading and construction activities including: 
1.  The sequence of grading and construction activities; 
2.  The sequence for installation and/or application of all soil erosion and sediment control measures; 
3.  The sequence for final site stabilization; 
c.  The design criteria for proposed soil erosion and sediment control measures; 
d.  The construction details for proposed soil erosion and sediment control measures; 
e.  The installation and/or application procedures for proposed soil erosion and sediment control measures, and; 
f.  The operation and maintenance program for proposed soil erosion and sediment control measures. 
    35.5 Minimum acceptable standards: 
35.5.1 Plans for soil erosion and sediment control shall be developed in accordance with these regulations using the principles as outlined in chapters 3 and 4 of the Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control (1985), as amended. Soil erosion and sediment control plans shall result in a development that: 
a)  Minimizes erosion and sedimentation during construction; 
b)  Is stabilized and protected from erosion when completed, and; 
c)  Does not cause any off-site erosion and/or sedimentation problems. 
35.5.2 The minimum erosion and sedimentation control standards for individual measures are those in the Connecticut Guidelines for Erosion and Sediment Control (1985), as amended. The commission may grant exceptions to these minimum standards when requested by the applicant only when technically sound reasons are presented. 
    35.6 Certification/denial of erosion and sediment control plans: The commission shall certify a soil erosion and sediment control plan when the plan complies with the requirements and objectives of these regulations. When the soil erosion and sediment control plan fails to comply with these regulations, the commission shall deny certification of the plan. 
    35.7 The developer/owner shall be responsible for maintaining all erosion and sediment control measures and facilities in proper working order throughout the life of the project. 
    35.8 Inspections: Inspections shall be made by the commission or its designated agent during development to ensure compliance with the certified plan and that control measures and facilities are properly installed and maintained. 
    35.9 Enforcement: Enforcement of the soil erosion and sediment control regulations shall be the responsibility of the commission or its designated agent. Failure to properly install and/or maintain any erosion and sediment control measures may result in the issuance of a stop work order until the problem is satisfactorily corrected. 
Section 36. - Aircraft restrictions. 
    36.1 Fixed-wing aircraft. 
36.1.1 The take off or landing of fixed-wing aircraft or the establishment of a site for the take off or landing of such aircraft is prohibited within the Borough of Naugatuck. 
36.1.2 Emergency landings: 
a.  The emergency forced landing of a fixed-wing aircraft within the Borough of Naugatuck shall not be considered a violation of these regulations; 
b.  Any fixed-wing aircraft landing as provided for in section 36.1.2a shall be prohibited from resuming flight from any site within the Borough of Naugatuck. 
    36.2 Helicopters/vertical take off and landing aircraft (VTOL). 
36.2.1 The regulated take off or landing of any helicopter/VTOL or the establishment of a site for the take off or landing of such aircraft within the Borough of Naugatuck shall be subject to the following restrictions: 
a.  The site shall be accessory to and located at a facility housing emergency medical services available to the public or such site shall be accessory to and located at a public safety facility at which ambulance and other emergency vehicles are housed. 
b.  The establishment of such a site shall be subject to the granting of a special permit as provided for by section 32 of these regulations and approval of federal and state authorities. 
c.  Any site shall be approved exclusively for and limited to emergency situations. The use of said site for nonemergency take off and landings is prohibited. 
d.  The special permit approving said site shall remain valid only so long as the requirements of subsection 36.2.1a are met. 
36.2.2 The take off and landing anywhere within the Borough of Naugatuck of any helicopter/VTOL participating in an emergency shall not be considered to be in violation of these regulations. 
36.2.3a The emergency forced landing of any helicopter/VTOL within the Borough of Naugatuck shall not be considered to be a violation of these regulations; 
   b. Any helicoper/VTOL landing as provided for in section 36.2.3a shall be prohibited from resuming flight from any site within the Borough of Naugatuck. 
36.3 The landing of any helicopter/VTOL, regardless of ownership, except as provided for by these regulations is expressly prohibited. 
Section 37. - Site plan review. 
    37.1 Standards: It is the intent of this section to provide for administrative site plan review and approval for the following purposes and in accordance with the following standards: 
37.1.1 Compliance: To determine compliance with all appropriate regulations; 
37.1.2 Access: To regulate vehicular and pedestrian access on and to the property in such a manner as to avoid undue hazards and undue traffic congestion of any public or private street. 
37.1.3 Driveways: To require that there be no more than two (2) driveways entering any lot from any one (1) street, except that there may be one (1) additional driveway for each additional three hundred (300) feet of lot frontage, or fraction thereof, in excess of three hundred (300) feet. Driveways shall not exceed thirty (30) feet in width at the street line unless a greater width is required by the State of Connecticut or as otherwise required by these regulations. 
37.1.4 Parking and loading: To determine whether or not off-street parking and loading will be suitably designed, paved, and drained in such a manner as to promote traffic safety and to protect public health and shall conform to the standards of section 42. 
37.1.5 Utilities: To determine whether or not suitable provision has been made for water supply and sewage disposal in accordance with applicable standards of the Naugatuck Valley Health District. 
37.1.6 Landscaping: To provide for permanently maintained landscaping on the lot to accomplish the following purposes: 
a.  Business districts: In business districts, no part of the area required for setback from a residence district boundary line shall be used for off-street parking and loading. A strip of land, not less than ten (10) feet in width in business district #1 and not less than twenty (20) feet in width in business district #2 and business district #3, along and adjacent to any residence district boundary line shall be suitable [suitably] landscaped with lawns and with trees and/or shrubs. 
b.  Industrial district #2: In industrial district #2, no part of the area required for setback from a residence district boundary line shall be used for off- street parking or loading spaces or driveways in connection therewith. No part of the area required for setback from a street line shall be used for off-street loading spaces and no more than fifty (50) percent of such area shall be used for driveways and/or off-street parking; the area required for setback from a street line shall be suitably landscaped with lawns, trees and/or shrubs, washed gravel or ornamental brick or stone pavement except for sidewalks and permitted driveways and off-street parking spaces. Along and adjacent to any residence district boundary line, as [a] trip [strip] of land not less than thirty (30) feet in width shall be left in its natural state if already wooded or shall be landscaped with lawns and/or shrubs. 
c.  To provide landscaped planting areas within or adjacent to off-street parking and loading areas in such a manner as to enhance the appearance of the area. The planting areas shall consist of 
planting strips or islands no less than eight (8) feet in width which are within or from a landscaping border adjacent to the parking and loading areas. 
37.1.7 Soil erosion and sedimentation control: Design and construction of any development including related streets, drainage and other improvements shall be executed in a manner so that such improvements will not cause soil erosion or sedimentation on the property being developed, or on surrounding properties, wetlands or watercourses. (See section 35.) 
37.1.8 Lighting: To determine the location, height, design and arrangement of outside lighting in order to avoid glare on any other lot and avoid hazards to traffic on any street. 
    37.2 Application: Application for site plan approval shall be submitted in writing to the zoning enforcement officer, shall be accompanied by an application for a certificate of zoning compliance and shall also be accompanied by the following: 
37.2.1 Site plan: A site plan, drawn to a scale of not less than one hundred (100) feet to the inch, showing existing and proposed contours, property lines, buildings, structures, signs, outdoor illumination, streets, driveways, off-street parking and loading spaces, outside storage areas, watercourses, storm drainage, sewage disposal facilities, water supply facilities and landscaping (including trees and/or shrubs, lawn, other landscaped terrain not to be disturbed) shall be prepared by and bear the seal of an architect or professional engineer or land surveyor licensed to practice in the State of Connecticut. 
37.2.2 Architectural plans: Preliminary architectural plans of all proposed buildings, structures and signs, including general exterior elevations, perspective drawings and generalized floor plans and including drawings for proposed signs. Four (4) copies shall be submitted. 
37.2.3 Certificate of public convenience: A certificate of public convenience accompanied by a water supply plan approved by the Connecticut department of health services and public utility control whenever water is to be supplied by a small water company. Four (4) copies shall be submitted. 
37.2.4 Soil erosion and sedimentation control plan: A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan as described in section 35. 
37.2.5 Inland wetlands report: A written report from the Naugatuck inland wetlands commission as described in section 32.3.4. 
37.2.6 Architectural and landscape review board report: A report as described in section 32.3.8. 
37.2.7 Sanitation: A sanitation certificate endorsed by the Naugatuck Valley Health District or a water pollution control board report as described in section 32.3.6. 
37.2.8 Other: The zoning commission may by resolution waive the submission of all or part of the information required under sections 37.2.1 through 37.2.7, or may request additional information. 
37.2.9 Fee: Seventy-five dollars ($75.00). 
    37.3 Procedure: Application shall be received only at a regular meeting of the borough zoning commission, but must be filed in the office of the zoning enforcement officer at least seven (7) days prior to such meeting for review and placement on the agenda. The borough zoning commission shall approve, approve subject to modification, or disapprove the application within sixty-five (65) days after the application has been received at a regular meeting and determined to be complete. Failure of the commission to act thereon shall be considered as an approval and a certificate to that effect shall be issued by the commission upon written demand by the applicant received within thirty (30) days after the expiration of the sixty-five-day period for action. An extension of the sixty-five-day period for action may be had with the written consent of the applicant. The grounds for decision of an application shall be stated by the borough zoning commission in its records. 
    37.4 Certification of soil erosion and sedimentation control plan: The commission shall certify that the soil erosion and sedimentation control plan complies with the requirements of section 37.2.4. Furthermore, site development shall not begin unless the soil erosion and sedimentation control plan and those control measures and facilities in the plan scheduled for installation prior to site development are installed and functional. All control measures and facilities shall be maintained in effective condition to ensure compliance with the certified plan. 
    37.5 Certificate of occupancy: No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until it has been determined by the zoning enforcement officer that all provisions of the site plan as approved by the zoning commission have been complied with. In those cases where seasonal conditions prevent compliance with the provisions of the site plan before the building is complete, the zoning enforcement officer may authorize issuance of the certificate of occupancy on the condition that all provisions of the plan are complied with as the season permits. Noncompliance with the stated time shall make approval null and void unless further extended for good cause. 
    37.6 Revisions and extensions: Any substantial revision of an approved site plan application and any reconstruction, enlargement, extension, moving or structural alteration of an approved site plan use or any building or structure in connection therewith shall require submission of a site plan application as for the original application, including applicable fees. 
    37.7 Condition of approval: Any person, firm or corporation having obtained approval of a site plan application under this section shall complete all work and comply with all conditions of approval of said site plan approval within two (2) years after said approval. In the event all such work and/or all such conditions are not completed within said time, the approval granted shall become null and void. The borough zoning commission may by resolution and without public hearing extend its approval for one-year periods for good cause shown. 
    37.8 Change of use: For any property where a site plan has already been approved and the occupancy changes so that the new occupancy falls under a different part of section 23, schedule A, permitted uses, from that use that was previously approved, a new site plan application shall be necessary. Such site plan shall be reviewed by the zoning enforcement officer, and the zoning enforcement officer or his/her designated agent shall be allowed to approve administratively, such changes if: (1) there is not additional exterior construction except for signs on the previously approved property, and (2) if the parking requirements for the new use are the same or less than the previous use. Such approval by the zoning enforcement officer or his/her designated agent shall allow occupancy by the new use immediately. Such action shall be reviewed and, if in accordance with the zoning regulations, shall be ratified by the commission at its next scheduled meeting. Any approval by the zoning enforcement officer or his/her designated agent, shall state that it is subject to review by the borough zoning commission. In case of any change as described above, where either additional parking or any exterior structural alterations, additions or renovations are involved, a site plan shall be submitted to the borough zoning commission as per the normal procedure under section 37. (5-1-90) 
ARTICLE IV. - BOROUGHWIDE REQUIREMENTS 

Section 41. - Performance standards. 
    41.1  Air pollution: No dust, dirt, fly ash or smoke and no offensive odors or noxious, toxic or corrosive fumes or gases shall be emitted into the air from any lot so as to endanger the public health or safety, to impair safety on or the value and reasonable use of any other lot, or to constitute a critical source of air pollution. 
    41.2  Noise: With the exception of time signals and noise necessarily involved in the construction or demolition of buildings and other structures, no noise shall be transmitted outside the lot where it originates when noise has a decibel level, octave band, intermittance and/or beat frequency which would endanger the public health or safety or impairs safety on or the value and reasonable use of any other lot. 
    41.3  Vibration: With the exception of vibration necessarily involved in the construction or demolition of buildings, no vibration shall be transmitted outside the lot where it originates. 
    41.4  Land and water pollution: No refuse or other waste materials shall be dumped on any lot except with the approval of the director of health of the Borough of Naugatuck and the zoning commission. No refuse or other waste materials and no liquids shall be dumped on any lot or dumped or discharged into any river, stream, watercourses, storm drain, pond, lake or swamp so as to constitute a source of water pollution. No construction or development of land shall occur within fifty (50) feet of a wetlands area or watercourse (boat and pump houses exempt). 
41.4.1 No modification of wetlands or watercourses or creation of wetlands shall be done without approval by the inland wetlands commission. 
    41.5  Danger: No material which is dangerous due to explosion, extreme fire hazard or radioactivity shall be used, stored, manufactured, processed or assembled except in accordance with applicable codes, ordinances and regulations of the Borough of Naugatuck, State of Connecticut and federal government. 
    41.6  Radio interference: No use of any lot shall cause interference with radio and television reception on any other lot and any use shall conform to the regulations of the federal communications commission with regard to electromagnetic radiation and interference. 
    41.7  Determination of compliance: In the event of doubt as to whether a proposed use will conform to the above performance standards, the zoning enforcement officer shall not approve the application for a certificate of zoning compliance and shall defer decision to the zoning commission for an interpretation as to compliance with the performance standards. 
Section 42. - Off-street parking and loading. 
    42.1  General: It is the purpose and intent of this section to assure that parking spaces and loading spaces are provided off the street in such number and with suitable design and construction to accommodate the motor vehicles of all persons normally using or visiting a use, building or other structure at any one (1) time. Off-street parking and loading spaces required to be provided by this section shall be permanently maintained and made available for occupancy in connection with and for the full duration of the use of land, buildings and other structures for which such spaces are herein required. If any existing use of land[,] buildings or other structures, conforming to the requirements of this section, is changed to a use requiring additional off-street parking or loading space to comply with this section, the additional spaces shall be provided for the new use in accordance with the standards hereinafter specified. All off-street parking and loading spaces hereafter established shall conform to the design and construction standards specified in this section as well as to the site development and landscaping standards of section 24 and any conditions attached to the approval of a special permit under these regulations. 
    42.2  Definitions: For the purpose of this section, one (1) parking space shall constitute an area with such shape, vertical clearance, access and slope as to accommodate one (1) automobile having an overall length of twenty (20) feet and shall contain an area of one hundred eighty (180) square feet, except that the minimum area may be reduced to one hundred sixty (160) square feet for spaces located in or on a building or structure. One (1) loading space shall constitute an area sufficient in size and arrangement to accommodate trucks of the type servicing the establishment. 
    42.3  Design standards: Each parking space shall be provided with adequate area for an automobile having an overall length of at least twenty (20) feet, to approach and exit and execute any necessary backing and turning movements without need to use any part of a street right-of-way. Points of entrance and exit for driveways onto the street shall be located so as to minimize hazards to pedestrian and vehicular traffic in the street. Driveways at points of entrance and exit onto the street shall be designed in such a manner that any automobile or any truck ordinarily servicing the establishment may execute normal turning movements without resorting to wide turns or other maneuvers which would be hazardous to the flow of traffic. No off-street loading space, including any truck loading bay, ramp or dock, shall be designed or arranged in a manner that trucks must back within any part of a street right-of-way in order to use such space. The restrictions of this paragraph, however, shall not apply to parking spaces provided in connection with a dwelling containing one (1) or two (2) dwelling units or a permitted office, customary home occupation or rooms to let in a dwelling. 
    42.4  Construction standards: All off-street parking and loading spaces shall be suitably improved, graded, stabilized and maintained so as to cause no nuisance or danger from dust or from stormwater flow onto any public street. Except for necessary driveway entrances and except for parking spaces provided in connection with a dwelling containing one (1) or two (2) dwelling units or a permitted office, customary home occupation or rooms to let in a dwelling unit, any area for off-street parking and loading located within ten (10) feet of any street line shall be separated from such right-of-way by a concrete curb, a fence, or a wall or by an embankment not less than twenty-four (24) inches in height, and shall be provided with the curb, fence, wall or embankment in such a manner that vehicles will not overhang the street line. 
    42.5  Parking spaces-Number and location: For each use of land, buildings and other structures, off-street parking spaces shall be provided in such number and in the location specified as follows: 
42.5.1  Dwelling containing one (1) or two (2) dwelling units: two (2) spaces for each dwelling unit and located on the same lot with the dwelling. 
42.5.2  Dwelling containing more than two (2) dwelling units: three (3) spaces for each dwelling unit rounded off to the next highest number and located on the same lot with the dwelling. 
42.5.3  Professional or business office in a dwelling unit: three (3) spaces per professional person or business proprietor, located on the same lot with the dwelling. 
42.5.4  Place of worship, theater, assembly hall, or stadium: one (1) space for each four (4) seats total capacity and located on the same lot with the building or on a lot distant not more than five hundred (500) feet in a direct line from the principal entrance to the structure. 
42.5.5  Hospital, convalescent home, sanitarium: one (1) space for each three (3) beds for patients and located on the same lot with the building. 
42.5.6  Rooms to let in a dwelling: one (1) space for each two (2) beds for guests and located on the same lot with the dwelling. 
42.5.7 Retail stores, business and professional offices, financial institutions, and medical and dental clinics in business district #2: one (1) space for each one hundred (100) square feet of ground floor area of the building and one (1) space for each three hundred (300) feet of upper floor area, and located on a lot distant not more than three hundred (300) feet in a direct line from the building. Any parking area involving more than twenty-five (25) spaces shall submit an acceptable traffic flow pattern with visual enhancements to the planning commission. Shopping centers with a total ground floor area exceeding one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet, containing retail stores, business and professional offices, financial institutions and restaurants are to have a minimum of one (1) parking space for each one hundred sixty-five (165) square feet of floor area in such shopping center. 
42.5.8  Retail stores, business and professional offices, financial institutions, medical and dental clinics in other than business district #2: one (1) space for each one hundred fifty (150) square feet of ground floor area of the building and one (1) space for each four hundred (400) square feet of upper floor area and located on a lot distant not more than three hundred (300) feet in a direct line from the building. 
42.5.9  Motor vehicle service stations and repair garages and establishments for motor vehicle washing: ten (10) spaces, plus five (5) spaces for each garage bay in excess of two (2) and located on the same lot with the building. 
42.5.10  Undertaker's establishment: fifteen (15) spaces and located on a lot distance [distant] not more than three hundred (300) feet in a direct line from the building. 
42.5.11  Hotels and motels: one (1) space for each sleeping room and located on the same lot with the building; plus two (2) spaces for each ten (10) sleeping rooms and located on a lot distant not more than three hundred (300) feet in a direct line from the building (Section 42.5.12 may also apply). 
42.5.12  Restaurants, taverns, bars, night clubs and dance halls: one (1) space for each seventy-five (75) square feet of patron floor area and located on a lot distant not more than three hundred (300) feet in a direct line from the building. 
42.5.13  Warehouses, wholesale businesses, trucking terminals, contractors businesses, research laboratories, office buildings (not primarily serving customers or clients on the premises) and establishments for the manufacture, processing or assembling of goods: one (1) space for each one and half (1.5) employees during the largest daily work shift period and located on a lot distant not more than five hundred (500) feet in a direct line from the building. 
42.5.14  Bowling alleys: five (5) spaces for each alley and located on a lot distant not more than three hundred (300) feet in a direct line from the building. 
42.5.15  Day care/nurseries: one (1) space per five (5) students and one (1) space for each employee on a shift. 
42.5.16  Other uses: sufficient off-street parking spaces shall be provided in connection with any use not listed in paragraphs 42.5.1 through 42.5.14, as approved by the resolution of the zoning commission as sufficient to preserve the purpose and intent of this section. 
    42.6  Classification of uses: Whenever two (2) or more classifications provided in paragraph 42.5 shall apply to a use of land, buildings or other structures the standards requiring the larger number of parking spaces shall apply, but where separate parts of a building or structure are used for purposes requiring a different number of parking spaces, the number of required spaces shall be determined by adding the number of spaces required for each type of use. 
    42.7  Loading spaces-Number and location: Each hospital, hotel, motel, retail store building, undertaker's establishment[,] restaurant, tavern, bar, night club, warehouse, wholesale business, trucking terminal, contractors business, research laboratories, office building and establishment for the manufacture, processing or assembling of goods having a ground floor area in excess of five thousand (5,000) square feet shall have one (1) off-street loading space for each thirty thousand (30,000) square feet of gross floor area or fraction thereof excluding basement and located on the same lot with the building or as provided in paragraph 42.8. 
    42.8  Joint use of space: Except where off-street parking spaces are required under paragraph 42.5 to be located on the same lot with the building, joint parking areas and loading spaces may be established by the owners of separate lots in order to provide the total number of off-street parking and loading spaces required. 
    42.9  Parking exempt areas: The zoning commission after due notice and public hearing as required for adoption or amendment of these regulations may delineate areas of the borough which shall be exempt from the required provision of off-street parking spaces under paragraph 42.5. Such delineation shall be shown on the zoning map and may be made only after the commission determines that the Borough of Naugatuck, or a combination of the borough and property owners, will provide sufficient and permanent off-street parking spaces to carry out the purpose and intent of this section. 
    42.10  Parking space shall be independent: No area may be designated as a parking space when movement of a vehicle from another area which has been properly designated as a parking space in accordance with this section of these regulations. 
42.10.1  Exception: Any space that shall fall into the category of an [a] fully enclosed garage. 
Section 43. - Signs. 
    43.1  General: No sign shall be established, constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, moved or structurally altered until an application for a certificate of zoning compliance therefor has been approved by the zoning enforcement officer. All signs shall conform to the provisions hereinafter specified. 
    43.2  Definitions: For the purpose of these regulations, the term "sign" shall include every sign, billboard, illustration, insignia, lettering, picture, display, banner, pennant, flag or other device, however made, displayed, painted, supported or attached, intended for use for the purpose of advertisement, identification, publicity or notice, when located out of doors and visible from any street or from any lot other than the lot on which the sign is located. The term "sign" shall include continuous strip lighting and shall not include any flag, pennant or insignia of any government unit or any sign located within the right-of-way of any public street when authorized by the board of burgesses of the Borough of Naugatuck in accordance with the general statutes of the State of Connecticut. 
    43.3  Standards for all districts: Signs shall conform to the following standards applicable in all districts: 
43.3.1  Purpose: All signs shall pertain only to goods sold, services rendered and establishments, enterprises, activities, persons, organizations and facilities on the lot where the sign is located except for (a) signs located in business district #1 and (b) signs used in campaigns for public office which may be erected in other than residence districts at election time for a period not exceeding sixty (60) days. 
43.3.2  Location: No sign shall be located within or hang over the right-of-way of any street, except that a sign attached to the wall of a building and parallel to such wall may project fifteen (15) inches into such right-of-way. 
43.3.3  Projecting and hanging signs: No sign shall project over or hang over any sidewalk, driveway, walkway, roadway or accessway except that signs attached to the wall of a building may thus project not more than five (5) feet therefrom, provided that such projection does not occur within ten (10) feet vertical clearance of the ground and provided the sign does not overhang a public street right-of-way. 
43.3.4  Obstructions: No sign shall be located or maintained so as to be a hazard to traffic or pedestrians, to obstruct any door, window, ventilation system or fire escape or exit, or to cause any other hazard to the public health or safety. 
43.3.5.  Light and motion: No flashing, revolving or moving signs or continuous strip lighting will be permitted. All lighting of signs in the residence districts shall be indirect with the source of illumination not visible from any street or from any lot other than the lot on which the sign is located. 
    43.4  Residence and residence-office districts: In addition to the standards specified in paragraph 43.3 signs in residence and residence-office districts shall conform to the following standards: 
43.4.1  Purpose: Signs shall be limited to the following: 
a.  On premises which are for sale or for rent, not more than two (2) signs which shall advertise only the premises, provided that each sign shall have an area not exceeding six (6) square feet. 
b.  On any lot containing a farm, place of worship, parish hall, cemetery, museum, school, college, university, membership club, charitable institution, hospital, recreation facilities, nature preserve, wildlife sanctuary, convalescent home, sanitarium, public utility or buildings, uses and facilities of the Borough of Naugatuck, State of Connecticut or federal government or in residence-office districts, business and professional offices, banks and other financial institutions, medical and dental clinics and undertaker's establishment one (1) sign not exceeding sixteen (16) square feet in area. 
c  Two (2) signs not exceeding a total of three (3) feet in area, identifying the occupant of the lot. 
d  Private warning and traffic signs with no advertising thereon, each not exceeding three (3) square feet in area, located and intended primarily for warning and traffic-control purposes. 
43.4.2  Location: No sign shall extend within less than ten (10) feet of any street line or property line, but signs permitted under paragraph[s] 43.4.1(c) and 43.4.1(d) may extend to the street line. No sign shall be located on any roof and no sign attached to a building shall project above the top of the wall of the building. Signs attached to buildings may project into the area required for setbacks provided that the sign does not project more than fifteen (15) inches from and is parallel to the wall of the building. 
43.4.3  Height: No sign supported from the ground shall exceed a height of eight (8) feet in a residence district or residence-office district. 
    43.5  Other than residence districts: In addition to the standards specified in paragraph 43.3, signs in other than residence districts shall conform to the following standards: 
43.5.1  Setbacks: Signs shall observe all setbacks required for buildings and other structures except as follows: 
a.  Signs of the type specified under paragraph[s] 43.4.1(c) and 43.4.1(d). 
b.  Signs attached to buildings may project into the area required for setbacks provided that the sign does not project more than fifteen (15) inches from and is parallel to the wall of the building. 
c.  On any lot, one (1) sign may extend to within ten (10) feet of any street line provided that the sign does not exceed forty (40) square feet in area, except that the maximum area of such sign may be increased by up to forty (40) additional square feet for each one hundred (100) lineal feet frontage up to a maximum of one hundred sixty (160) square feet. 
43.5.2  Height and area: Any sign which is not attached to or mounted on a building shall not exceed a height of twenty (20) feet and shall not exceed an area of one hundred twenty (120) square feet. Any sign attached to or mounted on a building shall project above the highest point of the roof of the building or more than four (4) feet above the wall of the building, whichever is higher. Signs attached to a wall of a building plus signs mounted on the roof of the building and designed to be viewed from the same side of the building as such wall shall not have an aggregate area greater than ten (10) percent of the area of such wall. 
43.5.3  Exceptions: Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs 43.5.2 and 43.5.3, the borough planning commission may grant a special permit in accordance with the procedures, standards and conditions of section 32, to permit signs of greater height and area in other than residence districts. 
    43.6  Measurements: Any sign may be double facing and only one (1) face shall be counted in determining conformity to sign area limitations. All dimensions for signs shall be based on measurements to the outside edge of the sign excluding any structure necessary to support the sign. The area of any sign shall be the entire area encompassed by the perimeter of the sign, which perimeter shall be the polygon formed by connecting all the outermost edge or points of the sign. 
    43.7  Site plans and special exceptions: Limitations on signs which may be imposed in connection with the granting of a special permit under these regulations are in addition to the provisions of this section. 
    43.8  Borough sign ordinance: All signs shall also be constructed and maintained in accordance with the applicable provisions of the borough ordinance pertaining to signs. 
    43.9  Measurements: All permits for permanent signs over forty (40) feet in size will expire three (3) years from dated permit. A new application shall be submitted and reapproval given by the planning commission if the following considerations are met: 
1.  That the sign has proven to be aesthetically correct; 
2.  That the structure is safe; 
3.  That the sign has been painted and maintained; and 
4.  That a public hearing may be necessary. 
The permit form "Application for Erection of Sign" shall have note thereon the following: 
"This permit expires three (3) years from the date entered if sign exceeds forty (40) square feet in area." 
Said permit forms with change will be available in the office of the building inspector, Borough of Naugatuck. 
Section 44. - Nonconformity. 
    44.1  Intent: It is the intent of these regulations that nonconformaties are not to be expanded and that the existence of any existing nonconformity shall not in itself be considered grounds for the issuance of a variance for any other property. 
    44.2  Definitions: A nonconforming use, building or other structure or lot is one which exists lawfully, whether by variances or otherwise, on the date these regulations or any amendment hereto became effective, and which fails to conform to one (1) or more of the provisions of these regulations or such amendment hereto. No nonconforming use, building or structure, or lot shall be deemed to have existed on the effective date of these regulations unless (1) it was actually in being on a continuous basis on such date, and (2) if such nonconformity is a use, such use had not been discontinued within the meaning of paragraph 44.5. 
    44.3  Approved permits and certificates: Unless otherwise specifically provided in these regulations, nothing in these regulations shall require any change in the use of any land, building or other structure, or part thereof, or in the area, location, bulk or construction of any building or other structure for which a certificate of zoning compliance shall have been lawfully approved and any required certificate of occupancy shall have been lawfully issued even though such use, building or structure does not conform to one (1) or more provisions of these regulations or any amendment hereto. 
    44.4  Change in plans: Subject to the time limitations of paragraph 44.4.1 nothing in these regulations shall be deemed to require any change in the proposed use of any land, building or other structure or the area, location, bulk or construction of any building or other structure for which an application for certificate of zoning compliance has lawfully been approved and any required building permit shall have been lawfully issued even though such proposed use, building or other structure does not conform to one (1) or more provisions of these regulations or any amendment hereto. 
44.4.1  Time limit: An approved application for a certificate of zoning compliance authorizing a proposed use, building or other structure that does not conform to one (1) or more provisions of these regulations or any amendment hereto, as described in paragraph 44.4, shall become null and void unless (1) the use authorized thereby shall have been established within one (1) year from the effective date of such regulations or any amendment thereto when such use does not involve the establishment of a building or other structure for which an application for a certificate of zoning compliance must be approved or (2) the use [of] building or other structure authorized thereby shall be established and completed within two (2) years from the effective date of such regulations or any amendment thereto. The zoning board of appeals may grant one (1) extension of such periods for an additional period not to exceed one (1) year after the public hearing for good cause demonstrated to the satisfaction of the board. 
44.4.2  Previous regulations: The provisions of paragraph[s] 44.4 and 44.4.1 shall apply to building permits and certificates of occupancy issued under the zoning regulations in effect prior to these regulations. 
    44.5  Discontinuance: No nonconforming use of land, buildings or other structures which shall have been discontinued for a continuous period of one (1) year shall thereafter be resumed or replaced by any other nonconforming use. 
    44.6  Repair: Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit work on any nonconforming building or other structure when required by law to protect the public health or safety and when ordered by the fire marshal or director of health, provided that such work does not increase the nonconformity. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit work or ordinary repair and maintenance of a nonconforming building or other structure or replacement of existing materials with similar materials. 
    44.7  Enlargement: No conforming use of land shall be enlarged, extended or altered, no building or other structure or part thereof devoted to a nonconforming use shall be enlarged, extended, constructed, reconstructed or structurally altered, except where the result of such changes is to reduce or eliminate the nonconformity. No nonconforming use of a building or other structure shall be extended to occupy land outside such building or other structure or space in another building or other structure. No nonconforming building or structure shall be enlarged, extended, constructed, reconstructed or altered, if the result would be an increase in nonconformity. 
    44.8  Moving: No nonconforming use of land shall be moved to another part of a lot or outside the lot, and no nonconforming use of a building or other structure shall be moved or extended to any part of the building or other structure not manifestly arranged and designed for such use at a time the uses became nonconforming, and no building or other structure containing a nonconforming use shall be moved, unless the result of any such move is to end the nonconformity. No nonconforming building or other structure shall be moved unless the result of such moving is to reduce or eliminate its nonconformity. 
    44.9  Change: No nonconforming use of land, building or other structure shall be changed to any use which is substantially different in nature and purpose from the former nonconforming use except such uses as are permitted as of right in the district in which they are to be located. No nonconforming use of land, building or other structure of [if] once changed to conform or to more nearly conform to these regulations shall thereafter be changed so as to be less conforming again. No nonconforming building or structure if once changed to conform or to more nearly conform to these regulations shall thereafter be changed so as to be less conforming again. 
    44.10  Casualty: If any nonconforming building or other structure or any building or structure containing a nonconforming use shall be damaged by fire or other casualty to such an extent that more than sixty (60) percent of its floor area is not usable under the building and fire safety codes applicable in the borough, as determined by the building inspector on advice of the borough fire marshal and borough engineer, such building or other structure shall not be reconstructed or repaired and such use shall not be resumed unless the building, structure and use are made to conform in all respects to these regulations. Where the casualty affects forty (40) percent or less of its floor area, as above determined the building or other structure may be reconstructed or repaired and any nonconforming use resumed, provided that such reconstruction is started within a period of one (1) year from such casualty and is diligently prosecuted to completion. In the event of failure to start such reconstruction or repair within a period of one (1) year from such casualty, or within such additional period, not exceeding six (6) months, as the commission may grant upon written application made to it, the right under this paragraph to reconstruct or repair such building or other structure and the right to resume such nonconforming use shall be lost and terminated. 
    44.11  Lots: A parcel of land, which fails to meet the area, shape or frontage or any other applicable requirements of these regulations pertaining to lots, may be used as a lot, and a building or other structure may be constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, extended, moved or structurally altered thereon, provided that all of the following requirements are met: 
44.11.1 The use, building or other structure shall conform to all other requirements of these regulations; 
44.11.2 The use shall not be a use for which a special permit is required in schedule A; 
44.11.3 The parcel shall have existed as a separate lot in the Borough of Naugatuck land records at the inception of zoning in Naugatuck, June 6, 1958, or shall have been a conforming lot at the time of its creation, and shall not have been joined to or absorbed into any other parcel since that time. 
    44.12  Title: No change of title, possession or right of possession shall be deemed to affect right to continue a nonconforming use, building or other structure. 
    44.13  Performance standards: Any use, building or other structure which does not conform to one (1) or more of the performance standards of section 41, performance standards, shall not be changed to increase such nonconformity but may be changed to decrease or eliminate such nonconformity. Any such nonconformity so reduced or eliminated shall not be resumed. 
    44.14  Off-street parking and loading: Any use, building or other structure which does not conform to one (1) or more of the provisions of section 42, off-street parking and loading, shall continue to conform to such provisions to the extent that it conforms on the effective date of such section. Any use of land, buildings or other structures which does not conform to one (1) or more of the provisions of section 42 shall not be changed to a use which would need additional off-street parking and loading spaces to comply with the provisions of section 42 unless such spaces are provided as required for the new use under section 42. 
    44.15  Signs: Signs of a size or type not permitted in the district in which they are situated, or which are improperly located or illuminated, or which are nonconforming in any other way, shall be considered nonconforming structures under this section, and any increase in size, illumination, or flashing of such signs shall be deemed to be an enlargement or extension producing an increase in nonconformity. 
Section 45. - Alcoholic beverages. 
    45.1  General: In addition to the other applicable requirements of these regulations, the use of land, buildings and other structures for the storage, sale or exchange of spirituous and alcoholic beverages shall conform to the following standards: 
45.1.1 No building or premises shall be used for the sale or exchange of spirituous and alcoholic beverages for consumption upon the premises if any part of such building or premises is situated within less than five hundred (500) feet in a direct line from any other building or premises upon which spirituous and alcoholic beverages are stored, sold or exchanged for consumption upon the premises. 
45.1.2 No building [or] premises shall be used for the sale or exchange of spirituous or alcoholic beverages either at wholesale or retail or whether for consumption upon the premises or otherwise, or for storage of spirituous and alcoholic beverages for the purpose of sale or exchange, if any part of such building or premises is situated within less than three hundred (300) feet in a direct line from any part of any building used for the purpose of a public school, a duly organized school other than a public school, charitable institution whether supported by public or private funds, or a hospital, or library. (5-30-86) 
45.1.3 No building or premises shall be used for the sale or exchange of spirituous and alcoholic beverages, either at wholesale or retail, for consumption off of the premises, if any part of such building or premises is situated within less than one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet in a direct line from any other building or premises upon which spirituous and alcoholic beverages are stored, sold or exchanged for consumption off the premises, except if said building or premises is licensed by the State of Connecticut for sale of such beverages under a grocery beer permit, then said premises shall not be required to conform to the minimum distance requirements set forth in this paragraph. 
45.1.4 If the use of any building or premises for the storage, sale or exchange of spirituous and alcoholic beverages shall be discontinued for a period of sixty (60) days, and such use does not conform to the minimum distance requirements of paragraph 45.1.1 or 45.1.2 or 45.1.3, such building or premises shall not again be used for the storage, sale or exchange or [of] spirituous and alcoholic beverages except in conformity with the provisions of this section 45. 
Section 46. - Flood plains. 
    46.1  Purpose: The flood plain district recognizes that there are areas within the Borough of Naugatuck that are subject to potential, periodic, occasional or frequent flooding and which function as part of the natural drainage system. These regulations serve to establish necessary minimum standards and review procedures over the use [of] land in the flood plain district in order to: reduce flooding hazard to human life and health, reduce flood damages to public and private property, minimize disruptions of commerce and governmental services, protect values, maintain the natural drainage system's capacity to safely store and transport flood waters and minimize damaging flood erosion and any increases in downstream flood potential. 
    46.2  Definitions: For the purpose of this section, certain words shall have the following meanings: 
46.2.1  Base flood: The flood having a one-percent chance of being equalled or exceeded in any given year. 
46.2.2  Base flood elevation: The elevation of the base flood as recorded on the flood hazard boundary map and accompanying stream profile data. 
46.2.3  Floodway: The high risk channel area of a watercourse and adjacent land area that must be reserved to discharge the base flood without increasing water surface elevation more than one (1) foot. 
46.2.4  Development: Any manmade change to improve or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations located within the area of special flood hazard. 
46.2.5  New construction: Structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of this section. 
46.2.6  Start of construction: The first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings or any work beyond the stage of excavation. For mobile homes in mobile home parks, it is the completion date of facilities to service the mobile home site. 
46.2.7  Structure: A walled and roofed building, a mobile home, or a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally aboveground. 
46.2.8  Substantial improvement: Any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure either before the improvement or repair is started or before the damage occurred if the structure has been damaged and is being restored. 
    46.3  General standards: In the flood plain district no structure shall be constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, extended, moved or structurally altered, no land use shall be established and no land shall be filled, graded or excavated until the zoning enforcement officer has approved a plan for the proposed structure, land use or alteration of land contour. Such approval shall not be granted or permit issued unless the plan complies with all of the following requirements: 
46.3.1 New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated at least two (2) feet above the base flood elevation. 
46.3.2 New construction and substantial improvement of any nonresidential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, either elevated or floodproofed to at least two (2) feet above the base flood elevation. Floodproofing shall conform with standards set by the Federal Insurance Administration and shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect. 
46.3.3 All mobile homes shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement by providing over-the-top and frame ties to ground anchors conforming with standards set by the Federal Insurance Administration, section 19.10.3(B) (8) of the Federal Register, Tuesday, October 26, 1976. For new mobile homes or the expansion or substantial improvement of existing mobile home parks, stands or lots shall be elevated so that the lowest floor of the mobile home will be at least two (2) feet above the base flood elevation and adequate surface drainage and access for a hauler shall be provided. No mobile home shall be placed in a floodway except in an existing mobile home park. 
46.3.4 No encroachment including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other development shall be permitted in a floodway unless a technical evaluation demonstrates that the encroachment will not result in any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge. All other flood plain district standards must also be satisfied. 
46.3.5 New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed of materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage and using methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 
46.3.6 New and replacement water systems shall be designed to minimize infiltration of flood waters. 
46.3.7 New and replacement sanitary systems shall be designed to minimize infiltration of flood waters and discharge from the systems into flood waters. On-site sanitary disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
46.3.8 Structures and improvements shall be designed to cause the least possible impediment to the flow of flood water and debris. 
46.4.9 No outdoor storage of such materials shall be permitted which would tend to be floated by flood water and cause obstructions downstream. 
46.3.10 Any reduction in the water-holding capacity of the flood plain caused by structures, improvements, filling or regrading of land shall be compensated by deepening and widening of the flood plain, prior to issuance of a building permit. 
    46.4  Application: Application for approval of a development in a flood plain shall be submitted to the zoning enforcement officer and it shall include the following: 
46.4.1 Eight (8) copies of a plot plan of the premises, drawn to scale and certified by and bearing the seal of a land surveyor and professional engineer, licensed to practice in the State of Connecticut, showing the actual shape and dimensions of the lot[,] the size and location of all existing and proposed structures and land uses, the layout of parking and loading facilities, where applicable and access thereto, existing and proposed grades base flood elevations data and limits of the flood plain area. This section may be waived by the zoning commission. 
46.4.2 Such other information as required by the zoning enforcement officer to determine compliance with this ordinance. 
    46.5  Procedure: The zoning enforcement officer shall approve, disapprove or approve with modifications the proposed plans. On [One (1)] copy of the approved plan, the approval noted thereon, shall be filed with the zoning enforcement officer, one (1) copy shall be made available to the applicant and one (1) copy shall be filed with the building inspector. 
    46.6  Conditions: No building permit shall be issued which is not in conformance with the approved plan and with any other regulations governing the use of the applicant's property. 
    46.7  Information to be recorded: The zoning enforcement officer shall record and maintain a record of the actual elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new substantially improved structures in the flood plain district. The zoning enforcement officer shall also record actual elevation and floodproofing certifications for all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures. 
    46.8  Alteration of watercourses: The zoning enforcement officer shall notify adjacent municipalities and the water resources unit of the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection prior to any alteration or relocations of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration. 
    46.9  Variances: As provided by section 51, the zoning board of appeals may hear and decide requests for variances from the requirements of section 46, flood plains, and may attach such conditions to the granting of a variance as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this section. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard[,] to afford relief. If any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result [sic]. In granting a variance, the zoning board of appeals shall: 
46.9.1 Give written notice to the applicant that the structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest floor elevated below the base flood elevation. Such notice shall also advise the applicant that the project is not exempted from flood insurance requirements and that insurance costs will commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
46.9.2 Maintain the records of all appeals, including technical information and report any variances to the Federal Insurance Administration upon request. 
ARTICLE V. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Section 51. - Zoning board of appeals. 
    51.1 The zoning board of appeals shall have all the powers and duties prescribed by these regulations and the general statutes of the State of Connecticut and may adopt rules and procedures necessary to exercise its authority. 
    51.2 The powers and duties of the board of appeals shall include the following: 
51.2.1 To hear and decide where it is alleged that there is an error in any order, requirement or decision made by the zoning enforcement officer. 
51.2.2 To hear and decide all matters upon which it is required to pass by the specific terms of these regulations or of the general statutes of the State of Connecticut. 
51.2.3 To determine and vary application of these regulations in harmony with their general purpose and intent and with due consideration for conserving the public health, safety, convenience, welfare and property values solely with respect to a parcel of land where, owing to conditions especially affecting such parcel but not affecting generally the district in which it is situated, a literal enforcement of these regulations would result in exceptional difficulty or unusual hardship, so that substantial justice will be done and the public safety and welfare secured. The zoning board of appeals should consider the following in making a decision in the case that all of the following conditions exist: 
a.  That if the owner complied with the provisions of these regulations he would not be able to make any reasonable use of his property; 
b.  That the difficulties or hardship relate to the physical characteristics of that parcel of land and are peculiar to the property in question in contrast with those of other properties in the same district; 
c.  That the hardship was not the result of the applicant's own action and/or not known at the time of purchase; (5-30-86) 
d.  That the hardship is not merely financial or pecuniary; 
e.  Any variance which is not executed within a period of six (6) months shall become null and void, unless an extension of time is applied for and granted by the zoning board of appeals; 
f.  Hardship shall be stated in writing at the time of said application and shall appear in the variance when granted. (5-30-86) 
    51.3 The zoning board of appeals shall consider the following conditions when warranted and file such conditions in the office of the town clerk of the Borough of Naugatuck: 
51.3.1 Require the screening and parking areas of other parts of the premises from adjoining premises or from the street by walls, fences, plantings or other devices. 
51.3.2 Modify the exterior features or appearances of any structure where necessary to be in harmony with surrounding property. 
51.3.3 Limit the size, number or occupants or extent of facilities. 
51.3.4 Limit the methods or times of operations. 
51.3.5 Regulate the number, design and location of access drives. 
51.3.6 Regulate the number, type and location of outdoor lighting facilities. 
51.3.7 Any other conditions that are deemed necessary by the zoning board of appeals. 
    51.4 The zoning board of appeals shall not be allowed to permit a use of land or structure not authorized by the provisions of these regulations under section 23 (Schedule A-Permitted Uses), for the zone in which the land is located. (5-30-86) 
    51.5  Notification of application: 
51.5.1 Upon application for a variance, the petitioner shall conspicuously post a sign on said parcel, indicating the date and time of said hearing. Such sign as provided by the zoning enforcement officer as authorized by the Borough of Naugatuck zoning commission. (5-30-86) 
51.5.2 Adjacent property owners (owners within a one-hundred-foot radius of the proposed parcel) shall be notified by certified mail of the impending public hearing so that they may participate in the hearing. 
Section 52. - Administration. 
    52.1  Zoning enforcement officer: The zoning commission shall appoint a zoning enforcement officer who shall have the responsibility and authority to enforce the provisions of these regulations. The zoning commission may appoint deputy zoning enforcement officers to assist and act for the zoning enforcement officer. The zoning enforcement officer and any deputy zoning enforcement officer shall have terms of service and compensation established by the commission. The building inspector may be appointed as zoning enforcement officer. The chairman may serve as zoning enforcement officer during times of emergency, not to exceed ninety (90) days at the discretion of the zoning commission by a two-thirds vote of the zoning commission. (5-30-86) 
    52.2  Application: An application for a certificate of zoning compliance shall be submitted to the zoning enforcement officer prior to construction, reconstruction, extension, enlargement, moving or structural alteration of any building or other structure. The application shall be accompanied by three (3) copies of a plan drawing or drawings, drawn to scale, and showing the following: 
52.2.1 Dimensions, area, radii and angles or bearings of the lot; 
52.2.2 The height, dimensions, use, floor area, ground coverage, location and setback dimensions of all buildings and other structures whether existing or proposed; 
52.2.3 The location, area and dimensions of off-street parking and loading spaces, any construction required in connection therewith and the means of access to such spaces; 
52.2.4 The location of any existing or proposed private disposal system; 
52.2.5 The location, area and dimensions of any outside storage areas site development and landscaping that are subject to the provisions of these regulations; and 
52.2.6 Such additional information as may be necessary to determine compliance with the provisions of these regulations. 
In addition the application shall be accompanied by other plans, drawings, data and statements necessary to determine compliance with the provisions of these regulations. The site plan required under section 32 or 37 may be substituted for the plan drawing or drawings required above. 
    52.3  Business and industrial districts: In addition to the requirements of paragraph 52.2, any application for a certificate of zoning compliance pertaining to a nonresidential use of land, building or other structure in any business or industrial district and not covered by a special permit application under section 32 or 37, shall be accompanied by the following, drawings prepared by and bearing the seal of a professional engineer, architect or landscape architect licensed to practice in the State of Connecticut: 
52.3.1  Site plan: See section 37, site plan review, section 37.2.1. 
52.3.2  Architectural plans: Preliminary architectural plans of all proposed buildings, structures and signs, including general exterior elevations, perspective drawings and generalized floor plans and including drawings for proposed signs; four (4) copies shall be submitted. 
Upon receipt, the zoning enforcement officer shall transmit a copy of the application and above plans to the borough planning commission and the commission within thirty-five (35) days after receipt, shall report its recommendations to the zoning enforcement officer for approval, disapproval or modification of the application and plans based on the provisions of these regulations. 
    52.4  Fees: Each application for a certificate of zoning compliance shall be accompanied by a fee of thirty-five dollars ($35.00), paid to the Borough of Naugatuck. Such fee is in addition to any other fees that may be required under these regulations. 
    52.5  Approval and issuance: The zoning enforcement officer shall approve an application for a certificate of zoning compliance and shall issue a certificate of zoning compliance when he determines that all requirements of these regulations have been met. No application shall be considered approved and no certificate shall be issued unless signed or countersigned by the zoning enforcement officer, or deputy zoning enforcement officer. Each application shall be approved or disapproved by the zoning enforcement officer within ten (10) days after receipt of (a) the application, (b) the report of the borough planning commission under paragraph 52.3 or expiration of the thirty-five-day period or (c) the report of action of the borough planning commission or zoning board of appeals on any special permit, special exception, variance or other decision of such board or commission, whichever is applicable and occurs later. Within ten (10) days after notification by an applicant that the premises are ready for occupancy, the zoning enforcement officer shall issue or deny a certificate of zoning compliance. One (1) copy of the plan drawing or drawings shall be returned by the zoning enforcement officer to the applicant when the application is approved. The following additional requirements shall apply to the approval of application and certificates: 
52.5.1  Conditions: Any maps, plans, documents, statements and stipulations submitted to and approved by the borough planning commission or zoning board of appeals in connection with any decision of such commission or board, and any conditions of approval attached by the commission or board, shall be conditions for approval of an application for certificate of zoning compliance by the zoning enforcement officer and issuance by him of a certificate. 
52.5.2  Temporary certificate: Upon certification by the applicant that the public health and safety will not be impaired and that there will be compliance with all other laws pertaining to health and safety, the zoning enforcement officer may issue a temporary certificate of zoning compliance having a duration of not more than six (6) months and renewable only for one (1) additional six-month period, for the temporary use of land, buildings and other structures in the process of improvement and completion in accordance with an approved application. 
52.5.3  Sanitation: Where a proposed use or a proposed building or other structure involves the installations, extension, relocation or reconstruction of a private sewage disposal or water supply system, no application for certificate of zoning compliance shall be approved until plans for such systems have been approved by the director of health or his authorized agent, no certificate of zoning compliance shall be issued until such system has been completed and approved by the director of health or his authorized agent or until the use of building or structure has been provided with connections to the borough sanitary sewer system and/or public water supply system. 
52.5.4  Other permits: Approval of an application or issuance of a certificate shall not be constructed to constitute compliance with any other regulation, ordinance or law nor to relieve the applicant from responsibility to obtain any permit thereunder. 
    52.6  Inspections: The zoning enforcement officer is authorized to inspect or cause to be inspected any land, building or other structure to determine compliance with these regulations. No certificate shall be issued until the zoning enforcement officer has inspected the land, building or other structure involved to determine that the use and/or the building or other structures conform to these regulations. At the time of the inspection for determination of issuance of a certificate, the zoning enforcement officer may request the applicant to (a) furnish the zoning enforcement officer with measurements, prepared by and bearing the name and seal of a land surveyor licensed to practice in the State of Connecticut, of all setback distances for any structure on the lot, or (b) facilitate the making of such measurements during the inspection of a land surveyor licensed to practice in the State of Connecticut. 
52.6.1 (A) A plot plan map made by a licensed land surveyor in the State of Connecticut shall be submitted to the zoning enforcement officer. This map shall have all distances accurate to within the zoning regulations and shall be on sheet sizes of multiples of 81/4 x 11, but no larger than 24;inch; x 36;inch;. This plot plan shall be filed with the zoning enforcement officer when: 
1.  A new building is to be constructed for which zoning and building permits have been issued and upon such time as the completion of the foundation of such building. No further work shall be done on the proposed structure until the aforementioned plot plan map showing "as-built" conditions has been filed with the zoning enforcement officer and stamped approval therewith. 
2.  The proposed construction is an addition to an existing building or structure and the aforementioned plot plan map shall be filed with the application for the permit. 
3.  The construction or structure is a tower, swimming pool, tennis court, signs or other project not considered a "building" per se. The aforementioned plot plan map shall be submitted upon completion of the excavation and forming but before placing or surfacing, pouring of footings or erection of structure to the zoning enforcement officer for his approval. All zoning and building and permits have been previously issued. Each staked suitably reference for ease and accuracy of replacement in instances where sign work may damage or destroy the markers [sic]. 
B.  The plot plan map for the aforementioned three (3) situations shall contain, but not be restricted to, at least the following information: 
1.  Location of existing and proposed buildings. 
2.  Location of structures, watercourses, wells, septic tanks, dry wells, subsurface leaching systems. 
3.  Property lines and measurements between said property lines and new construction as are adequate for the zoning enforcement officer to determine that the minimum front[,] side and rear yards are being maintained. 
4.  Setback[s] from watercourses, water bodies, and wetlands, as required by local and state inland wetlands regulations, stream encroachment ordinances and flood plain insurance regulations. 
5.  Any and all street line setback ordinances. 
6.  Setbacks for subsurface disposal systems conforming with local and state health department codes. 
7.  Setback[s] conforming with each other from all building structures and lines as required by all applicable statutes, codes, ordinances or regulations. 
C.  That for the purpose of expediency a letter from the builder and his designated surveyor shall be submitted prior to the actual "as-built" plans, stating to the zoning enforcement officer that all items in all preceding paragraphs will be complied with and in conformity with the zoning regulations of the Borough of Naugatuck. 
    52.7  Orders: The zoning enforcement officer is authorized to issue a stop work order if in his judgment the use of land, buildings and other structures or the construction, reconstruction, enlargement, extension[,] moving or structure [structural] alteration of a building or other structure are not being carried out in compliance with these regulations, he shall withdraw such order when he determines that there is compliance with these regulations. The zoning enforcement officer is authorized to order in writing the remedying of any condition found to be in violation of these regulations. 
    52.8  Records: The zoning enforcement officer shall keep records of all fees[,] all applications and certificates[,] all identifiable complaints of any violations of these regulations, all inspections made under these regulations and all notices of violations served by him and the action taken thereon. 
    52.9  Procedure: The zoning commission may from time to time by resolution adopt administrative rules and procedures for the enforcement of these regulations. (5-1-90) 
Section 53. - Penalties. 
    53.1 Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of these regulations shall be subject to penalties in accordance with the general statutes of the State of Connecticut. 
Section 54. - Amendments. 
    54.1 These regulations, including the zoning map which is a part hereof, may be amended by the commission on its own initiative or when initiated by a petition. Any amendment may be adopted only after due notice and public hearing as prescribed by the general statutes of the State of Connecticut. Any petition for amendment shall be accompanied by the following: 
54.1.1 For petitions concerning the text of these regulations, twenty (20) copies of the precise wording of the existing and proposed text shall be submitted. 
54.1.2 For petitions concerning the zoning map, eight (8) maps shall be submitted meeting the following requirements: 
a.  Drawn to a scale of not less than two hundred (200) feet to the inch; 
b.  Showing the area of the proposed change and of all lots within five hundred (500) feet of the proposed change and all of the existing property owners as indicated by the Naugatuck Assessor's records; 
c.  Delineating the existing and proposed zoning boundary lines; 
d.  Meeting the requirements of a "Class `D', `AA', `A1', or `A2' as prepared by a Registered Land Surveyor, licensed to practice in the State of Connecticut; or prepared by a Professional Engineer (PE), Civil Engineer or Landscape Architect; and a declaration of the area of all lots within said proposed zone change to within one hundredth of an acre (.01 plus or minus) or ten (10) square feet plus or minus when less than one (1) acre and to within .1 acre when greater than one (1) acre and certified by and bearing the seal of the preparer for accuracy. Any change of the zoning map initiated by the Borough of Naugatuck Zoning Commission shall be exempt from the requirements of this subsection, but not the prescribed requirements of section 8-3 of the Connecticut General Statutes. 
54.1.3 A public hearing on said petition shall commence within sixty-five (65) days after receipt of said petition by the zoning commission. The date of receipt shall be the date of the first scheduled monthly meeting of the zoning commission following submittal of the petition or the date of a special meeting having said petition on its agenda. 
54.1.4 Upon receipt of said petition, the zoning commission shall provide the applicant with a sign to be conspicuously posted on the property. Said sign shall indicate the date and time of a public hearing and remain in place until said hearing has been held. 
Section 55. - Validity. 
    55.1 If any provision of these regulations is adjudged by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, the effect of such decisions shall be limited to the provision expressly stated in the decision to be invalid, and all other provisions of these regulations shall continue to be valid and fully effective. 
    55.2 If any provision of these regulations is adjudged by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid as such provision applies to a particular building, other structure or lot, the effect of such decision shall be limited to the particular building, other structure or lot, and the general application of such provision to other buildings, structures or lots shall not be affected. 
Section 56. - Effective date and repeal. 
    56.1 These regulations and any amendment or change herein, shall be in full force and effect from the date established by the commission in accordance with the general statutes of the State of Connecticut. 
    56.2 The zoning regulations of the Borough of Naugatuck, adopted April 30, 1971, and amended since that date are hereby repealed coincident with the effective date of these regulations. The repeal of the above regulations and all amendments thereto shall not affect or impair any act done, offense committed or right accruing, accrued, or acquired or any liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred prior to the time such repeal took effect, but the same may be enjoyed, asserted, enforced, prosecuted or inflicted as fully and to the same extent as if such repeal had not been effected. 
[Section 57. - Citation procedures and fines for zoning violations.] 
57.1.  The Zoning Enforcement Officer or Assistant Zoning Enforcement Officer of the Borough of Naugatuck are authorized to issue citations for violations of the Naugatuck Zoning Regulations of the Borough of Naugatuck to the extent and in the manner provided by this Ordinance. Any such citation may be served either by hand delivery or by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the person named in such citation. If the person named in a citation sent by certified mail refused to accept such mail, the citation may be sent by regular United States mail. The Zoning Enforcement Officer or Assistant Zoning Enforcement Officer shall file and retain an original or certified copy of the citation. No citation shall be issued unless a written notice to correct has been provided which allows for a voluntary correction of the alleged violation within thirty (30) days. 
57.2.  A citation may be issued for any violation of the Zoning Regulations of the Borough of Naugatuck. 
57.3.  The fine for each such citation shall be one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) payable to the Treasurer of the Borough of Naugatuck. 
57.4.  Any person receiving such a citation shall be allowed a period of thirty (30) days from his or her receipt of the citation to make an uncontested payment of the fine specified in the citation to the Treasurer. If the citation has been sent by regular mail pursuant to the provisions of paragraph [57.]1 of this Ordinance, the day of receipt of the citation shall be deemed to be three (3) business days after the day of mailing of the citation. 
57.5.  If a person who has been issued a citation does not make uncontested payment of the fine specified in the citation to the Treasurer within the time allowed under paragraph [57.]4 of this Ordinance, the Zoning Enforcement Officer shall send a notice to the person cited, informing such person: 
a.  Of the allegations against him or her and the amount of the fines; 
b.  That the person cited may contest liability before a three (3) party panel of Hearing Officers appointed by the Mayor as provided in paragraph [57.]9 of this Ordinance, by delivering, in person or by mail, within thirty (30) days of the date of the notice, a written demand for a hearing; 
c.  That if the person cited does not demand such a hearing, an assessment and judgment shall be entered against him or her; and 
d.  That such judgment may issue without further notice. 
57.6.  If the person who is sent notice pursuant to paragraph [57.]5 of this Ordinance wishes to admit liability for any alleged violation, he or she may, without requesting a hearing pay the full amount of the fine, either in person or by mail, to the Zoning Enforcement Officer. All fines shall be made payable to the Treasurer of the Borough of Naugatuck. Such payment shall be inadmissable in any proceeding, civil or criminal, to establish the conduct of such person or other person making the payment. Any person who does not deliver or mail written demand for a hearing within ten (10) days of the date of the notice described in paragraph [57.]5 of the Ordinance shall be deemed to have admitted liability, and the Zoning Enforcement Officer shall certify to the Hearing Officers that such person has failed to respond. The Hearing Officers shall thereupon enter and assess the fines provided for by this Ordinance and shall follow the procedures set forth in paragraph [57.]8 of this Ordinance. 
57.7.  Any person who requests a hearing shall be given written notice of the date, time and place for the hearing. Such hearing shall be held not less than fifteen (15) days nor more than thirty (30) days from the date of the mailing of the notice, provided the Hearing Officers shall grant upon good cause shown any reasonable request by any interested party for postponement or continuance. The presence of the Zoning Enforcement Officer shall be required at the hearing if requested by the person who was issued the citation. A person wishing to contest liability shall appear at the hearing and may present evidence on his or her behalf. The Zoning Enforcement Officer may present evidence on behalf of the municipality. If the person who received the citation fails to appear, the Hearing Officers may enter an assessment by default against him or her upon a finding of proper notice and liability under the applicable provisions of the Borough of Naugatuck Zoning Regulations. The Hearing Officers may accept written information by mail from the person who received the citation and may determine thereby that the appearance of such person is unnecessary. The Hearing Officers shall conduct the hearing in the order and form and with such methods of proof as they deem fair and appropriate. The rules regarding the admissibility of evidence shall not be strictly applied, but all testimony shall be given under oath or affirmation. The Hearing Officers shall announce their decision at the end of the hearing. If a majority of the panel determine that the person who received the citation is not liable for the violation, the Hearing Officers shall dismiss the matter and enter that determination in writing accordingly. If a majority of the panel determine that the person who received the citation is liable for the violation, the Hearing Officers shall forthwith enter and assess the fines against such person as provided by this Ordinance. 
57.8.  If such assessment is not paid on the date of its entry, the Hearing Officers shall send by first class mail a notice of the assessment to the person found liable and shall file, not less than thirty (30) days nor more than twelve (12) months after such mailing, a certified copy of the notice of assessment with the Clerk of the Superior Court for Waterbury, together with the applicable entry fee. Further proceedings may then be held pursuant to the applicable provisions of the Connecticut General Statutes. 
57.9.  The Mayor of the Borough of Naugatuck shall appoint, subject to confirmation by the Board of Burgesses, three (3) or more citation Hearing Officers to conduct the hearings provided by this Ordinance. Hearing Officers shall serve for a term of two (2) years, unless removed for cause. Neither the Zoning Enforcement Officer, the Building Inspector nor any employee of the Borough of Naugatuck exercising zoning authority may be appointed to be a Hearing Officer pursuant to this Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 105, 10-23-97) 
ARTICLE VI. - PLANNED DEVELOPMENT 

Section 60. - Planned development district No. 1-Ramblewood. 
    60.1 General. The "Zoning Regulations of the Borough of Naugatuck, Connecticut" including the zoning map and zoning districts are amended by establishment of planned development district #1, hereinafter referred to as "PDD #1." 
60.1.1 Content: The zoning provisions applicable in PDD #1 are those specified in this statement. This statement is accompanied by the following maps and plans bearing the general title "Ramblewood, A Residential Community in Naugatuck, Connecticut, Celentano Properties, 35 Main Street, New Haven." 
a.  1, Boundary and land use plan, dated August 7, 1972 (Scale 1;inch; = 60;ft;); 
b.  1A, Site and landscaping plan, dated August 7, 1972 (Scale 1;inch; = 60;ft;); 
c.  2, Site lighting and utility plan, dated August 7, 1972 (Scale 1;inch; = 60;ft;); 
d.  3, Building Type A, dated June 7, 1972 (Scale 1/4;inch; = 1;ft;); 
e.  4, Building Type B, dated June 7, 1972 (Scale 1/4;inch; = 1;ft;); 
f.  5, Building Type B, dated June 7, 1972 (Scale 1/4;inch; = 1;ft;); 
g.  6, Building Type D & E, dated June 7, 1972 (Scale 1/4;inch; = 1;ft;); 
h.  6a, Building Type D & E, dated June 7, 1972 (Scale 1/4;inch; = 1;ft;); 
i.  7, Building Type C, dated June 7, 1972 (Scale 1/4;inch; = 1;ft;); and 
j.  8, Building Type F, dated June 7, 1972 (Scale 1/4;inch; = 1;ft;). 
60.1.2 Regulations: Within PDD #1, no land, building or other structure shall be used and no building or other structure shall be constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, moved or structurally altered except in conformity with the "Zoning Regulations of the Town of Naugatuck, Connecticut", adopted April 30, 1971, hereinafter referred to as the "regulations," as modified by this statement. Within PDD #1, no lot or land shall be subdivided, sold, encumbered or conveyed except in accordance with said regulations as modified by this statement. 
60.1.3 Boundary: The boundary of PDD #1 is delineated on plan 1, entitled "boundary and land use plan," specified in paragraph 1.1, encompasses an area of 14.3 acres, and is generally bounded and described as follows: 
On the north for approximately 425 feet by land now or formerly of Vincent Celentano; on the east for approximately 20 feet by the westerly street line of Osborn Road, 2,099 feet by land now or formerly of Vincent Celentano, Donald W. Fellows et ux., Robert Blomberg, John Plaskon et ux., Dana Cyr et ux., Francis Angiolillo, and Roy W. Palowski et ux., 265 feet by the westerly street line of Osborn, and 430 feet by land now or formerly of W.F. Cameron et ux., and H.F. Patriquin; on the south for approximately 612 feet by the northerly street line of New Haven Road (Conn. route 63); and on the west for approximately 2,216 feet by land now or formerly of Dena Ostrom, Vincent Celentano [and] Carolina Doolittle. 
    60.2 Permitted uses: The PDD #1 is hereby divided into the following land use areas as delineated on plan 1, entitled "boundary and land use plan" specified in paragraph 1.1: 
Area "A"-Residential. 
Area "B"-Open space. 
Area "C"-Commercial. 
Land, buildings and other structures in any land use shall be used for one (1) or more of the following specified uses and no other: 
60.2.1 Area "A"-Residential: 
a.  Dwelling containing two (2) or more dwelling units either for rental occupancy or condominium ownership; 
b.  Dwelling for watchman or caretaker; 
c.  Community house and administrative building directly related to the dwelling units and occupants of said units; 
d.  The following uses when clearly subordinate and subsidiary to the uses permitted in paragraphs 2.1.1, 2.1.2 and 2.1.3: 
1.  Storage; 
2.  Off-street parking as provided in paragraph 8; 
3.  Vehicular access; 
4.  Electric, telephone, gas, water, sanitary sewer lines, outside lighting and other utilities; 
5.  Landscape features permanently maintained; 
6.  Signs, as provided in paragraph 7; and 
7.  Recreation areas as required by section 32.8.1c of the regulations and including uses permitted under Part B-7 of schedule A of the regulations. 
60.2.2 Area "B"-Open space: 
a.  Undisturbed natural terrain and plant material and/or landscape features permanently maintained; and 
b.  Underground utilities from New Haven Road to Area "A." 
60.2.3 Area "C"-Commercial: 
a.  The uses permitted in a B-2 district under schedule A of the regulations, except that said uses permitted in a B-2 district as a matter of right, by the designation of a "P" in schedule A, shall be required to secure a special permit from the borough planning commission in accordance with section 32 of the regulations. 
    60.3 Lot area, shape and frontage: The land within PDD #1 land use areas "A" and "B" shall not be subdivided into individual lots, but land use area "A" will be divided into condominiums for sale of dwelling units and common area facilities, and/or partially retained for rental with rental land and dwellings in single building ownership. The existing land consisting of 14.3 acres is deemed to have the minimum area, shape and frontage required by the regulations. Within land use area "A" the minimum area for each dwelling unit shall be thirty thousand (30,000) square feet for the first dwelling unit and three thousand two hundred fifty (3,250) square feet for each additional dwelling unit in excess of one (1). 
    60.4 Height: Within land use areas "A" and "C," no building or other structure shall exceed a height of three (3) stories or forty (40) feet, whichever is less. 
    60.5 Setbacks: Within land use area "A" no building or other structure shall extend within less than thirty (30) feet of any street line, thirty (30) feet of any rear property line or boundary line of such land use area, and fifteen (15) feet of any side property line or boundary line of such land use area, except for buildings or other structures, located within three hundred (300) feet of New Haven Road which shall not extend within twenty-five (25) feet of any rear property line or boundary line or boundary line of such land use area, and ten (10) feet of any side property line or boundary line in such land use area. Within land use area "C" no building or other structure shall extend within less than twenty-five (25) feet of any street line, ten (10) feet of the boundary line of land use area "B" or twenty-five (25) feet of the boundary line of land use area "A" whichever is greater, and ten (10) feet of the side property line. 
    60.6 Coverage and bulk: Within land use area "A" the aggregate lot coverage of all buildings and other structures shall not exceed fifteen (15) percent of the area of area "A" and the total floor area of all buildings and other structures shall not exceed thirty-five (35) percent of the area of area "A." Within land use area "C" the aggregate lot coverage of all buildings and other structures shall not exceed forty (40) percent of the area of area "C" and the total floor area of all buildings and other structures shall not exceed one hundred (100) percent of the area of area "C." Within land use area "B" no building or other structures are permitted. 
    60.7 Signs: Within land use areas "A" and "C," signs shall conform to the requirements of section 43 of the regulations, except that within land use area "C" no sign shall be established or constructed until a special permit is secured from the borough planning commission in accordance with section 32 of the regulations. Within land use area "B," no sign is permitted. 
    60.8 Parking: Within land use area[s] "A" and "C," off-street parking and loading spaces shall be provided in accordance with section 42 of the regulations, except that within land use area "A" there shall be two (2) parking spaces for each dwelling unit, or one (1) parking space for each bedroom, whichever is greater. 
    60.9 Lighting: All outside lighting shall be directed so that the source of illuminating is not visible beyond the land use area. All lighting of signs in land use area "A" shall be indirect with the source of illumination not visible from any street or beyond area "A." 
    60.10 Other: All provisions of the regulations that are applicable in residential RA-2 districts shall be applicable to land use area[s] "A" and "B" of PDD #1, and in business district #2 shall be applicable to land use area "C" of PDD #1, except as modified by this statement. 
Section 61. - Planned development district No. 2-Naugatuck Industrial Park. 
    61.1 General: The "Zoning Regulations of the Borough of Naugatuck, Connecticut" including the zoning map and zoning districts, are amended by establishment of planned development district #2, hereinafter referred to as PDD #2. 
61.1.1 Content: The zoning provisions applicable in PDD #2 are those specified in this statement. The following maps and plans accompanying [accompany] this statement: 
(a)  Boundary survey, "Naugatuck Industrial Park, Economic Development Commission, Naugatuck, Connecticut" dated February 1978 (Scale 1;inch;= 100;ft;). 
(b)  Property map prepared for Bank Street Development Corporation and Main Street South Corporation showing land of Anne Wall Bronson, et al., Waterbury, Naugatuck, Connecticut dated May 1985 (Scale 1;inch;= 100;ft;). 
(c)  Land use plan, "Naugatuck Industrial Park, Economic Development Commission, Naugatuck, Connecticut" dated February 1978 (Scale 1;inch;= 400;ft;), as amended. 
(d)  Topographic Map, "Naugatuck Industrial Park, Economic Development Commission, Naugatuck, Connecticut" dated June 1974 (Scale 1;ft;= 400;ft;). 
61.1.2 Regulations: Within PDD #2, no land, building or other structure shall be used and no building or other structure shall be constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, extended, moved or structurally altered except in conformity with the "zoning regulations of the Borough of Naugatuck, Connecticut" hereinafter referred to as the "regulations," as modified by this statement. Within PDD #2, no lot or land shall be subdivided, sold, encumbered or conveyed except in accordance with said regulations as modified by this statement. 
61.1.3 Boundary: The boundary of PDD #2 is delineated on the map entitled "boundary map," specified in paragraph 61.1.1 encompasses an area of one hundred ninety-nine (199) acres, more or less, and is generally bounded and described as follows: 
On the north for approximately 2,930 feet by land now or formerly of Orton P. Camp Jr. et al., approximately 40 feet by land now or formerly or [of] Anne Wall Bronson, et al. being the southerly portion of a triangular piece located in the City of Waterbury, approximately 2,630 feet by land [now] or formerly of Orton P. Camp Jr. et al. On the east for approximately 3,765 feet by land now or formerly of Max Velenchik, 240 feet by land now or formerly of Dorothy Dumonski, the southerly street line of David Street and Alexander W. and Joan M. Lucuk, 1,683 feet by land now or formerly of Nunzia J. Finateri, Anthony J. and Helen Brazicki, and Vincent J. Dumonski and 302 feet by the westerly street line of Union City Road; on the south for approximately 1,251 feet by land now or formerly of Peter Sabaliauskas, Raymond C. and Patricia Gabani and 229 feet by the northerly street line of Prospect Street, 1,924 feet by land now or formerly of Ramos Iron Works, Inc., Robert James and Jennie Hedwig Irving and the easterly street line of Grandview Street, 1,503 feet by the northerly street line of Grandview Street land now or formerly of John R. McNamara, Frederick Gilbert, northerly street line of Liberty Street, by land now or formerly of Marie M. Carroll, northerly street line of Mitchell Street, by land now or formerly or [of] Leo M. and Maryann Klonis, by the northerly street line of Wilson Street, by land now or formerly of Joseph A. and Stella L. Foster, northerly property line of Neagle Street and by land of the Borough of Naugatuck, 118 feet by the northerly street line of Hopkins Street, 950 feet by land now or formerly of Frank A. and Lillian M. Savignano. On the west for approximately 4,010 feet by the easterly street line of Connecticut Route #8 and the southerly street line of North Main Street. 
    61.2 Permitted uses: The PDD #2 is hereby divided into the following land use areas as delineated on the map entitled: 
"Land use plan," specified in paragraph 61.1.1: 
Industrial #A "I-A" Industrial #B "I-B" Industrial #C "I-C" Business #A "B-A" Public facility #1 "PF-1" Open space #1 "OS-1" Open space #2 "OS-2"  
Land, buildings and other structures in any land use area shall be used for one (1) or more of the following specified uses and no other: 
61.2.1 Industrial #A-Area "I-A" 
(a)  Manufacturing, processing or assembling of goods; 
(b)  Warehousing; 
(c)  Research laboratories; 
(d)  Public utility company storage, maintenance and service facilities; 
(e)  The following uses when clearly subordinate and subsidiary to the uses permitted in paragraphs 61.2.2 (a), 61.2.1 (b), 61.2.2 (c), and 61.2.1 (d) of this statement: 
1.  Off-street parking and loading as provided in paragraph 61.8 of this statement; 
2.  Garages for the storage of company vehicles; 
3.  Dining facilities, clinics, recreational facilities and transient guest lodges, which shall be used only by those actually employed by the concern or by business visitors on the premises; 
4.  Outside storage areas shall not exceed ten (10) percent of the lot area, shall be enclosed, except for necessary vehicular access, by buildings and/or by fences, walls, embankments or evergreen shrubs or trees so as to screen the storage area from view from any other lot or from any street, and shall not extend into the area required for setback from a property line, street line or "OS-2" land use area; 
5.  Storage within a permanent structure; 
6.  Vehicular access; 
7.  Electric, telephone, gas, water, sanitary sewer, pretreatment sewage facilities, other utilities and outside lighting; 
8.  Landscape features permanently maintained; 
9.  Outdoor recreational facilities used only by those employed on the premises or by business visitors on the premises; 
10.  Communication facilities; and 
11.  Signs as provided in paragraph 61.7 of this statement. 
61.2.2 Industrial #B-Area "1-B" 
(a)  All uses permitted in [paragraph] 61.2.1 of this statement; 
(b)  The planning commission, upon the recommendation of the economic development commission, may grant a special permit under section 32 of the regulations for the establishment of (1) hotel or motel with restaurant and recreational facilities connected therewith and subordinate and subsidiary thereto and (2) commercial recreation businesses. 
61.2.3 Industrial #C-Area "I-C" 
(a)  All uses permitted in [paragraph] 61.2.2 of this statement; 
(b)  Office buildings for executive or business use; 
(c)  The following uses when clearly subordinate and subsidiary to the uses permitted in paragraphs 61.2.3(a) and 61.2.3(b) of this statement: 
1.  Utility substations; and 
2.  Maintenance shops for the upkeep and repair of building structure, equipment and landscaping on this lot. 
61.2.4 Business #A-Area "B-A" 
(a)  All uses permitted in a B-2 district under schedule A of the regulations, except that said uses permitted in a B-2 district as a matter of right by the designation of a "P" in said schedule A, shall be required to secure a special permit from the borough planning commission in accordance with section 32 of the regulations. 
61.2.5 Public facility #1-Area "PF-1" 
(a)  Borough facilities, including transportation; 
(b)  Public utility company electric, gas and telephone substations; 
(c)  Public utility company water storage facilities, pump stations and treatment facilities; 
(d)  Undisturbed natural terrain and plant material; 
(e)  Landscaped features permanently maintained; and 
(f)  Signs as provided in paragraph 61.7 of this statement. 
61.2.6 Open space #1-Area "OS-1" 
(a)  Recreational and borough facilities; 
(b)  Underground utilities and public utility company services located underground; 
(c)  Undisturbed natural terrain and plant material; 
(d)  Landscaped features permanently maintained; and 
(e)  Signs as provided in paragraph 61.7 of this statement. 
61.2.7 Open space #2-Area "OS-2" 
(a)  All uses permitted in [paragraph] 61.2.6 of this statement, and 
(b)  Vehicular access. 
    61.3 Lot area, shape and frontage: 
61.3.1 Industrial #A: Within land use area "I-A" each lot, including any area of said lot within land use area "OS-2," shall have a minimum area of two (2) acres, a minimum dimension of two hundred (200) feet and a minimum street frontage of fifty (50) feet. 
61.3.2 Industrial #B: Within land use area "I-B" each lot, including any area of said lot within land use area "OS-2," shall have a minimum area of five (5) acres, a minimum dimension of two hundred fifty (250) feet and a minimum street frontage of fifty (50) feet. 
61.3.3 Industrial #C: Within land use area "I-C" each lot including any area of said lot within land use area "OS-1," shall have a minimum area of ten (10) acres, a minimum dimension of three hundred (300) feet and a minimum street frontage of fifty (50) feet. 
61.3.4 Business #A: Land use area "B-A" is deemed to have the minimum area, shape and frontage required by the regulations. 
61.3.5 Public facility #1: Land use area "PF-1" is deemed to have the minimum area, shape and frontage required by these regulations. 
61.3.6 Open space #1 and #2: Land use area "OS-1" and "CS-2" are deemed to have the minimum area, shape and frontage required by the regulations. 
    61.4 Height: 
61.4.1 Industrial #A and #B: Within land use area[s] "I-A" and "I-B" no buildings or other structure shall exceed a height of two (2) stories or thirty (30) feet, whichever is less. 
61.4.2 Industrial #C: Within land use area "I-C," no building or other structure shall exceed a height of two (2) stories or thirty (30) feet, whichever is less. The planning commission upon the recommendation of the economic development commission may grant a special permit, under section 32 of the regulations, to permit an increase in the height of a building or other structure to six (6) stories or seventy-five (75) feet whichever is less. 
61.4.3 Public facility #1: Within land use area "PF-1," no building or other structure shall exceed a height of two (2) stories or thirty (30) feet whichever is less. The planning commission, upon recommendation of the economic development commission may grant a special permit under section 32 of the regulations, to permit an increase in the height of a water supply storage facility. 
61.4.4 Open spaces #1 and #2: Within land use areas "OS-1" and "OS-2" no building or other structure shall exceed a height of one (1) story or fifteen (15) feet, whichever is less. 
    61.5 Setbacks: 
61.5.1 Industrial #A: Within land use area "I-A," no building or other structure shall extend within fifty (50) feet of any street line or rear property line, twenty-five (25) feet of any side property line and fifteen (15) feet of any "OS-2" land use area. 
61.5.2 Industrial #B: Within land use area "I-B," no building or structure shall extend within fifty (50) feet of any street line or rear property line, forty (40) feet of any side property line and fifteen (15) feet of any "OS-2" land use area. 
61.5.3 Industrial #C: Within land use area "I-C," no building or other structure shall extend within fifty (50) feet of any street line, seventy-five (75) feet of any rear property line, fifty (50) feet of any side property line and fifteen (15) feet of any "OS-2" land use area. 
61.5.4 Public facility #1: Within land use area "PF-1," no building or structure shall extend within fifty (50) feet of any street or property line. Any portion of a water supply storage facility which exceeds thirty (30) feet in height shall be set back from any street or property line by one (1) additional foot for each foot or fraction thereof which such portion exceeds thirty (30) feet in height. 
61.5.5 Open spaces #1 and #2: Within land use area "OS-1" and area "OS-2," no building or structure shall extend within thirty (30) feet of any street or property line. 
    61.6 Coverage and bulk: 
61.6.1 Industrial #A: Within land use area "I-A," the aggregate lot coverage of all buildings and other structures shall not exceed thirty (30) percent of the lot area and the total floor area of all buildings and other structures shall not exceed sixty (60) percent of the lot area. 
61.6.2 Industrial #B: Within land use area "I-B," the aggregate lot coverage of all buildings and other structures shall not exceed thirty (30) percent of the lot area and the total floor area of all buildings and other structures shall not exceed sixty (60) percent of the lot area. 
61.6.3 Industrial #C: Within land use area "I-C," the aggregate lot coverage of all buildings and other structures shall not exceed thirty (30) percent of the lot area and the total floor area of all buildings and other structures shall not exceed sixty (60) percent of the lot area. 
61.6.4 Open spaces #1 and #2: Within land use area[s] "OS-1" an "OS-2," the aggregate lot coverage of all buildings and structures shall not exceed ten (10) percent of the lot area. 
    61.7 Signs: Within all land use areas specified in paragraph 61.2 of this statement, signs shall conform to the requirements of section 43 of the regulations, except that within land use areas, "PF-1", "OS-1" and "OS-2", signs shall conform to the requirements for residence districts. 
    61.8 Parking: Within land use areas "I-A" and "I-C", off-street parking and loading spaces shall be provided in accordance with section 42 of the regulations, and the standards specified in paragraph 24.7.4 of the regulations. Off-street loading, loading ramps, bay or platforms shall be located to the rear or side of all buildings or structures and permanently screened so that they are not visible from any street or abutting properties. 
    61.9 Lighting: Within PDD #2 all outside lighting shall be directed so that the source of illumination is not visible beyond the property line or lot, and all lighting of signs shall be indirect with source of illumination not visible from any street or property line. 
    61.10 Performance standards: The use of land, buildings and other structures in PDD #2 shall conform to the performance standards specified in section 41 of the regulations, or applicable local, state or federal regulations, whichever is the most restrictive. 
    61.11 Accessory buildings: All accessory buildings or structures shall have the same architectural character as the principal or main building. 
    61.12 Parapets: Parapets shall be provided where necessary to screen or hide any large air conditioning, ventilation, water storage or duct work located on the roof. 
    61.13 Other: All provisions of the regulations that are applicable in industrial district #2 shall be applicable to land use areas "I-A," "I-B" and "I-C" of PDD #2 in business district #2 shall be applicable to land use area "B-A" of PDD #2 and residence R-15 districts shall be applicable to land use areas "PF-1," "OS-1" and "OS-2" of PDD #2, except as modified by this statement. 
Section 62. - Planned development district No. 3-County Club View Estates. 
    62.1 General: The "Zoning Regulations of the Borough of Naugatuck, Connecticut" including the zoning map and zoning districts, are amended by establishment of planned development district #3, hereinafter referred to as "PDD #3." 
62.1.1 Purposes: 
(a)  To develop a tract of presently under-utilized real estate into a "planned condominium community" of integrated and harmonious design which is consistent, not only with its immediate surrounding neighborhood, but also with the character of the borough-at-large and the plan of boroughwide development established by the planning commission. 
(b)  To limit the mixed zoning uses available to a presently existing parcel of land by restricting said parcel of land to the harmonious single use of the unique proposed planned development district. 
62.1.2 Content: The zoning provisions to be applicable to PDD #3 are those suggested in this statement. This statement is accompanied by the following maps and plans bearing the general title "proposed planned development district #3." (Items a-f prepared by Paul Associates, Middlebury, Connecticut. Items g-h prepared by Alexander and Whitaker, Waterbury, Connecticut). 
(a)  Site plan, scale: 1;inch; = 40;ft;, dated 7/22/80, rev. 12/2/80, Doc. No. 80-1069, sheet 1 of 6; 
(b)  Property line & PDD #3 boundary line, scale: 1;inch; = 40;ft;, dated 12/2/80, Doc. No. 80-1097, sheet 2 of 6; 
(c)  Buildings, road, parking locations, scale: 1;inch; = 40;ft;, dated 12/2/80, Doc. No. 80-1096, sheet 3 of 6; 
(d)  Site utilities & golf courses drainage plan & profile, scale: 1;inch; = 40;ft; Hor. & 1;inch; = 4;ft; Vir., dated 12/2/80, Doc. No. 80-1095, sheet 4 of 6; 
(e)  Road & utilities profile, scale: 1;inch; = 40;ft; Hor. & 1;inch; = 4;ft; Vir., dated 12/2/80, Doc. No. 80-1094, sheet 5 of 6; 
(f)  Standard details, not to scale, dated 12/2/80, Doc. No. 80-1093, sheet 6 of 6; 
(g)  Typical unit floor plan and typical unit elevation; and 
(h)  Architect's rendering, buildings #1 & #10. 
62.1.3 Regulations: Within PDD #3, no land, building or other structure shall be used and no building or other structure shall be constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, moved or structurally altered except in conformity with the "Zoning Regulations of the Town of Naugatuck, Connecticut," adopted February 9, 1973, hereinafter referred to as the "regulations," as modified by this statement. Within PDD #3, no lot or land shall be subdivided, sold, encumbered or conveyed except in accordance with said regulations as modified by this statement. 
62.1.4 Boundary. The boundary of PDD #3, as delineated in the "property line & PDD #3 boundary line" referred to in section 62.1.2(b) above, encompasses the following parcel of land with an area of 9.88 acres and is generally bounded and described as follows: 
Beginning at a point in the easterly streetline of Spring St. which point is marked by an iron pin and is the southwesterly corner of the within described parcel and the northwesterly corner of land N/F G. Chisek, thence proceeding N 26 59 13 W 20.21 feet along the easterly streetline of Spring St. to a point, which point is marked by an iron pin, thence proceeding northerly and deflecting to the right 189.26 feet along the arc of a curve having a radius of 237.07 feet, chord bearing N 04 06 58 W 184.28 feet which arc is along the easterly streetline of Spring Street to a point, thence proceeding N 18 45 17 E 138.10 feet, along the easterly streetline of Spring St. to a point, thence proceeding N 78 47 26 E 422.54 feet along land N/F Robert & Janet Poulter to a point, which point is marked by an iron pin, thence proceeding N 11 58 21 E 75.05 feet along land N/F Robert & Janet Poulter to a point, which point is marked by an iron pin in a boulder, thence proceeding N 56 54 07 E 974.43 feet along land N/F H. Camp Est. and land N/F Penn. Central Railroad, each in part, to a point, thence proceeding southerly and deflecting to the left 364.65 feet along the arc of a curve having a radius of 1,985,08 feet, chord bearing S 14 43 20 E 364.14 feet, which arc is along the westerly line of the Penn. Central Railroad, thence proceeding S 70 57 17 W 358.04 feet along N/F Raymond Antonacci to a point, thence proceeding S 55 16 23 W 788.56 feet along land N/F Raymond Antonacci and land N/F A. Rodriques, each in part, to a point, which point is marked by an iron pin, thence proceeding S 69 47 58 W 71.40 feet along land N/F J. Peterson to a point, which point is marked by an iron pin, thence proceeding S 75 47 23 W 74.58 feet along land N/F J. Peterson to a point which point is marked by an iron pin, thence proceeding S 75 53 54 W 242.37 feet along land N/F R. Ruginis and G. Chisek each in part, to the point of beginning. 
    The within described parcel comprises of 43-, 389 square feet (9.88 acres) and bounded: 
Northerly 422.58 feet by land N/F Robert & Janet Poulter. Westerly 75.05 feet by land N/F Robert & Janet Poulter. Northerly 974.43 feet by land N/F H. Camp Est. and land N/F Penn. Central Railroad, each in part. Easterly 364.65 feet by land N/F Penn. Central Railroad. Southerly 1,534.95 feet by land N/F Raymond Antonacci, land N/F A. Rodriques, land N/F J. Peterson, land N/F R. Ruginis and land N/F Chisek, each in part. Westerly 347.57 feet by the easterly streetline of Spring St. 
62.2.0 Permitted uses: PDD #3 is to be used exclusively for a residential condominium community with no commercial uses whatsoever allowed therein. The land and buildings shall be used for the following specific use and no other. 
62.2.1 Residential: 
(a)  Dwellings containing four (4) to ten (10) residential dwelling units each for condominium ownership only. 
(b)  The following uses when clearly subordinate and subsidiary to the uses permitted in section 62.2.1: 
1.  (No storage); 
2.  Off-street parking as provided in section 62.8.0; 
3.  Vehicular access; 
4.  Electric, telephone, gas, water, sanitary sewer lines, outside lighting and other utilities; 
5.  Landscape features permanently maintained with the rearmost area to be maintained in its natural form; 
6.  "Sight easement" as proposed in the maps and plans named in sections 62.1.2(a) and 62.1.2(b); 
7.  Signs, as provided in section 7.0; 
8.  A "recreational area" as depicted in the map and plan named in section 62.1.2(a); 
9.  Loading areas for refuse dumpsters. 
    62.3 Lot area, shape and frontage: The land within PDD #3 shall not be subdivided into individual lots, but will be divided into condominiums for sale of dwelling units and common element facilities. The existing land consisting of 9.88 acres shall have the minimum area, shape and frontage required by the regulations. The area for each dwelling unit shall be 5,517 square feet. 
    62.4 Height: Within the proposed PDD no building shall exceed two (2) stories or thirty (30) feet. 
    62.5 Setbacks: Within the proposed PDD no building shall extend within less than twenty-five (25) feet of any street line, thirty (30) feet or [of] any rear property line and fifteen (15) feet of any side property line. 
    62.6 Coverage and bulk: Within the proposed PDD the aggregate lot coverage of all dwelling units shall not exceed ten (10) percent of the area. There shall be no other structures. 
    62.7 Signs: There shall be no signs except as shall (a) conform to the requirements of section 43 of the Naugatuck zoning regulations; (b) befit the character of a residential district; and (c) provide for public safety (police, fire, etc.) and unit, building and development identification. 
    62.8 Parking: Within the proposed PDD off-street parking and loading spaces shall be provided in accordance with section 42 of the Naugatuck zoning regulations, except that there shall be two (2) parking spaces for each dwelling unit, with each space being nine (9) feet by twenty (20) feet with a twenty-foot back-up. 
    62.9 Lighting: All outside lighting shall be directed so that the area directly illuminated shall be within the PDD. 
    62.10 Other: All provisions of the regulations that are applicable in residential RA-2 districts shall be applicable to PDD #3, except as modified by this statement. 
Section 63. - Planned development district No. 4-Nutmeg Village. 
    63.1 General: The "Zoning Regulations of the Borough of Naugatuck, Connecticut" including the zoning map and zoning districts, are amended by establishment of planned development district #4, hereinafter referred to as "PDD #4." 
63.1.1 Purposes: 
(a)  To develop a tract of presently undeveloped real estate into a cluster solar-residential community of integrated and harmonious design which is consistent, not only with its immediate surrounding neighborhood, but also with the residential character of the borough-at-large and the plan of boroughwide development established by the planning commission. 
(b)  To allow the use of a parcel of land which, due to the terrain, contours and location as it relates to existing utilities, could not be appropriately developed under the present zoning designation or any other existing zone regulations. 
63.1.2 Content: The zoning provisions to be applicable to PDD #4 are those proposed in this statement. This statement is accompanied by the following maps and plans which together constitute the "development plan" required by section 33.2.2 of the zoning ordinance, which are identified as follows: 
(a)  "Site plan-PDD #4," July 8, 1981-scale 1;inch; = 40;ft;, pages 1 and 2. 
(b)  "Architectural plans"-PDD #4, July 8, 1981, scale 1;inch; = 40;ft; pages 1, 2, 3 and 4. 
(c)  Boundary description, PDD #4, October 19, 1981. 
(d)  Subdivision plan-Section I, Nutmeg Village, Mulberry St. Naugatuck, CT., prepared for Valley Associates, scale 1;inch; = 40;ft; dated 2/21/82, revised 4/22/82 and 4/27/82, sheet 1. 
(e)  Subdivision plan-Section II, Nutmeg Village, prepared for Valley Associates, Mulberry Street, Naugatuck, CT, scale 1;inch; = 40;ft;, dated 4/2/82, revised 5/22/82 and 10/22/82. 
(f)  Boundary description, PDD #4, amendment #1, 10/20/82. 
(g)  Boundary map, map showing land to be rezoned, PDD #4, date [dated] 10/20/82 (amendment #1). 
(h)  Proposed subdivision map, Nutmeg Village, section 3, dated 10/4/82, revised 10/5/82, 11/1/82 and 12/15/82, 2/7/83. 
(i)  Site development plan, Nutmeg Village, section 3, dated 10/4/82, revised 11/1/82, 12/15/82, 1/28/83, 2/3/83, 2/7/83, 3/1/83, 4/4/83. 
63.1.3 Regulations: Within PDD #4, no land, building or other structure shall be used and no building or other structure shall be constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, moved or structurally altered except in conformity with the "Zoning Regulations of the Town of Naugatuck, Connecticut," adopted February 9, 1973, hereinafter referred to as the "regulations," as modified by this statement. Within PDD #4, no lot or land shall be subdivided, sold, encumbered or conveyed except in accordance with said regulations as modified by this statement. 
63.1.4 Boundary: The boundary of PDD #4, is delineated on the "site plans" referred to in section 63.1.2 above and encompasses an area of twenty-seven (27) acres. 
    63.2 Permitted uses: PDD #4, is to be used exclusively for a single family cluster solar residential community. The land and buildings shall be used for the following specific use and no other: 
63.2.1 Residential: 
(a)  Building containing no more than two (2) dwelling units in each building but with each dwelling unit constructed on a single building lot. 
(b)  The following uses when clearly subordinate and subsidiary to the uses permitted in section 63.2.1: 
1.  Storage; 
2.  Off-street parking; 
3.  Vehicular access; 
4.  Private access roads for rear lots shall be permitted, provided they each have a width of no less than fifteen (15) feet. Where rear lot access roads adjoin each other then rear lot owners shall be provided an easement for vehicular and pedestrian traffic and for utilities over each others access roads, which easements shall be noted on subdivision maps and shall be recited in the property owners deeds; 
5.  Electric, telephone, gas, water, sanitary sewer lines, outside lighting and other utilities; 
6.  Landscape features permanently maintained with the rearmost area to be maintained in its natural form; 
7.  Solar access, no trees, vegetation or structures of any kind whatsoever shall be permitted on any lot, that will impair the solar access of any lot within PDD #4. Solar construction features shall be noted on PDD #4's subdivision maps. Solar access requirements shall be noted on subdivision maps and guaranteed for each lot by suitable deed restrictions which shall require all property owners to preserve the solar access for their lots as well as others in the subdivision; 
8.  Open space shall be designated on PDD #4's site plan, and on any subsequent subdivision plans. The disposition requirements for open space land in PDD #4, shall be the same as recited in section 34.4.7 of the zoning regulations for open space divisions; 
9.  Signs, as permitted in zoning regulations. 
    63.3 Standards: The land within PDD #4 shall be subdivided into individual lots, in accordance with the planning commission regulations for the Borough of Naugatuck, and the provisions of these regulations that are applicable in an RA-1 zone, except as modified by this statement, as follows: 
63.3.1 Square: The minimum dimension of a square on a lot shall be forty (40) feet, to be determined at any location on the lot. 
63.3.2 Setbacks: 
63.3.2.1 Sidelines: Within the proposed PDD a building must be set back ten (10) feet or more from at least one (1) side property line, a building may extend up to any common side property line with no setback. A "common side" line is defined as that side line that is in common with any two (2) attached or detached single family homes and that is not set back ten (10) feet from the buildings on each lot. 
63.3.2.2 Street line: Within PDD #4, the minimum building setback requirement of twenty-five (25) feet shall be measured back from the front boundary line. A front boundary line shall be any lot boundary line that is not a rear line or a side line. 
63.3.3 Frontage: Within PDD #4, "street frontage" is defined as a line measured from side line to side line, at the building setback line. 
63.3.4 There shall be no more than ninety-five (95) lots permitted in PDD #4. 
63.3.5 Other: All other provisions of the regulations that are applicable in residential RA-1 districts shall be applicable to PDD #4, except as modified by this statement. 
    63.4 Boundary description, PDD #4, sections I and II. Beginning at a point in the northerly street line of Mulberry Street, said point being the southeasterly corner of land now or formerly of Ronald G. & Frances L. Ardry and is the southwesterly corner of the herein described parcel of land, thence running N 13;deg; 02;min; 35;sec; W along land now or formerly of said Ardy's. 253.25 feet, thence N 9;deg; 49;min; 04;sec; W along land now or formerly of said Ardry's and land now or formerly of Fred N. & Yolanda V. Mirabelle, each in part 31.21 feet, thence the following courses and distances along land now or formerly of Fred N. & Yolanda V. Mirabelle: N 19;deg; 19;min; 43;sec; W, 49.55 feet, N 30;deg; 39;min; 21;sec; W 45.60 feet, S 75;deg; 39;min; 46;sec; W, 41.13 feet, S 66;deg; 31;min; 31;sec; W, 45.56 feet, S 63;deg; 58;min; 54;sec; W, 114.70 feet, thence N 36;deg; 09;min; 00;sec; W along land now or formerly of Joseph R. Mezzo and Mary E. Mezzo, 241.03 feet, thence the following courses and distances along land now or formerly of Connecticut Water Company, N 56;deg; 08;min; 33;sec; E, 412.85 feet, N 54;deg; 57;min; 29;sec; E, 151.45 feet, N 56;deg; 39;min; 23;sec; E, 331.81 feet, N 49;deg; 06;min; 36;sec; E, 79.17 feet, thence the following courses and distances along land now or formerly of the Borough of Naugatuck, S 26;deg; 19;min; 53;sec; E, 196.26 feet, S 21;deg; 13;min; 36;sec; E, 157.90 feet, S 42;deg; 12;min; 17;sec; E, 97.95 feet, thence following courses and distances along land now or formerly of Charles Tarbunas, S 41;deg; 31;min; 31;sec; W, 123.97 feet, S 20;deg; 21;min; 34;sec; W, 325.84 feet, S 50;deg; 26;min; 40;sec; E, 157.93 feet, S 51;deg; 11;min; 50;sec; E, 159.69 feet, S 41;deg; 58;min; 20;sec; E, 132.33 feet, S 62;deg; 22;min; 30;sec; E, 57.92 feet, S 56;deg; 42;min; 54;sec; E, 107.34 feet, thence S 5;deg; 36;min; 00;sec; E along land now or formerly of the Borough of Naugatuck, 124.50 feet, thence westerly the following courses and distances along the northerly street line of Mulberry Street, westerly curving to the left along a line having a radius of arc of 775.00 feet, 22.55 feet, S 79;deg; 12;min; 27;sec; W, 153.50 feet, westerly curving to the right along a line having a radius of arc of 155.00 feet, 187.97 feet, N 31;deg; 18;min; 33;sec; W, 23.03 feet, westerly curving to the left along a line having a radius of arc of 325.00 feet, 268.66 feet, N 78;deg; 40;min; 21;sec; W, 323.30 feet to the point or place of beginning. 
The above described parcel of land is shown on a map entitled: "Map portion of land of The Estate of Antoni Smiecienski & Antonina Smiecienski, Mulberry Street, Naugatuck, Connecticut, May 31, 1977, scale 1;inch; = 100;ft;, prepared by Frank A. Desmond, borough engineer. 
    63.5 Boundary description PDD #4 amendment #1, October 20, 1982, section 3. Beginning at a point on the north street line of Mulberry Street, said point being the southeast corner of the property, now or formerly of the Borough of Naugatuck, N 05;deg; 36;min; 00;sec; W, 79.51 feet, thence N 56;deg; 42;min; 54;sec; W, 176.71 feet, thence N 62;deg; 22;min; 30;sec; W, 57.92 feet, thence N 41;deg; 58;min; 20;sec; W, 132.33 feet, thence N 51;deg; 11;min; 50;sec; W, 159.59 feet, thence N 50;deg; 26;min; 40;sec; W, 157.93 [feet], thence N 20;deg; 21;min; 34;sec; E, 325.84 feet, thence N 41;deg; 31;min; 31;sec; E, 123.97 feet, thence S 71;deg; 06;min; 25;sec; E, 761.42 feet, thence S 18;deg; 53;min; 26;sec; W, 261.91 feet, thence S 05;deg; 45;min; 17;sec; E, 237.70 feet, thence S 84;deg; 12;min; 20;sec; W, 25.00 feet, thence N 82;deg; 56;min; 07;sec; W, 254.87 feet, thence S 18;deg; 58;min; 15;sec; E, 59.43 feet, thence S 08;deg; 37;min; 17;sec; E, 140.57 feet, thence westerly along a curve delta - 5;deg; 37;min; 49;sec;, R = 775.00;min; L = 76.16;ft;, C = 76.13;min;, to the point and place of beginning. 
Section 64. - Planned development district No. 5-Glenhollow Condominiums. 
    64.1 General: The "Zoning Regulations of the Borough of Naugatuck, Connecticut," including the zoning map and zoning district, are amended by establishment of planned development district #5, hereinafter referred to as "PDD #5." 
64.1.1 Purposes: 
(a)  To develop a tract of presently under-utilized real estate into a "planned condominium community" of integrated and harmonious design which is consistent, not only with its immediate surrounding neighborhood, but also with the character of the borough-at-large and the plan of boroughwide development established by the planning commission. 
(b)  To limit the mixed zoning uses available to a presently existing parcel of land by restricting said parcel of land to the harmonious single use of the unique proposed planned development district. 
64.1.2 Content: The zoning provisions to be applicable to PDD #5 are those suggested in this statement. This statement is accompanied by the following maps and plans bearing the general title "Proposed Planned Development District #5 (items A-1 through A-4 prepared by Moeckel and Oris, Architects, P.C., Naugatuck, Connecticut and items C-1 through C-6 prepared by R. J. Desrosiers Associates, Naugatuck, Connecticut). 
(A-1) Site and landscaping plan, scale 1;inch; = 40;ft; - 0;inch;, dated 12/17/81. 
(A-2) Small scale building plans, scale 1/8 ;inch; = 1;ft; - 0,;inch; dated 12/17/81. 
(A-3) Large scale unit plans, scale 1/4;inch; = 1;ft; - 0;inch;, dated 12/17/81. 
(A-4) Exterior elevations, scale 1/4;inch; = 1;ft; - 0;inch;, dated 12/17/81. 
(C-1) Property & boundary survey, scale 1;inch; = 40;ft; - 0;inch;, dated 12/17/81. 
(C-2) Location plan, scale 1;inch; = 40;ft; - 0;inch;, dated 12/17/81. 
(C-3) Grading plan, scale 1;inch; = 40;ft; - 0;inch;, dated 12/17/81. 
(C-4) Utility plan, scale 1;inch; = 40;ft; - 0;inch;, dated 12/17/81. 
(C-5) Road plan & profiles, scales - Horizontal - 1;inch; = 40;ft; - 0;inch; Vertical - 1;inch; = 4;ft; - 0;inch; dated 12/17/81. 
(C-6) Standard details, dated 12/17/81. 
64.1.3 Regulations: Within PDD #5, no land, building or other structure shall be used and no building or other structure shall be constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, moved or structurally altered except in conformity with the "Zoning Regulations of the Town of Naugatuck, Connecticut," adopted February 9, 1973, hereinafter referred to as the "regulations", as modified by this statement. Within PDD #5, no lot or land shall be subdivided, sold, encumbered or conveyed except in accordance with said regulations as modified by this statement. 
64.1.4 Boundary: The boundary of PDD #5, as delineated in the "property & boundary survey" referred to in section 1.2 C-1 encompasses the following parcel of land with an area of five and three-tenths (5.3) acres and is generally bounded and described as follows: 
Description of parcel of land for proposed P.D.D.-Superior Homes, Inc. Beginning at a point in the southerly streetline of Wooster Street, said point being S 31;deg; - 34;min; = 36;sec; E, 10.0 feet from the northeasterly corner of land now or formerly of Anne Z. Smith and is the northwesterly corner of the herein described parcel of land, thence running N 66;deg; - 05;min; - 29;sec; E along Wooster Street, 75.25 feet, thence southerly curving to the left along a line having a radius of arc of 15.0 feet along land now or formerly of Harold L. & Fernande M. Cyphers, 23.92 feet, thence the following courses and distances along land of said Cyphers S 25;deg; - 17;min; - 02;sec; E, 72.66 feet, southerly curving to the left along a line having a radius of arc of 125.00;min;, 85.88 feet N 25;deg; - 20;min; -59;sec; E, 212.33 feet, thence S 79;deg; - 19;min; - 57;sec; E along land now or formerly of James Gilson et al, 156.44 feet, thence S 84;deg; - 50;min; - 32;sec; E along said Gilson, 416.86 feet, thence S 5;deg; - 43;min; - 22 W along land now or formerly of John J. Massimo et al., 111.22 feet, thence S 82;deg; - 56;min; -40;sec; W along land formerly of the Naugatuck Housing Authority (lots 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 and 8 Cold Spring Circle), 783.27 feet, thence N 52;deg; - 55;min; - 22;sec; W along land now or formerly of Michael William and Theresa Edwards, 49.41 feet, thence N 53;deg; - 54;min; - 56;sec; W along said Edwards, 62.00 feet, thence N 29;deg; - 21;min; - 58;sec; E along land nor [now] or formerly of Carol J. Poynton and Robert W. Wiltshire, 29.92 feet, thence N 29;deg; - 49;min; - 44;sec; W along land now or formerly of Hazel Morrow, 76.77 feet, thence N 64;deg; - 42;min; - 58;sec; E along land now or formerly of Anne Z. Smith, 165.00 feet, thence N 31;deg; - 34;min; - 36;sec; W along said Smith, 90.00 feet to the point or place of beginning. 
    64.2 Permitted uses: PDD #5 is to be used exclusively for a residential condominium community with no commercial uses whatsoever allowed therein. The land and buildings shall be used for the following specific use and no other: 
64.2.1 Residential: 
(a)  Dwellings containing four (4) to six (6) residential dwelling units each for condominium ownership only. 
(b)  The following uses when clearly subordinate and subsidiary to the uses permitted in section 64.2.1: 
1.  (No storage); 
2.  Off-street parking as provided in section 8.0; 
3.  Vehicular access; 
4.  Electric, telephone, gas, water, sanitary sewer lines, outside lighting and other utilities; 
5.  Landscape features permanently maintained with the perimeter areas to be maintained in their natural form; 
6.  Signs, as provided in section 64.7; and 
7.  Loading areas for refuse dumpsters. 
    64.3 Lot area, shape and frontage: The land within PDD #5 shall not be subdivided into individual lots, but will be divided into condominiums for sale of dwelling units and common element facilities. The existing land consisting of five and three-tenths (5.3) acres shall have the minimum area, shape and frontage required by the regulations. The area for each dwelling unit shall be five thousand seven hundred and seventy-one (5,771) square feet. 
    64.4  Height: Within the proposed PDD no building shall exceed two (2) stories or thirty (30) feet. 
    64.5 Setbacks: Within the proposed PDD no building shall extend within less than twenty-five (25) feet of any street line, thirty (30) feet of any rear property line and fifteen (15) feet of any side property line. 
    64.6 Coverage and bulk: Within the proposed PDD the aggregate lot coverage of all dwelling units shall not exceed ten (10) percent of the area. There shall be no other structures. 
    64.7 Signs: There shall be no signs except as shall: 
(a)  Conform to the requirements of section 43 of the Naugatuck zoning regulations; 
(b)  Befit the character of a residential district; and 
(c)  Provide for public safety (police, fire, etc.) and unit, building and development identification. 
    64.8 Parking: Within the proposed PDD off-street parking and loading spaces shall be provided in accordance with section 42 of the Naugatuck zoning regulations, except that there shall be two (2) parking spaces for each dwelling unit, with each space being nine (9) feet by twenty (20) feet, with a twenty-foot back-up. 
    64.9 Lighting: All outside lighting shall be directed so that the area directly illuminated shall be within the PDD. 
    64.10 Other: All provisions of the regulations that are applicable in residential R-15 districts shall be applicable to PDD #5, except as modified by this statement. 
Section 65. - Planned development district No. 6-Meadowland Estates. 
    65.1 General: The "Zoning Regulations of the Borough of Naugatuck, Connecticut," including the zoning map and zoning districts, are amended by establishment of planned development district #6, hereinafter referred to as "PDD #6." 
65.1.1 Purposes: 
(a)  To develop a tract of presently under-utilized real estate into a "planned condominium" of integrated and harmonious design which is consistent, not only with the long-range improvement of the neighborhood, but also with the character of the borough-at-large and the plan of boroughwide development established by the planning commission. 
(b)  To restrict a parcel of land presently zoned R-15 and I-2 with its various and sundry uses to the single and harmonious residential condominium use of the unique proposed planned development district, thereby benefitting the long range development of the neighborhood. 
65.1.2 Content: The zoning provisions to be applicable to PDD #6 are those suggested in this statement. This statement is accompanied by the following maps and plans bearing the general title "proposed planned development district #6." (Items a-f prepared by Paul Associates, Middlebury, Connecticut, items g-h prepared [by] Alexander and Whitaker, Waterbury, Connecticut). 
(a)  Property line & PDD #6 boundary line, Meadowland Estates Condominium, land N/F Mildred May Clark, New Haven Road-Horton Hill Road, Naugatuck, Conn., scale 1;inch; = 40;ft;, date 3/8/82, Doc. No. 82-1011, sheet 1 of 6. 
(b)  Site development plan, Meadowland Estates Condominium, land N/F Mildred May Clark, New Haven Road-Horton Hill Road, Naugatuck, Conn., scale 1;inch; = 40;ft;, date 3/8/82, Doc. No. 82-1012, sheet 2 of 6. 
(c)  Buildings, roads, parking and landscaping, Meadowland Estates, Condominium, land N/F Mildred May Clark, New Haven Road-Horton Hill Road, Naugatuck, Conn., scale 1;inch; = 40;ft;, date 3/8/82, Doc. No. 82-1013, sheet 3 of 6. 
(d)  Site utilities, Meadowland Estates Condominium, land N/F Mildred May Clark, New Haven Road-Horton Hill Road, Naugatuck, Conn., scale 1;inch; = 40;ft;, date 3/8/82, Doc. No. 82-1014, sheet 4 of 6. 
(e)  Profiles, Meadowland Estates Condominium, land N/F Mildred May Clark, New Haven Road-Horton Hill Road, Naugatuck, Conn., scale 1;inch; = 40;ft;, date 3/8/82, Doc. No. 82-1015, sheet 5 of 6. 
(f)  Standard details, Meadowland Estates Condominium, land N/F Mildred May Clark, New Haven Road-Horton Hill Road, Naugatuck, Conn., (not to scale), date 3/8/82, Doc. No. 82-1016, sheet 6 of 6. 
(g)  Typical unit floor plan and typical unit elevation, Meadowland Estates Condominium, Naugatuck, Conn., Project No. 8205, scale 1/4;inch; = 1;ft; 0;inch;, date 3/20/82, drawing No. 1. 
(h)  Building plan, ten unit building - front elevation, ten unit building, Meadowland Estates Condominium, Naugatuck, Conn., Project No. 8205, scale 1/4;inch; = 1;ft; 0;inch;, date 3/20/82, drawing No. 2. 
65.1.3 Regulations: Within PDD #6, no land, building or other structure shall be used and no building or other structure shall be constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, moved or structurally altered except in conformity with the "Zoning Regulations of the Town of Naugatuck, Connecticut," adopted April 30, 1971 and amended February 9, 1973, hereinafter referred to as the "regulations," as modified by this statement. Within PDD #6, no lot or land shall be subdivided, sold, encumbered or conveyed except in accordance with said regulations as modified by this statement. 
65.1.4 Boundary: The boundary of PDD #6 as delineated in the "property line & PDD #6 boundary line" referred to in section 65.1.2(a) above, encompasses the following parcel of land with an area of nine and ninety-six one-hundredths (9.96) acres and is generally bounded and described as follows: Beginning at an iron pin set in the northerly line of New Haven Road (Conn. Rte. #63) which point is the southeasterly corner of the within described parcel and which point is also the southwesterly corner of land N/F Franklin L. and Anne L. Behlman, thence N 82 13 33 W 291.00 feet along the northerly line of New Haven Rd. to the monument found, thence northwesterly and deflecting to the right 29.71 feet along the curve of radius 21.42 feet (delta = 79;deg; 27 min 56 sec., chord bearing N 42 29 35 W) to a point in the easterly line of Horton Hill Rd., thence N 02 45 37 W 548.78 feet along the easterly line of Horton Hill Rd. to a monument found, thence northeasterly and deflecting to the right 145.50 feet along the curve of radius 675 feet (delta = 12;deg; 21 min 01 sec., chord bearing N 03 24 53 E) to a point in the center line of Marks Brook, thence northeasterly 660 feet more or less, in an irregular line, along the center line of Marks Brook to a point in the southerly line of land N/F The Connecticut Water Co., thence S 40 17 43 E 232.61 feet along the southerly line of land N/F The Connecticut Water Co. to an iron pin set in the westerly line of land N/F Bernard and Gerald Gendron, thence S 12 15 58 W 296.84 feet to an iron pin set and S 10 53 57 W 91.90 feet to an iron pin found at the southwesterly corner of land N/F Gendron, which point is also the northwesterly corner of land N/F Franklin L. & Anne L. Behlman, both of the above courses being along the westerly line of land N/F Gendron thence S 08 08 21 W 80.65 feet and S 10 46 22 W 194.55 feet and S 10 11 01 W 262.74 feet and S 08 21 50 W 16.40 feet and S 19 16 39 W 67.54 feet to an iron pin set and S 07 46 27 W 110.00 feet to the point of beginning above described each of the above six (6) courses being along the westerly line of land N/F Behlman. 
The above described parcel is a portion of the land described in Volume 186 page 350 of the Naugatuck Land Records, and comprises four hundred thirty-three thousand seven hundred sixty-seven (433,767) square feet, more or less (9.96 acres, more or less). 
    65.2 Permitted uses: PDD #6 is to be used exclusively for a residential condominium community with no commercial uses whatsoever allowed therein. The land and buildings shall be used for the following specific use and no other: 
65.2.1 Residential: 
(a)  Dwellings containing eight (8) to ten (10) residential dwelling units each for condominium ownership only. 
(b)  The following uses when clearly subordinate and subsidiary to the uses permitted in section 65.2.1: 
1.  Off-street parking as provided in section 8.0; 
2.  Vehicular access; 
3.  Electric, telephone, gas, water, sanitary, sewer lines, outside lighting and other utilities; 
4.  Landscape features permanently maintained and those areas to be maintained in their natural state as depicted in the site development plan referred to in section 65.1.2(b); 
5.  Signs, as provided in section 65.7; 
6.  A "recreational area" as depicted in the map and plan named in section 65.1.2(b); and 
7.  Loading areas for refuse dumpsters. 
    65.3 Lot area, shape and frontage: The land within PDD #6 shall be divided into condominiums containing dwelling units for sale and common element facilities. The existing land consisting of nine and ninety-six one-hundredths (9.96) acres shall have the minimum area, shape and frontage required by the regulations. The area for each dwelling unit shall be four thousand one hundred seventy-one (4,171) square feet. 
    65.4 Height: Within the proposed PDD no building shall exceed two (2) stories or thirty (30) feet. 
    65.5 Setbacks: Within the proposed PDD no building shall extend within less than twenty-five (25) feet of any street line, thirty (30) feet of any rear property line and fifteen (15) feet of any side property line. 
    65.6 Coverage and bulk: Within the proposed PDD the aggregate lot coverage of all dwelling units shall not exceed fifteen (15) percent of the area. There shall be no other structures. 
    65.7 Signs: There shall be no signs except as shall: 
(a)  Conform to the requirements of section 43 of the Naugatuck zoning regulations, 
(b)  Befit the character of a residential district, and 
(c)  Provide for public safety (police, fire, etc.) and unit, building and development identification. 
    65.8 Parking: Within the proposed PDD off-street parking and loading spaces shall be provided in accordance with section 42 of the Naugatuck zoning regulations, except that there shall be two (2) parking spaces for each dwelling unit, with each space being nine (9) feet by twenty (20) feet, with a twenty-foot back-up. 
    65.9 Lighting: All outside lighting shall be directed so that the area directly illuminated shall be within the PDD. 
    65.10 Other: All provisions of the regulations that are applicable in residential RA-2 districts shall be applicable to PDD #6, except as modified by this statement. 
Section 66. - Planned development district No. 7-Brook Valley Estates Condominiums. 
    66.1.1 General: The "Zoning Regulations of the Borough of Naugatuck, Connecticut", including the zoning map and zoning districts, are amended by establishment of planned development district #7, hereinafter referred to as PDD #7. 
    66.1.2 Content: The zoning provisions to be applicable to PDD #7 are those specified in this statement. This statement is accompanied by the following maps and plans, of which those lettered (a)-(i) bear the general title: "Brook Valley Estates Condominiums, land N/F Helen DePino, New Haven Rd. (Rte. 63) -Beacon Valley Rd. Naugatuck & Beacon Falls, Conn.": 
(a)  Property line & PDD #7 boundary line: Brook Valley Estates Condominiums, land N/F Helen DePino, New Haven Rd. (Rte. 63) - Beacon Valley Rd., Naugatuck & Beacon Falls, Conn., scale 1;inch; = 100;ft;, date 4/25/83, Document No. 83-1018, sheet 1 of 9. 
(b)  Site development plan: Brook Valley Estates Condominiums, land N/F Helen DePino, New Haven Rd. (Rte. 63) -Beacon Valley Rd., Naugatuck & Beacon Falls, Conn., scale 1;inch; = 100;ft;, date 4/25/83, Document No. 83-1017, sheet 2 of 9. 
(c)  Site development plan: Brook Valley Estates Condominiums, land N/F Helen DePino, New Haven Rd. (Rte. 63) -Beacon Valley Rd., Naugatuck & Beacon Falls, Conn., scale 1;inch; = 100;ft;, date 4/25/83, Document No. 83-1016, sheet 3 of 9. 
(d)  Buildings, roads, parking and landscaping: Brook Valley Estates Condominiums, land N/F Helen DePino, New Haven Rd. (Rte. 63) - Beacon Valley Rd., Naugatuck & Beacon Falls, Conn., scale 1;inch; = 100;ft;, date 4/25/83, Document No. 83-1015, sheet 4 of 9. 
(e)  Buildings, roads, parking and landscaping: Brook Valley Estates Condominiums, [land] N/F Helen DePino, New Haven Rd. (Rte. 63) - Beacon Valley Rd., Naugatuck & Beacon Falls, Conn., scale 1;inch; = 100;ft;, date 4/25/83, Document No. 83-1014, sheet 5 of 9. 
(f)  Site utilities: Brook Valley Estates Condominiums, land N/F Helen DePino, New Haven Rd. (Rte. 63) - Beacon Valley Rd., Naugatuck & Beacon Falls, Conn., scale 1;inch; = 100;ft;, date 4/25/83, Document No. 83-1013, sheet 6 of 9. 
(g)  Profiles: Brook Valley Estates Condominiums, land N/F Helen DePino, New Haven Rd. (Rte. 63) - Beacon Valley Rd., Naugatuck & Beacon Falls, Conn., scale 1;inch; = 100;ft;, date 4/25/83, Document No. 83-1012, sheet 7 of 9. 
(h)  Profiles: Brook Valley Estates Condominiums, land N/F Helen DePino, New Haven Rd. (Rte. 63) - Beacon Valley Rd., Naugatuck & Beacon Falls, Conn., scale 1;inch;100;ft;, date 4/25/83, Document No. 83-1011, sheet 8 of 9. 
(i)  Standard details: Brook Valley Estates Condominiums, land N/F Helen DePino, New Haven Rd. (Rte. 63) - Beacon Valley Rd., Naugatuck & Beacon Falls, Conn., scale 1;inch; = 100;ft;, date 4/25/83, Document No. 83-1010, sheet 9 of 9. 
(j)  Typical unit floor plan and typical unit elevation. 
(k)  Building plan, - ten-unit building; front elevation - ten-unit building. 
    66.1.3 Regulations: Within PDD #7, no land, building or other structure shall be used and no building or other structure shall be constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, moved or structurally altered except in conformity with the "Zoning Regulations of the Town of Naugatuck, Connecticut," adopted February 9, 1973, hereinafter referred to as the "regulations," as modified by this statement. Within PDD #7, no lot or land shall be subdivided, sold, encumbered or conveyed except in accordance with said regulations as modified by this statement. 
    66.1.4 Boundary: The boundary of PDD #7 as delineated in "property line & PDD #7 boundary line" referred to in section 66.1.2(a) above, encompasses the following parcel of land with an area of eighteen and ninety-six one-hundredths (18.96) acres and is generally bounded and described as follows: 
Beginning at a point in the westerly street line of Beacon Valley Road, which point is the southeasterly corner of land N/F Lennea Weid and the northeasterly corner of the within described parcel, thence proceeding; S 45 30 20 W 63.55 feet and S 60 16 30 W 419.95 feet and S 47 12 33 W 377.32 feet and S 41 58 13 W 206.82 feet, the above four (4) courses being along the westerly street line of Beacon Valley Road, to a point, thence proceeding; N 34 27 16 W 34.51 feet and S 35 19 05 W 41.06 feet and S 39 49 07 W 25.52 feet, the above three (3) courses being along other land N/F Helen DePino, thence S 39 49 07 W 164.99 feet and S 52 02 24 W 123.14 feet and S 64 17 48 W 127.45 feet and S 75 16 25 W 56.28 feet and S 84 57 40 W 61.80 feet and N 73 19 49 W 36.82 feet, the above six (6) courses being along land N/F Howard & Helen Fasset and the center line of Beacon Hill Brook, to a point, thence N 70 18 54 W 63.30 feet and N 54 56 39 W 34.63 feet and N 32 42 39 W 32.46 feet and N 19 55 41 E 19.76 feet and N 29 37 23 E 47.96 feet and N 18 35 52 E 33.16 feet and N 32 42 28 W 53.61 feet and N 81 40 05 W 33.42 feet and N 64 50 08 W 53.93 feet, the above nine (9) courses being along land N/F Brian & Barbara Roscetti and the center line of Beacon Hill Brook, to a point, thence N 18 39 27 E 43.76 feet and N 18 39 28 E 245.61 feet and N 17 55 12 E 262.43 feet and N 17 43 10 E 241.05 feet, the above four (4) courses are along land N/F Lennea Weid & J. Viola Peterson, to a point, thence S 68 09 46 E 435.31 feet and N 17 24 33 E 256.83 feet and N 17 13 17 E 372.90 feet, the above three (3) courses being along the southerly and easterly lines of land N/F Southbury Food Center, Inc., to a point in the southerly line of New Haven Road (Conn. Rte. 63) thence S 75 51 17 E 60.09 feet along the southerly line of New Haven Road to a point, thence S 17 13 17 W 308.96 feet through other land of Helen DePino to a point, thence S 77 23 10 E 412.46 feet along other land N/F Helen DePino to a point in the center line of Beacon Hill Brook, thence S 88 12 07 E 71.22 feet and S 79 08 37 E 59.99 feet and S 73 08 10 E 200.21 feet, the above three (3) courses are along land N/F Lennea Weid to the point of beginning above described. The within described parcel comprises 825,766 square feet (18.96 acres) and is bounded: northerly 1112.93 feet by New Haven Road, by other land N/F Helen DePino and land N/F Lennea Weid, each in part. Southeasterly 2095.35 feet by Beacon Valley Road and land N/F Howard & Helen Fasset and land N/F Brian & Barbara Roscetti, each in part. Westerly 792.85 feet by land N/F Lennea Weid & J. Viola Peterson. Northerly 435.31 feet by land N/F Southbury Food Center, Inc. Westerly 629.73 feet by land N/F Southbury Food Center, Inc. 
    66.2.0 Permitted uses: PDD #7 is to be used exclusively for a residential condominium community, with no commercial uses whatsoever allowed therein. The land and buildings shall be used for the following specific use and no other: 
    66.2.1 Residential: 
(a)  Dwellings containing eight (8) to ten (10) residential dwelling units each for condominium ownership only. 
(b)  The following uses when clearly subordinate and subsidiary to the uses permitted in section 66.2.1: 
1.  Off-street parking as provided in section 66.8.0; 
2.  Vehicular access; 
3.  Electric, telephone, gas, water, sanitary sewer lines, outside lighting and other utilities; 
4.  Landscape features permanently maintained and those areas to be maintained in their natural state as depicted in the site development plan referred to in section 66.1.2(b); 
5.  Signs, as provided in section 77.7.0; 
6.  A "recreational area" as depicted in the map and plan named in section 66.1.2(b); 
7.  Loading areas for refuse dumpsters. 
    66.3.0 Lot area, shape and frontage: The land within PDD #7 shall not be subdivided into individual lots but will be divided into condominiums containing dwelling units for sale and common element facilities. The existing land, consisting of eighteen and ninety-six one-hundredths (18.96) acres, is deemed to have the minimum area, shape and frontage required by the regulations. Within PDD #7, the minimum area for each dwelling unit shall be five thousand nine hundred eighty-four (5,984) square feet. 
    66.4.0 Height: Within the proposed PDD, no building shall exceed two (2) stories, or thirty (30) feet. 
    66.5.0 Setbacks: Within the proposed PDD, no building shall extend within less than twenty-five (25) feet of any street line, any rear property line, or any side property line. 
    66.6.0 Coverage and bulk: Within the proposed PDD, the aggregate lot coverage of all dwelling units shall not exceed nine (9) percent of the area. There shall be no other structures. 
    66.7.0 Signs: There shall be no signs except as shall (a) conform to the requirements of section 43 of the Naugatuck zoning regulations; (b) befit the character of a residential district; and (c) provide for public safety (police, fire, etc.) and unit, building and development identification. 
    66.8.0 Parking: Within the proposed PDD, off-street parking and loading spaces shall be provided in accordance with section 42 of the Naugatuck zoning regulations, except that there shall be two and one-half (2.5) parking spaces for each dwelling unit, with each space being nine (9) feet × twenty (20) feet, with a twenty-foot back-up. 
    66.9.0 Lighting: All outside lighting shall be directed so that the source of illumination is not visible from any street or property line. 
    66.10.0 Other: All provisions of the regulations that are applicable in residential RA-2 districts shall be applicable to PDD #7, except as modified by this statement. 
Section 67. - Planned development district No. 8-Industrial Park Phase II. 
    67.1 General. The "Zoning Regulations of the Borough of Naugatuck, Connecticut," including the zoning map and zoning districts, are amended by establishment of planned development district #8, hereinafter referred to as "PDD #8." 
67.1.1 Content: The zoning provisions applicable in PDD #8 are those specified in this section. The following maps and plans bearing the general title, "Naugatuck Industrial Park, Economic Development Commission, Naugatuck, Connecticut" accompanying this section: 
(a)  Boundary survey with sheets 1 of 4, 2 of 4 and 3 of 4 dated January 31, 1980 revised August 1, 1980 and sheet 4 of 4 dated August 1, 1980. 
(b)  Land use plan, dated May, 1981. 
67.1.2 Regulations: Within PDD #8, no land, building or other structure shall be used and no building or other structure shall be constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, extended, moved or structurally altered except in conformity with the "Zoning Regulations of the Borough of Naugatuck, Connecticut" hereinafter referred to as the "regulations," as modified by this section. Within PDD #8, no lot or land shall be subdivided, sold, encumbered or conveyed except in accordance with said regulations as by this section. 
67.1.3 Boundary: The boundary of PDD #8 as delineated on the map entitled "boundary map," specified in paragraph 67.1.1, encompasses an area of two hundred thirty-six and eighty-seven one-hundredths (236.87) acres, and is generally bounded and described as follows: 
On the north for approximately 2,058 feet by land now or formerly of Percy Gordon, Francis M. McWeeney, Jr. and L. & M. Builders, Inc.; on the east for approximately 6,331 feet by land now or formerly of George & Mary Franco, Jennie & George Nardozza, Raynor, Maria Teresa Frank, Stanley J. & Brone R. Lucas, Algonquin Gas Transmission Company, Frank B. & Joseph B. Adomaitas & Adele N. Lacy, John Gallinas, Albert Lafreniere, C.C. & P., Inc., Subdivision of Miller Heights 2 & 3, Miller Drive, Laverne G. Clark and C.C. & P. Inc.; on the south for approximately 5,360 feet along the northerly street line of Prospect Street and land now or formerly of C.C. & P. Inc. C. & C. Realty, Inc., Donham Craft, Inc., the Wooster Cemetery, East Waterbury Road, Michael D. & Judy A. Guisto, Mary B. & Francis S. Kackowski, Anne Oldakowski, Michael J. & Shirley L. Jurewicz, Joseph F. & Teresa M. Dunn, Roland T. & Rita M. Noury, George M. & Gabrielle M'Sadoques and across Union City Road; and on the west for approximately 8,257 feet along the westerly street line of Union City Road and land now or formerly of Vincent J. Dumonski, Francis S. Kackowski, Francis J. & Sarah O. Schildgen, James R. & Geraldine A. Warren, William J. Shea & Antionette M. Dudek, along the easterly street line of East Waterbury Road and land now or formerly of John E. & Johanna White, George L. & Allene S. Allen, Charles E. & Regina Manville, Atelio J. Barbieri, Anthony Salvatore Sagnella & Rose Sagnella, Anthony Martin & Pauline Battista, Pasquale Jr. & Carmella Marie Mascia, Richard Strzisiewski, Mary & Michael Santarsiere, John & Lorette Wasserback, Florette Roy and Salvatorico Manna. 
    67.2 Permitted uses: The PDD #8 is hereby divided into the following land use areas as delineated on the map entitled, "land use plan", specified in paragraph 67.1.1: 
Industrial #AA-"I-AA" 
Industrial #BB-"I-BB" 
Industrial #CC-"I-CC" 
Office #A-"O-A" 
Public Facility #1-"PF-1" 
Open Space #1-"OS-1" 
Open Space #2-"OS-2" 
Land, buildings and other structures in any land use area shall be used for one (1) or more of the following specified uses and no other: 
67.2.1 Industrial #AA-Area "I-AA" 
(a)  Manufacturing, processing or assembling of goods; 
(b)  Warehousing; 
(c)  Research laboratories; 
(d)  Public utility company storage, maintenance and service facilities; 
(e)  The following uses, when clearly subordinate and subsidiary to uses permitted in paragraphs 67.2.1(a), 67.2.1(b), 67.2.1(c) and 67.2.1(d) of this section: 
1.  Off-street parking and loading, as provided in paragraph 67.8 of this statement; 
2.  Garages for the storage of company vehicles; 
3.  Dining facilities, clinics, recreational facilities and transient guest lodges, which shall be used only by those actually employed by the concern or by business visitors on the premises; 
4.  Outside storage areas shall not exceed ten (10) percent of the lot area; shall be enclosed, except for necessary vehicular access, by buildings and/or fences, walls, embankments or evergreen shrubs or trees so as to screen the storage area from view from any other lot or from any street; and shall not extend into the area required for setback from a property line, street line or "OS-2" land use area; 
5.  Storage within a permanent structure; 
6.  Vehicular access; 
7.  Electric, telephone, gas, water, sanitary sewer, pretreatment sewage facilities, other utilities and outside lighting; 
8.  Landscape features permanently maintained; 
9.  Outdoor recreational facilities used only by those employed on the premises or by business visitors on the premises; 
10.  Communication facilities; and 
11.  Signs, as provided in paragraph 67.7 of this section. 
67.2.2 Industrial #BB-Area "I-BB" 
(a)  All uses permitted in [paragraph] 67.2.1 of this section. 
67.2.3 Industrial #CC-Area "I-CC" 
(a)  All uses permitted in [paragraph] 67.2.2 of this section; 
(b)  Office buildings for executive or business use; 
(c)  The following uses, when clearly subordinate and subsidiary to the uses permitted in paragraphs 67.2.3(a) and 67.2.3(b) of this section: 
1.  Utility substations; and 
2.  Maintenance shops for the upkeep and repair of buildings, structures, equipment and landscaping on this lot. 
67.2.4 Office #A-Area "O-A" 
(a)  Office buildings for professional or executive use; 
(b)  The following uses, when clearly subordinate and subsidiary to the uses permitted in paragraph 67.2.4(a) of this section: 
1.  Off-street parking and loading, as provided in paragraph 67.8 of this section; 
2.  Garages for the storage of company vehicles; 
3.  Vehicular access; 
4.  Electric, telephone, gas, water, sanitary sewer, other utilities and outside lighting; 
5.  Landscaped features permanently maintained; 
6.  Outdoor recreational facilities used only by those employed on the premises or by company visitors on the premises; 
7.  Communications facilities; 
8.  Signs, as provided in paragraph 67.7 of this section. 
67.2.5 Public facility #1-Area "PF-1" 
(a)  Borough facilities, including transportation; 
(b)  Public utility company electric, gas and telephone substations; 
(c)  Public utility company water storage facilities, pump stations and treatment facilities; 
(d)  Undisturbed natural terrain and plant material; 
(e)  Landscaped features permanently maintained; and 
(f)  Signs, as provided in paragraph 67.7 of this section. 
67.2.6 Open space #1-Area "OS-1" 
(a)  Recreational and borough facilities; 
(b)  Underground utilities and public utility company service facilities located underground; 
(c)  Undisturbed natural terrain and plant material; 
(d)  Landscaped features permanently maintained; and 
(e)  Signs, as provided in paragraph 67.7 of this section. 
67.2.7 Open space #2-Area "OS-2" 
(a)  All uses permitted in [paragraph] 67.2.6 of this section; 
(b)  Vehicular access. 
    67.3 Lot area, shape and frontage: 
67.3.1 Industrial #AA: Within land use area "I-AA" each lot, including any area of said lot within land use area "OS-2," shall have a minimum area of two (2) acres, a minimum dimension of two hundred (200) feet and a minimum street frontage of fifty (50) feet. 
67.3.2 Industrial #BB: Within land use area "I-BB" each lot, including any area of said lot within land use area "OS-2," shall have a minimum area of five (5) acres, a minimum dimension of two hundred fifty (250) feet and a minimum street frontage of fifty (50) feet. 
67.3.3 Industrial #CC: Within land use area "I-CC" each lot, including any area of said lot within land use area "OS-2," shall have minimum area of ten (10) acres, a minimum dimension of three hundred (300) feet and minimum street frontage of fifty (50) feet. 
67.3.4 Office #A: Land use area "O-A" is deemed to have the minimum area, shape and frontage required by the regulations. 
67.3.5 Public facility #1: Land use area "PF-1" is deemed to have the minimum area, shape and frontage required by the regulations. 
67.3.6 Open spaces #1 and #2: Land use areas "OS-1" and "OS-2" are deemed to have the minimum area, shape and frontage required by the regulations. 
    67.4 Height: 
67.4.1 Industrial #AA and #BB: Within land use areas "I-AA" and "I-BB", no building or other structure shall exceed a height of two (2) stories or thirty (30) feet, whichever is less. 
67.4.2 Industrial #CC: Within land use area "I-CC", no building or other structure shall exceed a height of two (2) stories or thirty (30) feet, whichever is less. The planning commission, upon the recommendation of the economic development commission, may grant a special permit, under section 32 of the regulations, to permit an increase in the height of a building or other structure to six (6) stories or seventy-five (75) feet, whichever is less. 
67.4.3 Public facility #1: Within land use area "PF-1," no building or other structure shall exceed a height of two (2) stories or thirty (30) feet, whichever is less. The planning commission, upon the recommendation of the economic development commission, may grant a special permit, under section 32 of the regulations, to permit an increase in the height of a water supply storage facility. 
67.4.4 Open spaces #1 and #2: Within land use areas "OS-1" and "OS-2" no building or other structure shall exceed a height of one (1) story or fifteen (15) feet, whichever is less. 
    67.5 Setbacks: 
67.5.1 Industrial #AA: Within land use area "I-AA," no building or other structure shall extend within seventy-five (75) feet of any street line or within fifty (50) feet of any rear property line, twenty-five (25) feet of any side property line and fifteen (15) feet of any "OS-2" land use area. 
67.5.2 Industrial #BB: Within land use area "I-BB," no building or structure shall extend within seventy-five (75) feet of any street line or within fifty (50) feet of any rear property line and fifteen (15) feet of any "OS-2" land use area. 
67.5.3 Industrial #CC: Within land use area "I-CC," no building or structure shall extend within seventy-five (75) feet of any rear property line fifty (50) feet of any side property line, and fifteen (15) feet of any "OS-2" land use area. 
67.5.4 Public facility #1: Within land use area "PF-1," no building or structure shall extend within fifty (50) feet of any street or property line. 
67.5.5 Open space[s] #1 and #2: Within land use area "OS-1" and area "OS-2," no building or structure shall extend within thirty (30) feet of any street or property line. 
    67.6 Coverage and bulk: 
67.6.1 Industrial #AA: Within land use area "I-AA," the aggregate lot coverage of all buildings and other structures shall not exceed thirty (30) percent of the lot area and the total floor area of all buildings and other structures shall not exceed sixty (60) percent of the lot area. 
67.6.2 Industrial #BB: Within land use area "I-BB," the aggregate lot coverage of all buildings and other structures shall not exceed thirty (30) percent of the lot area and the total floor area of all buildings and other structures shall not exceed sixty (60) percent of the lot area. 
67.6.3 Industrial #CC: Within land use area "I-CC," the aggregate lot coverage of all buildings and other structures shall not exceed thirty (30) percent of the lot area and the total floor area of all buildings and other structures shall not exceed sixty (60) percent of the lot area. 
67.6.4 Open spaces #1 and #2: Within land use areas "OS-1" and "OS-2" the aggregate lot coverage of all buildings and structures shall not exceed ten (10) percent of the lot area. 
    67.7 Signs: Within all land use areas specified in paragraph 67.2 of this section, signs shall conform to the requirements of section 43 of the regulations, except: 
67.7.1 That within land use area[s] "O-A," "PF-1," "OS-1" and "OS-2" signs shall conform to the requirements for residence districts; 
67.7.2 Private warning and traffic-control signs, each not exceeding three (3) square feet in area, shall be located and intended only for warning and traffic-control purposes; 
67.7.3 All lighting of signs shall be indirect, with the source of illumination not visible beyond any street or property line. 
    67.8 Parking: Within land use areas "I-AA," "I-BB" and "I-CC," off-street parking and loading spaces shall be provided in accordance with section 42 of the regulations, and the standards specified in paragraph 24.7.4 of the regulations. Off-street loading, loading ramps, bays or platforms shall be located to the rear or side of all buildings or structures and be permanently screened so that they are not visible from any street or abutting properties. All off-street parking, loading spaces and driveways shall be constructed with a surface course of bituminous concrete. Machine formed bituminous concrete curbs shall be constructed along the edge of all parking and driveway pavement. 
    67.9 Lighting: Within PDD #8, all outside lighting shall be directed so that the source of illumination is not visible beyond the property line or lot, and all lighting of signs shall be indirect with the source of illumination not visible from any street or property line. 
    67.10 Performance standards: The use of land, buildings and other structures in PDD #8 shall conform to the performance standards specified in section 41 of the regulations, or applicable local, state or federal regulations whichever is the most restrictive. 
    67.11 Accessory buildings: All accessory buildings or structures shall have the same architectural character as the principal or main building. 
    67.12 Parapets: Parapets shall be provided where necessary to screen or hide any large air conditioning, ventilation, water storage or duct work located on the roof. 
    67.13 Landscaping: Any area not paved or covered by a building or structure shall be maintained in ground cover, landscaping or natural plant material. To the maximum extent possible, healthy shade trees having a caliber of five (5) or more inches and flowering trees having a caliber of one (1) or more inches shall be retained. 
    67.14 Exterior building materials: Building facing materials shall be permanent durable materials such as natural brick, quarry tile, poured in place or pre-cast concrete and stone, if the surfaces are dull and finished in dark, earth or neutral colors. High gloss surfaces, porcelain enamel and short-lived paints shall be avoided. 
    67.15 Other: All provisions of the regulations that are applicable in the industrial district #2 shall be applicable to land use areas "I-AA," "I-BB" and "I-CC" of PDD #8; in residence office RO-1 district shall be applicable to land use area "O-A" of PDD #8; and in residence R-15 districts shall be applicable to land use areas "PF-1," "OS-1" and "OS-2" of PDD #8, except as modified by this section. 
Section 68. - Planned development district No. 9-Fox Hill Village 
    68.1 General: The "Zoning Regulations of the Borough of Naugatuck, Connecticut", including the zoning map and zoning district, are amended by establishment of planned development district #9, hereinafter referred to as "PDD #9." 
68.1.1 Purposes: 
(a)  To improve and develop this tract of disturbed land into a residential development of integrated and harmonious design of stable character which is consistent, not only with its immediate surrounding neighborhood, but also with the character of the borough-at-large and the plan of boroughwide development establishment by the planning commission. 
(b)  To develop this parcel in a manner which is consistent overall with the considerations of solar access and natural ventilation. 
68.1.2 Content: The zoning provisions to be applicable to PDD #9 are those suggested in this statement. This statement is accompanied by the following maps and plans bearing the general title "Fox Hill Village, Fox Hill Road, Naugatuck, Connecticut, prepared for Morgan Development Inc., West Haven, Connecticut." 
(a)  Plot plan, scale 1;inch; = 100;ft;, 12/12/84, J&D Kasper Assoc., Bethel, Conn. 
(b)  1/7 Site plan, scale 1;inch; = 100;ft;, 2/7/85, Kasper Associates, Inc., Bridgeport, Conn. revised 6/28/85 
(c)  2/7 Grading & utilities plan, 2/7/85, Kasper Associates, Inc., Bridgeport, Conn. revised 6/28/85 
(d)  3/7 Erosion & sediment control plan, 2/7/85, Kasper Associates, Inc., Bridgeport, Conn. revised 6/28/85 
(e)  4/7 Conceptual planting plan, 2/7/85, Kasper Associates, Inc., Bridgeport, Conn. revised 6/28/85 
(f)  5/7 Other portions of site, miscellaneous details and notes, 2/7/85, Kasper Associates, Inc., Bridgeport, Conn. 
(g)  6/7 Standard details, 2/7/85, Kasper Associates, Inc., Bridgeport, Conn. 
(h)  7/7 Standard details, 2/7/85, Kasper Associates, Inc., Bridgeport, Conn. 
(i)  A-1 Floor plans, scale 1/4;inch; = 1;ft; 0;inch;, 1/25/85, Design Collaborative Architects, P.C., Bridgeport, Conn. 
(j)  A-2 Floor plans, scale 1/4;inch; = 1;ft; 0;inch;, 1/25/85, Design Collaborative Architects, P.C., Bridgeport, Conn. 
(k)  A-3 Elevations scale 1/8 ;inch; = 1;ft; 0;inch;, 1/25/85, Design Collaborative Architects, P.C., Bridgeport, Conn. 
(l)  A-4 Elevations, scale 1/8 ;inch; = 1;ft; 0;inch;, 1/25/85, Design Collaborative Architects, P.C., Bridgeport, Conn. 
68.1.3 Regulations: Within PDD #9, no land, building or other structure shall be used and no building or other structure shall be constructed, enlarged, moved or structurally altered except in conformity with the "Zoning Regulations of the Borough of Naugatuck, Connecticut," adopted February 9, 1973, hereinafter referred to as the "regulations," as modified by this statement. Within PDD #9, no lot or land shall be subdivided, sold, encumbered or conveyed except in accordance with said regulations as modified by this statement. 
68.1.4 Boundary: The boundary of PDD #9, as delineated in the "plot plan" referred to in section 68.1.2 encompasses the following parcel of land with an area of 19.4211 acres and is generally bounded and described as follows: 
Commencing at a point being the southeasterly corner of land N/F Patrick F. Horan and the northeasterly corner of property herein described. Said point also being on the westerly street line of Horton Hill. Thence S 13 deg. - 07 min. - 38 sec. W along the westerly street line of Horton Hill a distance of 238.92 feet to a point. Thence, in a southwesterly, southeasterly and southwesterly direction bounded southeasterly, northeasterly and southeasterly again by land to be deeded to Garland F. & Lorraine I. Jewett and by land N/F Mildred May Clark each in part in all the following ten (10) courses: 
S 78 deg. - 56 min. - 33 sec. W 158.00 feet 
S 25 deg. - 24 min. - 52 sec. W 248.79 feet 
S 59 deg. - 22 min. - 18 sec. W. 102.00 feet 
S 30 deg. - 37 min. - 42 sec. E. 70.00 feet 
S 59 deg. - 22 min. - 18 sec. W 66.85 feet 
S 73 deg. - 07 min. - 23 sec. W. 76.79 feet 
S 82 deg. - 56 min. - 03 sec. W. 110.00 feet 
S 49 deg. - 26 min. - 33 sec. W. 98.90 feet 
S 82 deg. - 16 min. - 13 sec. W. 76.30 feet and 
S 47 deg. - 13 min. - 23 sec. W. 49.82 feet to a point. 
Thence, N 80 deg. - 00 min. - 47 [sec.] W. bounded southwesterly by land N/F Charles A. Pugliese a distance of 148.62 feet to a point. Thence, N 16 deg. - 43 min. - 37 sec. W. bounded by land N/F Lot No. 7, Morgan Development Corporation a distance of 152.32 feet to a point. Thence, S 73 deg. - 16 min. - 23 sec. W. bounded southeasterly by land N/F Lot No. 7, Morgan Development Corporation a distance of 65.00 feet to a point. Thence, in a southwesterly direction bounded southeasterly by land N/F Lot No. 7, Morgan Development Corporation by a curve to the left having a radius of 160.19 feet and an arc length of 74.09 feet to a point. Thence, N 26 deg. - 52 min. - 51 sec. W. bounded southwesterly by Fox Hill Road (not accepted) a distance of 51.59 feet to a point. Thence, in a northwesterly direction bounded southwesterly by land N/F Robert A. and Kathleen Yanosky the following two (2) courses: 
N 39 deg. - 16 min. - 37 sec. W. 141.89 feet and 
N 60 deg. - 45 min. - 47 sec. W. 139.10 feet a point. 
Thence, in a northwesterly and northeasterly direction bounded southwesterly and northwesterly by land N/F Beacon Valley Grange #103 the following four (4) courses: 
N 02 deg. - 01 min. - 57 sec. W. 43.42 feet 
N 15 deg. - 57 min. - 03 sec. W. 94.56 feet 
N 16 deg. - 49 min. - 13 sec. W. 693.08 feet 
N 58 deg. - 13 min. - 03 sec. E. 102.23 feet to a point. 
Thence, in a southeasterly and northeasterly direction bounded northeasterly and northwesterly by land N/F Patrick F. Horan the following seven (7) courses: 
S 59 deg. - 30 min. - 17 sec. E. 214.45 feet 
S 01 deg. - 26 min. - 17 sec. E. 145.23 feet 
S 02 deg. - 41 min. - 37 sec. E. 180.22 feet 
S 79 deg. - 13 min. - 07 sec. E. 153.40 feet 
N 86 deg. - 03 min. - 53 sec. E. 290.90 feet 
N 84 deg. - 14 min. - 33 sec. E. 283.10 feet and 
S 84 deg. - 27 min. - 27 sec. E. 109.82 feet to the point and place of commencement. 
Said above described parcel contains 18.8803 acres. Parcel subject to rights to Fox Hill Road as shown on the above referenced map. Area of road is 0.5408 acres. 
    68.2 Permitted uses: PDD #9 is to be used exclusively for a residential condominium community with no commercial uses whatsoever allowed therein. The land and buildings shall be used for the following specific use and no other: 
68.2.1 Residential: 
(a)  Dwellings containing six (6) to ten (10) residential dwelling units each for condominium ownership only. 
(b)  The following uses when clearly subordinate and subsidiary to the uses permitted in section 68.2.1: 
1.  Off-street parking as provided in section 68.8.0; 
2.  Vehicular access; 
3.  Electric, telephone, gas, water, sanitary sewer lines, outside lighting and other utilities; 
4.  Landscape features permanently maintained with the perimeter areas to be maintained in their natural state as depicted in the planting plan referred to in section 68.1.2. 
5.  Signs, as provided in section 68.4.7. 
    68.3 Lot area, shape and frontage: The land within PDD #9 shall not be subdivided into individual lots, but will be divided into condominiums for sale of dwelling units and common element facilities. The existing land shall have the minimum shape, and frontage required by the regulations. The minimum area shall be eighteen and four tenths (18.4) acres. The area for each dwelling unit shall be seven thousand four hundred twenty-one (7,421) square feet. 
    68.4 Height: Within PDD #9 no building shall exceed three (3) stories or forty (40) feet. 
    68.5 Setbacks: Within PDD #9 no building shall extend within less than thirty (30) feet or any street line, thirty (30) feet of any rear property line and fifteen (15) feet of any side property line. 
    68.6 Coverage and bulk: Within PDD #9 the aggregate lot coverage of all dwelling units shall not exceed eight and one-tenth (8.1) percent of the area. There shall be no other structures. 
    68.7 Signs: There shall be no signs except as shall (a) conform to the requirements of section 43 of the Naugatuck zoning regulations; (b) befit the character of a residential district; and (c) provide for public safety (police, fire, etc.) and unit, building and development identification. 
    68.8 Parking: Within PDD #9 off-street parking and loading spaces shall be provided in accordance with section 42 of the Naugatuck zoning regulations, except that there shall be two and a half (21/2) parking spaces for each dwelling unit, with each space being nine (9) feet × twenty (20) feet, with a twenty-foot back-up. 
    68.9. Lighting: All outside lighting shall be directed so that the source of illumination is not visible from any street or property line. 
    68.10 Access: No vehicular access to Fox Hill Road shall be allowed from the site except for use by emergency vehicles (Only). These emergency accessways will be maintained, kept clear of parking and restricted as to use for emergency vehicles only by the condominium association. 
    68.11 Other: All provisions of the regulations that are not applicable in residential R-15 districts shall be applicable to PDD #9 except as modified by this statement. 
Subpart B - LIST OF SPECIAL ACTS[1] 
1923-Special Act No. 130. An act to issue bonds. 
1931-Special Act No. 146. An act to issue bonds. 
1933-Special Act No. 393. An act concerning tax anticipation notes. 
1941-Special Act No. 199. An act concerning removal of taxes from tax books. 
1943-Special Act No. 249. An act concerning paid members of the fire department. 
1945-Special Act No. 33. An act concerning public building bonds. 
1945-Special Act No. 228. An act concerning minority representation on bonds. 
1947-Special Act No. 84. An act amending Special Laws 1945, Act No. 228. 
1947-Special Act No. 422. An act amending Special Laws 1945, Act No. 33. 
1947-Special Act No. 433. An act concerning sale of land to the state. 
1949-Special Act No. 215. An act concerning the board of park commissioners. 
1949-Special Act No. 423. An act concerning pensions for borough employees. 
1951-Special Act No. 140. An act concerning sewerage disposal bonds. 
1951-Special Act No. 598. An act concerning pensions. 
1953-Special Act No. 98. An act concerning the authority of the board of park commissioners. 
1953-Special Act No. 159. An act concerning the department of finance. 
1953-Special Act No. 173. An act concerning the board of fire commissioners. 
1953-Special Act No. 321. An act concerning the board of police commissioners. 
1953-Special Act No. 483. An act concerning eligibility for retirement. 
1955-Special Act No. 519. An act amending Special Laws 1953, Act No. 173. 
1955-Special Act No. 520. An act amending Special Laws 1953, Act No. 321. 
1955-Special Act No. 595. An act concerning the fire marshal. 
1957-Special Act No. 573. An act concerning direct primaries (superseded by Connecticut General Statutes). 
1957-Special Act No. 624. An act amending Special Laws 1949, Act No. 423. 
1959-Special Act No. 533. An act concerning construction of a bridge. 
1961-Special Act No. 183. An act concerning pensions. 
1961-Special Act No. 192. An act concerning the salary of the town clerk. 
1961-Special Act No. 323. An act concerning a pension for the town clerk. 
1961-Special Act No. 404. An act concerning retirement credit for the assistant town clerk. 
1963-Special Act No. 303. An act concerning the duties of the town clerk during elections. 
1963-Special Act No. 353. An act concerning a private pension. 
1963-Special Act No. 371. An act concerning a private pension. 
1965-Special Act No. 299. An act amending Special Laws 1949, Act No. 423. 
1965-Special Act No. 300. An act amending Special Laws 1949, Act No. 423. 
1971-Special Act No. 60. An act concerning a private pension. 
1971-Special Act No. 64. An act concerning a private pension. 
1972-Special Act No. 97. An act validating a notice of Joseph Zydkiewicz to the borough alleging injuries. 
1972-Special Act No. 98. An act validating a notice of Stella Martins to the borough alleging injuries. 
1973-Special Act No. 6. An act authorizing the borough to grant a special pension to Dorothy Johnson. 
1974-Special Act No. 12. An act validating the notice of Marie Vagnini to the borough alleging injuries. 
1975 through 1986- No Special Acts re Naugatuck. 
1987-Special Act No. 55. An act concerning the authorization of state grant commitments of school construction projects in the borough. 
1988-Special Act No. 25. An act validating the grand lists for the Town and Borough of Naugatuck for the assessment year commencing October 1, 1987. 
1988-Special Act No. 56. An act concerning the authorization of state grant commitments for school construction projects in the borough. 
1988-Special Act No. 66. An act providing for various educational and recreational programs and projects in the borough. 
1988-Special Act No. 77. An act providing for renovation and additions to the firehouse. 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- This subpart contains a list of the Special Acts of the General Assembly concerning the Borough of Naugatuck from 1923 to the present that do not amend the Charter. The reader should consult the Special Acts index of the particular year to locate the complete text of an Act in the official publication of the Session Laws of Connecticut. 

Subpart C - TEXT OF CERTAIN SPECIAL ACTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- This subpart contains the complete text of some of the Special Acts of the General Assembly concerning the Borough of Naugatuck which the officials of the Borough deemed advisable to print. 

ARTICLE I. - SPECIAL ACTS 1933, ACT NO. 393-TAX ANTICIPATION NOTES 
An act concerning tax anticipation notes of the Borough of Naugatuck. 
    The mayor and burgesses of the Borough of Naugatuck may, at any time, provide for discounting at current rates of interest notes sufficient to meet taxes already laid but not collected, or which are payable in any current fiscal year, and shall have power to borrow, in the name of the borough, by obligations signed by the mayor, obligations signed by the mayor, such sums as in its opinion may be needed to defray appropriations made by said borough in anticipation of taxes which have been laid but not collected and in anticipation of proceeds of bonds the issue of which has been authorized but which remain unsold. Such notes for sums so borrowed shall be paid from taxes when collected or from proceeds of the sale of such bonds. The mayor and burgesses may cause to be inserted in any such note the following provision: "The bearer hereof may use this note at its face value plus accrued interest, if any, in payment of taxes due or to become due from such bearer to the Borough of Naugatuck, provided, if this note shall be presented to the collector of said borough for that purpose, it shall be accepted by him in payment of such taxes and provided, if the bearer of this note or the original purchaser thereof shall owe taxes to said borough when this note shall be presented for payment, or shall become due and payable, it shall be applied first, as far as may be, to the payment of taxes, interest and fees then due to said borough from such bearer and second, if any balance remain, to the payment of taxes, interest and fees then due to said borough from the original purchases; and the excess, if any there be, shall be paid to such bearer in cash." (Special Laws 1933, Act No. 393; Amd. of 11-8-94) 
ARTICLE II. - SPECIAL ACTS 1943, ACT NO. 249-PENSIONS FOR PAID MEMBERS OF FIRE DEPARTMENT 
An act providing for pension for the paid members of the Naugatuck fire department. 
    Section 1. There is created in the Borough of Naugatuck a fund to be known as the firemen's pension fund. (Special Laws, 1943, Act No. 249, § 1) 
    Section 2. The board of mayor and burgesses of the Borough of Naugatuck shall annually appropriate to said fund a sum not less than three hundred dollars, the first appropriation thereto to be made at the time of the passage of this act. (Special Laws 1943 Act No. 249, § 2) 
    Section 3. Each paid member of the department shall pay into said fund a sum equal to two per cent of his yearly salary, pro-rated monthly, which sum shall be deducted from each such member's pay and transmitted to said fund in addition to the annual appropriation of the board of mayor and burgesses. (Special Laws 1943, Act No. 249, § 3) 
    Section 4. Said fund shall be under the control of a board of trustees which shall consist of the board of mayor and burgesses, the chief of the fire department and the treasurer of the Borough of Naugatuck. The board of trustees shall make rules and regulations for the control, investment and deposit of said fund and are empowered to accept and receive all contributions and donations specifically given to said fund. The treasurer of the Borough of Naugatuck shall receive and deposit all moneys paid into said fund, and make such payments as are ordered by a majority vote of the board of trustees. (Special Laws 1943, Act No. 249, § 4) 
    Section 5. When any paid member of the Naugatuck fire department has attained the age of sixty-five years, and has served for a period of not less than twenty years as a paid member of said department, and has contributed to said fund as provided herein, he shall be retired upon his request on a monthly allotment equal to one-half of the average regular monthly pay received by him during the three years immediately preceding the time of his retirement, or said board of trustees may retire any such member on such monthly allotment by a vote of six of its members in legal meeting assembled. Any paid member may be retired as herein provided on account of illness or total or partial incapacity resulting from injury incurred in the discharge of his duty, if, after an examination by three reputable physicians, any two of them certifying in writing that such fireman is unable to perform to the full extent his duties as a fireman. (Special Laws 1943, Act No. 249, § 5) 
    Section 6. In the event of the resignation or death of an employee prior to the commencement of such retirement, the board of trustees shall pay to him or to his representative, designated or otherwise, an amount equal to his total contributions paid under this act and any amendments hereto. Upon the death of an employee after retirement, the amount of any excess of such total contributions made by him over the total monthly payments made to him shall be paid to his representative designated or otherwise. In the event of the discontinuance of the pensions fund provided for by this act, each employee shall be paid an amount equal to his total contributions. No employee shall have a vested interest in the funds of the pension fund, or in the amount, or any portion thereof, of the contributions of the borough or in any contribution except his own. (Special Laws 1943, Act No. 249, § 6) 
    Section 7. No action for any amount due under the provisions of this act shall be brought but within two years after the right of action shall accrue. All amounts not claimed within said period shall remain a part of said fund. (Special Laws 1943, Act No. 249, § 7) 
    Section 8. Said fund and the right of any person under the provisions of this act to any payment from said fund shall be exempt from any state, municipal, transfer or inheritance tax and shall not be subject to attachment, garnishment or execution and shall be unassignable. (Special Laws 1943, Act No. 249, § 8) 
ARTICLE III. - SPECIAL ACTS 1949, ACT NO. 215-BOARD OF PARK COMMISSIONERS 
An act creating a board of park commissioners in the Borough of Naugatuck. 
    There is established in the Borough of Naugatuck a board of park commissioners to be composed of five electors of said borough, to be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the burgesses and to serve the following terms: One for five years, one for four years, one for three years, one for two years and one for one year; and annually thereafter members shall be appointed for terms of five years to replace those whose terms expired. The members of the board shall annually elect a chairman. The members of the board shall serve without compensation. Said board shall administer, maintain and control the park, playground and recreational facilities of the Borough of Naugatuck with full privilege to apply to the board of mayor and burgesses and to the freemen for an annual appropriation of funds for such purposes. (Special Laws 1949, Act No. 215) 
ARTICLE IV. - SPECIAL ACTS 1949, ACT NO. 423-PENSIONS FOR EMPLOYEES OF BOROUGH 
An act concerning pensions for employees of the Borough of Naugatuck. 
    Section 1. Definitions. As used in this act, the following terms, unless a different interpretation is plainly required by the context, shall be defined as follows: "Retirement system" shall mean the plan for retirement of borough employees as established by this act; "retirement board" and "board" shall mean the board herein created for the administration of the retirement system; "pension" shall mean a payment made to an employee, other than a return of contributions; "retirement fund" shall mean the fund derived from contributions made as herein provided for the payment of pensions; "fiscal year" shall mean the twelve months from April first of any year to March thirty-first of the following year; "pay" shall mean the salary or wages, exclusive of expenses allowed, of an employee for services rendered to the borough. (Special Laws 1949, Act No. 423, § 1; Amd. of 11-8-94) 
    Section 2. Retirement board. There shall be a retirement system for the employees of the Borough of Naugatuck, the management of which shall be vested in the board of mayor and burgesses. The board shall employ such medical, clerical and other services as may be necessary for the proper operation of the retirement system. The board shall render, on April first of each year, a statement of the pension funds in its possession and of the cost of administration of this act. The board shall be the trustee of the retirement fund and shall have full control and management thereof, with power to invest the same in accordance with the laws governing the investment of trust funds. (Special Laws 1949, Act No. 423, § 2; Amd. of 11-8-94) 
    Section 3. Employees to whom this act applies. The terms of this act shall apply to all full-time employees of the Borough of Naugatuck, but not to officers of the borough elected by popular vote, not to employees covered by the state teachers' retirement system except as hereinafter indicated. Each eligible employee in the service of the borough September 1, 1949, shall be required to participate in the retirement system unless, within three months following, he shall notify the retirement board in writing of his intention not to do so. Following such written notice, the employee shall not thereafter be admitted to the retirement system unless he shall make a new application to participate within on[e] year after September 1, 1949, and such employee shall then be admitted only with the unanimous consent of the board after a prescribed physical and medical examination and upon payment of an amount equal to the contributions he would have been required to make from September 1, 1949. All employees who shall enter the service of the borough at any time after September 1, 1949, shall, within six months after beginning such service, apply for the right to participate in the retirement system and, provided such employee shall pass a prescribed physical and medical examination, he shall be granted such right. Failure of any such new employee to apply within six months shall not be a condition of his continued employment, but he shall thereafter be deprived of the right to participate in the retirement system. (Special Laws 1949, Act No. 423, § 3; Amd. of 11-8-94) 
    Section 4. Contributions by the borough. The Borough of Naugatuck shall be liable for such amount, or amounts, on account of future pensions representing services of employees rendered prior to the inception of the retirement system as may be determined by the retirement board. The borough shall also pay to the retirement board such amounts determined by it as necessary, in addition to the contributions of its employees to provide future pensions on account of services rendered by employees subsequent to the date upon which each shall begin participation in the retirement system. (Special Laws 1949, Act No. 423, § 4; Amd. of 11-8-94) 
    Section 5. [Employee contributions]. The rate of contribution to be made by each employee participating in said retirement system shall be one and one-half per cent on the first forty-two hundred dollars of his pay and four per cent on the excess over forty-two hundred dollars, if any, except that the rate of contribution to be made by each policeman and fireman shall be four per cent of his pay. Contributions shall be collected as deductions from pay and transmitted immediately to the retirement fund. In the event of withdrawal of the employees from the retirement system, the board shall pay to him an amount equal to his contributions under this section plus regular interest thereon compounded annually. In no event shall an employee have a vested interest in any funds of the retirement system other than in an amount equal to his own contributions plus regular interest thereon. (Special Laws 1949, Act No. 423, § 5; Special Laws 1957, Act No. 624, § 1; Amd. of 11-8-94) 
    Section 6. Qualifications for retirement. Any member of the retirement system who has completed fifteen years of continuous service as an employee of the Borough of Naugatuck and has attained the age of sixty-five years shall be eligible for retirement for super-annuation under the provisions of this act. Any such eligible member may retire from service by filing with the retirement board a written application duly attested, setting forth at what time he desires to retire. All members of the retirement system eligible for retirement who shall have attained the age of seventy in the case of men, or age sixty-eight in the case of women, shall be retired on the day following attainment of such age. (Special Laws 1949, Act No. 423, § 6; Amd. of 11-8-94) 
    Section 7. Retirement for disability. Any member of the retirement system shall be eligible for retirement and for a retirement pension who has completed ten years of continuous service if he becomes permanently and totally disabled from engaging in any gainful employment in the service of the borough. If such disability is shown to the satisfaction of the retirement board to have arisen out of the and in the course of his employment, as defined by the workmen's compensation act, he shall be eligible for retirement irrespective of the duration of his employment. Such retirement pension shall continue during the period of such disability. In order to obtain retirement pension under this section a member shall apply in writing for such pension within six months after incurring the disability, and the allowance shall be made retroactive to the date at which the pay of the disabled employee ceased. (Special Laws 1949, Act No. 423, § 7; Amd. of 11-8-94) 
    Section 8. Continuity of service. Continuous service, for the purposes of this act, shall mean uninterrupted employment; but absence from employment for any reason, followed by reinstatement within one year thereafter, shall not be considered as breaking the continuity of the service. Reinstatement of an employee in the retirement system shall be conditioned upon such medical examination as the board may prescribe and upon payment to the retirement fund of contributions previously withdrawn. In computing years of service to determine eligibility for retirement, no year shall be included in which the employee hasn't been in actual service for at least nine months. (Special Laws 1949, Act No. 423, § 8; Amd. of 11-8-94) 
    Section 9. [Monthly retirement pension.] After retirement, in accordance with the provisions of this act, each member, except a policeman, fireman and teacher shall receive, during lifetime, a retirement pension payable monthly at an annual rate amounting to five-sixth of one per cent of the first forty-two hundred dollars of his average pay for the seven years immediately preceding retirement plus one and two-thirds per cent of such average pay in excess of forty-two hundred dollars, if any, multiplied by the number of years of service. Each policeman and fireman shall receive, during lifetime, a retirement pension payable monthly at an annual rate amounting to one and two-thirds per cent of his average pay for the seven years immediately preceding retirement, multiplied by the number of years of service. The pension for permanent total disability arising out of and in the course of employment as defined in the workmen's compensation act, shall not be less than one-half of the member's annual pay at the time his disability was incurred. Any amount or amounts paid under the workmen's compensation act shall be deducted from such pension. In the event that a member, except fireman, policeman or teacher, retires under section 7 of number 423, of the Special Acts of 1949, before benefits under the Federal Social Security Act are available to him on account of age, the benefit of such member shall be computed at the rate of one and two-thirds per cent of his average annual pay up to forty-two hundred dollars until such time as he shall commence to receive social security payments. In the event that the primary social security for which any member participating in this system, excepting therefrom policemen, firemen and teachers, is eligible shall hereafter be increased, there shall be deducted from any pension payable to such member one-half of such increase. (Special Laws 1949, Act No. 423, § 9; Special Laws, 1957, Act No. 624, § 2; Amd. of 11-8-94) 
    Section 10. [Reserved.] 
Editor's note- Repealed by Special Laws 1965, Act No. 300. Section 10 provided: 
Section 10. Suspension of retirement pension. If a member shall be retired under this act, he may not thereafter accept employment of any kind without the approval of the retirement board. This section shall not apply to members retiring for disability. (Special Laws 1949, Act No. 423, § 10) 
    Section 11. Optional form of retirement pension. Any member may elect to receive a reduced retirement pension with the provision that such reduced retirement pension, minus ten per cent shall be continued after his death to his spouse named in such election so long as his surviving spouse lives. The member's retirement pension under this section shall not exceed fifty per cent of his average annual pay during the three years immediately preceding his retirement. A member shall file written notice of his election of this option with the board at least three years before he becomes eligible for retirement. No surviving spouse shall be entitled to the benefits of this section unless he or she shall have been married at least five years. (Special Laws 1949, Act No. 423, § 11; Amd. of 11-8-94) 
    Section 12. Accidental death. If it shall be shown to the satisfaction of the retirement board that a member sustained bodily injuries effected directly and independently of all other causes through external, violent and accidental means, while engaged in essential duties pertaining to his employment by the Borough of Naugatuck, and that such injuries, independently and exclusively of all other causes, and within six months from the date of the accident, caused the death of such member, the widow or widower of such member shall be entitled to an annuity of seven hundred and fifty dollars, payment in monthly payments, during his or her legal status as such, for a period not to exceed ten years, the first payment to become due one month subsequent to the discontinuance of any payments for which the borough may be liable under the workmen's compensation act. In the event that no widow or widower shall survive, or in the case of the death of any such widow prior to his or her receipt of such annuity payments, the children of the deceased member if any there be shall be entitled to the annuity share and share alike provided no payment shall be made to any child after his attainment of eighteen years. (Special Laws 1949, Act No. 423, § 12; Amd. of 11-8-94) 
    Section 13. [Teachers.] All full time teachers regardless of membership in the state teachers' retirement system if they comply with the requirements for membership hereinabove set forth shall be entitled to a limited participation in the retirement system. The rate of contribution to the retirement fund by each teacher shall be two percent of his pay which shall be deducted from his salary and transmitted to the retirement fund immediately. All teacher members of the retirement system as they hereinafter become eligible for retirement or for the benefits under section 12 shall in no instance be paid more than fifty per cent of the amounts paid to policemen and firemen, participating in this retirement system. Notwithstanding the provisions of section 6 of this act, any teacher member of the retirement system may elect to defer retirement under this act until attainment of the age of seventy, provided, if retirement would under the provisions of said section be otherwise mandatory at an earlier age, such teacher shall not be required to contribute to the retirement fund for employment beyond such earlier age nor shall further benefits accrue to such teacher under the provisions of this act for such extended employment. Upon written application, full-time teacher members of the retirement system with 15 years of continuous service with the borough may retire at a minimum retirement age of 55 with a reduced pension, to be determined actuarially, at no increased cost to the borough. (Special Laws 1949, Act No. 423, § 13; Special Laws 1957, Act No. 624, ;s ; 3; Special Laws 1965, Act No. 299; Referendum of 5-5-1969; Amd. of 11-8-94) 
    Section 14. Police and fire departments. All members of the police and fire department now in the service of the borough as full-time employees are eligible for membership in the retirement system created by this act, provided they shall waive their rights under their present pension plans. The funds of any member of the firemen's pension plan who elects to join the retirement system shall be transferred immediately into the fund created by this act. (Special Laws 1949, Act No. 423, § 14; Amd. of 11-8-94) 
    Section 15. Exemptions. The right of any person to a pension or to the return of contributions, any benefit or right accrued or accruing to any person under the provisions of this act and the cash and securities held hereunder shall be exempt from levy and sale garnishment, attachment or any other process, and shall be nonassignable. (Special Laws 1949, Act No. 423, § 15; Amd. of 11-8-94) 
ARTICLE V. - SPECIAL ACTS 1953, ACT NO. 98-AUTHORITY OF BOARD OF PARK COMMISSIONERS 
An act concerning the authority of the board of park commissioners of the Borough of Naugatuck. 
    Section 1. The Borough of Naugatuck is authorized and empowered to transfer to the board of park commissioners of said borough the control and maintenance of the land acquired by it from the Naugatuck Playground and Recreation Association, Incorporated, on May 11, 1927, and recorded on May 11, 1927, in Naugatuck land records in volume 71 at page 683. (Special Laws 1953, Act No. 98, § 1) 
    Section 2. This act shall take effect May 1, 1953. (Special Laws 1953, Act No. 98, § 2) 
ARTICLE VI. - SPECIAL ACTS 1953, ACT NO. 159-DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE 
An act concerning creating a department of finance in the Borough of Naugatuck. 
    Section 1. There shall be a department of finance of the Borough of Naugatuck which shall have control and supervision over the financial affairs of the borough. (Special Laws 1953, Act No. 159, § 1; Amd. of 11-8-94) 
    Section 2. There shall be board of finance consisting of the mayor as an ex officio member and nine electors of said borough, each of whom shall own property, real or personal, subject to taxation on the assessment list next prior to the date of his appointment, and each of whom shall, at the time of his appointment and during his term of office, hold no other borough office. (Special Laws 1953, Act No. 159, § 2; Referendum of 5-5-1969; Amd. of 11-8-94) 
    Section 3. The members of the board of finance shall be appointed by the board of mayor and burgesses not later than the first Tuesday of June each year. There shall be no more than a simple majority from any one political party. Those members serving on the board in 1969 shall hold office until their term expires. Not later than the first Tuesday in June 1969, five additional members shall be appointed for the following terms: 
1 for 2 years 
3 for 3 years 
1 for 5 years 
In 1971, and thereafter three members shall be appointed as provided in section 3 of this act for a term of three years and until their successors are duly appointed and have qualified. (Special Laws 1953, Act No. 159, § 3; Referendum of 5-5-1969; Amd. of 11-8-94) 
    Section 4. Vacancies in the board of finance shall be filled by the board of mayor and burgesses. Any such vacancy shall be filled from the political party from which the former incumbent was appointed. (Special Laws 1953, Act No. 159, § 4; Amd. of 11-8-94) 
    Section 5. No member of the board of finance shall receive compensation for services as such, but the necessary and reasonable expenses of the board shall be paid by the borough. (Special Laws 1953, Act No. 159, § 5; Amd. of 11-8-94) 
    Section 6. The board of finance shall elect from its own members, on or before June 30 following the biennial election, a chairman and a vice-chairman thereof. The controller, appointed under the provisions of section 8 of this act, shall be the clerk of said board and he shall keep the minutes of all meetings. (Special Laws 1953, Act No. 159, § 6; Amd. of 11-8-94) 
    Section 7. The board of finance shall hold such meetings as may be advisable upon giving at least forty-eight hours notice to each member before the time set for such meeting. The clerk of the board shall issue a call for a special meeting, either at the direction of the chairman, or upon the written request of six members thereof. At all meetings, six members shall constitute a quorum and the concurrence of five votes shall be necessary for the transaction of business. The mayor shall vote only to dissolve a tie. (Special Laws 1953, Act No. 159, § 7; Referendum of 5-5-1969; Amd. of 11-8-94) 
    Section 8. There shall be a controller who shall be the administrative head of the department of finance and who shall be appointed by the board of mayor and burgesses not later than the first Tuesday of June following the biennial election in 1953, and quadrennially thereafter, for a term of four years and until his successor is appointed and qualified. (Special Laws 1953, Act No. 159, § 8; Amd. of 11-8-94) 
    Section 9. Said controller shall have knowledge of municipal accounting and taxation and shall have had experience in budgeting and financial control. He shall have direct supervision over the department of finance and the administration of the financial affairs of the borough, including the keeping of accounts and financial records, special assessments and other revenues, the disbursement of borough funds and money, control over expenditures and such other duties as the board of mayor and burgesses may impose by ordinance. (Special Laws 1953, Act No. 159, § 9; Amd. of 11-8-94) 
    Section 10. Accounts shall be kept by the department of finance showing the financial transactions for all departments, offices, agencies, boards and commissions of the borough. Forms for such accounts shall be prescribed by the controller with the approval of the board of mayor and burgesses. Financial reports shall be prepared for each quarter and each fiscal year and for such other periods as may be specified by the board of mayor and burgesses. (Special Laws 1953, Act No. 159, § 10; Amd. of 11-8-94) 
    Section 11. The controller, or an employee designated by him and approved by the board of mayor and burgesses shall be the purchasing agent of the borough, and all supplies, materials, equipment, non-professional services and other commodities required by any department, office, agency, board or commission of the borough, including the board of education and probate court, shall be purchased through such agent on requisitions signed by the head of the department, office or agency, or chairman of the board or commission, or a responsible representative designated by such department head or chairman, and approved as to sufficiency of funds by said controller. Purchases shall be made in accordance with the following bidding procedures and under such regulations as shall be established by the board of mayor and burgesses. 
    Informal bidding procedure/purchases from $1,000.00 to $5,000.00. The controller, or his designated agent, shall prepare, adopt and maintain a vendor's catalogue file which file shall be kept current by the publication on an annual basis, of a notice in at least two area newspapers of wide circulation in the Borough of Naugatuck, soliciting vendors to complete a form provided by the controller's office so that they may be considered by such office to provide open market purchases from $1,000.00 to $5,000.00 including labor, goods or non-professional services needed by the borough. All open market purchases shall whenever possible be based on at least three competitive bids and shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder. These bids shall be solicited by direct mail request to prospective vendors or by telephone. 
    Formal bidding procedure/purchases over $5,000.00. If any open market purchases of labor, goods or non-professional services or a contract for the purchase of labor, goods or non-professional services involves the expenditure of five thousand dollars or more, the controller, unless it shall be determined by a formal recorded vote of two-thirds of the membership of the board of mayor and burgesses present and voting but no less than six members present and voting to be against the best interests of the borough, shall invite sealed bids or proposals, giving ten days public notice thereof by at least one publication in two area newspapers of wide circulation in the Borough of Naugatuck. This notice shall set forth a general description of such open market purchases, time and place where specifications may be obtained and the time and place for the opening of bids to the public. All such open market purchases shall whenever possible be based on at least three competitive bids and shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder, or if in the best interest of the borough, shall reject all such bids and proposals. If all such bids and proposals are rejected by the board of mayor and burgesses, no such purchase shall be made without a reinvitation of sealed bids under the aforesaid procedure. 
    General requirements in regard to informal and formal bidding procedures. A record of all open market orders and bids submitted shall be maintained and open to public inspection in the controller's office after the relevant open market purchase has been made. If the lowest bids received are for the same amount or unit price, quality and service being equal, the contract shall be awarded to a local bidder. No open market purchase of labor, goods or services or a contract for the purchase of labor, goods or services, including a continuing order or contract for the purchase of the same commodity over a period of time, shall be subdivided to avoid the intent of the bidding procedures. All purchases of services in connection with the purchase of materials from State of Connecticut shall be made in accordance with the aforesaid informal and formal bidding procedures. The controller or his designated purchasing agent shall record and maintain on file an explanation for all open market purchases from any bidder other than the lowest bidder. 
    States of emergency. The mayor may upon his/her declaration of a state of emergency authorize and undertake only such temporary measures or work which are absolutely necessary to immediately relieve a serious threat to individuals or property or the probability of such serious threat. Within forty-eight hours of the declaration of a state of emergency, the mayor shall call a meeting of the board of mayor and burgesses at which time he shall advise the board of all emergency actions taken and the cost thereof. Thereafter, the board of mayor and burgesses shall take all further measures or complete any permanent restorative work by repairs or replacement in accordance with the aforesaid provisions of this section. (Special Laws 1953, Act No. 159, § 11; Referendum of 11-6-1984; Amd. of 11-8-94) 
    Section 12. The controller shall compile preliminary estimates for the annual budget. The head of each department, office, commission or agency, except the board of education, shall, at least ninety days before the end of the fiscal year, file with the controller on forms provided by him, a detailed estimate of the expenditures to be made by his department, office, commission or agency and the revenue, other than tax revenue, to be collected thereby, during the ensuing fiscal year. Not later than thirty days thereafter, the controller shall present to the board of finance: (a) Estimates of revenue, presenting in parallel columns the itemized receipts collected in the last-completed fiscal year; the receipts collected during the current fiscal year to the time of preparing the estimates; the receipts estimated to be collected during the remainder of the current fiscal year; and estimates of the receipts, other than from the property tax, to be collected in the ensuing fiscal year; (b) itemized estimates of expenditures, presenting in parallel columns the actual expenditures, of each department, office, commission or agency for the last-completed fiscal year; the expenditures for the current fiscal year to the time of preparing the estimates; the expenditures as estimated for the remainder of the fiscal year; the request of the several departments, offices, commissions and agencies for the ensuing year; and the recommendations of the director of finance. The chairman of the board of education shall have the same duties and follow the same procedure with respect to the budget for the board of education. (Special Laws 1953, Act No. 159, § 12; Amd. of 11-8-94; Amd. of 11-5-96) 
    Section 13. The board of finance shall hold one or more public hearings, not later than fifty days before the end of the fiscal year, at which any elector or taxpayer may have an opportunity to be heard regarding appropriations for the ensuing fiscal year. Following receipt of the estimates from the controller and the chairman of the board of education and the holding of such public hearing or hearings the board of finance shall prepare a budget which shall comply with any minimum standard or requirements of the state tax department and shall recommend the same to a joint meeting of the board of finance and the board of mayor and burgesses. Such joint meetings shall be held not later than ten day following the aforesaid public hearing or hearings. Within fifteen days after the joint meetings of the board of finance and the board of mayor and burgesses, sufficient copies of said budget as recommended by the joint meeting, shall be made so as to be available for general distribution in the office of the controller. (Special Laws 1953, Act No. 159, § 13; Amd. of 11-8-94) 
    Section 14. Not later than fifteen days before the end of the fiscal year, the board of finance and the board of mayor and burgesses, meeting jointly, shall hold a public hearing on the budget as recommended by said boards. At least five days prior to said public hearing, the board of finance shall cause to be published, in a newspaper having circulation in the borough, a summary of the budget showing anticipated revenues by major sources, proposed expenditures by functions or departments and the amount to be raised by taxation, and shall give notice of the time and place of such public hearing. Not later than five days following said public hearing, the budget shall be adopted at a joint meeting of the board of finance and the board of mayor and burgesses, and an official copy shall be filed with the controller. The board of mayor and burgesses shall immediately determine and set the amount of the tax rate and the date or dates when the taxes shall become due and payable. 
    Within fourteen (14) days of adoption of the budget, a petition requesting that such budget be put to a vote of the electors may be filed with the borough clerk. Petition forms shall be made available to the public by the borough clerk beginning on the day following the joint meeting of the Board of Mayor and Burgesses and Board of Finance at which the budget is voted upon for purposes of presentation at the public hearing as provided for herein. Any such petition shall specify whether such vote of electors is being sought for the town operating budget or for the board of education budget and shall specify whether such vote is being sought because the level of expenditures in said budgets is too high or too low. Said petition shall conform with the requirements of the general statutes, except as provided herein. 
    In the case of a petition seeking a vote of the electors on the Town Operating Budget, such petition shall contain the following wording: "We, the undersigned, being electors of the Town and Borough of Naugatuck, Connecticut, do hereby petition that the Town Operating Budget (the non-board of education budget) of the Borough of Naugatuck for the (specify budget year) fiscal year, be put to a vote of the electors because such budget is (specify: too high/too low)." 
    In the case of a petition seeking a vote of the electors on the Board of Education Budget, such petition shall contain the following wording: "We, the undersigned, being electors of the Town and Borough of Naugatuck, do hereby petition that the Board of Education Budget of the Borough of Naugatuck for the (specify budget year) fiscal year, be put to a vote of the electors because such Board of Education Budget is (specify: too high/too low)." 
    At the end of each page of signatures for said petition the following language shall appear: "I, the Circulator of this petition page, do hereby attest and state under penalties of False Statement that my name is (insert name), my address is (insert address) and that each person whose name appears on this page has signed the same in my presence and I either know each said signer or that said signer has satisfactorily identified himself or herself to me and that all of the signatures on this page were obtained not sooner than sixty (60) days prior to the filing of this petition. Dated at Naugatuck, Connecticut this (insert date). (Signature of Circulator)." 
    Each petition shall be signed in ink by a number of qualified electors equal in number to at least eight (8) percent of the electors registered on the last completed registry list. Upon the filing of any petition signature page, the borough clerk shall forthwith certify on each such page the number of signers thereon who are on the last completed voter registry list. Any page which does not contain the statements and certifications hereinbefore required, or which is determined by the borough clerk to have been circulated in violation of any other provision of this section or any relevant section of the Connecticut General Statutes relating to circulation of petitions, shall be rejected by such clerk. If within the specified filing period, a petition for a vote of the electors is found to contain a number of signatures equal to eight percent of the electors registered on the last completed registry list, the borough clerk shall forthwith certify said petition to the board of mayor and burgesses. 
    Nothing herein shall prohibit the simultaneous circulation of petitions for a vote of the electors on both the town operating budget and board of education budget and if both such petitions are circulated and contain the requisite number of signatures, there shall be two questions presented at the vote of the electors, one on the acceptance or rejection of the town operating budget and one on the acceptance or rejection of the board of education budget. 
    Within five (5) days after certification of such petition, by the borough clerk, the board of mayor and burgesses shall meet to set a date for such referendum and the budget shall be submitted to the electors at a referendum called by the board of mayor and burgesses to be held on any day of the week other than a Sunday or legal holiday, not earlier than twenty-two (22) days nor later than twenty-eight (28) days from the date of the meeting held by the board of mayor and burgesses calling the referendum. 
    The question(s) to be voted on at such referendum, whether for the town operating budget or board of education budget or both as the case may be, shall be determined by the petition(s) certified to by the borough clerk. The question(s) shall be presented on the ballot as follows: 
    "Shall the Town Operating Budget of (dollar amount) for the Borough of Naugatuck for the fiscal year (specify year) be adopted?" 
    Shall the Board of Education Budget of (dollar amount) for the Borough of Naugatuck for the fiscal year (specify year) be adopted?" 
The voters shall be given the option to vote either "yes" or "no" on such question(s). 
    At least fifteen (15) percent of the qualified electors shall have to vote to make the referendum effective. If less than fifteen (15) percent vote, the budget shall be deemed adopted. If at least fifteen (15) percent of the electors vote, and the majority votes to accept, the budget is approved. If at least fifteen (15) percent of the electors vote, and the total votes to reject exceeds the votes to accept, the budget shall be deemed rejected. If rejected, the board of finance and the board of mayor and burgesses shall present a revised budget at a public hearing, and adopt a revised budget within fourteen (14) days from the date of the referendum in which the budget was rejected. If necessary a total of three (3) referendums may be held. 
    In the event of a referendum on the operating budget, the electors shall vote for any one of the three (3) following choices: 
I accept the budget. 
I reject the budget because it is too high. 
I reject the budget because it is too low. 
    At least seven (7) days prior to a referendum, a summary of the total budget, broken down by proposed departmental appropriations shall be published in a newspaper having a general circulation in said town and borough. (Special Laws 1953, Act No. 159, § 14; Ref. of 5-3-93; Amd. of 11-8-94; Amd of 11-5-96) 
    Section 15. No spending agency or officer acting in behalf of any spending agency of the borough shall expend or enter into any contract by which the borough shall become liable for any sum which, added to any contract or contracts then in force, shall exceed the balance in the appropriation for the spending agency in question, except in cases required by the laws of the state or an emergency order. (Special Laws 1953, Act No. 159, § 15; Amd. of 11-8-94) 
    Section 16. Should any occasion arise where more money is needed for any spending agency of the borough than has been appropriated as provided for in this act, the board of mayor and burgesses may refer such request to the board of finance, provided such request is for two thousand dollars or less, and if such referral is made, the chairman of the board of finance shall forthwith call a meeting of said board to consider the appropriation to be exceeded. Should any occasion arise where more money is needed for any spending agency of the borough than has been appropriated as provided for in this act, the board of mayor and burgesses shall refer such request to the board of finance and the board of mayor and burgesses sitting jointly, provided such request is in excess of two thousand dollars, which request shall be considered by the said boards sitting jointly at their next scheduled meeting. The said boards acting jointly may make the necessary increase in the appropriation after proper inquiry, provided however, if the amount requested is in excess of two thousand dollars, such increase shall not be allowed unless approved and adopted by a two-thirds vote of those present and voting at the said joint meeting of the board of finance and the board of mayor and burgesses. If such an increase shall be made after the laying of the annual tax, the amount thereof shall be included in, and made a part of, the next tax levy. (Special Laws 1953, Act No. 159, § 16; Amd. of 11-8-94) 
    Section 17. The board of finance shall have the power to transfer unexpended balances from one appropriation to another, provided no amount appropriated for any purpose shall be used or appropriated for any other purpose within the same spending agency unless the same shall be recommended by said board. (Special Laws 1953, Act No. 159, § 17; Amd. of 11-8-94) 
    Section 18. The board of finance with the approval of the board of mayor and burgesses is authorized to establish a reserve fund for capital and non-recurring expenditures as provided by the laws of this state. (Special Laws 1953, Act No. 159, § 18; Amd. of 11-8-94) 
    Section 19. To finance all or any part of the expenses of any capital project which the borough may lawfully construct, alter or acquire, the borough may, upon recommendation of the board of finance and approved by a majority vote of the board of mayor and burgesses, incur indebtedness by issuing bonds, or notes in anticipation of bonds, subject to the limitations of the laws of this state and the provisions of this act and the approval by a majority of the electors at any general or special election duly warned for said purpose. (Special Laws 1953, Act No. 159, § 19; Amd. of 11-8-94) 
    Section 20. The board of finance shall prepare and have published an audited annual report. Such report shall be available for distribution and shall contain, in addition to reports of borough and town officers or boards required by law to be included, such other matters as the board of finance shall deem advisable. For the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this section, the board of finance may designate the controller as its agent. (Special Laws 1953, Act No. 159, § 20; Amd. of 11-8-94) 
    Section 21. All special acts relating to the Borough of Naugatuck, to the extent that their provisions are in conflict with the provisions of this act, are repealed. (Special Laws 1953, Act No. 159, § 21; Amd. of 11-8-94) 
    Section 22. This act shall take effect upon its ratification by a majority vote of the electors of said town and borough who are present and voting on this act at a special meeting duly warned and held for such purpose after May 5, 1953, but before May 30, 1953, and the clerk of such town shall, within ten days after such meeting, notify the secretary of the state of the result of such vote. (Special Laws 1953, Act No. 159, § 22; Amd. of 11-8-94) 
Editor's note- See also Article XIV of this subpart (Special Acts 1969, Act No. 30) for the mayor's membership and voting rights on the board of finance. 
ARTICLE VII. - SPECIAL ACTS 1953, ACT NO. 173-BOARD OF FIRE COMMISSIONERS 
An act concerning the creation of a board of fire commissioners for the Borough of Naugatuck and Town of Naugatuck. 
    Section 1. [Created.] There shall be a board of fire commissioners consisting of the mayor of the Borough of Naugatuck, who shall be an ex-officio, non-voting member and five electors of said borough who shall have resided in said borough not less than ten years next preceding the date of their appointment and who shall be appointed by the mayor not less than ten nor more than thirty days after the borough and town election in Naugatuck. No more than three such appointive members shall at any time serve thereon from the same political party. Said members shall serve without compensation but the necessary and reasonable expenses of said board shall be paid by the borough. No member shall have authority to act for the board except pursuant to an order legally made at a meeting of said board. No appointive member of the board shall hold any other borough, town or state office or be employed by the Borough or Town of Naugatuck. In the event of a vacancy in said board for any reason including disability, resignation, death, removal of residence from the borough, disqualification by reason of loss of elector's rights or removal from office the mayor shall within thirty days of such vacancy appoint an elector of said borough to serve for the remainder of the unexpired term. (Special Laws 1953, Act No. 173, § 1; Special Laws 1955, Act No. 519, § 1; Amd. of 11-8-94) 
    Section 2. Term of board. In making such appointments in 1953, the mayor shall appoint one of said fire commissioners to serve for one year, one for two years, one for three years, one for four years, and one for five years, each to serve for the term for which he was appointed and until his successor is appointed and has qualified. In May, 1954, and annually thereafter, the mayor shall appoint one member to said board to serve for a period of five years and until his successor is appointed and has qualified, to succeed the member of the board whose term expires. (Special Laws 1953, Act No. 173, § 2; Amd. of 11-8-94) 
    Section 3. How constituted. There shall continue to be in the Borough of Naugatuck a fire department which shall consist of a chief engineer, a first assistant engineer, a second assistant engineer, a captain and such number of other officers, members and employees as the board of fire commissioners may recommend to the board of mayor and burgesses. The officers, members and employees of said fire department, at the time of the passage of the act, shall continue to hold office, membership and employment in said department in their present grades, unless promoted, dismissed, suspended or reduced in rank in accordance with the provisions of sections 4 and 6 of this act. (Special Laws 1953, Act No. 173, § 3; Amd. of 11-8-94) 
    Section 4. [Powers.] Said board of commissioners shall have general management and control over fire protection in the Borough of Naugatuck, including fire hydrants and the fire alarm system, together with the power to make all necessary regulations for the government of said fire department. Said board shall appoint, make promotions and prescribe the duties and qualifications of all officers, members and employees of the department, including the superintendent of fire alarm; dismiss, suspend or reduce in rank any such officer, member or employee, subject to the right to appeal as hereinafter provided; and fix compensation of all such officers, members and employees, subject to the approval of the board of mayor and burgesses, except where compensation has been established by legislative act. The board of fire commissioners shall submit to the board of mayor and burgesses annually a budget of its estimated expenditures for the ensuing year. (Special Laws 1953, Act No. 173, § 4; Special Laws 1955, Act No. 519, § 2; Amd. of 11-8-94) 
    Section 5. Officers of board and meetings. Said board shall annually elect one of its members to be chairman and shall elect a secretary who shall be a member of the board. Said board shall hold regular meetings and keep records of the same. Meetings may be called by the chairman of the board or by three of its members. A majority of the members of the board shall constitute a quorum for transaction of business. (Special Laws 1953, Act No. 173, § 5; Amd. of 11-8-94) 
    Section 6. Removal only for cause. Appeals. All officers, members and employees of said fire department shall hold office, membership and employment in said department until dismissal by unanimous vote of all five members of the board of fire commissioners for cause, provided, upon dismissal, reduction in rank or suspension, the person dismissed, suspended or reduced in rank, may appeal from the action of said board within thirty days from the date of notice of such action, to the Court of Common Pleas for the judicial district of Waterbury to be held at Waterbury. Said court may approve, modify or revoke the action of said board and may tax costs at its discretion. The action of the board shall remain in effect pending such appeal, but if the said court shall modify or revoke the action of said board, its decree may relate back to the date of the action of said fire commissioners. (Special Laws 1953, Act No. 173, § 6; Amd. of 11-8-94) 
    Section 7. Volunteers. The powers of appointment and removal conferred upon the board of fire commissions in section 4 of this act shall not be construed to include the officers of the volunteer fire company forming a part of the fire department of the Borough and Town of Naugatuck. Said volunteer company shall function as an independent group under its own regulations; provided said regulations do not in any way contravene the regulations of the department; and provided further, during fires or period of emergency, the chief engineer, or his designated subordinate shall have complete control over all firemen, regular and volunteer. (Special Laws 1953, Act No. 173, § 7; Amd. of 11-8-94) 
    Section 8. Removal of fire commissioners from office. Upon reasonable notice and after due hearing, the board of mayor and burgesses may remove from office, for malfeasance or for any neglect or refusal to properly perform his duties, any member of the board of fire commissioners. Such removal shall require an affirmative vote of at least five members of the board of mayor and burgesses. (Special Laws 1953, Act No. 173, § 8; Amd. of 11-8-94) 
    Section 9. Appeal from removal from office. Any member of the board of fire commissioners removed from office, as provided in section 8 hereof, may appeal from the act of the board of mayor and burgesses in the same manner as is provided in section 6 hereof. (Special Laws 1953, Act No. 173, § 9; Amd. of 11-8-94) 
    Section 10. Volunteer services. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 7 of Special Act No. 173, all volunteer safety services, including, but not limited to, the Rescue Squad, Ambulance Corps, Fire Department and the Fire Police shall fall under jurisdiction of the Board of Fire Commissioners. (Ref. of 5-3-93; Amd. of 11-8-94) 
    Section 11. Repeal of former acts. The provisions of any act pertaining to the Borough and Town of Naugatuck, inconsistent herewith, are repealed. (Special Laws 1953, Act No. 173, § 10; Amd. of 11-8-94) 
Editor's note- At the direction of the borough, section 10 of article VII has been renumbered to section 11. 
    Section 12. Effective date. This act shall take effect upon its ratification by majority vote of the electors of said town and borough who are present and voting on this act at a special meeting duly warned and held for such purpose after May 5, 1953, but before May 30, 1953, and clerk of said town, within ten days after such special meeting shall notify the secretary of state of the result of such vote. (Special Laws 1953, Act No. 173, § 11; Amd. of 11-8-94) 
Editor's note- See also Article XIV of this subpart (Special Acts 1969, Act No. 30) for the mayor's membership and voting rights on the board of fire commissioners. 
At the direction of the borough, section 11 of article VII has been renumbered to section 12. 
ARTICLE VIII. - SPECIAL ACTS 1953, ACT NO. 321-BOARD OF POLICE COMMISSIONERS 
An act creating a board of police commissioners for the Borough and Town of Naugatuck. 
    Section 1. The department of police protection in the Borough and Town of Naugatuck shall be subject to such regulations as the board of police commissioners of said borough and town may adopt and provide. Said board shall have general control over the public safety and welfare, and such powers and duties as are hereinafter stated, together with all powers and duties which now are or hereafter may be vested by the laws of the state in the executive head of police departments. (Special Laws 1953, Act No. 321, § 1; Amd. of 11-8-94) 
    Section 2. There shall be a board of police commissioners in said town and borough consisting of the mayor, who shall be an ex-officio, non-voting member, and five electors of said town and borough, appointed by the mayor, who shall have been residents for the period of at least ten years next preceding the date of their appointment, and who bear a good reputation in the community. Annually, the mayor shall appoint one member to serve for five years, or until his successor is appointed and has qualified, to succeed the member whose term expires. No member appointed shall, at the time of his appointment and during his term of office, hold any other borough, town or state office or be an employee of the Borough and Town of Naugatuck. No more than three such appointive members shall at any time be from the same political party. In the event of a vacancy in said board for any reason, including disability, resignation, death, removal of residence from the borough, disqualification by reason of loss of elector's rights or removal from office, the mayor shall, within thirty days of such vacancy, appoint an elector of said borough to serve for the remainder of the unexpired term. (Special Laws 1953, Act No. 321, § 2; Special Laws 1955, Act No. 520, § 1; Amd. of 11-8-94) 
    Section 3. The board of police commissioners shall administer, maintain and control the department of police protection of the town and borough, and shall appoint all policemen, both members and officers including the chief of police, except those coming within the provisions of section 16 hereof, all of whom shall hold office until reaching retirement because of age or disability, unless sooner removed for cause. The board shall set up all regulations pertaining to the police department, including standards governing the conduct and discipline of the members, officers and chief of police, standards governing the selection of members to the police department, and standards governing the promotions of members and officers in the police department, said standards of selection and promotion to include written examinations. (Special Laws 1953, Act No. 321, § 3; Amd. of 11-8-94) 
    Section 4. Upon reasonable notice and after due hearing, the board of police commissioners may remove from office, for malfeasance or for any neglect or refusal to properly perform his duties, any member or officer of said department of police protection, including the chief of police. Such removal shall require an affirmative vote of all five members of the board of police commissioners. (Special Laws 1953, Act No. 321, § 4; Amd. of 11-8-94) 
    Section 5. Any person in the department of police protection, including the chief of police, removed from office as provided in section 4 of this act, may appeal from the action of said board of police commissioners, within thirty days from the date of notice of such action, to the Court of Common Pleas for the judicial district of Waterbury at Waterbury. Said Court of Common Pleas may approve, modify or revoke the action of said board and may tax costs in its discretion. The action of the board shall remain in effect pending such an appeal, but, if said court shall modify or revoke the action of said board, its decree may relate back to the date of the action of said board. (Special Laws 1953, Act No. 321, § 5; Amd. of 11-8-94) 
    Section 6. No member of the board of police commissioners shall receive compensation for services as such, but the necessary and reasonable expenses of the board shall be paid by the borough. (Special Laws 1953, Act No. 321, § 6; Amd. of 11-8-94) 
    Section 7. The board of police commissioners shall hold meetings at least once a month and at other times as they may deem advisable. At its first meeting the board shall elect from its members a chairman who shall preside over all meetings. The clerk of said board shall be one of the members of the board who shall be elected by the board at its first meeting and who shall, in such capacity, keep minutes of all such meetings in a record book kept for that purpose. The clerk of said board shall issue a call for any meeting either at the discretion of the chairman or at the written request of any three members of the board. At all meetings three members shall constitute a quorum, and the concurrence of three votes shall be necessary for the transaction of business, except as set forth in section 4 of this act. (Special Laws 1953, Act No. 321, § 7; Amd. of 11-8-94) 
    Section 8. The board of police commissioners shall prepare the budget of the department of police protection and in addition shall submit to the board of mayor and burgesses at least semi-annually reports setting forth any recommendations, as follows: (a) Concerning wage scale of members and officers of said department, including the chief of police and those persons referred to in section 14 and section 15 hereof; (b) concerning the safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the Borough and Town of Naugatuck. (Special Laws 1953, Act No. 321, § 8; Amd. of 11-8-94) 
    Section 9. The word "member" or "members" as used in this act shall mean those persons in the department of police protection who hold the rank of regular patrolman, but shall not include those persons coming under the provisions of section 14 and 15 hereof. The word "officer" or "officers" as used in this act shall mean those in the department of police protection who shall be above the rank of regular patrolman but shall not mean the chief of police of said department. (Special Laws 1953, Act No. 321, § 9; Amd. of 11-8-94) 
    Section 10. The chief of police shall be the titular head of the department of police protection, and, as such, shall have charge and control, under the direction of the board of police commissioners, of the administration of said department, including the care and custody of its property, apparatus and equipment and the discipline of its members and officers in accordance with section 17 hereof. (Special Laws 1953, Act No. 321, § 10; Amd. of 11-8-94) 
    Section 11. All the members, officers and the chief of police, and those persons included in the provisions of section 15 hereof, shall have such authority as is vested in police officers by the laws of this state or by ordinance of the borough. (Special Laws 1953, Act No. 321, § 11; Amd. of 11-8-94) 
    Section 12. There shall be one chief of police in the department of police protection who shall sit in on all meetings of the board of police commissioners, but shall have no vote in any proceedings before the board. The number of members and the number of officers of said department shall be determined by the board of mayor and burgesses upon recommendation of the board of police commissions. (Special Laws 1953, Act No. 321, § 12; Amd. of 11-8-94) 
    Section 13. The clerk of the board of police commissioners may sign and issue subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses before the board of police commissioners at any lawful meeting of such board, and shall have such other powers as are set out in section 661 of the general statutes. (Special Laws 1953, Act No. 321, § 13; Amd. of 11-8-94) 
    Section 14. The board of police commissioners shall have power to appoint and define the duties of a police surgeon and special policemen, who shall serve at the pleasure of said board, notwithstanding the provisions of sections 4 and 5 hereof. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the police surgeon from acting as fire surgeon. (Special Laws 1953, Act No. 321, § 14; Special Laws 1955, Act No. 520, § 2; Amd. of 11-8-94) 
    Section 15. The board of police commissioners shall have the power to appoint such supernumary patrolmen, as well as policewomen and police matrons, as the board may deem necessary in the public interest. The duties of any person appointed under the provisions of this section shall be defined and set by said board of police commissioners. (Special Laws 1953, Act No. 321, § 15; Amd. of 11-8-94) 
    Section 16. Any regular or supernumary policeman of the Borough of Naugatuck who is qualified as such prior to the time of the passage of this act shall not be affected in his status as a policeman or in his seniority, or in his rank or in his salary or wage by the passage of this act, but shall from the date of passage of this act be otherwise subject to the provisions of this act. (Special Laws 1953, Act No. 321, § 16; Amd. of 11-8-94) 
    Section 17. The chief of police and next highest ranking officer shall have the power to suspend members and officers from office for cause; but such suspension shall not continue for more than forty-eight hours, unless the person ordering such suspension shall, within such time, notify said board in writing of such suspension, the grounds of such suspension and the name of witnesses to sustain such charges. After notice shall have been given to the accused, said board shall hear and examine witnesses under oath or affirmation upon the charges and in defense, and any member or officer of the department shall have the right to be represented by counsel when appearing before said board on charges. Said board may continue the suspension or restore the member or officer to duty. In all cases in which the suspension is continued, the person suspended shall be deprived of his pay and of all the rights, privileges and powers of a policeman during the period of such suspension. Any person suspended under the provisions of this section may appeal in the same manner as is provided in section 5 of this act for removal from office. (Special Laws 1953, Act No. 321, § 17; Amd. of 11-8-94) 
    Section 18. Upon reasonable notice and due hearing, the board of mayor and burgesses may remove from office, for malfeasance or for any neglect or refusal to properly perform his duties, any member of the board of police commissioners. Such removal shall require an affirmative vote of at least five members of the board of mayor and burgesses. (Special Laws 1953, Act No. 321, § 18; Amd. of 11-8-94) 
    Section 19. Any member of the board of police commissioners removed from office, as provided in section 18 hereof, may appeal from the action of the board of mayor and burgesses in the same manner as is provided in section 5 hereof for the removal of a member or officer of the department. (Special Laws 1953, Act No. 321, § 19; Amd. of 11-8-94) 
    Section 20. All acts, pertaining to the Borough of Naugatuck, inconsistent herewith are repealed. (Special Laws 1953, Act No. 321, § 20; Amd. of 11-8-94) 
    Section 21. This act shall take effect upon its ratification by a majority vote of the electors of said town and borough who are present and voting on this act at a special meeting duly warned and held for such purpose after May 5, 1953, but before May 30, 1953, and the town clerk shall notify the secretary of the state within ten days after such meeting, of the result of such vote. (Special Laws 1953, Act No. 321, § 21; Amd. of 11-8-94) 
Editor's note- See also Article XIV of this subpart (Special Acts 1969, Act No. 30) for the mayor's membership and voting rights on the board of police commissioners. 
ARTICLE IX. - SPECIAL ACTS 1953, ACT NO. 483-ELIGIBILITY FOR RETIREMENT 
An act concerning eligibility for retirement in the Borough of Naugatuck. 
    Any full-time employee of the Borough of Naugatuck, as of the effective date of this act, who was so employed on or before September 1, 1949, shall be eligible to receive a pension under the provisions of number 423 of the Special Acts of 1949, regardless of his age, provided he shall contribute to the retirement fund whatever amounts are due based on the entire length of his service; and the retirement board shall determine the amounts due as pension to any such pension in accordance with his years of service. (Special Laws 1953, Act No. 483) 
ARTICLE X. - SPECIAL ACTS 1961, ACT NO. 192-SALARY OF TOWN CLERK 
An act providing for the salary of the town clerk of the Borough of Naugatuck. 
Be it enacted by the senate and house of representatives in general assembly convened: 
    Section 1. The town clerk of the Borough of Naugatuck shall receive a salary of not less than sixty-eight hundred dollars per annum as compensation for his services, said salary to be in lieu of all fees to which said clerk is entitled under the provisions of the general statutes. Any subsequent additions to said salary shall be made by the board of finance of the Borough of Naugatuck. (Special Laws 1961, Act No. 192, § 1) 
    Section 2. All fees collected by the town clerk, as provided by the general statutes, in the performance of his duties as town clerk shall become the property of the Borough of Naugatuck, and shall be paid by said clerk, monthly, to the treasurer of said borough. (Special Laws 1961, Act No. 192, § 2) 
    Section 3. The Borough of Naugatuck shall pay all of the expenses of the office of said town clerk, including the salaries of clerks and assistants and the cost of materials and supplies required by said office. (Special Laws 1961, Act No. 192, § 3) 
    Section 4. This act shall take effect July 1, 1961. (Special Laws 1961, Act No. 192, § 4) 
ARTICLE XI. - SPECIAL ACTS 1961, ACT NO. 323-PENSION FOR TOWN CLERK 
An act providing for a pension for the town clerk of the Borough of Naugatuck. 
Be it enacted by the senate and house of representatives in general assembly convened: 
    Section 1. The town clerk of the Borough of Naugatuck may receive a pension from the Borough of Naugatuck, at the rate of one and two-thirds per cent, for each year of service, of his average salary for the last seven years of service, provided he has served more than fifteen consecutive years as town clerk. (Special Laws 1961, Act No. 323, § 1) 
    Section 2. The pension of the town clerk of the Borough of Naugatuck, in office on the effective date of this act, shall be based on his years in service since he was first elected to the office of town clerk, January 3, 1938. (Special Laws 1961, Act No. 323, § 2) 
    Section 3. Said incumbent town clerk shall pay into the pension fund of said borough such contribution as shall be determined by the board of mayor and burgesses. (Special Laws 1961, Act No. 323, § 3) 
ARTICLE XII. - SPECIAL ACTS 1961, ACT NO. 404-RETIREMENT CREDIT FOR ASSISTANT TOWN CLERK 
An act concerning retirement credit for the assistant town clerk of the Borough of Naugatuck. 
Be it enacted by the senate and house of representatives in general assembly convened: 
    The assistant town clerk of the Borough of Naugatuck, in office as of January 19, 1961, shall, as of the time of her salary is paid by said borough, become a member of the retirement system of said borough with rights accruing from her initial employment by the borough October 1, 1935, upon payment by said assistant town clerk to the pension fund of an amount to be determined by the mayor and burgesses of said borough. (Special Laws 1961, Act No. 404) 
ARTICLE XIII. - SPECIAL ACTS 1963, ACT NO. 303-TOWN CLERK TO BE ELECTIONS CLERK 
An act providing that the town clerk of Naugatuck be the elections clerk. 
Be it enacted by the senate and house of representatives in general assembly convened: 
    The town clerk of Naugatuck shall be the elections clerk of the consolidated Town and Borough of Naugatuck. All election duties imposed by law upon the municipal clerk, borough clerk or town clerk shall be the responsibility of, and be performed by, the town clerk of Naugatuck as elections clerk. All special acts, or portions thereof, relating to the Borough of Naugatuck, to the extent that their provisions are in conflict with the provisions of this act, are repealed. (Special Laws 1963, Act No. 303) 
ARTICLE XIV. - SPECIAL ACTS 1969, ACT NO. 30-MAYOR'S MEMBERSHIP AND VOTING RIGHTS RE THE POLICE COMMISSION, FIRE COMMISSION, FINANCE BOARD AND BOARD OF PUBLIC CHARITIES 
An act amending the Charter of the Borough of Naugatuck to provide the mayor with a vote, and a tie-breaking vote on the police commission, fire commission, finance board and board of public charities. 
    Section 1. In addition to the number of appointed members provided for by the Charter of the Borough of Naugatuck on the police commission, fire commission, finance board and board of public charities, the mayor shall be a voting member of each of said boards and commissions, and as such shall be entitled to vote upon any matter or question before them. 
    Section 2. In the event of a tie vote upon any matter before any of the boards or commissions listed in section 1 herein, the mayor shall be entitled to an additional vote on such board or commission, as the case may be, for the purpose of breaking such tie vote. 
    Section 3. In any instance where the board of mayor and burgesses and any of the boards or commissions listed in section 1 herein meet jointly and vote jointly upon any matter, the mayor shall only be entitled to a single vote as a member of the board of mayor and burgesses, and to a single tie-breaking vote, and shall not be entitled to vote as a member of both boards. 
    Section 4. All special acts, or sections of special acts, relating to the Borough of Naugatuck, to the extent that their provisions are in conflict with the provisions of this act, are repealed. 
    Section 5. Notwithstanding the time limitations of sections 9-369a and 9-370 of the general statutes, as amended, this act shall take effect upon its ratification by a majority vote of the electors of said town and borough present and voting thereon at the municipal election on May 5, 1969, and the town clerk shall notify the secretary of the state within ten days after such election of the results of such vote. 
    Section 6. The town clerk shall send to each elector to whom he has sent an absentee ballot which does not incorporate the question presented for ratification by this act a duplicate absentee ballot which incorporates such question and notice that such question is being presented and that submission of such duplicate ballot by such elector shall void any absentee ballot previously submitted. 
Approved April 21, 1969. 
Approved: Date of vote May 5, 1969. 
Vote for, 1,907; against, 1,145. 
Editor's note- This special act, which is a Charter amendment, has been incorporated into the Charter as the sixteenth through eighteenth sentences of section 11. It is reprinted here in its entirety because of its importance and as a convenience to the users of the code. See also article VI of this subpart for the special act regarding the board of finance, article VII of this subpart for the special act regarding the board of fire commissioners, and article VIII of this subpart for the special act regarding the board of police commissions. For provisions regarding the board of public charities see sections 3.12 and 3.13 of the Borough Charter contained in subpart A. 
CHARTER AND SPECIAL ACTS COMPARATIVE TABLE 
 This table shows the location within Subpart A and C of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 
Year  Act 
Number Section  Section 
this Charter 1893 161 1-3 1-3 5 5 7-26 7-26 28-65 28-65 67-70 67-70 1895 140 60 185 3.18 1-3 1-3 4-14 3.1-3.11 16-19 3.12-3.15 21-25 3.16-3.20 26 28 27 3.21 28, 29 4, 5 30 10 31 14 33 27 34 3.22 35 58 36 3.23 38 3.24 39 38 40 3.25 1897 415 1 10 3 21.1 4 3.8, 3.9 11 5 61.1 1911 109 31 1917 146 18 217 3.12 440 63.1 1919 43 3.9 352 60 1923 17 3.14 161 63 1925 314 62 1927 389 13 60 1929 274 60 281 21.1 347 1 36 1931 86 5 101 63 522 60 1935 529 1 36 1937 148 63 168 6 1, 2 6.1 3 3 3.18 4 6.2 6 6 1939 214 6.1 1941 170 60 191 6.1 1943 264 63 1945 156 1 1946 3 63 1947 472 3.10 1949 424 21 1953 258 60 404 63 440 2 32.1 3 11 4 19 5 15.1 1955 575 5 1957 231 12 1959 289 6.1 354 6.1 420 1 63 431 1 16 1961 195 16 1967 24 1 3 2 3.18 25 1, 2 6.1 3 6 11 4 32 5-5-1969(Ref.) 3.10 63 1969 29, 30 1 11 5-1-89(Ref.) 3.12 3.20 
6.1 
11 5- 3-93(Ref.) Art. VI, § 14 Art. VII, § 10       Rnbd Art. VII, §§ 10, 11       as Art. VII, §§ 11, 12 11- 8-94(Amd.) Subpart A, § 6.1 Subpart A, § 11.1 Subpart C, Art. I Subpart C, Art. IV, §§ 1-15 Subpart C, Art. VI, §§ 1-22 Subpart C, Art. VII, §§ 1-12 Subpart C, Art. VIII, §§ 1-21 11- 5-96(Amd.) Art. VI, § 12 Art. VI, § 14 3.18 11- 4-97 Subpart A., § 3.18 ed. note § 1  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 1973 CODE 
 This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1973 Code, as updated through February 9, 1973, which are included herein. Sections of the 1973 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 
1973 Code 
Section Section  
this Code 1-1 1-1 1-2 1-3 1-3 1-2 1-4 1-8 1-5, 1-6 1-5, 1-6 1-7-1-9 1-7 1-10 1-10 2-1 2-1 2-2 2-76, 2-77 2-3, 2-4 2-51, 2-52 2-5 2-53, 2-54 2-6-2-9 2-55-2-58 3-1-3-3 3-1-3-3 3-14-3-28 3-16-3-30 5-16-5-24 5-16-5-24 5-35-5-41 5-35-5-41 5-52-5-57 5-51-5-56 7-1-7-5 12-101-12-105 8-1-8-5 7-1-7-5 9-1, 9-2 8-1, 8-2 10-1-10-3 9-1-9-3 12-16-12-31 10-16-10-31 12-54 12-54 13-17-13-21 11-16-11-20 15-1 12-1 16-1-16-7 13-1-13-7 17-1 14-1 19-1 12-16 19-17 12-51 19-18(a), 19-18(b) 12-52, 12-53 19-19 12-55 19-21 12-59 19-32-19-39 12-76-12-83 19-50 19-65 19-63 19-64 20-1 15-134-15-136 20-3 15-116-15-120 22-1 16-1 16-12 22-2-22-8 16-2-16-8 22-9, 22-10 16-10, 16-11 22-23 16-56, 16-57 22-24-22-41 16-58-16-75 22-52-22-57 16-91-16-96 24-1 18-1 24-63, 24-64 18-31, 18-32 24-80-24-89 18-46-18-55 26-33 19-136 26-49 19-106 26-50 19-107-19-111 26-51, 26-52 19-112, 19-113 26-53 19-114 19-120 26-54-26-57 19-115-19-118 26-59 19-119 26-61 19-41 26-62(a), 26-62(b) 19-61 26-62(c), 26-62(d) 19-62, 19-63 26-62(f) 19-63 26-65(a), 26-65(b) 19-81 26-65(c)-26-65(e) 19-82-19-84 26-65(f) 19-86 26-65(g) 19-85 26-65(h)-26-65(k) 19-87-19-90 26-66-26-68 19-42-19-44  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
 This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1973 Code, as updated through February 9, 1973, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1973 Code, as supplemented. Ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Ordinance 
Number  Date Section  Section 
this Code 56 12- 4-73 I 15-86-15-90 15-92 II-VIII 15-93-15-99 57  4- 2-74 1, 2 15-66, 15-67 3 15-68-15-71 4 15-72 58  8-14-74 1-5 9-16-9-20 6 9-22 7 9-21 59  6- 3-75 15-47 1 15-46 2 15-49 3 15-48 15-51 4 15-50 5 15-52 60  4-11-76 1-3 2-91-2-93  3- 1-77 19-1 12-26, 12-27 19-3 12-28, 12-29 19-4 12-30 12-33 19-5, 19-6 12-31, 12-32 19-22-19-24 12-56-12-58 61  8-10-77 17-1 10- 4-77 16-91 62 11- 1-77 1 13-9 2 13-8 63  2- 7-78 1-3 15-22 11-14-78 15-87, 15-88 64 10- 2-79 I 2-31-2-34 II, III 2-35, 2-36 65  1- 2-80 I-IV 18-71-18-74 V 18-76 VI 18-75 66  4- 1-80 17-2 68 11-10-80 1 15-16-15-21 2, 3 15-23, 15-24 4 15-25-15-28 5 15-29 69 12-21-81 16-9 70  9- 7-82 15-91  3- 1-83 7-2 71  9-19-85 1 16-31, 16-32 2 16-33-16-36 3-8 16-37-16-42 72  3-14-86 1-3 2-59  4- 1-86 2-93 74 10- 7-86 1-1 2-112 1-2 2-111 1-3-1-6 2-113-2-116 1-7 2-118 1-8 2-117 75 11-22-86 I-IV 13-10 76 11-22-86 (a)-(d) 4-1 79  3- 3-87 13-11  9- 1-87 15-50  9-10-87 15-23 18-121-18-131 10-15-87 15-66 15-68-15-73 80 10-15-87 15-116-15-122 81 10-15-87 1-4 6-1  1- 5-88(Mo.) 15-1  4- 5-88 16-33 83  9-20-88 1-14 2-151-2-164  3- 7-89 I 2-32-2-34  6- 6-89 2-1 85 11- 7-89 1-4 9-4 86  2- 8-90 1-3 2-101-2-103 4 2-105 5 2-104 87  3-13-90 3.5-1-3.5-10 88  4- 3-90 1-7 18-91-18-97 8 18-92 9-11 18-98-18-100  5- 1-90 10-17 10-32 90  8- 7-90 90-1-90-4 2-175-2-178 91 11-13-90 1-7 Adopting Ordinance, p. vii 92 12- 4-90 1-6 10-45-10-50 93 12- 4-90 1(A)-(D) 10-61-10-64  3-15-91 87-3(1) 
(2) 

(3) 3.5-7 
3.5-11 
3.5-10 87-4(3), (4) 3.5-4(c), (d) 87-5(1) 
(2) 3.5-3 
3.5-5 94  8- 6-91 94.1-94.16 11-31-11-46 94.18 11-47  8- 6-91 19-2 12-26  8- 6-91 18-101 10- 1-91 11-32 96 12- 3-91 1, 2 2-16 12-17-92 18-132, 18-133 (Mo.)  1- 5-93       Rpld 2-101-2-105 (Amend.)  3- 2-93 12-26 (Amend.) 11- 2-93 18-91(d) 98 11-12-93       Rpld 18-71-18-76       Added 18-71-18-78 (Amend.) 11- 8-94       Added 2-101 (Amend.) 12- 5-95       Added 2-2 (Mo.)  7- 5-94 1-7       Added 7-26-7-32 99  7- 5-94 1-7       Added 17-3 (Mo.)  9- 6-94       Added 16-13 100 12- 6-94 1-4       Added 5-71-5-74 101  3- 7-95 1-7       Added 13-26-13-32 (Mo.)  4- 2-96 18-73(a) (Mo.)  5- 7-96       Rpld 5-20 103 12- 3-96 1-1-1-10       Added 18-106-18-115 104  2- 4-97       Added 6-2 (Amend.) 12- 3-96 6-1(a) (Mo.)  7- 1-97 1-7 7-26-7-32 (Amend.) 10-23-97 10-45, 10-46 10-47(a)(8), (9)       Added 10-47(a)(10)-(14) 10-47(e) 10-48(a) 10-49(a) 10-50(b) 105 10-23-97       Added App. B, § 57 106  3- 3-98 1-4       Added 9-41-9-44 107  3- 3-98       Rpld 15-47-15-52       Added 15-47-15-53 (Mo.)  3- 3-98 7-2 (Amend.)  5- 5-98       Added 12-26(d) (Amend.)  8- 4-98 Ch. 19, Art. III, Div. 4, tit. 19-106       Rpld 19-107-19-114 19-115-19-118       Rpld 19-119 19-120       Added 19-121 108  9- 1-98 1-7 17-3 109 10- 6-98       Added 7-6 (Mo.) 11-10-98 1-5       Rpld 15-66-15-73       Added 15-66-15-70 (Mo.)  8- 1-00 8-1 (Mo.) 10-10-00       Added 2-102 110  6- 5-01 1-7       Added 2-105-2-107 111  2- 5-02       Rpld 19-106, 19-115-19-118, 19-120       Added 19-122, 19-123, 19-125-19-127, 19-129, 19-130 112  2-12-02       Added 13-12 113  5-14-02       Added 19-16 (Mo.)  4- 1-03 7-2 114 10- 5-03 A-D       Added 2-17 115 11- 4-03 A-E       Added 2-18 116  6- 7-05 1-3 2-16 117  6-14-05 1-5       Dltd 15-116-15-122       Added 15-116-15-120 (Mo.)  9- 6-05 16-91 (Mo.)  4- 4-06 7-2 118  6- 6-06 1-8       Added 13-51-13-58 119  9- 5-06 I-IV       Added 13-71-13-74 120  7- 1-08       Added 15-71-15-78 121 12- 2-08 I-IV       Added 2-108 (Amend.)  7- 7-09       Dltd 2-93(c) (Amend.) 12- 1-09       Added 2-141 (Amend.)  3- 2-10 2-141 122 11- 1-10       Added 10-65-10-82 (Ord.) 12-28-10       Rpld 3.5-1-3.5-11       Added 3.5-1-3.5-12 123 11- 1-12       Added ch. 17, art. I (tit.)       Added 17-21-17-29 83  4- 2-13       Rpld 2-151-2-164       Added 2-151-2-166 (Ord.)  4- 2-13       Rnbd 2-175-2-178       as 18-134-18-137 124  4- 2-13       Added 2-175-2-179 125  2- 4-14       Added 10-50(d) 126  2- 4-14       Added 2-109-2-110.3  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
 This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the state law or related matters. 
G.S. 
Section Section  
this Code 1-1 1-2 4-124c et seq. Ch. 15, Art. VII 15-136 7-131A 2-52 6-238.3 15-75 7-136 15-86 15-88 7-148-7-186 Ch. 1 7-148(c)(4)(B) Ch. 9 Ch. 14 7-148(c)(4)(C) Ch. 5 7-148(c)(4)(F) Ch. 16 7-148(c)(4)(G) Ch. 19 7-148(c)(4)(H) Ch. 10 7-148(c)(6)(A)(i) Ch. 14 7-148(c)(6)(A)(ii) Ch. 19 7-148(c)(6)(A)(v) Ch. 16 7-148(c)(6)(B) Ch. 19 7-148(c)(6)(B)(i) Ch. 19 Ch. 19, Art. III 7-148(c)(6)(B)(iv) Ch. 16 7-148(c)(6)(C) 16-31 7-148(c)(6)(C)(i) Ch. 16 Ch. 16, Art. IV 7-148(c)(6)(C)(ii) Ch. 16 7-148(c)(6)(C)(iii) Ch. 16 Ch. 16, Art. II 7-148(c)(6)(C)(iv) Ch. 16 Ch. 16, Art. II 7-148(c)(6)(C)(v) Ch. 16 16-8 7-148(c)(7)(A)(ii), 7-148(c)(7)(A)(iii) Ch. 7 7-148(c)(7)(A)(v) Ch. 3, Art. II 7-148(c)(7)(B)(i), 7-148(c)(7)(B)(ii) Ch. 18 7-148(c)(7)(C) Ch. 19 7-148(c)(7)(D)(i), 7-148(c)(7)(D)(ii) Ch. 6 7-148(c)(7)(E) Ch. 11 7-148(c)(7)(F)(i) Ch. 16 7-148(c)(7)(H)(iii) Ch. 12, Art. V 7-148(c)(7)(H)(iv) Ch. 12, Art. II Ch. 12, Art. V 7-148(c)(7)(H)(vi) Ch. 5 7-148(c)(7)(H)(vii) Ch. 5 Ch. 5, Art. II, Ch. 5, Art. III 7-148(c)(7)(H)(xi) Ch. 11 7-148(c)(7)(H)(xv) 10-78 7-148(c)(8)(D) Ch. 11, Art. II 7-148(c)(10)(A) 1-7 10-32(a) 7-148(c)(10)(B) Ch. 2, Art. III 7-152b 18-100 18-95 7-152c 15-75 10-76 7-152c(f) 10-67 10-76 7-152c(g) 10-79 7-163a 16-9 7-169(a) 5-71 7-169-7-186q 5-73(a) 7-170 5-71 7-186a-7-186q 5-71 7-187-7-201 Ch. 1 7-194 Ch. 1 7-234 et seq. Ch. 19 Ch. 19, Art. II 7-245 et seq. Ch. 19 Ch. 19, Art. III 7-259-7-266 Ch. 19 7-324 et seq. Ch. 19 7-340 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. II, Div. 5 7-340a 2-91 7-381 et seq. 2-1 7-450(a) 2-141 8-1 15-46 8-3 App. B, §§ 54.1.2(d) 8-18 et seq. App. B 8-18-8-30a Ch. 15 8-19 Ch. 15 15-16 8-19 et seq. 15-17 8-19a 15-22(a) 8-23, 8-24 Ch. 15 8-25 et seq. App. A 8-26 Ch. 15 8-30 Ch. 15 8-124-8-139 Ch. 15 8-126 15-116 8-141, 8-142 Ch. 15 8-144 Ch. 15 8-151-8-162 Ch. 15 8-163-8-169 Ch. 15 8-186 et seq. 15-86 9-1 et seq. Ch. 8 9-167a 2-93(a) 15-22(c) 15-47 15-68 15-87(b) 9-169 8-2 9-169a 8-2 9-183 8-1(a) 10-15c 13-12 10-184 13-12 10-199 13-12 tit. 12 Ch. 17 12-65b 17-21 12-65h 17-21 12-81(56)(a)-(c) 17-1(a) 13a-1 et seq. Ch. 16 13a-123 Ch. 3 13a-123a, 13a-123b Ch. 3 13a-124, 13a-125 Ch. 3 13a-149 16-9(a) 14-1 4-1(a) 13-12 14-107 18-92(b) 14-149b 18-131 18-130 14-162 Ch. 18 14-253a Ch. 18, Art. III, 
Div. 3 14-254 Ch. 18, Art. III, 
Div. 3 tit. 21 Ch. 12 21-1 12-101(a) 21-1 et seq. Ch. 12, Art. V 21-2 12-101(a) 21-3 12-101(a)-12-101(c) 21-6 et seq. Ch. 5, Art. III 21-27 12-56 21-27 et seq. Ch. 12, Art. III 21-29 12-56 21-36 et seq. Ch. 12, Art. II 21-49 et seq. Ch. 3 21-50 Ch. 3, Art. II 21-50-21-63 Ch. 3, Art. II 21a-197 et seq. Ch. 5, Art. II 22a-28-22a-35 App. B, § 4.34, 
App. B, § 4.3522a-31-14 15-73 22a-36-22a-45 15-66 22a-42 15-72 22a-115 10-17 22a-150 10-32(a) 22a-170 et seq. Ch. 11, Art. II 22a-220 10-49 22a-241b 10-49, 10-50 22a-248(4) 10-17 22a-354a et seq. 2-16(a)(1) 22a-354e, f 2-16(c)(2) 22a-354i-3 2-16(b)(1) 22a-354p 2-16(b)(1) 22a-354v 2-16(a)(3) 23-65 Ch. 3 25-1 et seq. Ch. 19 25-69 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. II, Div. 4 25-84 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. II, Div. 4 25-84-25-98 2-76(b) 29-129-29-143a Ch. 5 29-253 Ch. 7 29-291 et seq. Ch. 9 29-293 Ch. 9, Art. II 29-343 et seq. 9-3 29-356 et seq. 9-1 30-1 4-1(a) 13-52 30-14-30-62a Ch. 4 30-15-30-17 Ch. 4 30-21, 30-22 Ch. 4 30-26 Ch. 4 30-36 Ch. 4 30-38, 30-39 Ch. 4 30-41 Ch. 4 30-43 Ch. 4 30-52 Ch. 4 30-55-30-59 Ch. 4 30-74 Ch. 4 30-86 Ch. 4 30-90a 13-55 30-91 Ch. 4 42-114a Ch. 3 51-164m 18-101 52-180 15-73 52-259 15-77 53-278a(3) 5-72(d) ch. 130 15-116-15-118 ch. 132 15-116-15-118  
