NEW CANAAN 


Chapter C
CHARTER
C:1

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ C1-1. Title.
This instrument, amending the Charter of the Town of New Canaan, shall be
known as the "Charter."
§ C1-2. Definitions.
In the interpretation of the Charter, the words and phrases set forth in this
section shall be construed and defined, unless otherwise clearly qualified by
their context, as follows:
BYLAW, BYLAWS — Rule or rules for the government of officers, boards,
commissions or committees of the Town.
ELECTOR — A resident of the Town of New Canaan qualified by law to vote
in a Town election.
FIRST SELECTMAN — The chief executive and chief administrative officer
of the Town elected to said office in accordance with the state statutes.
GENERAL STATUTES — The Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
GRAND LIST — The list of the assessed values of taxable property in the
Town, and including the list of the assessed values of taxable property in the
sewer taxing district.
HIGHWAY — Any public road, street, way, etc., including unimproved
portions within the limits of the right-of-way.
OFFICE OF TRUST OR EMOLUMENT — Any appointed or elected office for
which an oath of office is administered or a salary, wages, or fees are paid,
including Town employees and Town officers described in § C2-1.
ORDINANCE, ORDINANCES — Rule or rules and regulations or local laws
enacted by the Town's legislative body and affecting or regulating the
general public within the Town.
PUBLISH, PUBLISHED or PUBLICATION — Publication shall be consistent
with the governing General Statutes. If required by the General Statutes,
publication shall be in a newspaper having a substantial circulation in the
Town. If not required by the General Statutes, the Town may enact an
ordinance providing for publication by any legal means, or in any legal
manner, that provides for widespread dissemination by electronic means to
Town residents.
SELECTMEN — The Board of Selectmen of the Town, consisting of three
elected members and including the First Selectman.
SEWER TAXING DISTRICT — That real property in the Town so situated
that it is served or is capable of being served by the sewerage system of the
Town, the boundaries of which have been established or delineated by the
Town.
§ C1-1 CHARTER § C1-2
C:3
TAXPAYER, TAXPAYERS — When used to describe a qualification for public
office, the owner or owners of real property assessed therefore upon the last
completed Grand List or the husband or wife of such owner of real property.
TOWN — The Town of New Canaan, Connecticut.
TOWN COUNCIL — The legislative body of the Town having the legislative
powers provided in the Charter or the General Statutes.
TOWN SEAL — The common seal of the Town.
WARNING — A statement prescribed by the Charter or by the General
Statutes giving notice of the date, hour, place, as well as the purpose of
any event, meeting or public hearing of the Town Council or of any official,
board, commission or committee of the Town.
§ C1-3. General powers of Town.
The Town shall retain and may exercise every power and privilege
possessed by it at the time this Charter shall take effect and all powers
and privileges granted to towns by the General Statutes not inconsistent
herewith. The enumeration hereinafter of specific powers shall not be
construed as limiting the powers heretofore possessed or herein confirmed
and granted. The Town shall have the power:
(1) To lay out, establish, accept, maintain or discontinue public streets,
highways and other public places, establish the boundaries and fix
the grades thereof, and to adopt and enforce rules and regulations
governing the opening of such streets, highways and public places
for the purpose of laying water mains, electric conduits, sewers and
gas mains or for making any connections therewith or for any other
purpose.
(2) To establish sidewalks, determine the width and materials thereof and
to fix grades therefor and to establish building and curblines.
(3) To provide for the lighting of streets, highways and other public places.
(4) To adopt and enforce police regulations concerning traffic upon and
other use of the streets, highways and other public places.
(5) To establish and maintain a system or systems of public sewerage and
to adopt and enforce rules and regulations governing the operation
and use thereof; to establish and maintain a public system or systems
for the collection and disposal, or either of them, of garbage and
refuse and to adopt and enforce rules and regulations governing the
operation and use of any such system and the collection and disposal
of garbage and refuse by individuals, firms or corporations.
(6) To provide and maintain a system of public water supply and
distribution for domestic, business and industrial use, and for fire
protection.
(7) To establish and maintain a police force; to establish and provide for
and maintain an adequate system of fire protection and to adopt and
enforce rules and regulations governing the same.
(8) To establish a retirement and pension system or systems for members
of the police force and fire department, and to provide for a retirement
§ C1-2 NEW CANAAN CODE § C1-3
C:4
payment or pension to any paid or salaried officer or employee of the
Town upon his or her retirement.
(9) To adopt and enforce rules and regulations governing the design,
construction and use of buildings and all electrical, gas, heating and
plumbing installations.
(10) To adopt and enforce sanitary rules and regulations.
(11) To take private property for public use upon paying just compensation
therefor.
(12) To levy, assess and collect taxes to pay the Town debt, defray its lawful
expenses and to promote its general welfare.
(13) To make and collect assessments upon property receiving the benefit
of special improvements and to award damages in proper cases by
reason of any public improvement, provided such assessments or
awards of damage shall be levied or awarded equally upon all property
similarly situated, benefited or affected.
(14) To lay and collect a sewer tax upon all property receiving the benefit
of any public sewer, whether such property is connected therewith
or not, provided such tax shall be levied equally upon all property
similarly situated or benefited, such tax to be so computed and laid
as to provide a revenue sufficient to meet the cost of maintaining
the public sewerage system or systems and to pay the interest on all
outstanding sewer or filtration bonds heretofore issued or hereafter
issued by the Town to meet sinking fund requirements sufficient to pay
the principal of such bonds at their maturity, provided the Town may,
in the manner hereinafter prescribed, provide for the payment of the
interest and principal of such bonds or any part thereof in the general
tax levy upon the property of the entire Town.
(15) To establish separate or special taxing districts, define their purposes
and fix and alter their boundaries as hereinafter provided.
(16) To borrow money and give security therefor, subject to the restrictions
and limitations imposed by law.
(17) To make and enforce all bylaws and ordinances, not inconsistent with
law, which may be necessary or proper to carry into execution the
foregoing powers or any of them and all other powers which may be
hereafter vested in the Town.
§ C1-4. Additional boards, commissions or agencies.
The Town Council shall have the authority to establish, by ordinance,
additional boards, commissions, or agencies which are required by the
General Statutes, or which are specifically allowed by the General Statutes,
or which the Town Council deems advisable or necessary to carry out any
municipal powers, duties or responsibilities under the General Statutes.
All such officers, departments, boards, commissions or agencies shall be
elected, appointed and organized in the manner provided by the General
Statutes, except as otherwise provided by the Charter or by ordinances
or resolutions adopted pursuant to the Charter. The Town Council may, by
ordinance, alter the method of election, appointment or organization of any
or all such additional boards, commissions or agencies, including combining
§ C1-3 CHARTER § C1-4
C:5
or separating the duties of each, unless specifically prohibited from making
such alteration by the state Constitution or the General Statutes.
§ C1-4 NEW CANAAN CODE § C1-4
C:6
ARTICLE II
Town Officers and Membership of the Town Council, Boards,
Commissions and Committees
§ C2-1. Town officers.
The Town officers shall be three Selectmen, a Treasurer, two Registrars of
Voters, a Town Clerk and 12 members of the Town Council, all of whom shall
be elected at the biennial Town elections, together with an Assessor, a Tax
Collector and the members of each of the various Town boards, commissions
and committees of the Town. Provisions in this Charter prohibiting any
Town officer from holding any other office of trust or emolument shall not be
construed to prohibit service on committees of the Town government or on
charter revision commissions or other extraordinary, ad-hoc commissions.
The Treasurer shall have and exercise the powers and duties conferred
and imposed by law on town treasurers. The Treasurer shall exercise the
functions of the agent of public funds.
§ C2-2. Date of biennial elections.
The biennial elections of the Town of New Canaan shall be held on the
first Tuesday following the first Monday of November in the odd-numbered
years, except that the election of Registrars of Voters shall be held in the
even-numbered years.
§ C2-3. Minority representation.
There shall be a minority representation on all boards, commissions,
committees or similar bodies, whether elective or appointive, in accordance
with the General Statute § 9-167a.
§ C2-4. Certain Town officers required to be electors of the Town.
Every elected Town officer, member of the Town Council and every member
of any other board or commission shall be an elector of the Town, and if
for any reason such person ceases to be an elector of the Town, he or she
shall thereupon cease to hold office or to be such member and such office
or membership shall be deemed vacant. Members of appointed committees
need not be electors or residents of the Town.
§ C2-5. Manner of election of officers and appointment of board
members.
This Charter shall not alter the manner of election nor the date thereof,
nor the term of office of any elected officer of the Town, nor the method
of appointment or term of office of any member of the Town Council or of
any Town board, commission or committee, whether or not such manner
of election, date thereof, term of office or method of appointment was
established under any previous Charter or by any bylaw or ordinance of the
Town unless the same shall be changed by the provisions of this Charter.
§ C2-1 CHARTER § C2-6
C:7
§ C2-6. Oath of office required.
Each elected or appointed officer or member of the Town Council or
member of any board, commission or committee shall, before entering upon
the performance of the duties as such officer or member, take the oath of
office prescribed by law and file the same with the Town Clerk.
§ C2-7. Continuation in office of officers, Town Council members
and board members.
Each duly qualified Town officer, member of the Town Council and member
of other boards, commissions or committees of the Town in office on the
effective date of this Charter shall continue in office until the expiration of
the term for which he or she was elected or appointed and until his or her
successor shall be appointed or elected and shall have qualified.
§ C2-8. Removal from office.
Any appointed officers or members of any appointed board, commission
or committee may be removed for cause prior to the expiration of their
respective terms by unanimous vote of the Board of Selectmen.
§ C2-9. Failure to attend meetings.
Failure of an appointed member to attend three successive meetings of
his or her respective board, commission or committee, without adequate
excuse, shall be a cause for removal by unanimous vote of the Board of
Selectmen.
§ C2-10. Action by adjourned meetings to be effective.
Any action which might have been taken at any meeting of the Board of
Selectmen, the Town Council or of any board, commission or committee on
the date for which such meeting was duly called may be taken with the same
force and effect at any adjourned meeting thereof.
§ C2-11. Requirements for meetings of boards, commissions and
committees.
Each board, commission or committee shall hold such regular meetings as
it shall determine and may hold such other meetings as are called by its
Chairman or by its Secretary on the written request of any two members
thereof. Notice for all regular, special, or emergency meetings shall be
provided in accordance with the Freedom of Information Act.
§ C2-12. Procedure where lack of quorum.
Whenever any meeting of the Board of Selectmen, the Town Council or
of a board, commission or committee shall have been duly called and no
quorum shall be present, the First Selectman, in the case of the Board of
Selectmen and the Chairman or Chairman pro tempore of the Town Council
§ C2-6 NEW CANAAN CODE § C2-12
C:8
or of such board, commission or committee in other cases, may adjourn
the meeting in accordance with the Freedom of Information Act. Unless
otherwise provided by this Charter or General Statute, a majority of a
board, commission or committee shall constitute a quorum.
§ C2-13. Time requirements for performance.
Whenever, by mistake or inadvertence, the Town Council, an officer, board,
commission or committee shall omit to perform any act at or within a time
required by this Charter, such act shall be performed as soon thereafter as
may be practicable and such action so taken shall have the same force and
effect as if performed at or within the time required by this Charter.
§ C2-14. Code of Ethics for Town officers and employees, members
of the Town Council, boards, commissions and committees.
There shall be an ordinance establishing a Town Code of Ethics enacted
by the Town Council setting forth standards of ethical conduct of all Town
officers and employees, members of the Town Council and members of
boards, commissions and committees of the Town.
§ C2-12 CHARTER § C2-14
C:9

ARTICLE III
The First Selectman and the Board of Selectmen
§ C3-1. The First Selectman.
There shall be a First Selectman who shall be the chief executive and chief
administrative officer and shall enforce the bylaws and ordinances of the
Town and the laws of the state and shall have such powers and perform such
duties as are not inconsistent with this Charter and as are imposed upon the
office by the Charter, bylaws and the ordinances of the Town and the laws
of the state.
§ C3-2. The Board of Selectmen.
There shall be a Board of Selectmen which shall have, retain and exercise
the powers heretofore possessed by it, not inconsistent with this Charter or
the General Statutes, and, in addition thereto, it shall have such powers and
perform such duties as the ordinances, bylaws or the law may prescribe.
§ C3-3. Duty to carry out provisions of Charter.
The Board of Selectmen shall do every act and perform every duty
necessary to give effect to this Charter unless such act or duty is required
of or delegated to some other officer, board, commission or committee or
reserved to the Town Council for action thereon.
§ C3-4. Power to make certain appointments and fill certain
vacancies.
The Board of Selectmen shall, at such times as are herein designated or as
are designated by the bylaws or ordinances, appoint the required number of
duly qualified persons to fill the membership of all boards, commissions or
committees whose members are not elected. The Board of Selectmen shall
fill for the unexpired portion of the terms, all vacancies occurring in offices,
boards, commissions or committees to which the Board of Selectmen has
the power of appointment; provided, however, that between the first
Tuesday after the first Monday in November in odd-numbered years and
the second Tuesday following the day of the municipal election in the oddnumbered
years, the Board of Selectmen shall appoint no person to fill a
vacancy on any board, commission or committee whose members are not
elected, nor shall they fill the unexpired portions of terms where there
are vacancies which have occurred or are occurring in offices, boards,
commissions or committees as to which the Board of Selectmen has the
power of appointment. Appointments to the Board of Finance are subject to
confirmation by the Town Council as specified in § C4-8 and § C5-2.
§ C3-5. Power to fill vacancies in elective positions and manner of
filling the same.
If a vacancy shall occur from any cause in any elective office or in the
membership of any elective board, commission or committee, except the
§ C3-1 CHARTER § C3-5
C:11
Town Council, the Board of Selectmen or the Board of Education, such
vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term at the next succeeding
biennial Town election or at a special election held on the date of the next
regular state election, whichever shall first occur; provided, however, that
until such election such vacancy shall be filled by the Board of Selectmen.
If any such vacancy shall occur between the first Tuesday after the first
Monday in November in odd-numbered years, being the day of the
municipal election, and the second Tuesday following the day of the
municipal election in the odd-numbered years, such vacancies shall be filled
only by the Board of Selectmen taking office on or after the second Tuesday
following the day of the municipal election.
§ C3-6. Duties of purchasing agent for Town.
Except in the case of Board of Education, the Selectmen shall be the agency
for the purchase of all goods and the contracting of all services required
by the Town Council or by any elected or appointed board, commission,
committee, officer and department of the Town and by any volunteer fire
company receiving Town aid and all contracts for the purchase of such
goods or services shall be awarded by the Selectmen in accordance with
the sums appropriated for such purposes by the Town. Any specialized
goods or services shall be purchased or contracted for in accordance with
specifications relative thereto approved by the Town Council or by the
board, commission, committee, officer, department or volunteer fire
company making the requisition therefor.
§ C3-7. Authority to act as purchasing agent for Board of
Education.
The Selectmen shall have the authority to act as purchasing agent for the
Board of Education, but only to the extent and for the periods voted by
the Board of Education, provided that the cost of all goods or services
requisitioned by the Board of Education shall be charged against the
appropriations under the control of the Board of Education.
§ C3-8. Secretarial assistance.
It shall be the duty of the Selectmen to furnish the Town Council and
each board, commission, committee or department of the Town, except the
Board of Education, upon request, with such assistance as may be required
to provide complete and adequate minutes and to record the vote of the
members upon all questions.
§ C3-9. Acceptance of public highways.
The Selectmen are empowered, without action by the Town Council, to
accept as a public highway any street or highway situated in the Town
which has been improved in accordance with the law and in accordance
with any rule, regulation, bylaw or ordinance of the Town or of any board,
commission or committee of the Town.
§ C3-5 NEW CANAAN CODE § C3-10
C:12
§ C3-10. Acceptance of road and drainage deeds.
The Selectmen are empowered, without action by the Town Council, to
accept deeds to areas to be devoted to public highway purposes, to execute
and deliver deeds to areas no longer needed for public highway purposes, to
accept grants or easements on behalf of the Town for stormwater and public
sanitary sewer lines and to release any such easements no longer needed
for public purposes.
§ C3-11. Death, resignation or disability of members of Board of
Selectmen.
A. Death or resignation. Upon the death of a member of the Board of
Selectmen or upon the written resignation of a member of the Board of
Selectmen directed to the Town Clerk, the Town Clerk shall notify the
remaining members of the Board of Selectmen and the Chairman of the
Town Council by certified mail that a vacancy exists on the Board of
Selectmen.
B. Self-determination of disability by a member. If a member of the Board of
Selectmen, a regular member or the First Selectman suffers a disability
which such member believes would prevent him or her from serving
on that Board, such member shall give written notice by certified mail
to the Town Clerk stating the nature of the disability which causes the
inability to serve. Upon receipt of such notice, the Town Clerk shall mail
copies of the same by certified mail to the other members of the Board
of Selectmen and to the Chairman of the Town Council, and shall declare
a vacancy because of the inability of the member to serve. Such inability
shall continue until terminated by such member of the Board by written
notice that the member no longer is under any disability, such notice
to be delivered by certified mail to the Town Clerk, who shall mail by
certified mail such notice to the other members of the Board and to the
Chairman of the Town Council, whereupon the inability to serve shall
be declared to have ended by the other members of the Board and the
Chairman of the Town Council.
C. Determination of disability by committee. If a member of the Board of
Selectmen suffers a disability which causes an inability to serve and such
member fails or cannot give written notice to the Town Clerk of such
inability, the Chairman of the Town Council and the remaining members
of the Board of Selectmen shall meet and shall determine, by majority
vote, if an inability to serve exists. If an inability is found by a majority
vote, the vote shall be certified to the Director of Health, who shall
designate two qualified physicians to serve with the Director of Health
as a Committee to verify the inability of such Board member to serve.
Within 30 days after a verification by the Committee of inability to serve,
the Director of Health shall file with the Town Clerk a written report by
the Committee containing a finding as to the question of the inability of
the Board member to serve. Such finding shall be binding on the Board
of Selectmen, including the disabled member unless overruled by a court
of competent jurisdiction, and such finding shall continue in full force
and effect until notice in writing of the determination by a majority of the
§ C3-10 CHARTER § C3-11
C:13
Committee as to the termination of such inability shall have been filed
with the Town Clerk.
D. Replacement. Within 15 days after the receipt by the other members
of the Board of Selectmen and the Chairman of the Town Council of a
notice of inability to serve, either from an individual Selectman through
the Town Clerk, or from the Committee through the Town Clerk or in
the event of notice of the death or of the resignation of a member of
the Board, the remaining members of the Board of Selectmen and the
Chairman of the Town Council shall meet on the call of the Chairman
of the Town Council and shall appoint by a majority vote an individual
to serve on the Board, either as a replacement of a regular member or
as the replacement of the First Selectman, to serve until the inability
ends or for the remaining portion of the term or until a special election
is held, as the case may be. If the member being replaced is a member
of a political party, then the replacement must be a member of the same
party. If the member to be replaced is unaffiliated, the member may be
replaced by an unaffiliated voter or a member of any political party. The
new member shall hold office until the next municipal or state election
or until a special election, if called, and shall have the same powers and
duties as the replaced member.
§ C3-12. Special election to fill vacancies on Board.
Any appointment by the remaining members of the Board of Selectmen and
the Chairman of the Town Council shall be subject to a special election
called upon petition signed by not less than 5% of the electors of the Town
as determined by the last completed registry list filed in the office of the
Town Clerk not later than 15 days after such appointment. Following the
filing with the Town Clerk, an election shall be held not later than 15 days
after the filing of the petition. All such special elections shall be held in
accordance with the requirements and regulations of the General Statutes.
Replacement members elected by special election shall hold office until the
next municipal election and shall have the same powers and duties as the
replaced member.
§ C3-11 NEW CANAAN CODE § C3-12
C:14
ARTICLE IV
The Town Council
§ C4-1. Powers and duties.
The Town Council shall be the legislative body of the Town and shall have all
of the legislative powers provided in this Charter or the General Statutes.
§ C4-2. Membership.
The Town Council shall consist of 12 members, who shall be electors of the
Town and shall be elected at large and, upon qualification, shall take office
immediately after their election. The First Selectman, ex officio, shall also
be a member of the Town Council but shall vote only in case of a tie.
§ C4-3. Election and terms of office; political affiliations.
At each biennial Town election, six members of the Town Council shall be
elected for a term of four years. At any election of members of the Town
Council, no elector shall vote for more than six (6) members to serve for
the same term. All nominations for membership on the Town Council shall
be made in accordance with the statutory requirements of the State of
Connecticut. The minority representation requirements of General Statutes
§ 9-167a shall apply.
§ C4-4. Vacancies.
Any vacancy on the Town Council shall be filled for the unexpired term at
the next succeeding biennial Town election or at a special election held
on the date of the next regular state election, whichever shall first occur;
provided, however, that until such election such vacancy shall be filled by
the Town Council.
§ C4-5. Compensation.
With the exception of the First Selectman, the members of the Town Council
shall serve without compensation and shall hold no other office of trust or
emolument in the Town government. Service on committees of the Town
government is not prohibited by this section, provided that such service
does not create a conflict of interest as defined in the Town Code of Ethics.
§ C4-6. Organization.
The Town Clerk shall call an organization meeting of the Town Council
within two weeks following each election at which members are elected to
the Town Council, and at such meeting the newly elected members shall
be sworn in and a Chairman, a Vice Chairman, a Secretary and any other
officer or officers determined by the Town Council shall be elected from
the membership, and thereafter the Town Council shall exercise its powers
and duties. The Chairman shall, when present, preside at all meetings of
the Town Council, and in the absence of the Chairman, the Vice Chairman
§ C4-1 CHARTER § C4-6
C:15
shall preside. In the absence of both the Chairman and the Vice Chairman,
the Town Council shall choose one of its members to act as Chairman pro
tempore. The person presiding shall retain his or her vote as a member of
the Town Council.
§ C4-7. Meetings.
The Town Council shall meet in a public place at least once every two
months and at other times upon the call of the Chairman of the Town
Council or of the Board of Selectmen. The Town Council shall also meet
within 21 days after receipt of a petition signed by at least 50 electors
of the Town and setting forth a matter which may be considered by the
Town Council. All meetings shall be open to the public, except for executive
sessions in accordance with the Freedom of Information Act. At any open
meeting, any elector may, with the permission of the Town Council, be heard
by the Town Council.
§ C4-8. Quorum; action by Town Council.
A quorum for a meeting of the Town Council shall be seven members,
exclusive of the First Selectman, and the affirmative vote of seven members
of the Town Council shall be required for the passage of any appropriation
or the passage, amendment, suspension or repeal of any bylaw or
ordinance, or for the confirmation of any appointment to the Board of
Finance.
§ C4-9. Records.
A record of all actions taken by the Town Council and of the vote of each
member thereon shall be filed by the Secretary in the office of the Town
Clerk as a public record.
§ C4-10. Notices required for action on appropriations, ordinances
and bylaws.
No appropriation shall be passed by the Town Council and no bylaw or
ordinance shall be passed, amended, suspended or repealed by the Town
Council except after a warning published once a week for two successive
weeks, together with posting of the warning of the meeting of the Town
Council which is to act upon the appropriation, bylaw or ordinance.
§ C4-11. Manner of making bylaws and ordinances.
The Town Council shall make the bylaws and ordinances in the following
manner: The full text of each proposed bylaw or ordinance shall be
published once a week for two successive weeks, together with a notice of
public hearing thereon to be held by the Town Council showing the time
and place thereof. After such hearing the Town Council may enact such
proposed bylaw or ordinance, together with any amendments thereto which
it may make, and shall forthwith file the same as so enacted with the Town
Clerk for public record in a book kept by the Town Clerk for that purpose.
§ C4-6 NEW CANAAN CODE § C4-11
C:16
Any such bylaw or ordinance enacted as proposed and published, without
amendment, shall become effective eight days after such filing with the
Town Clerk and eight days after publication in summary form, whichever
event shall last occur, unless a notice of intent to petition for a referendum
is filed under § C4-14; but if enacted with one or more amendments, the
Town Council shall forthwith publish at least once each such amendment
with its related context, together with a notice in summary form that such
bylaw or ordinance as enacted with amendment will become effective eight
days after publication of such and eight days after such filing with the Town
Clerk, whichever event shall last occur, unless a notice of intent to petition
for referendum is filed under § C4-14. The Town Clerk shall note the date of
publication and filing on the record of such bylaw or ordinance in the Town
Clerk's office.
§ C4-12. Method of approving appropriations.
The Town Council shall pass no appropriation not recommended by the
Board of Finance, but may approve, disapprove or reduce but not increase
the amount of any appropriation recommended by that Board.
§ C4-13. Requirements for filing and publication of Town Council
actions.
Each affirmative or negative legislative action taken by the Town Council
which relates to any appropriation or bond issue, or to any ordinance or
bylaw, shall be filed in the office of the Town Clerk promptly after such
action has been taken and shall be published promptly in summary form at
least once.
§ C4-14. Effective date of legislative action.
Each affirmative legislative action taken by the Town Council which relates
to any appropriation or bond issue, or to any ordinance or bylaw, shall
become effective eight days after publication of such action unless a notice
of intent to file a petition for referendum has been filed in the office of the
Town Clerk within seven days after the publication of such action.
§ C4-15. Legislative action subject to referendum.
Each affirmative or negative legislative action taken by the Town Council
which relates to any appropriation or bond issue, or to any ordinance or
bylaw, is subject to referendum.
§ C4-16. Procedure and rules for referendum on legislative action.
1. Notice of intent to petition. Notice of intent to petition for referendum
on a legislative action subject to referendum shall be signed by at least
50 electors of the Town and shall be filed in the office of the Town Clerk
within seven days after the publication of such legislative action.
2. Petition for referendum. A petition for referendum on a legislative action
subject to referendum shall be signed by not less than 5% of the electors
§ C4-11 CHARTER § C4-16
C:17
of the Town as determined by the last completed registry list, and shall
be filed in the office of the Town Clerk not later than 30 days after the
publication of such legislative action.
3. Date of referendum. Following the filing with the Town Clerk of a petition
for referendum, a referendum shall be held not later than 30 days after
the filing of such petition. The date of the referendum shall be set by the
Town Council.
4. Number of votes required for repeal or overrule by referendum. An
affirmative action of the Town Council shall not be repealed, nor a
negative action overruled, unless the number of votes in favor of repeal
or overrule shall be a majority of those voting and equal to at least
15% of the number of electors of the Town as determined by the last
completed registry list.
5. Effect of a referendum.
a) If a referendum repeals or overrules an action taken by the Town
Council which relates to any appropriation or bond issue
recommended by the Board of Finance, such recommendations shall
be returned to the Board of Finance for reconsideration.
b) If a referendum repeals an affirmative action taken by the Town
Council which relates to any ordinance or bylaw, such action shall be
nullified forthwith.
c) If a referendum overrules a negative action taken by the Town Council
which relates to any ordinance or bylaw, such action shall be returned
to the Town Council for reconsideration.
§ C4-16 NEW CANAAN CODE § C4-16
C:18
ARTICLE V
Board of Finance, Financial Procedures, Taxes, Audit Committee
§ C5-1. Composition of Board of Finance; qualifications of
members.
There shall be a Board of Finance of eight regular members, and three
alternate members, who shall be electors and taxpayers of the Town. They
shall hold no other office of trust or emolument in the Town or State
governments. Service on committees of the Town or State governments is
not prohibited by this section, provided that such service does not create
a conflict of interest as defined in the Town Code of Ethics. No member
thereof shall receive compensation for services as such, but the necessary
expenses of the Board, when funds have been appropriated therefor by
the Town Council, shall be paid by the Treasurer. There shall be minority
representation on the Board and on the panel of alternates in accordance
with § 9-167a of the General Statutes.
§ C5-2. Appointment and term of office of members of Board of
Finance.
The Selectmen shall annually in November after election day appoint,
subject to confirmation by an affirmative vote of seven members of the Town
Council, two members of the Board of Finance, who, after qualification,
shall hold office for a term of four years from the 15th day of November
and until their successors have been appointed and shall have qualified. The
Selectmen shall appoint in the odd-numbered years on or promptly after
the first day of December, subject to confirmation by an affirmative vote of
seven members of the Town Council, the three alternate members of the
Board of Finance, who shall hold office for a term of two years from the first
day of December until their successors have been appointed and shall have
qualified. No appointment to the Board of Finance to fill a vacancy shall be
effective unless confirmed by an affirmative vote of seven members of the
Town Council.
§ C5-3. Officers and organization.
In addition to the eight regular members of the Board of Finance, the First
Selectman shall be an ex officio member of the Board of Finance and shall
have no vote except in the case of a tie. On or promptly after the 15th day of
November each year, the Board of Finance shall meet at the call of the First
Selectman to choose one of its regular members to be Chairman and one of
its regular members to be Secretary. The First Selectman shall not serve as
Chairman or Secretary.
§ C5-4. Powers and duties of officers and alternates.
The Chairman shall preside and vote, when present, at all meetings of
the Board of Finance. In the absence of the Chairman, the Board shall
choose one of its regular members Chairman pro tempore who shall preside
§ C5-1 CHARTER § C5-4
C:19
and vote. The Secretary shall file in the office of the Town Clerk a full
and detailed record of all proceedings, acts and resolutions of the Board,
including the votes of each member on all actions taken, and such record
shall be a public record.
The alternate members of the Board of Finance, when seated as provided
herein, shall have all the powers and duties of regular members of the
Board of Finance. Alternate members shall have no vote, and shall not
count towards a quorum or for other purposes, unless seated for a regular
member. In the event of the absence of a regular member from a meeting of
the Board, or if a regular member is disqualified, such absent or disqualified
member shall designate an alternate to act in his or her place. In the
absence of such designation, the Board of Finance, by majority vote of
those members present and voting, shall designate and seat an alternate or
alternates.
§ C5-5. Quorum.
At all meetings of the Board of Finance, five members shall be a quorum
and the concurrence of five votes shall be necessary for the transaction of
business, except that when only five members are present, the concurrence
of four votes shall be sufficient for the transaction of business.
§ C5-6. Requests for annual appropriations.
The Town Council, all officers, department heads, boards, commissions
and committees of the Town and the New Canaan Library shall annually
not later than the third Tuesday preceding the first Tuesday in February
submit to the Selectmen, in a form prescribed by the Board of Finance,
itemized estimates of their respective requests for appropriations to cover
such expenses, together with statements in detail of their respective
expenditures for similar purposes for the preceding fiscal year and such
other information as may from time to time be required by the Board of
Finance. The Selectmen shall review such estimates or requests, including
the preliminary budget estimates submitted by the Board of Education,
and shall compile a recommended budget which shall be submitted to the
Board of Finance for its consideration not later than the first Tuesday of
February in each year. The Board of Education shall submit its preliminary
budget estimates to the Board of Selectmen, for its review and comment,
not later than the third Tuesday preceding the first Tuesday in February,
and shall compile and submit its recommended budget directly to the Board
of Finance, with a copy to the Board of Selectmen, not later than the first
Tuesday in February in each year.
§ C5-7. Requests for capital expenditures.
All officers, department heads, boards, commissions and committees shall
submit annually to the Selectmen, with the estimates of their respective
expenses for the ensuing fiscal year and in a form prescribed by the Board
of Finance, an outline of the estimated capital expenditures of such office,
§ C5-4 NEW CANAAN CODE § C5-7
C:20
board, commission or committee during the next five fiscal years. The
Selectmen shall consider such outlines and shall submit to the Board of
Finance, not later than two weeks after the first Tuesday of February,
a recommended budget of such capital expenditures, including such
recommendation as they desire as to the creation of a reserve therefor in
the Town budget for the ensuing fiscal year.
§ C5-8. Pension and retirement systems and insurance.
The Board of Finance may recommend to the Town Council the
establishment of a system of retirement payments or pensions for officers
or employees of the Town, including employees of the New Canaan Library
employed prior to January 1, 2011, in consideration of years of service,
age or disability, and may recommend the amount and duration of such
payments or pensions. The Town Council, after publication once a week for
two successive weeks, together with a simultaneous posting of a warning of
the meeting of the Town Council which is to act upon the recommendation
of the Board of Finance, may approve or reject any such recommendation,
but may not increase the amount or duration of such retirement payments
or pensions or change the beneficiaries thereof. The Board of Finance, in
its annual recommendation for appropriations to cover Town expenditures
for each fiscal year, may likewise include provision for group insurance
covering officers or employees of the Town. Any existing system of
retirement payments or pensions shall remain in effect until modified under
the provisions of this section.
§ C5-9. Board of Finance budget recommendations and public
hearing.
The Board of Finance, after receipt of the recommended budget from the
Board of Selectmen and after obtaining any further information which it
may require, shall prepare tentative budget recommendations. The Board
of Finance shall cause such recommendations to be published at least once,
together with a notice fixing the time of a public hearing which shall be held
not later than the sixth Tuesday following the first Tuesday of February;
and the place where such hearing shall be held by the Board of Finance
upon requests for appropriations, to hear all persons, including members
of the Board of Finance, who may wish to be heard in respect to any such
recommendations or who may wish the Board of Finance to recommend any
other appropriation or any other matter within the power of the Board of
Finance.
After such public hearing, the Board of Finance forthwith shall hold a
meeting or meetings to consider the estimates and requests so presented.
The Board of Finance shall thereupon prepare and present its
recommendations to the Board of Selectmen, for submission to the Town
Council, for appropriations to cover Town expenditures for the ensuing
fiscal year. Such recommendations may also include appropriations to pay
any part of the Town debt or to provide a fund for any public improvement
or any other matter within the power of the Board of Finance and to provide
§ C5-7 CHARTER § C5-9
C:21
a contingent fund for expenses of the Town not otherwise provided for,
which contingent fund, when appropriated by the Town Council, shall be
subject to disbursement by the Board of Finance. Nothing in this section
shall be construed to be a limitation upon the Board of Finance in the
disbursement of the whole or any part of the Town contingent fund.
All such recommendations for appropriations shall be classified under
proper headings and shall be accompanied by an estimate, made by the
Board of Finance, of the amount of revenue the Town will receive during
such fiscal year from all sources, except that of taxation, and an itemized
list of the debts and obligations of the Town as of the date of the meeting or
meetings following the public hearing of the Board of Finance and a detailed
statement showing the amount of increase or decrease of the proposed
appropriation as compared to the last previous appropriation made by
the Town Council for like purpose. Such recommendations shall include
the amount of any unexpended balances or surplus to be applied against
appropriations and a reserve for uncollectible taxes; provided, however,
that if the Town Council shall reduce the proposed appropriations so
recommended and published by an amount exceeding 5%, then in that
event, the amount of unexpended balances or surplus to be applied shall be
reconsidered by the Board of Finance for final action.
§ C5-10. Annual budget meeting.
The recommendations for appropriations so prepared by the Board of
Finance shall be delivered to the Selectmen not later than the seventh
Tuesday following the first Tuesday of February in each year in the form
of a written report signed by the Chairman of the Board of Finance and
a majority of its members. The Selectmen shall forthwith cause to be
published once a week for two successive weeks a notice of a meeting
of the Town Council to act upon such recommendations, stating the time
and place thereof. The first of such notices shall include the publication of
the recommendations of the Board of Finance. Such meeting of the Town
Council shall be held not later than 11 weeks after the first Tuesday of
February in each year.
§ C5-11. Town Council action upon annual appropriations and other
recommendations.
The Town Council shall take action upon each of the proposed
appropriations so recommended and published. It may approve, disapprove
or reduce but may not increase the amount of such appropriations or any of
them or the amount of any unexpended balances or surplus to be applied or
any reserve for any uncollectible taxes; and no appropriation shall be made
for any purpose not recommended and published as hereinbefore provided.
If a recommendation of the Board of Finance pertains to some matter other
than a money appropriation, then the Town Council shall act thereon in such
case as provided in this Charter.
§ C5-9 NEW CANAAN CODE § C5-12
C:22
§ C5-12. Action upon special appropriations.
Whenever the Board of Selectmen or the First Selectman requests a special
appropriation, or whenever a special appropriation, in the opinion of the
Board of Finance, shall be necessary for any purpose, the Board of Finance
shall deliver a recommendation to the Selectmen and the Selectmen shall
present the recommendation to a meeting of the Town Council or may
present the recommendation of the Board of Finance to a meeting called
for that purpose, whereupon the Selectmen shall forthwith cause to be
published once a week for two successive weeks a notice of a meeting
of the Town Council to consider and act upon the recommendation of
the Board of Finance for such special appropriation, which notice shall
state the time and place thereof. The Board of Finance shall also include
in its recommendation that such special appropriation shall be paid from
moneys in the Town treasury not otherwise appropriated or by the levying
of a special tax. If and when such special appropriation shall be made
by the Town Council and the levying of a special tax to pay such special
appropriation shall be approved by the Town Council, the Board of Finance
shall lay a special tax upon the grand list last completed and fix the date or
dates upon which such special tax shall become due and payable and shall
thereupon issue a warrant to the Tax Collector to receive and collect the
same in the manner provided by the General Statutes for the collection of
taxes.
§ C5-13. Bond issues.
The Board of Finance may recommend the issuance of the bonds of the
Town, in the form and subject to the limitations required by law, for any
public purpose and the Board of Finance shall deliver a recommendation
to the Selectmen as to such bond issue, and the Selectmen shall forthwith
cause to be published once a week for two successive weeks a notice
of a meeting of the Town Council to consider and act upon such
recommendation of the Board of Finance stating the time and place thereof.
Such recommendation and the notice shall contain a full and complete
statement of the purpose or purposes for which bonds are to be issued
and the amount and general terms thereof. The Town Council may approve,
disapprove or reduce the amount of such proposed bond issue, but may
not increase the same nor change the terms thereof. Such bonds, if and as
approved by the Town Council, shall be executed and signed by the First
Selectman and the Town Treasurer and the Town Clerk shall affix thereto
the seal of the Town and attest to the same.
§ C5-14. Special taxes for special improvements.
In cases where special taxes shall be levied to provide funds for special
improvements, the Board of Finance may, after holding its public hearing
duly warned by publication at least once, at which all persons whose
property may be affected shall be heard, designate what property shall be
subject to special assessments for special benefits and the amount thereof
and the date or dates upon which such special assessments shall become
§ C5-12 CHARTER § C5-14
C:23
due and payable, and shall thereupon issue a warrant to the Tax Collector to
receive and collect the same on the date or dates so fixed for such payment
in accordance with the manner provided in the General Statutes for the
collection of taxes. All such special assessments shall be borne equally by
all property similarly situated, benefited or affected.
§ C5-15. Sewer taxing district.
There shall be a sewer taxing district in the Town. The Board of Finance
shall in the annual request for appropriations recommend to the Town
Council the method by which moneys shall be raised that are necessary to
maintain and operate the public sewerage system or systems and to pay
the interest and principal of all sewer and filtration bonds heretofore issued
by the Town and outstanding at the time this Charter shall take effect or
which may hereafter be issued. Unless otherwise provided by ordinance, the
Board of Finance by resolution may from time to time include in the existing
sewer taxing district additional areas of the Town.
§ C5-16. Assessments for sewer improvements or extensions.
The Board of Finance, in laying any special assessment in connection with
the extension or improvement of the sewage disposal system in the Town,
is authorized to proceed in accordance with the General Statutes, but no
assessment or charge for the extension of the sewage disposal system
into unsewered areas shall be less than 100% of the cost thereof, except
under circumstances found by the Board of Finance to be unusual and
extraordinary or to involve undue hardship.
§ C5-17. Procedure for abolishing sewer taxing district.
The Town Council may vote to abolish the sewer taxing district and
thereafter all charges for operation and maintenance of the public sewage
disposal system and for the payment of interest and amortization of all
sewer and filtration bonds shall be included in the annual request for
appropriations made by the Board of Finance to the Town Council. In the
event of the adoption of such action by the Town Council, the Town Council
and the Town Clerk shall certify such action to the State Commissioner
of Revenue Services, the Office of Policy and Management, and to the
Secretary of the State.
§ C5-18. Procedure for establishing special tax districts.
The Board of Finance may recommend the establishment of special tax
districts by delivery of a recommendation to the Selectmen, and the
Selectmen shall forthwith cause to be published once a week for two
successive weeks a notice of a meeting of the Town Council to consider
and act upon the recommendation of the Board of Finance, stating the time
and place thereof. The recommendation shall set forth the purposes and
conditions governing such special tax districts and shall fix the boundaries
thereof. No such district shall be established unless the recommendations
§ C5-14 NEW CANAAN CODE § C5-18
C:24
of the Board of Finance shall be approved by the Town Council and unless
a majority of the electors resident in such proposed district and the owners
of real property located therein have consented thereto by written ballot
cast at a special election called for such purpose in each of the proposed
districts. If the Town Council approves such recommendations, it shall fix
the date, time and place or places of such special elections and provide the
usual facilities for holding the same, and the Board of Finance, together
with the Town Council, shall make an appropriation to cover the necessary
expenses thereof.
§ C5-19. Tax Collector to be appointed by Selectmen.
The Tax Collector shall be appointed by the Board of Selectmen and shall
serve at the pleasure of the Selectmen. The Tax Collector shall have such
powers and perform such duties, under the direction of the Board of
Selectmen, as may be prescribed by the General Statutes. The Tax Collector
shall not hold any other office in the Town government or engage in any
business in the Town that could create a conflict of interest as defined in
the Town Code of Ethics. Service on committees of the Town government is
not prohibited by this section, provided that such service does not create a
conflict of interest as defined in the Town Code of Ethics.
§ C5-20. Tax warrant.
The Board of Finance shall issue a warrant to the Tax Collector to receive
and collect any regular or special tax laid under the provisions of this
Charter, which warrant shall specify the grand list upon which such tax
is laid and the date or dates when it shall become due and payable. Such
warrant shall be signed by the Chairman of the Board of Finance and a
majority thereof. The Town Clerk shall affix thereto the Town seal and attest
to the same.
§ C5-21. Payment of taxes.
The Board of Finance, in fixing the dates as to when taxes shall become
due and payable, may provide that the taxes on personal property or taxes
on real property, or both, shall become due and payable in one or more
installments. The provisions of the General Statutes as now or hereafter
amended, shall be applicable to delinquent regular taxes or to delinquent
special taxes laid under the provisions of this Charter.
§ C5-22. Liens on property for taxes.
The liens on property for taxes annually laid by the Town of New Canaan
on any grand list shall date from the first day of July next preceding the
completion of the lists upon which such taxes shall be laid.
§ C5-18 CHARTER § C5-23
C:25
§ C5-23. Lien fees.
Lien fees collected by and paid to the Tax Collector of the Town in
accordance with the provisions of the General Statutes shall be credited to
the general fund thereof.
§ C5-24. Water rates.
The Board of Finance, upon recommendation of the Director of Public
Works, shall have power to establish equitable rates, and from time to
time revise such rates, for the use of any system of public water supply
authorized by the Town Council, to be paid by the owner of each lot or
building receiving the benefits thereof, provided such rates shall be so
computed as to provide revenue sufficient to meet the cost of maintaining
and operating such system and to pay the cost of interest and amortization
on all outstanding water supply bonds hereafter issued by the Town. Such
rates shall be collected in the manner provided by the General Statutes for
the collection of taxes.
§ C5-25. Payment of judgments against Town.
The Board of Finance shall make an appropriation sufficient to pay any
judgment rendered against the Town by a court of competent jurisdiction
when, in the opinion of the Board of Finance, all reasonable legal defenses
or remedies have been invoked. The moneys necessary to pay such
appropriation may be withdrawn for that purpose from funds in the Town
treasury not otherwise appropriated, if the same be sufficient. Should the
money in the Town treasury available for such purpose be insufficient, the
Board of Finance may, by resolution, authorize the Treasurer to borrow the
amount necessary. The sum so borrowed shall be included by the Board in
the next tax levy upon the grand list of the Town last completed and the
Board of Finance shall fix the rate thereof in an amount sufficient to provide
the moneys necessary to pay such judgment with the interest due thereon
and fix the date or dates when such tax shall be due and payable. The Board
shall thereupon issue its warrant, in the form prescribed in § C5-20 hereof,
to the Tax Collector to receive and collect the same.
§ C5-26. Audit Committee, composition and qualification of
members.
There shall be an Audit Committee of five members who shall be electors
of the Town. The members shall serve without compensation and shall hold
no other office of trust or emolument in the Town government nor serve on
any other committees of the Town government. No member may accept any
consulting, advisory or other compensatory fee from the Town, nor shall a
member have had any material financial relationship with the Town in the
three years prior to appointment to the Committee. Additional qualifications
are defined by Town Ordinance, as amended.
§ C5-23 NEW CANAAN CODE § C5-27
C:26
§ C5-27. Appointment and terms of office.
The Board of Selectmen shall appoint members of the Audit Committee,
subject to confirmation by an affirmative vote of seven members of the
Town Council, for a term of three years to begin on December 1st each
year, with two members to be appointed the first year, two members to be
appointed the second year, and one member to be appointed the third year.
Members may serve for no more than three successive three-year terms or
part thereof.
Each member, after qualification, shall hold office from their initial
appointment and until a successor has been appointed and shall have
qualified. In the event of a vacancy due to death, resignation or removal,
within 60 days of such vacancy the Selectmen will appoint a successor
member of the Committee. There shall be minority representation on the
Committee in accordance with § 9-167a of the General Statutes.
§ C5-28. Organization, officers, records and quorums.
On or promptly after the first day of December in each year the Audit
Committee shall meet at the call of the First Selectman to choose one of
its members to be Chairman and one of its members to be Secretary. The
Chairman shall, when present, preside at all meetings of the Committee
and shall have a vote as a member thereof. In the absence of the Chairman
or Secretary, as the case may be, the Committee shall choose one of its
members Chairman pro tempore or one of its members Secretary pro
tempore. Three members shall be a quorum for the transaction of business
at any meeting.
The Secretary shall file in the office of the Town Clerk agendas and minutes
of all meetings of the Committee, including the votes of each member on all
actions taken.
The Committee shall prepare and send an annual report of its activities to
the Town Bodies within sixty days after filing of the financial statements
with the State Office of Policy and Management.
§ C5-29. Powers and duties.
Subject to Town Ordinance, as amended, the purpose of the Audit
Committee is to assist the Town Bodies (Board of Selectmen, Town Council,
Board of Finance and Board of Education) in fulfilling the Town Bodies'
respective oversight responsibilities relating to:
A. The integrity of the Town's financial statements, financial reporting
processes and systems of internal accounting and controls;
B. The annual independent audit of the Town's financial statements, the
engagement of the independent auditors and the evaluation of the
independent auditors' qualifications, independence and performance;
C. Compliance with legal and regulatory requirements that could materially
impact the Town's financial statements;
D. The evaluation of enterprise risk issues;
§ C5-27 CHARTER § C5-29
C:27
E. The engagement of the internal audit resources and ensuring the
adequacy and completeness of an internal audit annual plan and related
resources, receiving the related reports, and evaluating the internal
auditor(s) qualifications, independence and performance; and
F. Overseeing the Town's plan for corrective action which should include
appropriate and timely follow-up measures.
In performing the Committee's duties, members may reasonably rely
upon management to prepare financial statements in accordance with
applicable standards and to maintain an effective system of internal
controls that provide reasonable assurances regarding the reliability of
financial reporting.
§ C5-30. Recipients of Town funds required to keep records for
auditing purposes.
Any person, group or organization receiving funds from the Town of New
Canaan to be disbursed for public purposes shall keep records of the
method and manner in which such funds received from the Town are
expended, shall submit to the Board of Selectmen annual reports in a form
prescribed by that Board, setting forth the details of the expenditures of
such funds, and shall submit such records for audit by the Town Auditors.
§ C5-31. System of accounting.
The Town shall maintain a system of accounting for keeping records to
show amounts of current and past taxes and all types of liabilities of each
taxpaying entity and the collections, adjustments, charges and abatements.
The Town shall maintain its financial records in accordance with Generally
Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP) and in compliance with the
Government Accounting Standards Board (GASB). The Town Finance
Department shall maintain sound internal controls, including appropriate
separation of duties. The Town shall annually hire an independent
accounting firm to audit the financial books of the Town, and require the
firm to submit a formal audit report to the Town Council, Board of Finance,
and the Connecticut Office of Policy and Management to ensure that the
Town is in compliance with the provisions of the General Statutes.
§ C5-32. Transfer of unexpended balances.
A. The Board of Finance may, by resolution, transfer unexpended balances
from one appropriation to another, but no amount appropriated for any
purpose, whether general or special, shall be used or appropriated for
other purposes without the approval of the Board of Finance, expressed
by resolution thereof. Unexpended cash balances remaining at the end
of any fiscal year may, by resolution of the Board of Finance, be either
transferred to a surplus account or subtracted from the amount the Town
Council has authorized to be raised by taxation for the ensuing fiscal
year.
B. All uncommitted appropriations for capital improvements may, at the
end of any fiscal year, with the approval of the Board of Finance, be
§ C5-29 NEW CANAAN CODE § C5-32
C:28
continued and set up as a reserve for the same purposes and may be
committed by the Board of Finance for the same capital improvements
for one fiscal year after the expiration of the fiscal year for which such
appropriations were originally made.
§ C5-33. Expenditures exceeding appropriations.
Neither the Town Council nor any officer, board, commission or committee
shall expend any money or enter into any contract for any purpose by
which the Town shall become liable for any sum which, with any contract
then in force, shall exceed the sum appropriated by the Town for such
purpose, except in cases of necessity connected with the repair of public
buildings, sewers, sewage disposal plants, highways and bridges and with
public welfare, and then not to exceed the amount provided by § 7-348 of
the General Statutes. Should any emergency arise whereby more money is
needed for any department or service of the Town government than has
been appropriated, the Selectmen shall notify the Board of Finance of such
fact and the Chairman of said Board of Finance shall thereupon call a
special meeting thereof to consider an additional appropriation. The Board
of Finance may make the necessary appropriation therefor if it shall not
exceed the amount provided in § 7-348 of the General Statutes, but not
more than one such appropriation shall be made during any one fiscal year.
In case no funds shall be available to meet such additional appropriations,
the Town may, with the consent of the Board of Finance, given by resolution,
borrow the amount necessary, and the sum so borrowed shall be included
by the Board of Finance in the next regular tax levy upon the Town. If any
sum greater than the amount provided in § 7-348 shall be necessary, the
Board of Finance shall proceed under and in accordance with the provisions
of § C5-12 relating to special appropriations. Nothing in this section shall
be construed to be a limitation upon the Town in issuing bonds as herein
provided or expending the proceeds therefrom in accordance with the vote
of the Town Council. Nothing in this section shall be construed to be a
limitation upon the Board of Finance in the disbursement of the whole or
any part of the Town contingent fund. In the event of budget category
shortfalls in any department other than the Board of Education, the Chief
Financial Officer, with the approval of the Board of Finance, may make line
item transfers, provided the total budget shall not be increased thereby.
§ C5-34. Penalty for exceeding appropriation.
Should the Town Council or any officer or officers or any board, commission
or committee expend or cause to be expended any money of the Town or
enter into any contract in violation of § C5-29, he, she, they or the members,
jointly and severally, of such board, commission or committee or of the Town
Council shall be liable in a civil action in the name of the Town and the
amount so drawn from the treasury or for which the Town is made liable
under such contract shall be liquidated damages in such action against such
officer or officers or members of such board, commission or committee or
the Town Council, but this section shall not be construed as preventing the
Town from pursuing any other remedy which might be provided by law.
§ C5-32 CHARTER § C5-34
C:29

ARTICLE VI
Assessor; Assessing Procedures; Board of Assessment Appeals
§ C6-1. Assessor.
There shall be one Assessor, who shall be appointed by the Board of
Selectmen and who shall serve at the pleasure of the Selectmen. The
Assessor shall have such powers and perform such duties, under the
direction of the Board of Selectmen, as may be prescribed by the General
Statutes. The Assessor shall not hold any other office in the Town
government or engage in any business in the Town that could create a
conflict of interest as defined in the Town Code of Ethics.
§ C6-2. Requirements for filing real estate lists.
All persons required to file with the Assessor of the Town of New Canaan
lists of property subject to taxation shall not include real estate in such
lists, except as follows: Any record owner of real estate situated in the
Town, to which real estate any new construction, improvement or interior or
exterior alterations exceeding $50 in value have been added and for which
no building permit has been obtained from the Town of New Canaan, or
from which real estate any building has been wholly or partially razed or
removed during the 12 months next preceding the first day of October, and
for which no permit has been obtained from the Town of New Canaan, shall
be required to prepare, swear to and sign and file a list of such real estate
with said Assessor on or before the first business day of November.
§ C6-3. Requirements for filing personal property lists.
All persons required by the General Statutes to file lists of personal property
with the Assessor of the Town shall on or before the first business day of
November prepare, swear to and file such lists with said Assessor valued as
of the first day of October.
§ C6-4. Penalty for failure to file required lists.
The addition of 25% to taxpayers' lists provided by the General Statutes
for failure to file such lists, or for omitting property from such lists, shall
apply only to such property for which lists are required to be filed under the
provisions of §§ C6-2 and C6-3 hereof.
§ C6-5. Assessment day; lodging of grand list.
The assessment day of the Town of New Canaan shall be October 1 of each
year. The Grand List, when completed, shall be lodged with the Assessor's
office on or before January 31.
§ C6-6. Board of Assessment Appeals.
There shall be a Board of Assessment Appeals of three members who shall
be elected for two-year terms at each biennial Town election. The Board of
§ C6-1 CHARTER § C6-6
C:31
Assessment Appeals shall have all the powers and duties prescribed by the
General Statutes.
§ C6-7. Board of Assessment Appeals meeting dates.
The Board of Assessment Appeals shall meet at least three times during
the month of March and at least once in the month of September annually,
provided that any meeting in the month of September shall be for the sole
purpose of hearing appeals related to the assessment of motor vehicles, and
shall give notice of the time and place of such meetings by posting it at
least 10 days before the first meeting in each such month in the office of the
Town Clerk, and publishing it in accordance with the General Statutes and
§ C1-2 hereof. Such meetings shall be held on business days, which may be
Saturdays, the last not later than the last business day of each such month,
on or before which date such Board shall complete the duties imposed upon
it. No appeal from the doings of the Assessor shall be heard or entertained
by the Board unless presented to it at one of its meetings during the month
of March, or during the month of September in the case of an appeal related
to motor vehicle assessment.
§ C6-8. General Statutes to prevail.
In the event that the General Statutes are amended to change the name of
the Board of Assessment Appeals or its times for meeting, or to change any
other provisions in this article relating to assessing procedures, the General
Statutes as amended shall prevail and override the provisions of this article.
§ C6-6 NEW CANAAN CODE § C6-8
C:32
ARTICLE VII
Board of Education
§ C7-1. Membership, powers and duties.
The Board of Education, consisting of nine members, shall continue to
exercise all of the powers and perform all of the duties conferred or imposed
upon Boards of Education in towns by the General Statutes. The members
of the Board of Education shall be electors of the Town.
§ C7-2. Election of members.
Members of the Board of Education shall be elected for a term of four
years, with four members elected at one biennial municipal election and
five members elected at the next biennial municipal election. At each such
election any elector may vote for the total number of members of the Board
of Education to be elected at such election, and each political party shall
have the right to nominate as many persons as there are vacancies on
the Board, provided there shall be minority representation on the Board of
Education in accordance with § 9-167a of the General Statutes. All elections
and nominations to the membership of the Board shall be made in
accordance with the statutory requirements of the State of Connecticut.
§ C7-3. (Reserved)
§ C7-4. Vacancies.
If a vacancy occurs in the office of any member of the Board of Education, it
may be filled by the remaining members of the Board until the next regular
biennial municipal election, at which election a successor shall be elected
for the unexpired portion of the term, and the official ballot shall specify the
vacancy to be filled. If the Board of Education fails to fill any vacancy which
occurs on the Board within 90 days after the vacancy occurs, the Board of
Selectmen may fill such vacancy until the next biennial municipal election.
§ C7-1 CHARTER § C7-4
C:33

ARTICLE VIII
Fire Commission
§ C8-1. Establishment of Fire Commission.
There shall be a Fire Commission composed of three members, who shall be
electors of the Town. The members shall serve without compensation and
shall hold no other office of trust or emolument in the Town government.
Service on committees of the Town government is not prohibited by this
section, provided that such service does not create a conflict of interest as
defined in the Town Code of Ethics.
§ C8-2. Appointment and terms of office.
The Selectmen shall annually on or promptly after the first day of December
appoint one member of the Fire Commission who, after qualification, shall
hold office for a term of three years from the first day of December until
a successor has been appointed and shall have qualified. As long as there
shall be a volunteer fire company in the Town of New Canaan, one of
the members of the Commission shall be an inactive member, in good
standing, of such a volunteer fire company, in order to foster and recognize
the volunteer component of the department. There shall be minority
representation on the Commission in accordance with § 9-167a of the
General Statutes.
§ C8-3. Organization, officers, records and quorum.
On or promptly after the first day of December of each year, the Commission
shall meet at the call of the First Selectman to choose one of its members to
be Chairman and one of its members to be Secretary. The Chairman shall,
when present, preside at all meetings of the Commission and shall have a
vote as a member thereof. The Secretary shall file in the office of the Town
Clerk a record of all proceedings, acts and resolutions of the Commission,
including the votes of each member on all actions taken, and such record
shall be a public record. Two members shall be a quorum for the transaction
of business at any meeting.
§ C8-4. Powers and duties.
The Fire Commission shall supervise the management of the fire
department of the Town to ensure adequate fire protection and rescue
response, and shall exercise powers and perform duties with respect
thereto as follows:
A. Appoint a Fire Chief subject to the approval of the Board of Selectmen.
When a paid Chief is duly appointed and employed, the Commission
shall supervise the Chief in all the duties and responsibilities of the
office, including dismissal; the Chief's salary, compensation, benefits,
and increases shall be established with the consultation and approval
of the Selectmen. In the event of a vacancy in the position of Chief, an
Assistant Chief shall be Acting Chief in order to maintain the chain of
§ C8-1 CHARTER § C8-4
C:35
command and leadership responsibilities of the department pending the
appointment of a permanent Chief.
B. As to volunteer fire companies established in the Town, the Commission
shall:
(1) Ensure that the Town provides volunteer firefighters, as per
Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) regulations,
with required personal protective equipment.
(2) Recognize volunteers as members in accordance with the
constitution and bylaws of the volunteer fire company.
(3) Direct the volunteer fire company to follow all rules and regulations
and standard operating procedures of the fire department.
Modification of these rules and regulations shall be in consultation
with the volunteer officers. The volunteer fire company shall be
responsible for discipline of any volunteers who have violated its
rules and regulations or for conduct found to be detrimental to the
public welfare.
(4) Provide that copies of all rules and regulations referred to herein
shall be delivered to all persons affected thereby.
C. As to the paid Fire Department established in the Town, the Commission
shall:
(1) Employ and appoint career officers and fire fighters and other paid
personnel of the Fire Department as may be necessary for the
adequate protection of the Town. Consult with the Chief to solicit
names of qualified candidates for each paid position for service with
the Fire Department. Persons so employed shall be paid by the Town.
(2) Implement changes in the classification and compensation of
employees of the Fire Department, in accordance with any collective
bargaining agreements, after consultation with the Board of
Selectmen.
(3) Review and approve rules and regulations regarding career
personnel, for the proper governance of the Fire Department, in
accordance with contract and regulatory obligations.
(4) Remove or suspend without payment of wages any employee of the
Fire Department for violation of any such rules and regulations or
for conduct found by the Commission to be detrimental to the public
welfare but only after a hearing by the Commission upon written
charges delivered to the accused person a reasonable time before
such hearing, at which hearing such person may be represented by
counsel; provided such actions may be taken only in accordance with
collective bargaining agreements and regulatory obligations.
D. As to general fire protection and prevention, the Commission shall:
(1) From time to time prepare and submit to the Selectmen proposed
rules and regulations for governing and abating fire hazards in
public and private buildings and in all other places in the Town
and recommend their adoption by the Town Council as a bylaw or
ordinance of the Town.
(2) Appoint, subject to the approval of the Board of Selectmen, a Fire
Marshal, who shall possess the powers and perform the duties
imposed upon such officer by law or by ordinance of the Town.
§ C8-4 NEW CANAAN CODE § C8-4
C:36
ARTICLE IX
Health and Human Services Commission
§ C9-1. Composition and qualification of members.
There shall be a Health and Human Services Commission of nine members.
The members shall be electors of the Town, and the First Selectman shall be
a member ex officio but shall vote only in case of a tie. With the exception
of the First Selectman, the members shall serve without compensation and
shall hold no other office of trust or emolument in the Town government.
Service on committees of the Town government is not prohibited by this
section, provided that such service does not create a conflict of interest as
defined in the Town Code of Ethics.
§ C9-2. Appointment and terms of office.
The Selectmen shall annually on or promptly after the first day in December
appoint three members of the Commission, all of whom, after qualification,
shall hold office for a term of three years from the first day of December
until their successors have been appointed and have qualified.
§ C9-3. Organization, officers, records and quorum.
On or promptly after the first of December in each year, the Commission
shall meet at the call of the First Selectman to choose one of its members
to be Chairman and one of its members to be Secretary. The Chairman
shall, when present, preside at all meetings of the Commission and shall
vote as a member thereof. The Secretary shall file in the office of the Town
Clerk a full and detailed record of all proceedings, acts and resolutions of
the Commission, as required by the Freedom of Information Act, including
the votes of each member on all actions taken, and such record shall be
a public record; provided, however, that the names of needy persons and
confidential matters relating to their domestic, financial or other private
affairs, and the votes of the members of the Commission in specific
instances granting or refusing welfare, shall not be a public record. The
concurrence of a majority of the Commission shall be necessary for the
transaction of business.
§ C9-4. Powers and duties.
The Health and Human Services Commission shall have the following
general duties and responsibilities in serving Town needs in the areas of
human services, aging services, youth services and assigned public health
services:
The Commission shall possess and exercise all of the powers and duties
relating to the public's general welfare as described above, imposed upon
boards of selectmen or municipalities by the Town of New Canaan, General
Statutes of Connecticut or the United States Code, as well as those powers
and duties that may be imposed on it by ordinances of the Town.
§ C9-1 CHARTER § C9-4
C:37

ARTICLE X
Inland Wetlands Commission
§ C10-1. Composition and qualification of members.
There shall be an Inland Wetlands Commission of seven regular members
and three alternate members who shall be electors of the Town. Ex-officio
members may be provided as in the Town ordinance. The members shall
serve without compensation and shall hold no other office of trust or
emolument in the Town government. Service on committees of the Town
government is not prohibited by this section, provided that such service
does not create a conflict of interest as defined in the Town Code of Ethics.
§ C10-2. Appointment and terms of office.
The Selectmen shall annually on or promptly after the first day of December
appoint three or four regular members of the Inland Wetlands Commission,
who, after qualification, shall hold office for a term of two years from
the first day of December and until reappointed or their successors have
been appointed and shall have qualified. On or promptly after the first day
of December in the odd-numbered years, the Selectmen shall appoint the
remaining regular members, who, after qualification, shall hold office for a
term of two years from the first day of December and until reappointed or
their successors have been appointed and shall have qualified.
§ C10-3. Organization, officers, records and quorums.
On or promptly after the first day of December the members of the Inland
Wetlands Commission shall meet at the call of the First Selectman to choose
one of its regular members to be Chairman and one of its regular members
to be Secretary.
§ C10-4. Alternate members.
In the event of the absence of a regular member from a meeting of the
Inland Wetlands Commission or if a regular member shall disqualify himself
or herself or be disqualified under the provisions of the General Statutes or
the Town Code of Ethics, the Chairman shall designate and seat an alternate
member from the panel of alternates.
§ C10-5. Powers and duties.
The Inland Wetlands Commission shall have all the powers and duties and
be subject to the restrictions and limitations of inland wetland commissions
as established under the General Statutes and as provided in the Town
ordinance, as from time to time amended.
§ C10-1 CHARTER § C10-5
C:39

ARTICLE XI
Conservation Commission
§ C11-1. Composition; compensation; qualification of members.
There shall be a Conservation Commission of five members who shall be
electors of the Town. The members shall serve without compensation and
shall hold no other office of trust or emolument in the Town government.
Service on committees of the Town government is not prohibited by this
section, provided that such service does not create a conflict of interest as
defined in the Town's Code of Ethics. There shall be minority representation
on the Commission in accordance with Section 9-167a of the Connecticut
General Statutes.
§ C11-2. Appointment; terms of office.
On or promptly after the first day of December in even-numbered years,
the Selectmen shall appoint two members of the Commission, who, after
qualification, shall hold office for a term of two years from the first day of
December and until their successors have been appointed and shall have
qualified. On or promptly after the first day of December in odd-numbered
years, the Selectmen shall appoint three members of the Commission, who,
after qualification, shall hold office for a term of two years from the first day
of December and until their successors have been appointed and shall have
qualified.
§ C11-3. Organization; official records and quorum.
On or promptly after the first day of December, the Commission shall meet
at the call of the First Selectman to choose one of its members to be
Chairman and one to be Secretary. The Chairman shall, when present,
preside at all meetings of the Commission, and shall vote as a member
thereof. The Secretary shall file in the office of the Town Clerk a full and
detailed record of all proceedings, acts, and resolutions of the Commission,
including the votes of each member on all actions taken, and such record
shall be a public record. Three members shall constitute a quorum, and the
concurrence of two votes shall be necessary for the transaction of business.
§ C11-4. Powers and duties.
The Commission shall have all of the powers, duties and responsibilities as
specified in the ordinances of the Town.
§ C11-1 CHARTER § C11-4
C:41

ARTICLE XII
Parks and Recreation Commission
§ C12-1. Composition and qualification of members.
There shall be a Parks and Recreation Commission of no fewer than seven
and no more than 11 members, as determined by resolution of the Board
of Selectmen. The members shall be electors of the Town. The members
shall serve without compensation and shall hold no other office of trust or
emolument in the Town government. Service on committees of the Town
government is not prohibited by this section, provided that such service
does not create a conflict of interest as defined in the Town Code of Ethics.
§ C12-2. Appointment and terms of office.
The Selectmen shall on or promptly after the first day of December in each
year appoint 1/3 of the members of the Parks and Recreation Commission
for a term of three years, all of whom, after qualification, shall hold office
from the first day of December and until their successors have been
appointed and have qualified. If 1/3 of the total membership is not a whole
number, then the Selectmen shall divide the membership as equally as may
be into three appointment classes, and the members of the classes shall be
appointed on a three-year rotation. There shall be minority representation
on the Commission in accordance with § 9-167a of the General Statutes.
§ C12-3. Organization, officers, records and quorum.
On or promptly after the first day of December in each year, the Parks
and Recreation Commission shall meet at the call of the First Selectman
to choose one of its members to be Chairman and one of its members to
be Secretary. The Chairman, when present, shall preside at all meetings of
the Commission and shall have a vote as a member thereof. In the absence
of the Chairman, the Board shall choose one of its members Chairman pro
tempore. The Secretary shall file in the office of the Town Clerk a full and
detailed record of all proceedings, acts and resolutions of the Commission,
including the votes of each member on all actions taken, and such record
shall be a public record. A majority of the total members shall constitute
a quorum and the concurrence of a majority of those present shall be
necessary for the transaction of business.
§ C12-4. Powers and duties.
The Commission shall exercise powers and perform duties as follows:
A. Recommend to the Selectmen for adoption by the Town Council such
bylaws or ordinances relating to public recreation and the use of parks
and other recreational facilities as, in its opinion, shall be proper.
B. Consider and make recommendations to the Selectmen as to the
acceptance of donations or devises of property to the Town for park or
recreational purposes.
§ C12-1 CHARTER § C12-4
C:43
C. Consider and recommend to the Planning and Zoning Commission
acquisition of parks and other recreational facilities.
D. In conjunction with the Town Recreation Department, organize, direct,
control, equip, foster and promote recreational programs and activities
in public parks, streets, public buildings or elsewhere in the Town except
those recreational programs and activities under the jurisdiction of the
Board of Education or those recreational programs and activities that
may from time to time be delegated to any other board, commission,
committee or authority of the Town by the Charter or by any bylaw or
ordinance adopted by the Town Council.
E. Evaluate the maintenance and care of parks, utilizing the resources of
the park maintenance staff of the Department of Public Works, within the
annual budget allocation provided to the Commission by the Town, or as
may be more specifically provided by ordinance.
F. On or promptly after the first day of November in each year, the
Commission shall submit an Annual Report to the Board of Selectmen
and the Town Council, which report shall include the following sections:
(1) RECREATION: describing activities for the past year, and new goals
and projects, pertaining to the recreational programs and facilities;
(2) PARKS: describing activities for the past year, and the current
condition of the parks, park maintenance needs and short-term
plans, and capital projects and long-range planning.
§ C12-5. Method of acquisition of park property.
The Selectmen, upon recommendation of or after consultation with the
Parks and Recreation Commission and the Planning and Zoning
Commission, may consider the acceptance of gifts, donations or devises of
land or other property for park or recreational purposes and recommend
to the Town Council the acceptance or rejection thereof. Should the
Selectmen, after consultation with the Parks and Recreation Commission
find it necessary or advisable to acquire land or facilities or both for park
and recreational purposes or for the improvement of park property, they
shall make a report relative thereto to the Board of Finance, together
with a request for a special appropriation. When an appropriation for such
acquisition or improvement shall have been made by the Town Council,
the Selectmen shall have exclusive charge of the disbursement of such
appropriation in substantial accord with the purpose for which such
appropriation was made. If the carrying out of any such recommendation
makes necessary the condemnation of land, the Town is authorized to take
such land within the limits of the Town by condemnation for the purpose of
such public use.
§ C12-6. Park bylaws, permits and use by nonprofit groups.
The Selectmen may, upon recommendation of or after consultation with
the Parks and Recreation Commission, recommend to the Town Council
the adoption of bylaws and ordinances governing the use of public parks,
may prescribe a system for the issuance of permits for the use of all Townowned
land used for park purposes, including public amusements, games,
§ C12-4 NEW CANAAN CODE § C12-6
C:44
picnics and other purposes to which such areas might be devoted, and may
enter into agreements with nonprofit groups or agencies for the use and/or
improvement of Town property devoted to park or recreational purposes.
§ C12-6 CHARTER § C12-6
C:45

ARTICLE XIII
Parking Commission
§ C13-1. Composition; qualification of members.
There shall be a Parking Commission of five members who shall be electors
of the Town, together with the First Selectman as an ex officio member,
who shall vote only in the case of a tie. With the exception of the First
Selectman, the members shall serve without compensation and shall hold
no other office of trust or emolument in the Town government. Service
on committees of the Town government is not prohibited by this section,
provided that such service does not create a conflict of interest as defined
in the Town Code of Ethics.
§ C13-2. (Reserved)
§ C13-3. Appointment and terms of office.
The Selectmen shall on or promptly after the first day of December in each
year appoint the necessary number of members of the Parking Commission
to fill the vacancies occurring by reason of the expiration of the term
of office of any member. Such appointment shall be for a term of three
years from the first day of December and until their successors have been
appointed and shall have qualified. There shall be minority representation
on the Commission in accordance with § 9-167a of the General Statutes.
§ C13-4. Organization, officers, records and quorum.
On or promptly after the first day of December in each year, the Parking
Commission shall meet at the call of the First Selectman to choose one of
its appointed members to be Chairman and one of its appointed members to
be Secretary. The Chairman shall, when present, preside at all meetings of
the Commission and shall have a vote as a member thereof. In the absence
of the Chairman, the Board shall choose one of its members Chairman
pro tempore. The Secretary shall file in the office of the Town Clerk a
full and detailed record of all proceedings, acts and resolutions of the
Commission, including the vote of each member on all actions taken, and
such record shall be a public record. Three members shall be a quorum for
the transaction of business at any meeting.
§ C13-5. Powers and duties.
The Parking Commission shall:
(1) Recommend to the Board of Selectmen such policies, rules and
procedures as may be applicable to the maintenance and operation of
all public off-street parking facilities owned or controlled by the Town.
(2) Recommend to the Board of Selectmen the acquisition of land and other
property necessary for or incidental to the establishment, maintenance
and operation of public off-street parking facilities by purchase, lease or
condemnation.
§ C13-1 CHARTER § C13-5
C:47
(3) Consider offers of gifts or devises of land or money to be used for
purposes of this article and recommend to the Board of Selectmen
acceptance or rejection thereof.
(4) Recommend to the Board of Selectmen the establishment of such fees
and such rules as may be appropriate for the parking of vehicles on
public off-street parking facilities owned or controlled by the Town,
and make similar recommendations to the Police Commission for the
parking of vehicles on any public street. Such fees shall be collected
under the direction of the Board of Selectmen and shall be turned over
by the Board of Selectmen to the Town Treasurer for deposit in the Town
General Fund, unless the use or disposition of such fees are subject to
the terms and provisions of a bond indenture relating to the issuance of
revenue bonds.
(5) Recommend to the Board of Selectmen the installation of parking
meters on public off-street parking facilities owned or controlled by the
Town, and on public streets. No contract requiring the expenditure of
money for the purchase or installation thereof shall be submitted to
the Town Council by the Board of Selectmen unless accompanied by a
recommendation by the Board of Finance.
(6) The Parking Commission shall prepare and submit to the Board of
Selectmen and to the Planning and Zoning Commission plans for the
provision of public off-street parking facilities, which plans shall be
completed on or before the 15th day of November next after the Parking
Commission's appointment. Annually thereafter, the Parking
Commission shall update such plans and submit the same to the Board
of Selectmen and to the Planning and Zoning Commission on or before
the 15th day of November.
(7) Consider and recommend to the Police Commission such rules and
regulations as it deems advisable for improvement of traffic circulation
and parking within the Town of New Canaan.
(8) Hear parking citation appeals if authorized by ordinance.
§ C13-6. Annual appropriations.
The Board of Selectmen shall prepare annually an itemized estimate of
expenses for the maintenance or operation of public off-street parking
facilities for the ensuing fiscal year and of expenses of the Parking
Commission, including such professional assistance to the Commission as
may be approved by the Board of Selectmen, and shall submit such estimate
and its request for an appropriation to cover such expenses to the Board
of Finance and expend such appropriation, all in accordance with the
applicable provisions of the Town Charter. The Board of Selectmen shall
present to the Board of Finance promptly after the effective date of this
article an estimate of expenses for the remainder of the fiscal year and a
request for an appropriation therefor.
§ C13-7. Existing contracts continued.
Nothing in this article shall be constructed to abrogate or render invalid
any existing contract to which the Town or the Board of Selectmen as the
§ C13-5 NEW CANAAN CODE § C13-7
C:48
Parking Commission were parties and which relate to leases or to the duties
or functions to be performed by the Town, and all such leases and contracts
shall be carried out on behalf of the Town by the Board of Selectmen.
§ C13-7 CHARTER § C13-7
C:49

ARTICLE XIV
Town Employees and Ethics Board
§ C14-1. Personnel under jurisdiction of Selectmen.
The appointment and dismissal of all employees of the Town, except those
who are elected or are under the jurisdiction of the Board of Education,
the Fire Commission, or the Police Commission, shall be made by the
Selectmen. All appointments shall be made on the basis of merit and after
examination as to fitness. Before the appointment or dismissal of any paid
employee, the Selectmen shall consult with the board, commission,
committee, officer, department or individual to whom the services of such
employee are to be or have been rendered.
§ C14-2. Classification and compensation plan.
The Selectmen shall review and revise or establish when necessary a plan of
classification and compensation for all Town employees whose appointment
or dismissal is under the jurisdiction of the Selectmen or of the Fire
Commission or Police Commission.
§ C14-3. Ordinance establishing classification and compensation
plan and merit system.
The Board of Selectmen shall recommend to the Town Council the
enactment of any bylaws or ordinances necessary to give effect to any
classification or compensation plan or plans or any changes therein. Any
ordinance so adopted by the Town Council shall provide a merit system of
personnel administration.
§ C14-4. Code of Ethics for Town employees and officials.
There shall be an ordinance establishing a Code of Ethics enacted by
the Town Council setting forth standards of ethical conduct for all town
officials, including members of boards and commissions, whether such town
officials and members are elected, appointed, regular or alternate, and
all employees of the Town, Board of Education, and Police Commission,
whether paid or unpaid.
§ C14-5. Ethics Board.
There shall be an Ethics Board of five members who shall be electors of
the Town. The members shall serve without compensation and shall hold
no other office of trust or emolument in the Town government. Service
on committees of the Town government is not prohibited by this section,
provided that such service does not create a conflict of interest as defined
in the Town Code of Ethics.
§ C14-1 CHARTER § C14-6
C:51
§ C14-6. Appointment and term of office.
On or promptly after the first day of December, 2016, the Selectmen shall
appoint, subject to confirmation by an affirmative vote of seven members of
the Town Council, two members of the Ethics Board to serve a term of three
years, two additional members of the Ethics Board to serve a term of two
years, and one member to serve a term of one year. On or promptly after
the first day of December, 2017, the Selectmen shall appoint, subject to
confirmation by an affirmative vote of seven members of the Town Council,
one member of the Ethics Board to serve a term of three years. Thereafter,
on a three year cycle, the Selectmen shall appoint, annually on or promptly
after the first day of December, subject to confirmation by an affirmative
vote of seven members of the Town Council, members of the Ethics Board
for a term of three years, with two members to be appointed the first year,
two members to be appointed the second year, and one member to be
appointed the third year. Each member, after qualification, shall hold office
from their initial appointment and until a successor has been appointed and
shall have qualified. In the event of a vacancy due to death, resignation, or
removal, within sixty (60) days of such vacancy the Selectmen shall appoint,
subject to confirmation by an affirmative vote of seven members of the Town
Council, a successor member of the Committee. There shall be minority
representation on the Board in accordance with § 9-167a of the General
Statutes.
§ C14-7. Organization, officers, records and quorum.
On or promptly after the first day of December in each year the Ethics Board
shall meet at the call of the First Selectman to choose one of its members to
be Chairman and one of its members to be Secretary. The Chairman shall,
when present, preside at all meetings of the Board and shall have a vote as
a member thereof. The Secretary shall file in the office of the Town Clerk
a full and detailed record of all proceedings, acts and resolutions of the
Board, including the votes of each member on all actions taken, and such
record shall be a public record. Three members shall be a quorum for the
transaction of business at any meeting.
§ C14-8. Powers and duties.
The Ethics Board shall operate in accordance with the Town Ethics Board
Ordinance and pursuant to Section 7-148h of the Connecticut General
Statutes, and it shall have the following general powers and duties:
A. Review and recommend modifications, if any, to the Town Code of Ethics
and the Town Ethics Board Ordinance for adoption by the Town Council;
B. Receive, review and address, in accordance with the Town Ethics Board
Ordinance, its own rules and regulations and Section 7-148h of the
Connecticut General Statutes, written complaints of alleged violations
of the Town Code of Ethics by a Town officer, member of the Town
Council, an official, member of a board, commission or committee, or
any employee of the Town, including an official or employee of the Board
§ C14-6 NEW CANAAN CODE § C14-8
C:52
of Education. All written complaints must be submitted to the Town
Attorney for recording and prompt notification to the Ethics Board.
C. Hear appeals of complaints from any employee aggrieved as to the status
or condition of employment, except employees governed by the Board
of Education and collective bargaining agreements, after such employee
follows the grievance procedures provided by the Town of New Canaan
Employee Handbook.
D. Render advisory opinions and interpretations as to conflicts of interest
arising under the Town Code of Ethics for all Town officers, members of
the Town Council, and for all officials, members of boards, commissions
and committees, and all employees of the Town, including officials and
employees of the Board of Education.
§ C14-8 CHARTER § C14-8
C:53

ARTICLE XV
Police Commission
§ C15-1. Composition and qualification of members.
There shall be a Police Commission of three members who shall be electors
of the Town. The members shall serve without compensation and shall hold
no other office of trust or emolument in the Town government. Service
on committees of the Town government is not prohibited by this section,
provided that such service does not create a conflict of interest as defined
in the Town Code of Ethics.
§ C15-2. Appointment and term of office.
The Selectmen shall annually on or promptly after the first day of December
appoint one member of the Police Commission who, after qualification, shall
hold office for a term of three years from the first day of December and
until a successor has been appointed and shall have qualified. There shall
be minority representation on the Commission in accordance with § 9-167a
of the General Statutes.
§ C15-3. Organization, officers, records and quorum.
On or promptly after the first day of December in each year, the Police
Commission shall meet at the call of the First Selectman to choose one of
its members to be Chairman and one of its members to be Secretary. The
Chairman shall, when present, preside at all meetings of the Commission
and shall have a vote as a member thereof. The Secretary shall file in the
office of the Town Clerk a record of all proceedings, acts and resolutions of
the Commission, including the votes of each member on all actions taken,
and such record shall be a public record. Two members shall be a quorum
for the transaction of business at any meeting.
§ C15-4. Powers and duties.
The Police Commission shall manage and supervise the police force of the
Town and shall exercise powers and perform duties with respect thereto as
follows:
A. Employ and appoint a Chief of Police, subordinate police officers and
other persons as regular or special members of the police force as may
be necessary for the adequate protection of the Town.
B. Recommend to the Selectmen changes in the classification and
compensation of police officers and members of the police force.
C. Make rules and regulations, after consultation with the Selectmen, for
the proper government of the police force, copies of which shall be
delivered to each officer and member of the force.
D. Remove, suspend or fine any officer or member of the police force for
violation of any such rules and regulations or for conduct found by
the Commission to be detrimental to the public welfare but only after
a hearing by the Commission upon written charges delivered to the
§ C15-1 CHARTER § C15-4
C:55
accused person a reasonable time before such hearing, at which hearing
such person may be represented by counsel.
§ C15-5. Traffic regulations.
The Police Commission may make and from time to time change rules
for the regulation of traffic on streets, highways and other public places
under the jurisdiction of the Police Commission, not inconsistent with the
ordinances of the Town or the law, and may fix a penalty for violation
thereof. Upon adoption by the Police Commission, such rules shall not be
effective until 10 days after their publication. Such rules may be altered,
amended, suspended or repealed in the same manner as they may be
adopted. All existing traffic regulations shall remain in effect until altered,
amended, suspended or repealed in accordance with the provisions hereof.
In formulating any such rules, the Police Commission shall consider
recommendations from the Parking Commission, the Board of Selectmen,
and the Town Council.
§ C15-4 NEW CANAAN CODE § C15-5
C:56
ARTICLE XVI
Planning and Zoning Commission
§ C16-1. Composition and qualification of members.
There shall be a Town Planning and Zoning Commission of nine regular
members and three alternate members who shall be electors of the Town,
together with the First Selectman and the Town Engineer as ex officio
members. The First Selectman and the Town Engineer shall have no vote.
With the exception of the First Selectman and the Town Engineer, the
members shall serve without compensation and shall hold no other office
of trust or emolument in the Town government. Service on committees of
the Town government is not prohibited by this section, provided that such
service does not create a conflict of interest as defined in the Town Code of
Ethics.
§ C16-2. Appointment and terms of office.
The Selectmen shall annually on or promptly after the first day of December
appoint three regular members of the Town Planning and Zoning
Commission, who, after qualification, shall hold office for a term of three
years from the first day of December and until their successors have been
appointed and shall have qualified. On or promptly after the first day of
December in the odd-numbered years, the Selectmen shall appoint the
three alternate members, who, after qualification, shall hold office for a
term of two years from the first day of December and until their successors
have been appointed and shall have qualified. There shall be minority
representation on the Commission and on the panel of alternates in
accordance with § 9-167a of the General Statutes.
§ C16-3. Organization, officers, records and quorums.
On or promptly after the first day of December the members of the
Commission shall meet at the call of the First Selectman to choose one of
its regular members to be Chairman and one of its regular members to be
Secretary. The Chairman shall, when present, preside at all meetings of the
Commission. In the absence of the Chairman, the Board shall choose one
of its members Chairman pro tempore. The Secretary shall keep a record
of the acts and resolutions of the Commission, including the vote of each
member upon any issue before it, and file such record in the office of the
Town Clerk. A quorum shall consist of five members, and the concurrence
of four votes, except as otherwise provided in § C13-6 hereof, shall be
necessary for the transaction of business.
§ C16-4. Powers and duties.
The Town Planning and Zoning Commission shall have all the powers and
duties and be subject to the restrictions and limitations of zoning
commissions as established under the General Statutes, as from time to
§ C16-1 CHARTER § C16-4
C:57
time amended, and of municipal planning commissions established under
the General Statutes, as from time to time amended.
§ C16-5. Town planning and zoning rules and regulations and plan
of conservation and development to remain in effect.
The zoning regulations and the boundaries of zoning districts heretofore
enacted, together with all planning rules and regulations and any plan of
conservation and development heretofore enacted or adopted, are validated
and shall remain in full force and effect until modified, repealed, amended
or superseded.
§ C16-6. Procedure for holding public hearings.
For the purpose of holding public hearings as required under the General
Statutes and as required under the planning and zoning rules and
regulations now or hereinafter in force in the Town of New Canaan, the
Chairman may appoint committees of no less than five appointed members,
among whom may be included the Chairman. One member of the committee
shall be designated as Secretary. Unless provided otherwise by statute,
action on matters which have been subject to a public hearing shall be taken
by a majority vote of the entire Commission at a regular or special meeting
thereof, except that in the event of a protest being filed in accordance
with the General Statutes concerning a proposed amendment, change or
repeal of zone regulations or zone boundaries, a vote of 3/4 of the entire
Commission shall be required for the adoption of such amendment, change
or repeal.
§ C16-7. Alternate members.
In the event of the absence of a regular member from a meeting of the
Commission or if a regular member shall disqualify himself or herself or be
disqualified under the provisions of the General Statutes or the Town Code
of Ethics, the Chairman shall designate and seat an alternate from the panel
of alternates, but in designating and seating such alternate, the Chairman
shall choose alternates in rotation so that the alternates chosen by the
Chairman shall be seated as nearly an equal number of times as is possible.
The alternate members, when seated as provided herein, shall have all
the powers and duties of regular members of the Commission. Alternate
members shall have no vote, and shall not count towards a quorum or for
vote ratios or other purposes, unless seated for a regular member.
§ C16-4 NEW CANAAN CODE § C16-7
C:58
ARTICLE XVII
Public Works Department
§ C17-1. Powers and duties.
There shall be a Department of Public Works which shall have
administrative powers and duties as are set forth in this Charter.
§ C17-2. Appointment and term of office of Director of Public
Works.
There shall be a Director of Public Works who shall be appointed by the
Selectmen to serve for an indefinite term at the pleasure of the Selectmen
and who shall be responsible to the Board of Selectmen. The Director of
Public Works shall possess practical and technical qualifications for the
duties of the office and shall not engage in any other business or hold any
other office, public or private, for which a salary or emolument is paid.
§ C17-3. Appointment and term of office of Town Engineer.
There shall be a Town Engineer who shall be appointed by the Selectmen
and shall report to the Director of Public Works, to serve for an indefinite
term at the pleasure of the Board of Selectmen. The Town Engineer shall be
a professional engineer registered in Connecticut, and shall not engage in
any other business or hold any other office, public or private, for which a
salary or emolument is paid.
§ C17-4. Duties and powers of Director of Public Works and Town
Engineer.
The Director of Public Works shall supervise the Department of Public
Works and have charge and control of all buildings, materials, apparatus
and other equipment of the department or to which the functions of the
department relate. The Director of Public Works and the Town Engineer
shall be the chief technical advisors of the Town and of the Town Council
and of all boards, commissions, committees and officers, except the Board
of Education, concerning the physical matters of the Town and the design
and construction of its physical plant as provided for in this Charter. The
Director of Public Works, with the Town Engineer, shall furnish at the
request of the Town Council or of any board, commission, committee or
officer of the Town such technical advice as is reasonably required relating
to any function of the Town or of its government and shall perform such
other reasonable and related duties as the Board of Selectmen may direct.
The Town Engineer shall be in charge of and shall make or superintend the
making of all surveys, maps, plans, drawings, bids and estimates thereon
relating to the work of the Town or any of its departments, boards,
commissions, committees or officers except the Board of Education. The
Town Engineer shall have custody of all maps of the Town not entrusted
by ordinances, bylaws or otherwise to any other department, commission,
committee or officer thereof and shall prepare with and upon direction of
§ C17-1 CHARTER § C17-4
C:59
the Planning and Zoning Commission all maps or other records showing
highways, building and veranda lines, street profiles and plans, profiles of
storm and sanitary sewers, planning and zoning districts and planning maps
of the Town which involve engineering.
§ C17-5. Streets and highways.
Except as otherwise provided by ordinance, the Department of Public Works
shall have full control of the inspection and the construction,
reconstruction, care, maintenance, altering, paving, repairing, draining,
cleaning and snow clearance of all public places and of all streets,
highways, sidewalks and curbs, and of the installation and maintenance of
public lighting, street signs and guideposts.
§ C17-6. Public buildings, works and improvements.
The Department of Public Works shall have full control of the inspection and
the construction, reconstruction, care, repair and maintenance of all public
buildings, public works and public improvements except school buildings
and grounds.
§ C17-7. The maintenance of public grounds, including parks.
The Department of Public Works shall be in charge of the work involved
in the maintenance, care and improvement of, and construction required in
connection with, all real property of the Town, including public cemeteries,
parks, playgrounds, recreational areas and other areas not specifically
designated for a particular Town use, except recreational facilities or areas
for which responsibility for maintenance, care or improvement is delegated
to any other board, commission, committee or authority by the charter or
by any bylaw or ordinance adopted by the Town Council. The Department of
Public Works shall not undertake any new construction in park, playground
or recreational area except that for which funds have been appropriated
and then only after consultation with the Parks and Recreation Commission.
§ C17-8. Equipment.
The Department of Public Works shall have full control of the care, repair
and maintenance of all equipment, including automotive equipment, used
in the Department of Public Works or in any other department of the Town,
except school, police and fire equipment.
§ C17-9. Sewer and water systems; refuse disposal.
The Department of Public Works shall have full control of the construction,
reconstruction, establishment, re-planning, restoration, enlargement,
improvement, removal, care, repair and maintenance of all public sewagedisposal
systems, public refuse-disposal systems and public water-supply
systems in the Town.
§ C17-4 NEW CANAAN CODE § C17-10
C:60
§ C17-10. School property.
The Department of Public Works may maintain and care for school buildings
or grounds and may undertake engineering work and supervision on behalf
of the Board of Education, but only if and to the extent and for the periods
voted by the Board of Education, provided that the costs thereof are
charged against the Board of Education's appropriations.
§ C17-10 CHARTER § C17-10
C:61

ARTICLE XVIII
Town Attorney
§ C18-1.
There shall be a Town Attorney, appointed by the Board of Selectmen, who
shall be an attorney at law admitted to practice in the State of Connecticut,
and who shall be the legal advisor for the Town and all departments,
boards, commissions and officers of the Town relating to their official duties.
The Town Attorney shall issue written opinions on questions of law; shall
approve and/or prepare forms of contracts and other instruments to which
the Town is a party; shall attend as required meetings of boards and
commissions; shall appear for and defend the Town against claims against
the Town, boards, commissions, and officers; shall prepare and file legal
actions on behalf of the Town as directed; and shall defend, appeal,
compromise or settle legal actions brought by or against the Town, its
officers, boards or commissions with the approval of the requisite officer,
board or commission. If required, the Town Attorney shall be responsible
for the management of any outside counsel, including review of all
correspondence, pleadings and bills rendered by such outside counsel.
The Board of Selectmen may appoint Assistant Town Attorneys as may be
necessary.
§ C18-1 CHARTER § C18-1
C:63

ARTICLE XIX
Town Clerk
§ C19-1. Term of office and duties.
There shall be an elected Town Clerk whose term of office shall be that
prescribed by the General Statutes and whose powers and duties will be
those prescribed by the General Statutes and this Charter.
§ C19-2. Town Clerk and Assistant Town Clerks to be paid by the
Town.
The Town Clerk and any Assistant Town Clerks shall be paid an annual
compensation by the Town for the performance of their duties and such
compensation shall be in lieu of all fees and other compensation. The Town
Clerk's salary shall be set by the Town Council pursuant to the General
Statutes. Neither the Town Clerk nor any Assistant Town Clerk shall receive
any additional compensation for acting as registrar or assistant registrar of
births, marriages and deaths. The Town Clerk and Assistant Town Clerks
shall not hold any other office in the Town government or engage in any
business in the Town that could create a conflict of interest as defined in
the Town Code of Ethics. Service on committees of the Town government is
not prohibited by this section, provided that such service does not create a
conflict of interest as defined in the Town Code of Ethics.
§ C19-3. Disposition of Town Clerk fees.
The fees or compensation now or hereafter provided by the General
Statutes to be paid to Town clerks shall be collected by the Town Clerk. All
moneys collected by the Town Clerk in accordance with such statutes and
with the bylaws or ordinances of the Town, except such as the Town Clerk
shall be required by law to transmit directly to an agency of the State of
Connecticut, shall be deposited by the Town Clerk with the Treasurer of the
Town at least once each month. At the time of making each such deposit,
the Town Clerk shall file with the Treasurer a full statement of such receipts
so deposited and of the receipts forwarded directly to any state agency, and
the Town Clerk shall also keep a record of the receipts of the office.
§ C19-4. (Reserved)
§ C19-1 CHARTER § C19-4
C:65

ARTICLE XX
Zoning Board of Appeals
§ C20-1. Composition and qualification of members.
There shall be a Zoning Board of Appeals composed of five regular
members, together with a panel of three alternate members, all of whom
shall be electors of the Town. The alternate members and the regular
members of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be subject to the provisions of
the General Statutes and the law relating to the disqualification of members
of zoning authorities. The members of the Zoning Board of Appeals and
of the panel of alternates shall serve without compensation and shall hold
no other office of trust or emolument in the Town government. Service
on committees of the Town government is not prohibited by this section,
provided that such service does not create a conflict of interest as defined
in the Town Code of Ethics.
§ C20-2. Appointment of members and alternates; terms of office.
The Selectmen shall, annually on or promptly after the first day of
December, appoint the number of members of the Zoning Board of Appeals
and of the panel of alternates to the Zoning Board of Appeals necessary to
fill the vacancies occurring by reason of the expiration of the term of office
of any such member or alternate. Such appointments shall be for a term of
two years from the first day of December and until their successors have
been appointed and have qualified. There shall be minority representation
on the Board and on the panel of alternates in accordance with § 9-167a of
the General Statutes.
§ C20-3. Organization, officers and records.
On or promptly after the first day of December in each year, the Zoning
Board of Appeals shall meet at the call of the First Selectman to choose one
of its regular members to be Chairman and one of its regular members to
be Secretary. The Chairman shall, when present, preside at all meetings of
the Board; in the absence or disqualification of the Chairman, the Secretary
shall assume all of the duties of the Chairman. The Secretary shall keep a
record of the acts and resolutions of the Board, including the vote of each
member upon any issue before it, and file such record in the office of the
Town Clerk.
§ C20-4. Seating of alternates of Zoning Board of Appeals.
In the absence of a regular member at a meeting of the Board, the Chairman
of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall seat an alternate designated by an
absentee regular member from the panel of alternates provided for under
§ C17-1 hereof. In the absence of such designation by an absentee regular
member, or if a regular member shall recuse himself or herself or be
disqualified under the provisions of the General Statutes relating to
disqualifications of members of zoning authorities or by law, the Chairman
§ C20-1 CHARTER § C20-4
C:67
shall designate and seat an alternate from the panel of alternates, but
in designating and seating such alternate, the Chairman shall choose
alternates in rotation so that the alternates chosen by the Chairman shall be
seated as nearly an equal number of times as is possible. The minutes of the
meeting shall record the availability of any alternate who cannot be seated
in rotation by the Chairman. Alternate members shall have no vote unless
seated for a regular member.
§ C20-5. Powers and duties.
The Zoning Board of Appeals and the members of the panel of alternates
when seated shall have all the powers and duties set forth in the General
Statutes relating to Zoning Boards of Appeals and the voting on any issue
or matter before it shall be in accordance with the provisions of the General
Statutes.
§ C20-4 NEW CANAAN CODE § C20-5
C:68
ARTICLE XXI
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ C21-1. Language of the Charter.
For the purpose of this Charter, unless the context clearly indicates
otherwise: words used in the present tense include the future tense; words
in the singular number include the plural number and words used in the
plural number include the singular; words used in the masculine include
the feminine and neuter; the word "shall" is mandatory and the word "may"
is permissive; where applicable, the word "person" shall mean individuals,
companies, corporations, public or private, societies and associations.
§ C21-2. Validity.
Should any article, section or provision of this Charter be held invalid or
unlawful by a court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect
the validity of the remainder of this Charter nor the context in which said
article, section or provision thereof so held invalid may appear, except to
the extent that an entire section or part of a section may be inseparably
connected in meaning and effect with the article, section or provision to
which such ruling shall directly apply. If any article, section or provision
of the Charter shall be held invalid or unlawful by a court of competent
jurisdiction, then the article, section or provision of the Charter of the Town
in effect on November 8, 2016, pertinent to or dealing with the same subject
matter shall be considered to have remained in full force and effect and
shall be in full force and effect.
§ C21-3. Captions.
The captions in this Charter are for convenience only and are not to be
construed as part of this Charter and shall not be construed as defining or
limiting in any way the scope or intent of the provisions hereof.
§ C21-4. Continuation of existing contracts.
Nothing herein contained shall be construed to abrogate or render invalid
any existing contract or contracts to which the Town is a party existing as
of November 8, 2016, and all such contracts shall be carried out on behalf
of the Town.
§ C21-5. Continuation of ordinances and bylaws.
All bylaws and ordinances of the Town, not inconsistent herewith, in force at
the time this Charter shall take effect shall continue in force until the same
shall be repealed or amended in the manner prescribed in this Charter.
§ C21-1 CHARTER § C21-6
C:69
§ C21-6. Continuation of appropriations and Town funds.
All appropriations approved and in force and all funds, including special
reserve funds in the name of the Town as of November 8, 2016, shall remain
in full force and effect.
§ C21-7. Authority to adopt codification of ordinances and bylaws by
reference.
The Town of New Canaan is authorized to adopt a codification of, and
codifying amendments to, those ordinances and by laws by the adoption of
an ordinance under § C4-11 hereof stating in substance that the Code of
Ordinances and Bylaws is adopted, and the requirements under said § C4-11
for publication in full of said codification of and codifying amendments to
the ordinances and bylaws shall be deemed satisfied by filing two copies
thereof in the office of the Town Clerk at least eight days before the effective
date of the ordinance adopting the same.
§ C21-8. Library Board.
Pursuant to the provisions of Special Acts of 1947, No. 434, P605, the
library directors of the Town of New Canaan shall not be elected by the
electors of the Town or be appointed by any officer or officers of the Town.
§ C21-9. Special Legislation amendments to be approved.
No Special Legislation enacted after November 9, 2016, under the
provisions of Article 10 of the Constitution of the State of Connecticut
relating to or affecting the Town of New Canaan shall be valid or effective
unless the same is approved at a meeting of the Town Council duly warned
and held for that purpose within 60 days after the passage of such Special
Legislation.
§ C21-10. Periodic Charter Review.
On or before November 8, 2026, and at least every ten (10) years thereafter,
the Town Council shall consider and act upon a resolution calling for the
establishment of a Charter Revision Commission to review and, if necessary,
amend the Charter. The process of initiating the Charter Revision
Commission shall be governed by § 7-188 of the General Statutes.
§ C21-11. Effective date.
This Charter shall become effective November 9, 2016.
§ C21-6 NEW CANAAN CODE § C21-11
C:70
Chapter 2
FEES
§ 2-1. Board of Selectmen to set amounts.
Whenever any fees are required to be paid under this Code for any license
or permit to be issued by the Town Clerk or by any board, commission,
agency, department or committee of the Town and are not otherwise
prescribed by federal or state law, the amount thereof shall be set by vote
of the Board of Selectmen.
§ 2-2. Consultation and review.
Any such fee shall be set by the Selectmen, however, only after consultation
with the board, commission, agency, department or committee involved. The
fees subject to this Chapter 2 shall be reviewed annually by the Board of
Selectmen on or before July 1 of each year.
§ 2-3. Failure to modify fees.
Failure of the Board of Selectmen to modify or change any existing or new
fee under its jurisdiction shall not be deemed to be a waiver of any right to
change such fee in the future.
§ 2-4. Publication and effective date of proposed fees.
After the Selectmen have voted to change or to establish a fee where none
has been enacted, the proposed fee shall be published at least once in a
newspaper having a substantial circulation in the Town not less than 15
days before its effective date. The proposed fee shall thereafter become
effective on the first day of the succeeding month.
§ 2-5. Fees subject to this chapter. [Amended 1-11-2006]
The following sections of the Code shall be subject to this ordinance:
Chapter 5, Amusements, §§ 5-1 and 5-3; Chapter 7, Auctions, §§ 7-2 and
7-4; Chapter 9, Building and Demolition Codes, § 9-5; Chapter 16,
Environmental Commission, including all fees under Connecticut General
Statutes Chapters 440, 446i, and 477; Chapter 20, Fallout Shelters, § 20-8;
Chapter 25, Garbage and Refuse, §§ 25-11 and 25-14; Chapter 26, Going-
Out-of-Business Sales, § 26-3; Chapter 29, Health and Sanitation, §§ 29-7,
29-25, 29-27 and 29-31; Chapter 31, Historic District and Commission,
including all fees under Connecticut General Statutes Chapter 97a; Chapter
32, Housing Code, § 32-6D; Chapter 40, Planning and Zoning Commission
and Zoning Board of Appeals (Chapter 1, Article XVII), including all fees
under General Statutes Chapters 124 and 126; Chapter 41, Off-Street
Parking Regulations; Chapter 42, Parks, §§ 42-7A(2) and 42-9C(2); Chapter
43, Peddlers and Itinerant Vendors, §§ 43-5 and 43-13; Chapter 44,
Personnel Rules and Regulations, § 44-42; Chapter 48, Police, § 48-1;
§ C21-11 CHARTER § 2-5
C:71
Chapter 49, Recycling, § 49-10; Chapter 51, Sewers and Sewage Disposal,
§ 51-14; Chapter 54, Streets and Sidewalks, §§ 54-16, 54-20, 54-29, 54-37,
54-53 and 54-57; and such sections as may hereafter be enacted.
§ 2-6. Effective date.
This ordinance shall take effect October 31, 1982.
Chapter 3
ADOPTION OF CODE
§ 2-5 NEW CANAAN CODE § 2-6
C:72
ARTICLE I
Authorization to Adopt Code
(Approved 5-22-57)
§ 3-1. An act concerning authorizing the Town of New Canaan to
adopt code of ordinances by reference.
The Town of New Canaan is authorized to adopt a codification of, and
amendments to, its ordinances and bylaws by the adoption of an ordinance
under Section 13 of the Town Charter, as amended, stating in substance
that the Code of Ordinances and Bylaws is adopted, and the requirement
under said Section 13 for publication in full of said amended and codified
ordinances and bylaws shall be deemed satisfied by filing two copies thereof
in the office of the Town Clerk of New Canaan at least 30 days before the
effective date of the ordinance adopting the same.
§ 3-1 CHARTER § 3-1
C:73

ARTICLE II
Code Adoption
[Adopted 10-14-65]
§ 3-2. Authority.
By authority of Special Act No. 341 of the 1957 Connecticut legislature, the
ordinances of the Town of New Canaan, of a general and permanent nature
as revised and codified in the following chapters, namely, Chapters 1 to 54,
both inclusive, and Chapter 56, are hereby ordained as general ordinances
of the Town of New Canaan, and are adopted as and shall constitute "Code
of the Town of New Canaan, Connecticut, 1965."
§ 3-3. Effective date; repeal of prior ordinances.
The provisions of such Code shall be in force on and after November 20,
1965, and all ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or
prior to September 23, 1965, and not contained in such Code are hereby
repealed from and after the said November 20, 1965.
§ 3-4. Exceptions.
The repeal provided for in the preceding section of this ordinance shall not
affect any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture
incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the said
September 23, 1965, nor shall it affect any prosecution, suit or proceeding
pending or any judgment rendered on or prior to the said September 23,
1965, nor shall such repeal affect any ordinance or resolution promising or
guaranteeing the payment of money for the town or authorizing the issue of
any bonds of the town or any evidence of indebtedness of the town or any
contract or obligation assumed by the town; nor shall such repeal affect the
administrative ordinances or resolutions of the Board of Selectmen not in
conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of such Code; nor shall it affect
any right or franchise conferred by any ordinance or resolution of the Board
of Selectmen on any person or corporation; nor shall it affect any of the
following ordinances:
A. The annual appropriation ordinance.
B. Any ordinances levying and imposing taxes.
C. Any ordinance relative to the opening, relocating, naming of the streets
and alleys.
D. Any ordinance relative to zoning.
E. Any ordinance relative to official maps of the town.
F. Any ordinance naming and designating streets, avenues, lanes, alleys
and roadways of the town.
G. Any ordinance relative to traffic.
H. Any ordinance regulating subdivision and road regulations.
I. Any ordinance passed after September 23, 1965.
§ 3-2 CHARTER § 3-5
C:75
§ 3-5. Copies to be filed.
Two copies of the "Code of the Town of New Canaan, Connecticut, 1965"
be filed in the office of the Town Clerk and be made available to persons
desiring to examine same.
§ 3-5 NEW CANAAN CODE § 3-5
C:76
Chapter 4
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 4-1. Title.
The ordinances and bylaws embraced in this and the following chapters and
sections shall constitute and be designated as "The Code of the Town of New
Canaan, Connecticut," and may be so cited.
§ 4-2. Definitions.
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances and bylaws of the
town, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed,
unless they are inconsistent with the manifest intent of the Board of
Selectmen or the context clearly requires otherwise:
CASUAL RESTAURANT — A restaurant operating for a temporary period in
connection with a fair, carnival, circus, public exhibition or similar public
function.[Added 9-17-68; effective 10-19-68]
COMPUTATION OF TIME — The time within which an act is to be done shall
be computed by excluding the first and including the last day; and if the last
day be Sunday or a legal holiday, that day shall be excluded.
COUNTY — Means the County of Fairfield in the State of Connecticut.
FOOD — All articles used for food, drink, confectionery or condiment, and
all substances or ingredients used in the preparation thereof. Ice cream,
ice-cream sodas, sundaes and soft drinks usually and ordinarily served
at drug stores and soda fountains shall not be deemed to be "food" as
herein defined, it being the purpose and intent of this definition and of the
definition of "restaurant" that a drug store having only a soda fountain and
not serving sandwiches or meals of any kind shall not be deemed to be a
restaurant.[Added 9-17-68; effective 10-19-68]
GENDER — Words importing the masculine gender include the feminine
and neuter.
GENERAL STATUTES — Means the revision of 1949 of the General Statutes
of the State of Connecticut and all amendments thereto.
JOINT AUTHORITY — All words giving a joint authority to three or more
persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority
of such persons or officers unless otherwise specifically provided.
MONTH — Means a calendar month.
NUMBER — A word importing the singular number only may extend and
be applied to several persons or things, and a word importing the plural
number may apply to one person or thing.
OATH — Includes an affirmation in all cases in which by law an affirmation
may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and
"sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed."
§ 3-5 CHARTER § 4-2
C:77
OWNER — Applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, or joint tenant of the whole
or of a part of such building or land.
PERSON — Shall extend and be applied to associations, firms, partnerships
and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals.
PRECEDING, FOLLOWING — Means next before and next after,
respectively.
RESTAURANT — Any restaurant, coffee shop, coffee wagon, cafeteria,
short-order cafe, luncheonette, tavern, sandwich stand, drug store or soda
fountain serving or selling food, whether consumed on or off the premises,
and all other eating or drinking establishments, as well as kitchens or other
places in which food or drink is prepared for sale in another restaurant
or casual restaurant, but shall not include churches, parish houses, private
clubs or fraternal organizations not open to the general public.[Added
9-17-68; effective 10-19-68]
SIDEWALK — Means any portion of the street, usually lying on either side
thereof, between the curb and the adjacent property line, intended for the
use of pedestrians.
SIGNATURE, SUBSCRIPTION — Includes a mark when the person cannot
write.
STREET — Includes avenues, boulevards, highways, roads, alleys, lanes,
viaducts, bridges and the approaches thereto, and all other public
thoroughfares in the town and means all that part thereof from the property
line of the premises abutting thereon.
STATE — Means the State of Connecticut.
TENANT, OCCUPANT — Applied to a building or land, means any person
who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or
with others.
TOWN — Means the Town of New Canaan in the County of Fairfield, in the
State of Connecticut.
WRITTEN, IN WRITING — Includes any representation of words, letters or
figures, whether by printing or otherwise.
YEAR — Means a calendar year.
§ 4-3. Continuity of provisions.
The provisions appearing in this Code, insofar as they are the same as those
of the ordinances and bylaws existing at the time of adoption of this Code,
shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments.
§ 4-4. Validity.
If any part, section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this Code
is for any reason declared to be unconstitutional or invalid, by a court of
§ 4-2 NEW CANAAN CODE § 4-4
C:78
competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions of this Code.
§ 4-5. Section titles.1
The titles of the various sections of this Code, printed in boldface type, are
intended as descriptions to indicate the contents of the sections and shall
not be deemed to be a part of any section, nor, unless expressly so provided,
shall they be so deemed when any section, including its title is amended or
re-enacted.
§ 4-6. Repeal provisions.
When an ordinance which has repealed another shall itself be repealed, the
previous ordinance shall not be revived without express words to that effect.
§ 4-7. Enforcement of prior penalties, etc.
The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment, penalty or
forfeiture incurred before the repeal takes effect, or any suit, prosecution
or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for any offense committed,
or for the recovery of a penalty or forfeiture incurred under the ordinance
repealed.
§ 4-8. Violations and penalties.
A. Whenever in this Code, or in any other ordinance, rule or regulation
promulgated by any officer or agency of the town under authority vested
in him or it by law or ordinance, any act is prohibited or is declared to be
unlawful, or the doing of any act is required, or the failure to do any act
is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided therefor
either by this Code or state law, the violation of any such provision of
this Code, or any other ordinance, rule or regulation shall be punished
by a fine not exceeding $200 or by imprisonment in a common jail or
workhouse for a term not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and
imprisonment.
B. Each day any violation of this Code or any such ordinance, rule or
regulation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 4A
ALARM DEVICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Emergency Medical Services
Commission — See Ch. 15.
Fire Department — See Ch. 22.
Police — See Ch. 48.
1. Editor's Note: This section amended by publisher.
§ 4-4 CHARTER § 4-8
C:79
§ 4A-1. Preamble.
It is determined that the number of false alarms being made to the Police
and Fire Department hinders the efficiency of those Departments, lowers
the morale of Department personnel, constitutes a danger to the general
public in the streets during responses to false alarms and jeopardizes the
response of volunteers; and that the adoption of this ordinance will reduce
the number of false alarms and promote the responsible use of alarm
devices in New Canaan.
§ 4A-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this ordinance, the following definitions shall apply:
ALARM DEVICE —
ALARM USER — The owner of any premises in which an alarm device is
used, provided that an occupant who expressly accepts responsibility for an
alarm device by registration pursuant to § 4A-5 shall be deemed the "alarm
user."
AUTOMATIC DIAL ALARM — A telephone device or attachment that
mechanically or electronically selects a telephone line to police, fire or
EMS headquarters and reproduces a prerecorded voice message to report
a criminal set, fire or other emergency calling for Police or Fire Department
or EMS response. Excluded from this definition are devices which relay a
digital-coded signal to police or fire headquarters.
CENTRAL STATION — An office to which remote alarm devices transmit
signals where operators monitor those signals and relay information to the
Police and Fire Departments or EMS.
CONTRACTOR — Any person, firm or corporation in the business of
supplying and installing alarm devices or servicing the same.
EMS — Emergency medical services.
Any device which, when activated, calls for Police or Fire Department
response as follows:
(1) Transmits a signal to police or fire headquarters;
Transmits a signal to a person who relays information to police, fire
or EMS headquarters; or
(2)
Produces an audible or visible signal to which the Police or Fire
Departments are expected to respond.
(3)
A.
Excluded from this definition and the scope of this ordinance are
devices which are designed to alert or signal only persons within the
premises in which the device is installed.
B.
§ 4-8 NEW CANAAN CODE § 4A-2
C:80
FALSE ALARM — Any automatic activation of an alarm device to which the
Police or Fire Department or EMS respond and which is not caused by a
criminal act, fire, smoke or other emergency and which is not the result
of a verified malfunction of telephone equipment, power failure, lightning
strike or a generally recognized cataclysmic event.[Amended 2-6-1991,
effective 2-22-1991]
§ 4A-3. Administrator designated.
A. There shall be in the town an administrator for alarm devices, who shall
have the powers and duties granted to him under this ordinance.
B. The Director of Finance or his/her designee shall be the administrator
under the direction and control of the Board of Selectmen, which is
authorized to adopt regulations for the administration of this ordinance.
§ 4A-4. Citation Hearing Officers. [Amended 7-12-89, effective
7-28-89]
In accordance with Section 7-148 of the Connecticut General Statutes, the
First Selectman shall appoint one or more Citation Hearing Officers, other
than police officers or employees or persons who issue citations, to conduct
hearings authorized by this ordinance.
§ 4A-5. Registration of alarm devices; procedure.
A. Each alarm user shall register his alarm device or devices with the
administrator prior to use.
B. Alarm device registration shall be accomplished by filling out a form
provided by the administrator, to include such information concerning
the identity of the prospective alarm user, the name of the central station
monitoring the alarm, the identity of the alarm user's contractor, if
any, and the nature of the proposed alarm device as the administrator
may require. The administrator shall issue the alarm user a written
acknowledgment of proper registration.
C. It shall be the responsibility of each alarm user to notify the
administrator of changes in registration information.
§ 4A-6. Registration of central stations; procedure.
A. Each central station which plans to transmit signals to the Police or Fire
Departments or EMS must register with the administrator before doing
so.
B. Central station registration shall be accomplished by filling out a form
provided by the administrator, to include such information as the
administrator may require concerning the identity of the applicant, the
type of its business organization (individual proprietorship, partnership,
corporation), the principal place of business of the entity and the
location of the office monitoring alarms. The administrator shall issue
the central station a written acknowledgment of proper registration.
C. It shall be the responsibility of each central station to notify the
administrator of changes in the registration information, but such
notification need not be given more frequently than once a month.
§ 4A-2 CHARTER § 4A-7
C:81
§ 4A-7. Registration of contractors.
Each contractor who wishes to provide authorized inspection and repair
services in accordance with § 4A-13 shall register with the administrator.
Certifications called for in § 4A-13 shall be accepted from registered
contractors only.
§ 4A-8. Automatic dial alarms prohibited.
No automatic dial alarm may be installed after January 1, 1987. No
automatic alarm device in use on such date may remain in use after July 1,
1987.
§ 4A-9. Special authorization for digital-coded signals required.
A. After the publication of this ordinance, the administrator will not permit
the registration of an alarm device which transmits a digital-coded signal
to either the Police Department or the Fire Department unless the alarm
user has received special authorization in accordance with § 4A-9B.
B. A commercial establishment or a not-for-profit institution may have a
direct line to the Police Department or Fire Department, provided that:
(1) The connection is by a high-grade, dedicated line meeting
specifications that may be established by the Departments
concerned.
(2) The Police Chief or Fire Chief determines that the level of risk and
exposure justifies a direct line.
(3) The Police Chief or Fire Chief has notified the administrator of his
approval of such a direct line.
C. After July 1, 1987, signals that result from the activation of an alarm
device for which a direct connection has not been authorized in
accordance with § 4A-9B must be transmitted to a central station, which,
after such verification as is practicable, will transmit the alarm to the
Police Department, Fire Department or EMS.
§ 4A-10. Exterior audible signals.
From and after July 1, 1987, unless required by law or regulation, no
alarm device which produces an exterior audible signal shall be installed or
maintained unless its operation is automatically restricted to a maximum of
15 minutes.
§ 4A-11. Reporting of false alarms; notification.
A. The Police Department, Fire Department and EMS shall report false
alarms to the administrator, based upon the report of the investigating
officer.
B. It shall be the responsibility of the central station to notify the alarm
user or his designated keyholder whenever the central station reports an
alarm activation to the Police Department, Fire Department or EMS.
§ 4A-7 NEW CANAAN CODE § 4A-12
C:82
§ 4A-12. False alarm charges; notification and procedure for
contesting liability. [Amended 7-12-1989, effective 7-28-1989;
2-6-1991, effective 2-22-1991]
A. Whenever the administrator determines that a false alarm has occurred,
the administrator shall mail a written warning as required by
Connecticut General Statutes § 7-148(10) to the alarm user stating that
the administrator has made such determination and that a charge will be
imposed for the second and each subsequent false alarm within the same
fiscal year of the town in the amount of $100 for a Police Department
or EMS response and $200 in the case of a Fire Department response.
[Amended 7-8-1998, effective 7-24-1998]
B. Upon determining that two or more false alarms have occurred within
the same fiscal year of the town with respect to the same alarm user,
the administrator shall send a citation in accordance with Connecticut
General Statutes § 7-152c to such alarm user, including a notice of the
following:
(1) The allegation against such alarm user and any charges imposed.
(2) His right to contest his liability before a Citation Hearing Officer if
he submits a written request for hearing within 10 days of receipt of
notice from the municipality.
(3) An assessment and judgment entering without further notice, if the
alarm user does not make written request for a hearing.
C. Any person who requests a hearing shall be given written notice of
the date, time and place for the hearing. Such hearing shall be held
in accordance with the provisions of Section 7-152c of the Connecticut
General Statutes. The Citation Hearing Officer, if he determines that the
person requesting the hearing is liable for the violation of this ordinance,
shall enter and assess the fines, penalties and costs.
§ 4A-13. Inspection required; certification. [Amended 7-12-1989,
effective 7-28-1989; 2-6-1991, effective 2-22-1991]
A. If activations of any alarm device have resulted in five false alarms
within a single fiscal year of the town, the administrator shall, when
notifying the alarm user of this fifth false alarm and the charge therefor,
request that the alarm user arrange to have the alarm device inspected
by a contractor, that the alarm device be adjusted or repaired, if
necessary, and that the alarm user submit a certification, in writing, from
the contractor that he has inspected the alarm device and that it is in
proper working order. Such notification by the administrator shall be
sent by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested.
B. Such certification must be submitted within 15 days from the date of the
return receipt for the administrator's letter. However, if the alarm user
requests an extension of time to file the report because of absence from
the town or other satisfactory reason, the administrator shall extend for
a reasonable time the date for filing.
C. If the certification is not received within the fifteen-day period or
permitted extension thereof, the administrator shall notify the alarm
user that:
(1) The registration of the alarm device is suspended.
§ 4A-12 CHARTER § 4A-13
C:83
(2) Thereafter, the alarm device shall be deemed unregistered and,
unless disconnected, subject to the penalties therefor.
(3) The alarm user has the right to contest the suspension before a
Citation Hearing Officer if he submits a written request within 10
days of receipt of notice from the municipality. The suspension shall
be lifted and the alarm user so notified when a satisfactory
certification has been received by the administrator.
D. Any person who requests a hearing shall be given written notice of
the date, time and place for the hearing. Such hearing shall be held
in accordance with the provisions of Section 7-152c of the Connecticut
General Statutes.
§ 4A-14. Notice to include instructions. [Amended 7-12-89, effective
7-28-89]
Each notice of a false alarm charge, the reaffirmation of such a charge
by the administrator or the suspension of a registration shall refer to and
provide instructions concerning the alarm user's right to further recourse.
§ 4A-15. Confidential information. [Amended 7-12-1989, effective
7-28-1989;2 2-6-1991, effective 2-22-1991]
All information in the possession of the administrator, the Citation Hearing
Officers, Police Department, Fire Department or EMS concerning particular
alarm users and particular alarm devices shall not be divulged without the
written consent of the alarm user or users concerned, except information as
to the occurrence of false alarms. This provision shall not be construed to
limit access to information as provided by law.
§ 4A-16. Information to be compiled.
The administrator, Police Department, Fire Department and EMS shall,
with respect to each and every false alarm, compile information concerning
alarm devices, contractors and sources of false alarms in a form such that
the information may be evaluated in terms of relative reliability of different
sorts of alarm devices and particular contractors and the frequency of false
alarms attributable to different categories of sources.
§ 4A-17. Town not liable.
Notwithstanding the provisions of this ordinance, the town and its
departments, officers, agents and employees shall be under no obligation
whatsoever concerning the adequacy, operation or maintenance of any
alarm device or of the alarm-monitoring facilities at police and fire
headquarters. No liability whatsoever is assumed for the failure of such
alarm devices or monitoring facilities or for the failure to respond to alarms
or for any other omission in connection with such alarm devices.
2. Editor's\Note:\This ordinance also redesignated §§ 4A-17 through 4A-23 as §§ 4A-16
through 4A-22, respectively.
§ 4A-13 NEW CANAAN CODE § 4A-18
C:84
§ 4A-18. Violations and penalties.
Any person who performs or causes to be performed any of the following
acts shall be subject to a penalty not to exceed $100 for each such act:
A. Failure to register an alarm device or give notice of changes in
registration information as required by this ordinance.
B. Use of an automatic dial alarm or an exterior audible alarm device in
violation of the provisions of this ordinance.
§ 4A-19. General fund for charges and fees.
Charges for false alarms, appeal fees and penalties for violations shall be
collected by the administrator and placed in the general fund.
§ 4A-20. Enforcement. [Amended 2-6-1991, effective 2-22-1991]
The provisions of this chapter are designated for enforcement in accordance
with Section 7-148 and Section 7-152c of the Connecticut General Statutes,
and the town may institute civil proceedings to enforce the provisions
herein contained.
§ 4A-21. Applicability.
The provisions of this ordinance shall not apply to alarm devices on
premises owned or controlled by the town, including the Board of
Education, the State of Connecticut or the Government of the United States
nor to alarm devices installed in a licensed motor vehicle, trailer or boat.
§ 4A-22. Severability.
The invalidity of any part or parts of this ordinance shall not affect the
validity of the remaining parts.
§ 4A-23. Effective date.
This ordinance shall take effect January 1, 1987.
Chapter 5
AMUSEMENTS
§ 5-1. Fees for required licenses.
Except as provided in § 5-5 of this code, no exhibition, performance, circus,
menagerie, carousel, show or carnival under canvas, in a building or out
of doors shall be held without obtaining a license for such performance or
exhibition or other event from the Town Clerk upon the payment of a fee
therefor of $10 per day, and for every other public show, exhibition, music
festival or entertainment a fee of $5 per day shall be paid upon issuance of
a license therefor.
§ 4A-18 CHARTER § 5-2
C:85
§ 5-2. Permit required from Planning and Zoning Commission.
Before the issuance of any license permit to the provisions of the preceding
section, the applicant therefor shall present to and file with the Town Clerk
a temporary permit from the Planning and Zoning Commission for the use
of the land or buildings involved, if any, for the purpose stated in the
application for such license.
§ 5-3. Fee for licensing public halls, etc. [Amended 3-19-68;
effective 4-19-68]
All public halls or places of entertainment may be licensed in lieu of
licensing any exhibition, performance or entertainment therein for a license
fee of $25 per year.
§ 5-4. Revocation.
Any license issued under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked by
the Selectmen in the sole discretion in case the licensee shall permit any
unlawful, improper or objectionable use of any land, building, public hall or
place of entertainment.
§ 5-5. Exceptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to entertainments,
performances, exhibitions or other events held by any religious, charitable,
fraternal, educational or political organization to promote its own purposes
and objects and without profit to any person or member of any such
organization other than reasonable compensation for services actually
rendered.
§ 5-6. Prohibited licensing.
No license shall be issued for any business, enterprise, exhibition or other
event prohibited by law, nor that is not expressly authorized by this chapter.
§ 5-7. Noises prohibited.
No person shall create a nuisance within the limits of the town by
advertising any sale, performance, exhibition, carnival or meeting of any
kind by means of a mechanical noise or music-producing apparatus,
commonly known as a radio loudspeaker.3
§ 5-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall willfully violate any provision of this chapter shall be
punished as provided in § 4-8 of this Code.4 A second conviction shall cancel
3. Editor's Note: See also § 39-3, p. 3901, infra.
4. Editor's Note: See p. 404, supra.
§ 5-2 NEW CANAAN CODE § 5-8
C:86
the license of any person so convicted and no license shall be issued to any
such offender for six months after such second conviction.
Chapter 6
ANIMALS AND FOWL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Hitching of animals to fire hydrants — See Ch.
22.
§ 6-1. Maintenance of animals and fowl.
No person shall keep or maintain horses, cattle, swine, goats, fowl, pigeons,
nor any other animals or fowl, in such a manner as may, in the opinion of
the Director of Health, constitute a threat to public health.
§ 6-2. Keeping of roosters; penalty.
A. No person shall keep in the Town any roosters in such location that the
crowing thereof shall be annoying to any person occupying premises
in the vicinity. Upon complaint of any person so annoyed, the Director
of Health shall have authority to order the owner of such roosters to
remove the same so that such annoyance shall cease.
B. Every person violating any provision of this section, or refusing to
comply with any order made hereunder by the Director of Health within
10 days after notice of such order, shall be punished as provided in § 4-8
of this Code.
§ 6-3. Animals not to be noisy.
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any dog or other animal which
habitually makes such noise at night as to disturb persons residing in the
neighborhood thereof.
§ 6-4. Animals not to run at large. [Amended 4-20-2010; effective
5-7-2010]
A. All fowl or poultry kept within the limits of the Town must be penned and
not allowed to run at large or onto premises other than those belonging
to or occupied by the party owning or keeping such fowl or poultry.
B. No owner, keeper or custodian of any horse, pony, ass, mule, cattle,
sheep, goat, swine, fowl or poultry, or other livestock animal, excluding
dogs (which are covered by state statute) and cats, shall abandon such
animal or allow such animal to roam at large upon the land of another
and not under the control of the owner, keeper or custodian, or allow
such animal to roam at large on any public highway, private way or
common drive not attended or under the control of such owner, keeper
or custodian.
§ 5-8 CHARTER § 6-4
C:87
C. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be fined no
less than $75 per animal or occurrence and no more than $250 per
animal or occurrence for each subsequent offense.
§ 6-5. Location of housing facilities restricted.
No animal named in § 6-1 of this code shall be housed or maintained on
marshy ground nor on land subject to overflow nor within 300 feet of any
public meetinghouse or any inhabited house other than that of the owner
or keeper of such animals, without the written approval of the Director of
Health.
§ 6-6. Restraint upon complaint required.
If any person makes complaint to the Chief of Police that any animal owned
or harbored in the Town is a nuisance or is damaging or has damaged
private or public property, or has attacked any person, the Chief of Police
shall investigate such complaint, and if the facts sustain such complaint, it
shall be unlawful for the owner, keeper or parent or guardian of a minor
owner or keeper of such animal, after proper warning by the Chief of Police,
to fail to restrain or control such animal.
§ 6-7. Disposal of dead animals.
The carcass of any dead animal not killed for food shall be removed and
disposed of within 24 hours after death by the owner thereof or if the owner
cannot be found then by the Board of Selectmen or their agent by burial,
incineration or other method approved by the Director of Health.
§ 6-8. Control of dogs in public places. [Added 3-12-2003, effective
3-28-2003]
A. Leashing and conduct in public places. Except in a dog run established
by the Town, no person shall bring any dog into any public park, public
playground, public school grounds, public parking lot, public street or
sidewalk unless the dog is on a leash or lead that is no more than 25 feet
in length and under the control of its owner or keeper at all times. No
person shall allow any dog to dig up, mutilate, deface or destroy any such
Town-owned properties.5 [Added 6-11-2003, effective 6-27-2003)
B. Leashing in the Business District. Notwithstanding the leash length
provisions of Subsection A, no person shall bring any dog into any public
parking lot, public street or sidewalk within the New Canaan Business
District unless the dog is on a leash or lead that is no more than eight
feet in length and under the control of its owner or keeper at all times.
The New Canaan Business District is defined as that area of Town that is
bounded by Grove Street (west); Pine, Cherry and Vitti Streets (south);
Summer Street (east); and Cherry, Locust, Main, Park and Elm Streets
(north).
5. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A, Leashing and conduct in public places, added
3-12-2003, was repealed 4-16-2003, effective 5-2-2003.
§ 6-4 NEW CANAAN CODE § 6-8
C:88
C. Cleaning up after dogs. The owners and/or keepers or any person having
custody or control of any dog on any public street, public sidewalk,
or public parking lot, or within any public park, public playground, or
public school grounds shall promptly remove all feces left by the dog on
such public areas and dispose of such feces in a sanitary manner.
D. Dogs not allowed in public buildings. No person shall bring any dog
into any Town-owned building, with the exception of Town-approved
activities which invite the presence of animals.
E. Enforcement and penalty. The provisions of this section may be enforced
by infractions issued by any police officer or Animal Control Officer. Any
person violating this section shall be fined $90 for each offense or the
maximum amount allowed for infractions as set forth by the State of
Connecticut Superior Court infractions schedules.
F. Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to police dogs,
or to a guide dog accompanying a blind person or to a service dog
accompanying a disabled person.
§ 6-9. Determination, regulation and control of vicious dogs.
[Added 3-12-2003, effective 3-28-2003]
A. Definitions. As used in this ordinance, the following words and terms
shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates
that a different meaning is intended:
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER — Any person employed or appointed by
the Town of New Canaan who is authorized to investigate and enforce
violations relating to animal control or cruelty under the provisions of
this ordinance or state laws.
AT LARGE — A dog that is not secured within an enclosure, dog cage,
vehicle or building, or is not under the direct control of a person.
DIRECT CONTROL — Immediate, continuous physical control of a dog
such as by means of a leash, cord, or chain of such strength to restrain
the dog and controlled by a person capable of restraining the dog.
ENCLOSURE — A structure or fence constructed of heavy-gauge steel
or other suitable material, with secure sides, top, and bottom, at least
six feet in height and at least five feet by 10 feet, suitable to prevent the
entry of children and suitable to confine a dog and to prevent the dog
from escaping.
IMPOUNDMENT — The taking or picking up and confining of a dog by
any police officer or Animal Control Officer.
KEEPER — Any person or other legal entity, other than the dog owner,
harboring or having responsibility, possession or control of the dog.
MUZZLE — A device, as of straps or metal, that can be safely and
securely fastened over the mouth of a dog to prevent the dog from biting
any person or other animal.
OWNER — Any person or other legal entity owning a dog or, in the case
of a person under the age of 18, the person's parent or legal guardian.
§ 6-8 CHARTER § 6-9
C:89
B. Vicious dogs a nuisance. Any dog which has been declared vicious by
the Animal Control Officer or by the Chief of Police shall be deemed
a nuisance and shall be regulated and controlled in accord with this
ordinance. This ordinance shall apply to any dog that enters the
territorial jurisdiction of the Town of New Canaan, regardless of the
residence of the dog or its owner or keeper.
C. Determination of viciousness.
(1) If the Animal Control Officer has reasonable cause to believe that
a dog is vicious, the Animal Control Officer shall conduct an
investigation into the conduct and propensities of the dog. The
Animal Control Officer may consider, without limitation:
provocation; the severity of attack or injury to a person, domestic
animal or pet; previous aggressive history of the dog; observable
behavior of the dog; the site and circumstances of the incident; and
statements from interested parties.
(2) The Animal Control Officer may declare a dog to be vicious if any
one of the following criteria is met:
(a) Any dog which has severely injured or killed a domestic animal
or pet while off its owner's or keeper's property;
(b) Any dog which bites, inflicts injury, assaults or otherwise attacks
a human being, another dog or domestic animal without
provocation on any public or private property;
(c) Any dog which has been used primarily or in part for the purpose
of dog fighting, or any dog trained for dog fighting.
(3) The Animal Control Officer shall not declare a dog to be vicious if
any of the following criteria is met:
(a) If any injury or damage is sustained by a person who, at the time
such injury or damage was sustained, was committing a willful
trespass or other tort upon premises occupied by the owner
or keeper of the dog, or such person was teasing, tormenting,
abusing or assaulting the dog or was committing or attempting
to commit a crime;
(b) If any injury or damage was sustained by a domestic animal
which, at the time such injury or damage was sustained, was
teasing, tormenting, assaulting or invading the premises
occupied by the owner or keeper of the dog;
(c) If the dog was protecting or defending the premises occupied by
the owner or keeper of the dog, or was protecting or defending
a human being within the immediate vicinity of the dog from an
attack or assault.
D. Regulation and control of vicious dogs. If the Animal Control Officer
determines a dog to be vicious, the Animal Control Officer may issue any
of the following orders for the disposition of the dog or for the controlled
retention of the dog and the protection of the public:
(1) Where a dog's history includes a bite upon a human, that the dog
be destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner, provided that
no destruction shall take place until after the appeal period expires,
unless the owner consents. In no case will a dog be destroyed
without prior notification to the owner. The owner or keeper of the
§ 6-9 NEW CANAAN CODE § 6-9
C:90
dog shall pay all costs and expenses necessitated by the seizure
of the dog, including such expenses as may be required for the
destruction of the dog;
(2) That the owner or keeper shall remove the dog permanently from
the owner's or keeper's premises and from any other location
within the Town of New Canaan in a specified time frame as
directed by the Animal Control Officer;
(3) That the vicious dog be licensed and registered according to the
laws of the Town of New Canaan and the State of Connecticut;
(4) That the owner or keeper shall present to the Animal Control
Officer proof that the owner or keeper has procured liability
insurance in the amount of at least $50,000 covering any damage
or injury which may be caused by such vicious dog, and produce
for the Animal Control Officer a copy of the policy declaration
document identifying the insurance policy and its terms. The
insurance policy must provide that notice of any cancellation,
termination or expiration of the liability insurance policy must be
sent to the Animal Control Officer. The owner or keeper shall
maintain and not voluntarily cancel the liability insurance unless
the owner or keeper shall cease to own or keep the vicious dog.
Cancellation of the insurance policy for failure to pay the insurance
premium shall be considered a voluntary cancellation, and a
violation of this subsection;
(5) That the owner or keeper shall, at his/her own expense, have
the licensing number assigned to such vicious dog tattooed or
electronically chipped upon such vicious dog by a licensed
veterinarian, in a location and manner acceptable to the Animal
Control Officer. The number shall be noted in the Animal Control
Officer's file for such vicious dog, if it is different from the licensing
number when the vicious dog is registered in subsequent years;
(6) That the owner or keeper shall display a sign on his/her property
warning that there is a vicious dog on the premises. Said sign
shall be visible and capable of being read from the street, road or
highway, whether public or private, which abuts said premises;
(7) That the owner or keeper of a vicious dog shall provide a certificate
to the Animal Control Officer from a licensed veterinarian that the
dog has been spayed or neutered, and that the owner or keeper of
said vicious dog shall be responsible for the cost of the spaying or
neutering;
(8) That the owner or keeper shall have an enclosure for the vicious
dog on the property where the vicious dog is primarily kept or
maintained. All vicious dogs shall be confined in an enclosure. It
shall be unlawful for any owner or keeper to maintain a vicious dog
upon any premises which does not have an enclosure;
(9) That the owner or keeper of a vicious dog shall not permit the dog
to be outside the enclosure unless the dog is safely secured within a
dog cage, vehicle or building, or unless the dog is securely muzzled
and restrained with a chain, leash or lead with a minimum tensile
strength of 300 pounds, not exceeding three feet in length, under
§ 6-9 CHARTER § 6-9
C:91
the direct control of a person capable of restraining the dog. The
muzzle shall be made in such a manner that will not cause injury to
the dog or interfere with its vision or respiration but shall prevent
it from biting a person or another animal;
(10) That the owner or keeper of a vicious dog shall notify the Animal
Control Officer or the Police Department immediately if a vicious
dog is at large, or on the loose, or has attacked a human being or
another animal, or has been sold or given away, in which case the
owner or keeper shall provide the Animal Control Officer with the
name, address, and telephone number of the new owner or keeper
of the vicious dog;
(11) That the owner or keeper comply with such other conditions and
requirements that the Animal Control Officer determines to be
reasonable for the restraint of the dog or the protection of the
public.
E. Decision and notice.
(1) If the Animal Control Officer determines a dog to be vicious, the
Animal Control Officer shall notify the dog owner or keeper of any
orders or special conditions for the regulation and control of the
dog. Initial notification may be provided verbally. Within five days
after declaring a dog vicious, the Animal Control Officer shall notify
the dog owner or keeper, in writing, of the determination and of
any orders of the Animal Control Officer regarding disposition of
the dog, or the special restrictions and conditions for keeping the
dog. Such written notice shall be given either by certified mail, or
by personal delivery through the Animal Control Officer or his/her
delegate.
(2) The Animal Control Officer may immediately impound the dog until
the orders, special restrictions or conditions are satisfied. The dog
owner or keeper shall pay all costs of impoundment. In the event
the owner or keeper of the dog refuses to surrender the dog for
impoundment, the Animal Control Officer or a police officer may
obtain a search warrant and seize the dog upon execution of the
warrant.
F. Appeals.
(1) This ordinance shall not limit or exclude any enforcement powers or
authority that the Animal Control Officer has under the Connecticut
General Statutes. If any orders of the Animal Control Officer are
issued and based upon a finding that the dog has bitten a human
being, then any appeal of such orders shall be taken pursuant to
Connecticut General Statutes Section 22-358, as the same may be
amended from time to time.
(2) If any orders of the Animal Control Officer are issued and based
upon a finding of viciousness not involving a bite upon a human
being, then the determination and orders of the Animal Control
Officer may be appealed to the Chief of Police (or Acting Chief in
the Chief's absence) by the owner or keeper of the dog within fifteen
days of receiving written notice of the determination and orders. The
determination and orders of the Animal Control Officer shall remain
§ 6-9 NEW CANAAN CODE § 6-9
C:92
in effect pending the appeal. The Chief of Police shall convene a
hearing for the purpose of determining, de novo, whether the dog
in question should be declared vicious. The Chief of Police shall
notify the owner or keeper of the dog that a hearing will be held,
at which time the owner or keeper may have the opportunity to
present evidence as to why the dog should not be declared vicious.
The hearing shall be held promptly, within no fewer than five nor
more than 10 days after service of notice upon the owner or keeper
of the dog. The Chief of Police shall conduct the hearing in the order
and form and with such methods of proof as the Chief deems fair and
appropriate. The rules regarding the admissibility of evidence shall
not be strictly applied, but all testimony shall be given under oath
or affirmation. The hearing shall be open to the public. The Chief
of Police shall consider the factors set forth above in Subsection C,
Determination of viciousness. If the Chief of Police determines the
dog to be vicious, the Chief of Police may issue any of the orders,
special restrictions or conditions allowed above in Subsection D,
Regulation and control of vicious dogs.
(3) Within five days after declaring a dog vicious, the Chief of Police
shall notify the dog owner or keeper, in writing, of the determination
and of any orders regarding disposition of the dog, or the special
restrictions and conditions for keeping the dog. Such written notice
shall be given either by certified mail, or by personal delivery
through the Chief of Police or his/her delegate.
G. Violations and penalties. Any person violating any order of the Animal
Control Officer or Chief of Police relating to any vicious dog shall be
fined $90 for each offense, or the maximum amount allowed for
infractions as set forth by the State of Connecticut Superior Court
infractions schedules, and, in addition, the Animal Control Officer may
immediately impound the vicious dog. The impounded vicious dog shall
not be released until the dog owner or keeper complies with all orders of
the Animal Control Officer or Chief of Police. The dog owner or keeper
shall pay all costs of impoundment. The penalties set forth herein shall
not be in lieu of or limit the authority of the Animal Control Officer to
take other action authorized by the Connecticut General Statutes.
H. Exceptions. The provisions of this ordinance shall not apply to dogs
utilized by law enforcement officers in the performance of their duties.
I. Severability. The provisions of this ordinance are declared to be
severable. If any portion, section, sentence, clause, or phrase of the
ordinance shall for any reason be held to be invalid or unconstitutional
by a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the
validity of the remaining portions, sections, sentences, clauses, and
phrases, but they shall remain in effect, it being the legislative intent
that this ordinance shall remain in effect notwithstanding the invalidity
of any part.
§ 6-10. Feeding waterfowl prohibited. [Added 5-20-2009, effective
6-12-2009]
§ 6-9 CHARTER § 6-10
C:93
A. No person shall feed or provide food for migratory or domestic waterfowl
such as ducks, geese, swans, etc., on any public land or waters within
the Town of New Canaan.
B. The provisions of this section may be enforced by infractions issued by
any police officer or Animal Control Officer. Any person violating this
section may be fined, for each offense, $90 or the maximum amount
allowed for infractions on the State of Connecticut Superior Court
infractions schedules.
Chapter 7
AUCTIONS
§ 7-1. Licensing requirements.
No person shall sell or expose for sale by auction any goods or articles,
except provisions, charcoal, wood, products of the farm and secondhand
household furniture, without a license therefor issued by the Town Clerk on
written application to the Clerk three days before the issuance thereof.
§ 7-2. Term of license and fee.
A license fee of $5 shall be paid to the Town Clerk upon the issuance of
any license under the provisions of § 7-1 of this code, and such fee shall
cover the conduct of any such auction for a period not exceeding three
consecutive days.
§ 7-3. Revocation.
Any license required by § 7-1 of this code may be revoked by the Board of
Selectmen if it shall be for the public interest so to do.
§ 7-4. License required for auction of jewelry, etc.
r of State Police to sell at auction jewelry and other articles enumerated in
Section 2329d of the General Statutes shall, before operating in this town
under such license, obtain from the Town Clerk a written license to conduct
such auction in the town.
§ 7-5. Auctions prohibited upon highways.
It shall be unlawful for any person to hold an auction or act as an auctioneer
of goods, wares or merchandise upon any highway of the town.
§ 6-10 NEW CANAAN CODE § 7-5
C:94
Chapter 7A
BLIGHT ABATEMENT AND PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building and demolition codes — See Ch. 9.
Citation hearing procedure — See Ch. 11.
Demolition — See Ch. 12A.
Garbage and refuse — See Ch. 25.
Housing Code — See Ch. 32.
Nuisances — See Ch. 37.
§ 7A-1. Authority and purpose.
A. This chapter is enacted pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes
§ 7-148(c)(7)(H)(xv) regarding housing blight.
B. This chapter is intended to protect, preserve and promote public health,
safety and welfare; to maintain and preserve the beauty of
neighborhoods; and to allow for the prevention, control and abatement
of blighted premises.
§ 7A-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words, terms and phrases
shall have the following meanings unless the context clearly indicates
otherwise. Where terms are not specifically defined in this chapter, they
shall have their ordinarily accepted meaning or such meaning as the context
shall imply.
BLIGHT PREVENTION OFFICER — A Town employee designated by the
First Selectman to carry out the duties specified in this chapter.
BLIGHT REVIEW BOARD — The Board described in § 7A-6 of this chapter.
BLIGHTED PREMISES —
Any residential building, structure, or parcel of land in which one or
more of the following conditions have existed for at least 30 days and
are visible from the first or second floor of an adjacent homeowner's
dwelling:
(1) Missing, broken or boarded-up windows or doors.
(2) Collapsing or dilapidated roof.
(3) Collapsing or dilapidated structure.
(4) Crumbling brick, concrete, or cinderblock walls.
Seriously damaged, missing or loose siding, gutters, leaders,
shingles or roofing.
(5)
(6) Significant fire or water damage.
A.
§ 7-5 CHARTER § 7A-2
C:95
CITATION HEARING OFFICER — An individual appointed by the First
Selectman to conduct citation hearings under this chapter.
DISABLED INDIVIDUAL — A person who has a disability as that term is
defined under the Americans With Disabilities Act of 1990, as amended.
ELDERLY INDIVIDUAL — A person who is 65 years of age or older.
LOW-INCOME INDIVIDUAL — A person whose household income is less
than 200% of the federal poverty level used for purposes of determining
Medicaid eligibility.
NAMED PARTY — With respect to residential property which may be a
blighted premises, the owner or owners and such tenants, agents, or other
persons in control of the premises that the Blight Prevention Officer
determines are appropriate to be included as a named party.
§ 7A-3. Prohibition.
No owner, tenant, agent, or other person in control of residential real estate
shall maintain, cause to be maintained, or allow any blighted premises.
§ 7A-4. Voluntary abatement.
The Blight Prevention Officer shall investigate conditions that come to his
attention that could lead a property to be considered a blighted premises.
In cases in which the Blight Prevention Officer determines that a probable
violation of § 7A-3 of this chapter may exist, he or she shall contact the
owner(s) and such tenants, agents or other persons in control as he or she
(7) Persistent and excessive amounts of garbage, trash or debris.
(8) Inoperable machinery.
(9) A structure substantially infested with rodents or other pests.
Overgrown brush, grass or weeds of at least one foot in height
covering a significant portion of the property's front yard, other
than (i) ornamental grass which is part of a landscaped area, and
(ii) areas identified as inland wetlands.
(10)
Trees, bushes or other vegetation that overhang and significantly
hinder the use of a street, sidewalk, or driveway.
(11)
One or more fallen trees, except those that have fallen (i) within the
past six months, or (ii) in an area in which trees and brush exist in
a natural, unlandscaped state.
(12)
(13)Extensive graffiti.
Notwithstanding the above, the following shall not be considered to
constitute a blight condition: (i) debris which is part of a construction
project subject to a valid building permit; (ii) a condition which is
subject to a pending insurance claim; (iii) material in a compost pile; or
(iv) firewood in a neatly stacked pile.
B.
§ 7A-2 NEW CANAAN CODE § 7A-4
C:96
deems appropriate. The Blight Prevention Officer shall attempt to achieve a
voluntary abatement of the conditions in question.
§ 7A-5. Access to premises.
The Blight Prevention Officer and other Town officials may enter property
during reasonable hours for the purpose of remediating blighted conditions.
This chapter does not authorize entry into a dwelling house or structure on
such property.
§ 7A-6. Blight Review Board.
A. Referral. If the Blight Prevention Officer determines that voluntary
abatement is unlikely to occur in a reasonable time, he or she shall refer
the matter to the Blight Review Board for a hearing.
B. Appointment and composition. The Blight Review Board shall consist of
five electors of the Town who are appointed by the Board of Selectmen
and shall serve without compensation. No more than three members
shall be registered in the same political party. The Board shall include at
least one member from each of the following:
(1) The Town Planning and Zoning Commission; and
(2) The Health and Human Services Department.
C. Terms of service. Members of the Blight Review Board shall serve a term
of three years. A member's term may be renewed at the discretion of the
Board of Selectmen.
§ 7A-7. Notice of hearing.
In the case of a matter referred to the Blight Review Board, the Blight
Prevention Officer shall prepare a written notice of hearing, which shall
include the following:
A. The location of the premises where the violation is alleged to occur.
B. A description of the probable violation and the conditions evidencing
such violation.
C. A statement that a hearing of the Blight Review Board will be held to
determine (i) whether a violation in fact exists, (ii) the actions to be taken
to abate such violation, and (iii) the date by which such violation shall be
fully abated.
D. All named parties who are served the notice are required to appear at
the hearing.
E. The location, time, and date, which shall not later than 30 days following
delivery of the notice of the hearing.
§ 7A-8. Service of notice.
A. Service of any notice required by this chapter shall be by one or both of
the following methods:
(1) By personal delivery to the named party; or
(2) By certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the named
party at his or her last known address.
B. In the case of the hearing described in § 7A-7 of this chapter, notice also
shall be made to adjacent neighbors.
§ 7A-4 CHARTER § 7A-9
C:97
§ 7A-9. Hearing.
The Blight Review Board shall hold a hearing under § 7A-6 of this chapter
within 30 calendar days of the date notice is served under § 7A-8 of this
chapter. All interested persons shall be given the opportunity to present
evidence on the question of whether a violation of this chapter has
occurred. If a named party fails to appear, the Blight Review Board may
nevertheless determine whether a violation has occurred, provided the
Board has determined that notice was properly served in accordance with
§ 7A-8 of this chapter.
§ 7A-10. Determination by Blight Review Board.
A. After a hearing under § 7A-9 of this chapter, the Blight Review Board
shall issue a written determination whether a violation exists. If the
Board determines that a violation exists, it shall include in its written
determination the actions to be taken to abate the violation and the date
by which such violation shall be fully abated.
B. In determining the date by which a violation shall be abated, the Blight
Review Board may grant additional time for good cause, which shall
include but not be limited to:
(1) An elderly individual who is unable to personally correct a violation
due to his or her age;
(2) A disabled individual who is unable to personally correct a violation
due to his or her disability; or
(3) A low-income individual who is unable to correct a violation due to
cost.
C. In determining whether good cause exists, the Blight Review Board shall
consider (a) whether the severity of the violation is such that additional
time is not warranted, and (b) whether other occupants of the premises
are able to assist in correcting the violation in a timely fashion.
§ 7A-11. Notice of violation.
Upon the determination of the Blight Review Board that a violation of this
chapter exists, the Blight Prevention Officer shall send a written notice of
violation to each named party. The notice shall state:
A. The violation;
B. The date by which the violation shall be remedied;
C. That the failure of a named party to remedy the violation within the
prescribed time shall result in the issuance of a citation in accordance
with § 7A-15 of this chapter;
D. The amount of the daily civil penalties and other fines imposed under
this chapter; and
E. That if the named party fails to remedy the violation, the Town may cause
remediation at the expense of the named party.
§ 7A-9 NEW CANAAN CODE § 7A-12
C:98
§ 7A-12. Extension.
Notwithstanding the provisions of § 7A-10 of this chapter, the Blight
Enforcement Officer may, at his or her discretion, grant to any named party
one thirty-day extension of the time to remediate the violation.
§ 7A-13. Penalties.
Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable by a civil
penalty not to exceed $100 for each day a violation exists and continues
beyond the date required for remediation set forth in the notice of violation
under § 7A-11 of this chapter. Violators will also be responsible for all costs
and expenses associated with enforcement and the collection of any civil
penalties, which shall include, but shall not be limited to, attorney fees,
court costs, mailing costs and filing fees.
§ 7A-14. Issuance of citation.
A. The Blight Enforcement Officer shall issue to all named parties a citation
when a violation of this chapter continues beyond the date by which the
Blight Review Board required that the violation be abated. The citation
shall state:
(1) A description of the violation.
(2) The amount of the daily penalties that shall be levied from the date
of the citation, plus such other fines, penalties, costs and/or fees due.
(3) That the uncontested payment of such penalties and other amounts
shall be made within 10 business days of the date of the citation.
(4) That the named party may contest his liability before a Citation
Hearing Officer by delivering, in person or by mail, within 10
business days of the date of the citation, a written demand for a
hearing.
(5) That if the named party does not demand a hearing, an assessment
and judgment shall be entered against the named party and that
such judgment may issue without further notice.
(6) That the Town shall file a lien against the real estate in accordance
with Connecticut General Statutes § 7-148aa for the amount of any
unpaid civil penalties or other fines, costs or fees imposed by the
Town in accordance with this chapter.
B. Delivery of the citation shall be made in the manner described in § 7A-8.
A copy of the citation shall simultaneously be sent to each lienholder of
the subject property.
§ 7A-15. Citation hearing procedure.
A. A named party who chooses to appeal a citation and requests a hearing
shall be given written notice of the date, time and place of the hearing.
Such hearing shall be held not less than 15 calendar days and not
more than 30 calendar days from the date the notice is sent, provided
that the Citation Hearing Officer shall grant, upon good cause shown,
any reasonable request by an interested party for postponement or
continuance. An orginal or certified copy of the citation shall be filed
with and retained by the Town and shall be deemed to be a business
§ 7A-12 CHARTER § 7A-15
C:99
record within the scope of C.G.S. § 52-180 and evidence of the facts
contained therein. Upon request of the person appealing the citation,
the Blight Prevention Officer shall be required at the hearing. A named
party wishing to contest liability shall appear at the hearing and may
present evidence on his or her behalf. If any named party who received
the citation fails to appear, the Citation Hearing Officer may enter an
assessment by default against him or her upon a finding of proper
notice. The Citation Hearing Officer may accept copies of any relevant
investigatory and citation reports and any other official documents by
mail and may determine thereby that the appearance of a named party
is unnecessary.
B. The Citation Hearing Officer shall conduct the hearing in the order
and form, and with such methods of proof, as he or she deems fair
and appropriate. Rules regarding the admissibility of evidence shall
not be strictly applied, but all testimony shall be given under oath
or affirmation. The Citation Hearing Officer shall announce his or her
decision at the end of the hearing. If the Citation Hearing Officer
determines that the named party is not liable, the Citation Hearing
Officer shall dismiss the matter and enter that determination in writing
accordingly. If the Citation Hearing Officer determines that the named
party is liable for the violation, he or she shall enter and assess the civil
penalties, fines, costs and fees as provided by this chapter.
C. If the Citation Hearing Officer's assessment is not paid on the date
of entry, the Citation Hearing Officer shall send by first-class mail a
notice of assessment to the named party found liable and shall file,
not less than 30 calendar days nor more than 12 months after such
mailing, a certified copy of the notice of assessment with the clerk of the
applicable superior court facility, together with the applicable filing fee.
Such certified copy shall constitute a record of assessment. Within such
twelve-month period, assessment against the same named party may be
accrued and filed as one record of assessment. The Citation Hearing
Officer's assessment shall have the effect of a civil money judgment, and
a levy of execution of such judgment may issue without further notice to
the named party.
D. A named party against whom an assessment has been entered pursuant
to this chapter is entitled to judicial review by way of appeal in
accordance with C.G.S. § 7-152c(g).
§ 7A-16. Recording of lien.
Any unpaid civil penalty or other fine imposed under this chapter, and any
and all costs and expenses incurred by the Town for the enforcement of this
chapter, shall constitute a lien upon the real estate against which the civil
penalty or other fine was imposed from the date of such civil penalty or fine.
§ 7A-17. Remediation by Town.
If the Citation Hearing Officer determines that a named party is liable for
the violation, the Town may cause or take such action as is necessary to
§ 7A-15 NEW CANAAN CODE § 7A-17
C:100
correct the violation. All costs and expenses of such corrective action shall
be a lien upon the real estate.
§ 7A-18. Coordination.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to prevent the
enforcement of other statutes, codes, ordinances or regulations which
prescribe standards other than are provided in this ordinance.
B. In any case where a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict
with a provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety or health ordinance,
regulation or other code of the Town or state, the provision which
establishes the higher standard for the promotion and protection of the
health and safety, and property values of the people shall prevail.
C. This chapter shall not affect violations of any other ordinance, code or
regulation existing prior to the most recent amendment of this chapter,
and any such violations may be governed and continue to be punishable
under the provisions of those ordinances, codes, or regulations in effect
at the time the violation was committed.
Chapter 8
BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building and demolition codes — See Ch. 9.
Citation hearing procedure — See Ch. 11.
Housing code — See Ch. 32.
§ 8-1. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to help protect public safety and welfare
by providing an effective and easily recognizable system for the posting of
street numbers to permit the rapid location of any building by emergency
vehicles, such as, but not limited to, police, fire and ambulance services.
§ 8-2. Definitions; standards.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUILDING — An apartment, condominium building or condominium unit,
single-family dwelling, multifamily dwelling, commercial establishment,
government building and any other building or structure which may be
occupied at any time by any person or persons.
BUILDING UNIT NUMBER — Is applied as follows: a number of no less
than 2 1/2 inches in height, placed on each building unit, which number is
visible from the street. In the case of a building which is served by its own
driveway, and where the building is more than 50 feet from said street or
is otherwise not clearly visible from the street, the owner shall, instead,
§ 7A-17 CHARTER § 8-2
C:101
display a number on a mailbox or fence or a post located at the side of the
driveway entrance or sidewalk so as to make said number easily visible from
the street. When a post is used, the building number shall be no less than
two feet off the ground. When a mailbox is on the curbline of said property,
as numbered in accordance herewith, the building number shall be placed
on both sides of the box and shall have numbers at least 2 1/2 inches
high. In those instances where the intersection of adjacent property lines
precludes the posting of a building number at the entrance to a building
owner's driveway, the building owner shall post the number at the side of
his/her driveway, as close to the entrance as property rights permit.
CONDOMINIUM COMPLEX NUMBERING — Shall be handled in a similar
fashion to private roads. In this case, a sign at least two feet off the ground
shall be placed at the entrance to the condominium complex, displaying
in numbers at least 21/2 inches high the highest and lowest of the
condominium units in said complex. Other required numbering of individual
condominium units shall be done in accordance with the definition of
"building unit number" of this chapter.
SHARED-DRIVEWAY NUMBERING — Those building unit numbers which
apply to all building units, located on or accessed by a shared driveway/
accessway or unnamed/unidentified private road. In such cases, at the
building owners' expense, a sign at least two feet off the ground shall be
placed at the driveway entrance, containing numbers at least 21/2 inches
high of the lowest and highest building units on said shared driveway or
private road. In addition, individual building number signposts shall be
placed at the intersections of the common driveway and individual building
driveways, indicating the location and identity of each building. Other
required numbering of individual building units shall be done in accordance
with the definition of "building unit number" of this chapter.
§ 8-3. Duties of owner.
Requirements. It shall be the duty of the owner of any given building unit
to ascertain the proper building unit number from the Town of New Canaan
(Department of Public Works) and to display same as indicated and defined
in § 8-2 above.
§ 8-4. Enforcement.
It shall be the responsibility of the Chief of Police, or his departmental
designee, to enforce the provisions of this section through the issuance
of citations. The Fire Marshal, or his departmental designee, also has the
authority to issue citations.
§ 8-5. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, firm or corporation who violates the provisions of this chapter
shall be subject to a fine for each violation that is in accord with the
schedule of fines established by the Board of Selectmen. Each building
unit without number(s), and each day without number(s), following a grace
§ 8-2 NEW CANAAN CODE § 8-5
C:102
period of 14 days from the day on which the building owner shall have been
informed of the violation by registered/certified mail, shall be considered a
separate violation.
§ 8-6. Hearing.
Any person seeking to contest a citation may request a hearing, pursuant to
Chapter 11, Citation Hearing Procedure.
Chapter 9
BUILDING AND DEMOLITION CODES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Subdivision and street regulations — See Ch.
55.
Zoning Regulations — See Ch. 60.
§ 9-1. Adoption of standards.
The State of Connecticut Building Code of 1971 with amendments, effective
April 19, 1974, and with subsequent amendments thereto made to and
including December 31, 1976, as provided for in Chapter 354 of the General
Statutes of Connecticut,6 Revision of 1958, revised to January 1, 1977, shall
be effective in the Town of New Canaan, and the State Demolition Code
prescribed under Chapter 354a of the General Statutes of Connecticut,
Revision of 1958, revised to January 1, 1977, shall also be effective in
the Town of New Canaan.7 Any amendments to the State of Connecticut
Building Code made after December 31, 1976, by the State Building Code
Standards Committee and the State Building Inspector shall not be effective
in the Town of New Canaan until the Chief Building Official of New Canaan
has received copies thereof duly certified by the State Building Inspector,
and any amendments to the State Demolition Code made by the State
Commission on Demolition after December 31, 1976, shall not be effective
in the Town of New Canaan until the Chief Building Official of New Canaan
has received from the State Commission on Demolition copies thereof duly
certified.
§ 9-2. Enforcement officials.
The Board of Selectmen shall appoint a Chief Building Official to administer
the State of Connecticut Building Code, such Chief Building Official to be
duly certified in accordance with the provisions of § 19-397 of the General
Statutes of Connecticut,8 Revision of 1958, as now or hereafter amended,
6. Editor's Note: For the State Building Code, see § 29-251 et seq. of the Connecticut General
Statutes.
7. Editor's Note: See § 29-401 et seq. for the State Demolition Code.
8. Editor's Note: See now Connecticut General Statutes, § 29-261.
§ 8-5 CHARTER § 9-2
C:103
who shall hold office until November 15, 1977, and, commencing on
November 15, 1977, the Board of Selectmen shall appoint a Chief Building
Official, who shall hold office for term of four years and until a successor
shall have qualified; and, quadrennially thereafter, the Board of Selectmen
shall so appoint a successor. The Chief Building Official shall be the officer
who shall administer the State Demolition Code. The Board of Selectmen
may appoint Assistant Building Officials, who shall be certified under
§ 19-397 as aforesaid, whose terms of office shall be coincidental with that
of the Chief Building Official and who shall be responsible to the Chief
Building Official.
§ 9-3. Local rules and regulations.
The Chief Building Official may promulgate rules for the operation of his
department within the limitations set forth in the State of Connecticut
Building Code and is empowered to render interpretations of the meaning
and the intent of the provisions of said code.
§ 9-4. Board of Building Appeals.
There shall be a Board of Building Appeals consisting of five members, all
of whom shall meet the qualifications set forth in the State of Connecticut
Building Code. The said Board shall be appointed by the Board of
Selectmen, the terms of office to be in accordance with the State of
Connecticut Building Code.
§ 9-5. Fees.
A. In accordance with the provisions of the State of Connecticut Building
Code as now or hereafter amended, the following fees shall be paid
to the Building Department when work is done requiring a permit:
[Amended 6-6-1989, effective 7-1-1989; 3-21-2001, effective
5-1-2001; 6-7-2005, effective 7-1-2005; 7-12-2005, effective
8-15-2005]
(1) For all construction, $50 per first $1,000 of project value and $10 per
additional $1,000 of project value or part thereof.
(2) For trade permits for electrical, plumbing, heating, ventilation and
cooling work, when the Chief Building Official shall find that no
building permit is required, the same rates as prescribed above for
building permits shall pertain.
(3) Reinspection fee of $25.
(4) Additional fee of $200 for work done without a permit.
B. If the Chief Building Official shall determine, at the time of the
completion of the work for which a building permit was applied for or
was issued, that the additional cost of the completed work was more than
the estimated cost, an additional fee shall be charged and collected from
the owner of the premises at the rate prescribed, and, in the event that
a certificate of occupancy is required, it shall not be issued until such
additional fee is collected.
§ 9-2 NEW CANAAN CODE § 9-6
C:104
§ 9-6. Temporary structures for builders.
Field offices, toolhouses and builders' shanties erected or placed on the site
as an aid in the construction of a building shall be immediately removed
upon the completion of the building and prior to the issuance of a certificate
of occupancy.
§ 9-7. Space heaters.
No person shall use or allow to be used a space heater in any building used
in whole or in part as a place of human habitation. As used in this section,
"space heater" means a heating appliance, with or without flue connection,
which uses kerosene, range oil or similar petroleum fuel and is utilized
principally for the heating of the space in and adjacent to that in which
such appliance is located. Said term includes any room heater known also
as a parlor heater or cabinet heater, oil stove, portable kerosene heater
and any similar oil-burning heater. Said term further includes any heating
appliance which uses gas and which does not provide suitable fresh-air
intakes. All other types of heating, cooling and ventilating equipment shall
be in accordance with provisions of the State of Connecticut Building Code
pertaining to same.
§ 9-8. Carbon monoxide detectors and generators. [Added
10-20-2010,9 effective 11-5-2010]
A. Purpose and scope. This section is enacted under the authority of
Connecticut General Statutes § 7-148 for the purpose of protecting the
health and safety of New Canaan residents and visitors by requiring the
installation of carbon monoxide detectors in certain projects requiring
a Building Department permit and by requiring safe distances between
generators and residences. The requirements of this section shall be
triggered by:
(1) All new residential construction for which a building permit is
required;
(2) All residential alterations or additions for which a building permit is
required;
(3) Installation or replacement of any fuel-burning appliance, including,
without limitation, oil or gas burners, boilers, or furnaces, for which
any Building Department permit is required;
(4) The outdoor installation of any fuel-burning generator for which any
Building Department permit is required.
B. Carbon monoxide detectors required. In all projects triggered by the
provisions of Subsection A(1), (2), and (3), above, the property owner
shall install carbon monoxide (CO) detectors in accordance with the
following minimum provisions:
(1) At least one CO detector shall be installed in the immediate vicinity
of each sleeping room.
(2) At least one CO detector shall be installed on each level of the
building, including finished or unfinished basements or cellars.
9. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former § 9-8, Fire limits.
§ 9-6 CHARTER § 9-8
C:105
(3) A minimum of one CO detector shall be installed per 3,000 square
feet (or portion thereof) of habitable space, and the CO detectors
shall be remote from one another. Remoteness shall be defined as 1/
2 of the diagonal cross section of the story in which the CO detector
is installed.
(4) In new construction, CO detectors must receive power from the
primary building power supply and have a battery backup in case
the primary power supply is interrupted and must be hard-wired and
interconnected in such a manner that the activation of one alarm will
activate all of the CO alarms in the dwelling unit.
(5) In the case of any residential alterations or additions for which a
building permit is required, and also in the case of any installation
or replacement of any fuel-burning appliance, including, without
limitation, oil or gas burners, boilers, or furnaces, for which any
Building Department permit is required, CO detectors shall be
installed throughout the dwelling unit as required above for new
construction, but portions of the dwelling unit not affected by
construction shall be permitted to be individual CO detectors
powered by battery alone and without interconnection. When, in
the course of renovations, additions or alterations, the necessary
sheetrock has been removed to facilitate interconnection, CO
detectors shall be interconnected and hard-wired.
(6) In all cases, the CO detectors shall be installed in strict compliance
with the manufacturer's installation instructions as well as the
Connecticut State Building Code.
(7) All CO detectors must provide some form of visual or audible signal
and must have been UL (Underwriters Laboratories, Inc.) listed. A
CO detector is deemed approved for this section if it bears the label
of a nationally recognized standard testing laboratory and meets
the revised standards of at least ANSI/UL 2034, Single and Multiple
Station Carbon Monoxide Alarms, or ANSI/UL 2075, Gas and Vapor
Detectors and Sensors, and subsequent revision or its equivalent.
The CO detector may be a combination smoke/gas/CO device.
C. Generator location. In the case of any installation of any fuel-burning
generator for which any Building Department permit is required, the
property owner shall locate the generator at least five feet from any
building (or portion thereof) containing residential habitable space and
at least 10 feet from any building opening.
D. Enforcement and penalties. The Building Official is authorized to enforce
the provisions of this section by withholding building permits,
certificates of occupancy, and certificates of compliance and by issuing
municipal citations up to $250 per day or the maximum allowed by
Connecticut General Statutes § 7-148. The issuance, payment, and
procedure to contest a citation shall be in accordance with Connecticut
General Statutes § 7-152c and the citation hearing procedure in Chapter
11 of the Code of the Town of New Canaan. The provisions of this
section are in addition to, and not in lieu of, any other remedies available
to the Town of New Canaan under the Connecticut General Statutes,
Connecticut State Building Code, Fire Code, Public Health Code, Zoning
§ 9-8 NEW CANAAN CODE § 9-8
C:106
Regulations, other sections of the Town Code, or the common law. The
issuance of citations under this section shall not preclude the exercise of
such other remedies or an action at law or equity.
§ 9-9. Floodplain management.
A. In accordance with the requirements of Section 1910.3(d) of the
National Flood Insurance Program Regulations, all building construction
undertaken in the Town of New Canaan for which a building permit
is issued subsequent to the effective date of this ordinance and which
is located in a designated floodplain (as delineated on Flood Insurance
Rate Maps) shall comply with the federal regulations pertaining to
floodplain management in such a manner as to ensure that all structures,
including their utilities and drainage, are located and designed so as to
prevent or minimize flood damage, as follows:
(1) The lowest floor, including basement, of new residential structures
and additions to existing residential structures shall be elevated to
or above the height of the one-hundred-year-flood level.
(2) The lowest floor, including basement, of new nonresidential
structures and additions to existing nonresidential structures shall
be elevated to or above the recorded height of the one-hundredyear-
flood level or be floodproofed, watertight and designed and
so certified by a registered professional engineer or architect to
withstand hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads below the height of
the one-hundred-year-flood level.
(3) The sills of all structures henceforth erected within a designated
floodplain shall be bolted to their foundations so as to prevent
flotation and lateral movement.
(4) Private water supplies and sewage disposal systems shall be located
and designed to avoid contamination or impairment of operation by
flooding.
(5) No encroachment shall be made in the floodway (as portrayed in
the Flood Insurance Rate Map) which would restrict the passage
of floodwaters and cause an increase above the one-hundred-yearflood
level. This prohibition applies but is not limited to filling and
regrading, as well as to new construction.
B. Applicable federal regulations shall take precedence over all conflicting
laws and ordinances.
§ 9-10. Unaccepted streets or unapproved subdivisions.
A. No building permits or occupancy permits shall be issued by the Chief
Building Official except for a building or structure on a lot which:
(1) Abuts on an easement or right-of-way laid out prior to February 11,
1946.
(2) Abuts on an easement or right-of-way laid out subsequent to
February 11, 1946, and prior to January 1, 1956, in accordance with
the then existing Subdivision Regulations or Zoning Regulations.
(3) Abuts on an accepted public road.
§ 9-8 CHARTER § 9-10
C:107
(4) Abuts on a private road not less than 50 feet in width which was laid
out prior to December 1, 1952, in accordance with the then existing
Subdivision Regulations or Zoning Regulations.
(5) Abuts on a road not less than 50 feet in width laid out subsequent
to December 1, 1952, or abuts on an accessway leading therefrom
laid out subsequent to January 1, 1956, in conformance with the
Subdivision Regulations or Zoning Regulations in effect when the
same was laid out, provided that the Town Engineer has advised
the Chief Building Official, in writing, that such road or accessway
has been sufficiently completed in accordance with the following
provisions:
(a) Installation of the traveled way and solid graded earth shoulders
to the width specified in the Town Subdivision Regulations.10
(b) Installation under the traveled way of the graveled base as
required by the Town Subdivision Regulations.
(c) Installation of all bridges, culverts, headwalls, drainage ditches,
stormwater drains and drainage appurtenances as specified in
the subdivision plan approved by the Town Planning and Zoning
Commission.
B. Any building or structure erected in a subdivision and for which no
building permit was issued shall be deemed an unapproved structure,
and the Chief Building Official may bring action to enjoin the erection of
such building or structure or cause it to be removed or to cause to be
vacated any such building or structure.
§ 9-11. Exceptions.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall prevent the issuance of a building
permit for the construction of farm or accessory buildings which are not in
violation of any zoning or building regulation of the Town.
Chapter 10
APPROVAL OF IMPROVEMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Charter
Building and demolition codes — See Ch. 9.
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 51.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 54.
Subdivision and street regulations — See Ch.
55.
§ 10-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to further implement the powers and execute
the responsibilities of the Town of New Canaan under the Connecticut
10.Editor's Note: See Ch. 55, Subdivision and Street Regulations.
§ 9-10 NEW CANAAN CODE § 10-1
C:108
General Statutes and under its Charter, particularly, but without limitation,
Charter § C1-3(9) relating to the regulation of the design, construction and
use of buildings within the town.
§ 10-2. Approval of improvements.
A. No improvement shall be constructed on any real property of which the
town is the record owner, nor shall any improvement whatsoever be
constructed by authority of any board or agency, the capital or operating
budget of which is contained in appropriations which must be approved
by the Town Council, unless the Town Council shall have first approved
the construction of such improvement. Approval by the Town Council
of an appropriation for the construction of an improvement shall be
deemed to satisfy the requirements of this chapter.
B. Owners of private property, within one hundred feet of any municipal
property on which such an improvement is proposed to be constructed,
shall be given prior written notice of the proposed improvement and
the date that such matter will be heard by the Town Council, which
notice shall be mailed at least 10 days prior to the Town Council hearing.
[Added 2-10-1999, effective 1-1-2000]
§ 10-3. Conditions.
Approval by the Town Council as contemplated by this chapter shall be
subject to such conditions as the Town Council may impose. Without
limitation, such conditions may include:
A. The approval of such town boards or commissions as may be specified.
B. The submission of a satisfactory plan for financing the maintenance and
preservation of the proposed improvement.
§ 10-4. Saving clause.
If any portion of this ordinance shall be invalidated as contrary to law, the
remaining portion shall remain in force.
§ 10-5. Effectiveness.
This ordinance shall become effective upon adoption in accordance with
Town Charter.
Chapter 10A
CARRYOUT BAGS
§ 10A-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to preserve and protect the environment
and encourage the use of reusable carryout bags by reducing the use of
carryout bags made of plastic and limiting the use of carryout bags made of
nonrecyclable paper.
§ 10-1 CHARTER § 10A-2
C:109
§ 10A-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CARRYOUT BAG — A bag of any material, commonly plastic, or kraft paper,
that is provided to a consumer at the point of sale to carry purchases out of
the establishment. The term shall not include:
RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT — Any person, corporation, partnership,
business, or other organization or group, however organized, that transfers
merchandise, goods, or materials, including, without limitation, clothing,
food, or personal items of any kind, directly to a consumer in exchange
for payment. The term includes, by way of example and not limitation, any
grocery store, grocery delivery service, department store, clothing store,
hardware store, hospital, pharmacy, liquor store, restaurant, delicatessen,
convenience store, food truck, sidewalk vendor, farmers' market, flea
market, and any other retail store or vendor. The term shall not include the
sale of goods at yard sales, tag sales, or other sales by residents at their
home.
REUSABLE CARRYOUT BAG — A bag with handles that is specifically
designed and manufactured for multiple reuse that:
Bags used by consumers inside a retail establishment to:
Package bulk items, such as fruit, vegetables, nuts, grains, candy,
or small hardware items;
(1)
Contain or wrap frozen foods, meat, or fish, whether prepackaged
or not;
(2)
Contain or wrap flowers, potted plants, or other items where
dampness may be a problem;
(3)
Segregate food or merchandise that could damage or contaminate
other food or merchandise when placed together in a bag; or
(4)
(5) Contain unwrapped prepared foods or bakery goods.
A.
Newspaper bags, door-hanger bags, or laundry/dry cleaning or garment
bags.
B.
Bags sold in packages containing multiple bags intended for use as
garbage, pet waste, or yard waste bags.
C.
Bags of any type that customers bring to a retail establishment for their
own use.
D.
Is made of (a) cloth, fiber, or other machine washable fabric, (b)
laminated material, or (c) durable plastic that is at least 6.0 mils
(thousandths of an inch) thick; and
A.
§ 10A-2 NEW CANAAN CODE § 10A-2
C:110
§ 10A-3. Restrictions on carryout bags.
A. No retail establishment in the Town of New Canaan shall sell, provide,
or distribute carryout bags made of plastic, other than reusable carryout
bags.
B. No retail establishment in the Town of New Canaan with more than
10,000 square feet of retail space shall sell, provide, or distribute
carryout bags made of paper unless such bags either:
(1) Have a capacity of less than 600 cubic inches; or
(2) Are 100% recyclable, contain a minimum of 40% post-consumer
recycled content, and conspicuously display the phrase "Reusable
and Recyclable," and the percentage of post-consumer recycled
content, on the outside of the bag.
§ 10A-4. Charges for carryout bags.
A. Any retail establishment in the Town of New Canaan with more than
10,000 square feet of retail space that elects to provide carryout bags
made of paper consistent with § 10A-3B(2) of this chapter shall charge
the consumer $0.10 at the point of purchase for each such bag. Such
charge shall be subject to applicable sales tax.
B. The charge imposed by a retail establishment as provided in Subsection
A of this section shall be retained solely by the retail establishment.
C. All retail establishments subject to Subsection A shall post a sign at or
near each point of purchase that reads substantially as follows: "Each
paper carryout bag provided by this store to a consumer shall be subject
to a fee of $0.10."
D. All retail establishments shall indicate on the consumer transaction
receipt the number of carryout bags subject to a fee and the total
amount of charge imposed.
E. No retail establishment shall rebate or otherwise reimburse a customer
for any portion of the charge provided in Subsection A of this section.
F. Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a retail establishment from
providing reusable carryout bags for no or nominal cost or encouraging
and providing incentives for the use of reusable carryout bags, including
credits or rebates for customers that bring their own reusable carryout
bags for the purpose of carrying purchases out of the retail
establishment.
G. Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a consumer from using bags or
containers of any type that they bring to a retail establishment, so long
as they are clean and sanitary, or from carrying away goods that are not
placed in bags.
H. It shall be presumed that all paper carryout bags sold or used by a retail
establishment are subject to the charge provided in Subsection A of this
section until the contrary is established. The burden of proving that such
carryout bags are not subject to the charge hereunder shall be upon the
retail establishment so claiming.
Does not contain lead, cadmium, or any other toxic material, as defined
by applicable state and federal standards and regulations for packaging
or reusable bags.
B.
§ 10A-2 CHARTER § 10A-5
C:111
§ 10A-5. Exceptions.
A. The charge reflected in § 10A-4 of this chapter shall not apply to the
extent it would violate the laws of the United States or the State of
Connecticut.
B. The charge reflected in § 10A-4 of this chapter shall not apply to the use
of carryout bags to carry items purchased pursuant to the Supplemental
Nutritional Assistance Program (SNAP), the Special Supplemental
Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children (WIC), or a similar
governmental food assistance program.
§ 10A-6. Enforcement and penalties for violation.
A. This chapter shall be enforced by the Director of Health or her designee.
B. Upon determination that a violation has occurred, the retail
establishment shall be liable for the following:
(1) Upon the initial violation, written warning notice that a violation has
occurred shall be issued to the retail establishment. No penalty shall
be imposed for the initial violation;
(2) For the second violation, a penalty of $150; and
(3) For the third and each subsequent violation, a penalty of $250.
C. No more than one penalty shall be imposed upon a retail establishment
for any twenty-four-hour period.
§ 10A-7. Severability.
If any section, clause, sentence or provision of this chapter shall be
adjudged by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid or
unenforceable, such adjudication shall not affect the validity or
enforceability of any other provision hereof, and the applicability thereof to
other persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby.
§ 10A-8. Effective date.
This chapter shall become effective six months following its adoption by
the Town Council in order to allow retail establishments time to dispose
of their existing inventory of carryout bags made of plastic and convert to
alternative packaging materials compliant with this chapter.
Chapter 11
CITATION HEARING PROCEDURE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Numbering of building — See Ch. 8. Inland wetlands and watercourses — See Ch.
33A.
§ 10A-5 NEW CANAAN CODE § 11-1
C:112
§ 11-1. Statutory authority; purpose.
In accordance with Section 7-152c of the Connecticut General Statutes, as
the same may be amended from time to time, there is hereby established
a citation hearing procedure, for use in contesting citations issued in
accordance with town ordinances where such hearing procedures apply.
§ 11-2. Appointment of hearing officers.
The First Selectman shall appoint one or more citation hearing officers,
other than police officers or Town of New Canaan employees or persons who
issue citations, to conduct the hearings authorized by this chapter.
§ 11-3. Admission of liability by payment of fine.
A. If any person who is sent notice pursuant to a town ordinance wishes to
admit liability for any alleged violation, he/she may, without requesting a
hearing, pay the full amount of the fine admitted to, in person or by mail
to the Town of New Canaan. Checks should be payable to the Treasurer
of the Town of New Canaan.
B. Such payment shall be inadmissible in any proceeding, civil or criminal,
to establish the conduct of such person or other person making the
payment.
§ 11-4. Failure to request hearing.
Any person who does not deliver or mail written demand for a hearing
within 30 days of the notice provided for in the subject town ordinance shall
be deemed to have admitted liability, and the person issuing the citation
shall certify such person's failure to respond to the hearing officer. The
hearing officer shall thereupon enter and assess the fine provided for by the
subject ordinance, and shall follow the procedures set forth in § 11-8 of this
chapter.
§ 11-5. Notice of hearing.
Any person who requests a hearing shall be given written notice by certified
mail of the date, time and place for the hearing. Such hearing shall be held
not less than 15 days nor more than 30 days from the date of the mailing
of notice, provided that the hearing officer shall grant postponement or
continuance for any reasonable request by any interested party for good
cause shown.
§ 11-6. Filing of initial citation.
An original or certified copy of the initial citation issued by the issuing
official shall be filed and retained by the Town of New Canaan and shall be
deemed to be a business record within the scope of Section 52-180 of the
Connecticut General Statutes and evidence of the facts contained therein.
§ 11-7. Conduct of hearing.
§ 11-1 CHARTER § 11-7
C:113
A. The presence of the issuing official shall be required at the hearing. A
person wishing to contest his/her liability shall appear at the hearing and
may present evidence in his/her behalf.
B. A designated municipal official, other than the hearing officer, may
present evidence on behalf of the municipality.
C. If the person that demanded a hearing fails to appear, the hearing officer
may enter an assessment by default against him/her upon finding of
proper notice and liability under this chapter.
D. The hearing officer may accept from such person copies of investigatory
and citation reports and other official documents by mail and may
determine thereby that the appearance of such person is not necessary.
E. The hearing officer shall conduct the hearing in the order and form and
with such methods of proof as he/she deems fair and appropriate. The
rules regarding the admissibility of evidence shall not be strictly applied,
but all testimony shall be given under oath or affirmation.
F. The hearing officer shall announce his/her decision at the end of the
hearing. If the hearing officer determines that the person is not liable,
he/she shall dismiss the matter and enter his/her determination in
writing accordingly. If the hearing officer determines that the person
is liable for the violation, the hearing officer shall forthwith enter and
assess the fines, penalties, costs or fees against such person as provided
by this chapter.
§ 11-8. Notice of assessment.
If such assessment is not paid on the date of entry, the hearing officer shall
send, by first class mail, a notice of the assessment to the person found
liable and shall file, not less than 30 days nor more than 12 months after
such mailing, a certified copy of the notice of assessment with the clerk
of the Superior Court facility designated by the Chief Court Administrator,
together with the statutory entry fee. Within such twelve-month period,
assessments against the same person may be accrued and filed as one
record of assessment. Notwithstanding any other provisions of the
Connecticut General Statutes, the hearing officer's assessment, when so
entered as a judgment, shall have the effect of a civil money judgment and
a levy of execution on such judgment way be issued without further notice
to such person.
§ 11-9. Appeals.
A person against whom an assessment has been entered pursuant to this
chapter is entitled to judicial review by way of appeal. An appeal shall
be instituted within 30 days of the mailing of notice of such assessment
by filing a petition to reopen assessment, together with an entry fee in
an amount equal to the entry fee for a small claims case pursuant to
Connecticut General Statutes Section 52-259, in the Superior Court, which
shall entitle such person to a hearing in accordance with the rules of the
judges of the Superior Court.
Chapter 11A
§ 11-7 NEW CANAAN CODE § 11-9
C:114
CONSERVATION COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Environmental Commission — See Ch. 16.
Code of Ethics — See Ch. 17.
Inland wetlands and watercourses — See Ch.
33A
Planning and Zoning Commission — See Ch.
40.
Zoning — See Ch. 60.
§ 11A-1. Composition; compensation; qualification of members.
There shall be a Conservation Commission of five members who shall be
electors of the Town. The members shall serve without compensation and
shall hold no other office of trust or emolument in the Town government.
Service on committees of the Town government is not prohibited by this
section, provided that such service does not create a conflict of interest
as defined in the Town's Code of Ethics.11 There shall be minority
representation on the Commission in accordance with Section 9-167a of the
Connecticut General Statutes.
§ 11A-2. Appointment; terms of office.
Within 30 days after this ordinance shall become effective, the Board of
Selectmen shall appoint the members of the Commission. The initial term
of two members shall be from the date of appointment to the first day of
December 2008, and the initial term of three members shall be from the
date of appointment to the first day of December 2009. On or promptly
after the first day of December in even-numbered years, the Selectmen shall
appoint two members of the Commission, who, after qualification, shall hold
office for a term of two years from the first day of December and until their
successors have been appointed and shall have qualified. On or promptly
after the first day of December in odd-numbered years, the Selectmen shall
appoint three members of the Commission, who, after qualification, shall
hold office for a term of two years from the first day of December and until
their successors have been appointed and shall have qualified.
§ 11A-3. Organization; official records and quorum.
On or promptly after the first day of December, the Commission shall meet
at the call of the First Selectman to choose one of its members to be
Chairman and one to be Secretary. The Chairman shall, when present,
preside at all meetings of the Commission, and shall vote as a member
thereof. The Secretary shall file in the office of the Town Clerk a full and
detailed record of all proceedings, acts, and resolutions of the Commission,
including the votes of each member on all actions taken, and such record
11.Editor's Note: See Ch. 17, Ethics, Code of.
§ 11-9 CHARTER § 11A-3
C:115
shall be a public record. Three members shall constitute a quorum, and the
concurrence of two votes shall be necessary for the transaction of business.
§ 11A-4. Powers and duties.
The Commission shall have all of the powers, duties and responsibilities
vested in Conservation Commissions under Section 7-131a of the
Connecticut General Statutes, as now or hereafter amended. Without
limitation, these powers, duties and responsibilities are as follows.
A. The Commission shall do the following:
(1) Keep an index of all open areas, publicly or privately owned,
including parks, woodland, undeveloped and underdeveloped land,
open marshlands, swamps and other wetlands, for the purpose of
obtaining information on the proper and potential use of such areas;
(2) Conduct research into the utilization and possible utilization of land
areas in the Town of New Canaan;
(3) Keep records of its meetings and activities; and
(4) Make an annual report of its activities to the Town Council.
B. The Commission may do the following:
(1) Coordinate the activities of unofficial bodies organized for similar
purposes;
(2) Advertise, prepare and distribute books, maps, charts, plans and
pamphlets as necessary for its purposes;
(3) Propose a greenways plan for inclusion in the plan of conservation
and development of the Town prepared pursuant to Section 8-23 of
the Connecticut General Statutes;
(4) Inventory natural resources and formulate watershed management
and drought management plans. Such plans shall be consistent
with water supply management plans prepared pursuant to Section
25-32d of the Connecticut General Statutes;
(5) Offer recommendations to the Planning,& Zoning Commission of
plans and programs for the development and use of all areas
indexed under Subsection A(1) above;
(6) Offer recommendations to the Planning and Zoning Commission
and to the Environmental Commission regarding proposed land use
changes and regulation changes;
(7) With the approval of the Town Council, acquire land and easements
in the name of the Town and promulgate rules and regulations,
including, but not limited to, the establishment of reasonable
charges for the use of such land and easements;
(8) Supervise and manage park property, or portions thereof, upon
delegation of such authority by the Park and Recreation
Commission, provided the Park and Recreation Commission may
resume exercising its authority by resolution adopted at a duly
noticed public meeting;
(9) Supervise and manage Town property, or portions thereof, other
than parks, upon delegation of such authority by the entity which
has supervisory or management responsibilities for such space or
property, provided the delegating entity may resume exercising its
authority by resolution adopted at a duly noticed public meeting;
§ 11A-3 NEW CANAAN CODE § 11A-4
C:116
(10) Receive monetary and other gifts in the name of the Town for any
of the Commission's purposes, and administer the same for such
purposes subject to the terms of the gift;
(11) Exchange information with the State of Connecticut Commissioner
of Environmental Protection, and accept assistance from the
Commissioner in planning the Commission's overall program and
coordinating state and local conservation activities.
§ 11A-5. Recommendations on designations of open space land and
easements.
The Commission may advise and make recommendations to the Planning
and Zoning Commission and the Environmental Commission regarding
acceptance or rejection of open space designations or easements in
connection with land use applications pending before such other
commissions.
§ 11A-6. Gifts, donations, devises, and acquisition of land and
easements.
With the approval of the Town Council, the Commission may acquire land
and easements in the name of the Town, or receive gifts, donations or
devises of land, or other interests or rights in land, including conservation
easements, for any of the purposes set forth under Sections 7-131a and
7-13lb of the Connecticut General Statutes, as now or hereafter amended.
Should the Conservation Commission find it necessary or advisable to make
a request for the acquisition of land, or any interest or rights in land,
including the acquisition of conservation easements, for any of the purposes
set forth under the said Sections 7-131a and 7-131b of the Connecticut
General Statutes, and after approval thereof by the Planning and Zoning
Commission, it shall make a report relative thereof to the Board of
Selectmen, together with a request for an appropriation. When an
appropriation for such acquisition of land or interest or rights in land,
including the acquisition of conservation easements, shall have been made
by the Town, the Board of Selectmen shall have exclusive charge of the
appropriation in substantial accord with the purpose for which such
appropriation was made. If the carrying out of any such recommendation
makes necessary the condemnation of land, the Commission is authorized to
take such land within the limits of the Town by condemnation in accordance
with Section 7-131b of the Connecticut General Statutes.
§ 11A-7. Rules for use of acquired land and easements.
The Commission may promulgate rules and regulations, including, but not
limited to, the establishment of reasonable charges for the use of land and
easements, for any of its purposes as set forth in this ordinance. Such rules
and regulations shall not become effective unless they are approved by the
Town Council.
§ 11A-4 CHARTER § 11A-8
C:117
§ 11A-8. Severability.
Should any provision of this ordinance be declared unlawful or ultra vires,
such action shall not affect the validity of any other provision or part
thereof.
Chapter 12
UTILITIES COMMISSION
§ 12-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
UTILITY — Includes street railway, electric, gas, telephone, telegraph,
pipeline, sewage, water and community antenna television companies
owning, leasing, maintaining, operating, managing or controlling plants or
parts of plants or equipment and all express companies having special
privileges on railroads or street railways within this state, but shall not
include telegraph company functions concerning intrastate money-order
service, towns, cities, boroughs and municipal corporations or departments
thereof, whether separately incorporated or not, or a private power
producer.
§ 12-2. Establishment.
There shall be a Utilities Commission composed of six members who shall
be electors and residents of the Town of New Canaan. The members shall
serve without compensation and shall hold no other office of trust or
emolument in the town government. Not more than four members of the
same political party shall serve upon the Commission at the same time.
§ 12-3. Appointment of members; term of office.
A. The Board of Selectmen shall make initial appointments to said
Commission as follows:
(1) Two members shall serve until December 1, 1987.
(2) Two members shall serve until December 1, 1988.
(3) Two members shall serve until December 1, 1989.
B. Except for the original appointments and hereinbefore stated, all
subsequent appointments by the Board of Selectmen shall be for a term
of three years.
§ 12-4. Purpose; powers of Commission.
A. The Commission is created for the purpose of monitoring the activities
and operations of public and private utilities servicing the residents and
businesses of New Canaan to ensure that the needs of residences and
businesses located in New Canaan are adequately met and that New
Canaan's consumers' interests are represented before any applicable
commission or agency having jurisdiction over the utility in question.
§ 11A-8 NEW CANAAN CODE § 12-4
C:118
B. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing purpose, the
Commission shall have the right to receive complaints regarding utility
service in New Canaan and to require and receive information and
reports from town officials on a timely basis.
C. The Commission is formed for the purpose of receiving and evaluating
complaints and presenting its position and concerns to appropriate local
and state agencies.
D. The Commission may take a position on all issues involving a utility,
including but not limited to quality, adequacy of supply and rate, which
are raised before regional and town boards and commissions, and make
that position known to the state's boards and agencies.
Chapter 12A
DEMOLITION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building and demolition codes — See Ch. 9.
Citation hearing procedure — See Ch. 11.
Historic district and commission — See Ch.
31.
Housing Code — See Ch. 32.
Nuisances — See Ch. 37.
§ 12A-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this ordinance is to authorize the Town of New Canaan, as
allowed by § 29-406(b) of the Connecticut General Statutes, to impose a
waiting period of not more than 90 days before granting a demolition permit
for certain structures of architectural, historical, or cultural importance.
The objective of this process is to promote the cultural, economic,
educational and general welfare of the Town of New Canaan by establishing
a process whereby the owners of buildings with significant historic
characteristics will be informed of the economic, cultural, and aesthetic
benefits of historic preservation and to encourage the preservation,
rehabilitation and reuse of such structures. The waiting period will provide
time for all interested parties to consider and put forth alternatives to
demolition, and to preserve historically significant records, photographs,
artifacts, and other items of continuing historical interest. This ordinance is
limited to, and will provide greater public notice of, permits to demolish a
building, structure, or part thereof that is more than 50 years old and 500
square feet or more in area.
§ 12A-2. Permit required, generally.
No person shall demolish any building, structure or part thereof without
first obtaining a permit for the particular demolition undertaking from the
Town Building Official. Such permit shall be issued except as otherwise
§ 12-4 CHARTER § 12A-2
C:119
provided in this ordinance pursuant to § 29-406 of the Connecticut General
Statutes, as amended.
§ 12A-3. Permit requirements for certain structures.
When the building, structure or part thereof to be demolished is 500 square
feet or more in size and at least 50 years old (hereinafter referred to as the
"structure"), then no permit shall be issued except upon compliance with
the provisions of this ordinance in addition to § 29-406 of the Connecticut
General Statutes and the State Demolition Code, as amended.
§ 12A-4. Application contents.
Any person wishing to obtain a permit to demolish a structure shall file an
application (hereinafter referred to as the "application") verified under oath
in the office of the Town Building Official on a form approved by the Town
Building Official, which application shall include the following information:
A. The name, if any, and address of the structure to be demolished;
B. The name and address of the owner(s) of the structure to be demolished;
C. The age of the structure to be demolished;
D. The square footage of the structure to be demolished; and
E. The names and addresses of the owners of all properties adjoining
(and across the street from) the property on which the structure to
be demolished is located, according to an attached copy of a pertinent
portion of the current Assessor's map.
§ 12A-5. Notice of intent to demolish; publication and posting.
Within 10 days after the filing of an application for a permit to demolish a
structure, the applicant shall:
A. Publish in a local newspaper having substantial circulation in the Town
of New Canaan a "Notice of Intent to Demolish" (hereinafter referred to
as the "notice"). Such notice is defined and described in § 12A-6 below;
B. Mail copies of such notice by certified mail to the owners of all properties
adjoining (and across the street from) the property on which the
structure to be demolished is situated;
C. Mail copies of the notice by certified mail to the New Canaan Historical
Society, the New Canaan Historic District Commission, and any New
Canaan taxpayer who has requested, in writing, from the Town Building
Official copies of any such notices filed pursuant to this ordinance. The
Town Building Official shall maintain the list of those requesting to be so
notified, and shall delete from the list those who do not annually renew
in January, in writing, the request to be notified; and
D. Post in a conspicuous location of the property on which the structure
is situated a sign at least 24 inches by 36 inches in size visible from
the nearest public street or other accessway adjoining the property.
Such sign shall include a copy of the notice and shall contain the word
"DEMOLITION" in capital letters no less than two inches in height. If
there is more than one structure proposed for demolition, one sign shall
be posted in respect to each such structure. All signs required hereunder
§ 12A-2 NEW CANAAN CODE § 12A-5
C:120
shall remain posted on the property, if the permit is issued, until the
completion of all demolition activities authorized by the permit.
§ 12A-6. Notice contents.
The notice required by § 12A-5 shall be on a form approved by the Town
Building Official, shall be entitled "Notice of Intent to Demolish," and shall
include the following information:
A. The information required in § 12A-4A through D of this ordinance
inclusive; and
B. A statement that an application for a permit to demolish has been filed
in the office of the Town Building Official and is currently pending and is
available for public inspection.
§ 12A-7. Notice filing.
Within 14 days after publication of the notice, the applicant shall file in
the office of the Town Building Official a statement verified under oath
on a form approved by the Town Building Official certifying that all of
the requirements of this ordinance have been complied with and attaching
thereto a copy of the notice, evidence of publication, a photograph of the
posted sign, and all certified mail receipts.
§ 12A-8. Historical Review Committee.
There shall be a standing committee appointed by the Board of Selectmen
consisting of at least three and not more than five persons with appropriate
credentials or experience in architecture, design, construction,
engineering, archeology, history, or historical preservation. The committee
shall have the following duties and responsibilities:
A. To prepare and update the Historic Resource Inventory listing structures
in the Town of New Canaan with historical significance;
B. To prepare and update written criteria for the analysis of historical,
architectural, and other characteristics relevant to this ordinance;
C. To reach out proactively to owners of significant structures and inform
them of the tax benefits, grants, and economic, cultural, and aesthetic
benefits of historic preservation, and to encourage the preservation,
rehabilitation and reuse of such structures;
D. To develop policies and procedures consistent with this ordinance;
E. To review and decide upon objections to demolition filed in accordance
with the following section.
§ 12A-9. Objections and issuance of permit.
A. If the Town Building Official has received no pertinent written objection
to the application within 15 days following publication of the notice
in the newspaper, then the Building Official shall issue the demolition
permit, provided all other requirements of the State Demolition Code
have been satisfied. Pertinent written objections shall state the
architectural, historical or cultural importance of the structure.
Impertinent objections may be rejected by the Building Official.
§ 12A-5 CHARTER § 12A-9
C:121
B. If the Town Building Official receives a pertinent written objection to
the application within 15 days following publication of the notice, then
the Building Official shall promptly refer such objection to the Historical
Review Committee. The Committee shall review and decide all pertinent
objections within 15 days of receipt of the objection by the Building
Official. If the Committee fails to notify the Building Official of its
decision within such fifteen-day period, or if the Committee makes a
written finding that the structure is not of an age, style, condition or
character that is of historical, architectural or cultural significance to
the Town of New Canaan, then the Building Official shall issue the
demolition permit, provided the time for filing objections has passed,
and provided that all other requirements of the State Demolition Code
have been satisfied. If the Committee makes a timely written finding
that the structure is of historical, architectural or cultural significance
to the Town of New Canaan, then the Building Official shall not issue
the demolition permit until 90 days after the date the application was
filed. In the event, however, that all pertinent written objections are
withdrawn before the expiration of such ninety-day period, or the
Committee, having considered the steps that have been taken to
accomplish the purpose of this ordinance, makes a finding that no
further delay is appropriate, the Building Official shall issue the
demolition permit, provided that all other requirements of the State
Demolition Code have been satisfied.
§ 12A-10. Factors for consideration.
In carrying out the purposes of this ordinance, the Building Official and
the Committee shall consider, in addition to other criteria developed by the
Committee, the structure's significance in national, state, or local history,
architecture, archeology, engineering, and culture. A structure may be
considered significant for any of the following reasons:
A. The structure is associated with events that have made a noted
contribution to national, state, or local history;
B. The structure is associated with the lives of persons noted in national,
state or local history;
C. The structure embodies distinctive characteristics of a type, period,
or method of construction that is rare or disappearing and worthy of
preservation; or represents the work of a noted architect, builder, or
craftsman; or possesses high artistic values or distinctive design
features or craftsmanship.
§ 12A-11. Provisions supplemental.
This ordinance is intended to supplement and not to limit any requirements
now or hereinafter imposed on any applicant for or recipient of a permit and
to supplement and not to limit any authority now or hereafter granted to the
Town Building Official by the Connecticut Basic Building Code and the State
Demolition Code. The provisions of this ordinance shall not apply to any
demolition ordered by the Town Building Official because of an emergency
or threat to public health or safety.
§ 12A-9 NEW CANAAN CODE § 12A-12
C:122
§ 12A-12. Preclearance of property.
Property owners or their agents may apply to the Historical Review
Committee, prior to filing an application for a demolition permit, for an
advance determination of whether the structure is of historical,
architectural or cultural significance to the Town of New Canaan. The
application shall be on a form provided by the Building Official, and the
application fee shall be established by the Board of Selectmen. The
Historical Review Committee shall hold a public hearing on the application,
and shall cause notice of the public hearing to be mailed to the owners of
all properties adjoining (and across the street from) the property on which
the structure is situated, and to the New Canaan Historical Society, the New
Canaan Historic District Commission, and any New Canaan taxpayer who
has requested, in writing, from the Town Building Official copies of any such
notices filed pursuant to this ordinance. The Committee shall cause notice
of the public hearing to be published in a newspaper having substantial
circulation in New Canaan, at least six days prior to the date of the public
hearing. The legal notice shall specify the date, time and location of the
public hearing, and shall identify the property on which the structure is
located. If the Committee determines that the structure is not of historical,
architectural or cultural significance to the Town of New Canaan, then the
notice and objection provisions of §§ 12A-5, 12A-6, 12A-7 and 12A-9 of this
ordinance shall not be applicable. Any such determination shall be valid for
three years. If the Committee determines that the structure is of historical,
architectural or cultural significance to the Town of New Canaan, then such
notice and objection provisions shall be applicable.
Chapter 13
DISPOSAL AND SALE OF TANGIBLE PERSONAL PROPERTY
§ 13-1. Disposal and sale by Selectmen. [Amended 10-21-2009,
effective 11-6-2009]
When any board, commission, committee or department of the Town of New
Canaan, including the Board of Education, shall have determined that any
supplies, materials or equipment of a value of $250 or more are obsolete,
unusable or of no further use to the Town, the same shall be disposed of
by sale under procedures established by the Board of Selectmen. However,
if such supplies, materials or equipment are to be used as trade-ins or
down payments on new supplies, materials or equipment, then they shall
be disposed of by the board, commission, committee or department of the
Town involved.
§ 13-2. Public notice required. [Amended 10-21-2009, effective
11-6-2009]
If the Board of Selectmen shall determine that the value of the tangible
personal property specified in § 13-1 is $5,000 or more, the Board of
Selectmen shall solicit sealed bids or hold a public auction by public notice
§ 12A-12 CHARTER § 13-2
C:123
inserted once in a newspaper having a circulation in the Town at least seven
calendar days before the opening of the bids or the auction. Alternatively,
the Board of Selectmen may establish online sale or auction procedures,
provided that the bidding is open to the public. If the highest bid is less than
$5,000 or if there shall be no bids, the Board of Selectmen may dispose of
the same in such manner as it shall see fit.
§ 13-3. Disposition of cash proceeds.
Upon receipt of any cash proceeds from the sale of such supplies, materials
or equipment, the same shall be deposited in the general fund of the Town.
Chapter 14
ELECTIONS
§ 14-1. Hours polls to be open.
A. The polls shall remain open for voting at all regular and special
municipal elections of the Town of New Canaan on days other than the
days of a regular or special state election between the hours of 6:00 a.m.
and 8:00 p.m.
B. The polls shall remain open during the hours between 12:00 noon and
8:00 p.m. for voting on any item on the call for a regular or special town
meeting for which a petition is filed with the Town Clerk calling for a
vote on the voting machines. [Added 1-17-1967, effective 2-18-1967]
§ 14-2. Number of Justices of the Peace. [Added 3-24-1964, effective
4-25-1964; amended 6-12-1996, effective 6-12-1996]
The number of Justices of the Peace for New Canaan shall be fixed at 60.
§ 14-3. Discontinuance of separate enrollment lists. [Added
3-8-1972, effective 4-15-1972]
The Registrars of Voters shall discontinue the maintenance of separate
enrollment lists and shall designate the party affiliation, if any, of each
elector on the registry list with the name of such elector.
Chapter 14A
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
§ 14A-1. Authority and purpose.
This ordinance is enacted pursuant to the Municipal Powers Act,
Connecticut General Statutes § 7-148, and the civil preparedness and
emergency management statutes, Connecticut General Statutes § 28-1 et
seq., in order to preserve and protect the public health, public safety,
general welfare, peace and security of the Town of New Canaan, its
residents and their property.
§ 13-2 NEW CANAAN CODE § 14A-2
C:124
§ 14A-2. Definitions.
As used in this ordinance, the following definitions shall apply.
ATTACK — Any attack or series of attacks by a terrorist or an enemy of
the United States causing, or which may cause, substantial damage or
injury to civilian property or persons in any manner by sabotage or by the
use of bombs, shellfire or atomic, radiological, chemical, bacteriological or
biological means or other weapons or processes.
MAJOR DISASTER — Any catastrophe, including, but not limited to, any
hurricane, tornado, storm, high water, wind-driven water, tidal wave,
tsunami, earthquake, volcanic eruption, landslide, mudslide, snowstorm, or
drought, or, regardless of cause, any fire, flood, explosion, or man-made
disaster.
LOCAL EMERGENCY — Any attack or major disaster or other public health
or safety crisis occurring in the Town of New Canaan or adversely affecting
the Town of New Canaan, including incidents occurring elsewhere but
causing regional consequences such as evacuations.
EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS PERSONNEL — Any organized personnel
of the Town of New Canaan engaged in carrying out civil preparedness
functions in the event of an attack, major disaster, or local emergency,
including the Police Department, the Fire Department, the Department
of Public Works, the Highway Department, the Health Department, and
Community Emergency Response Teams under the direction of Town
officials.
§ 14A-3. Declaration of local state of emergency.
In the event of an attack, major disaster, or local emergency creating a
risk of severe hazards to the life, welfare, or property of the Town of New
Canaan or its residents, the First Selectman may declare the existence of a
local state of emergency. The declaration of a local state of emergency will
be communicated to the public as soon as reasonably possible, and a written
statement of the declaration shall be submitted to the Governor of the State
of Connecticut and the Connecticut Department of Emergency Management
and Homeland Security.
§ 14A-4. Effect of declaration.
A. In the event of a local state of emergency, the First Selectman, in
consultation and coordination with the Police and Fire Departments,
the Director of Emergency Preparedness, and the Area Coordinator for
the State of Connecticut Department of Emergency Management and
Homeland Security, may take such action as he or she deems necessary
to mitigate the emergency, including (without limitation) the following:
(1) Request state or federal assistance and financial aid;
(2) Invoke emergency-related mutual aid agreements with other
municipalities or government agencies, and extend or accept
mutual aid;
(3) Invoke emergency assistance agreements with private entities;
§ 14A-2 CHARTER § 14A-4
C:125
(4) Invoke emergency operations, evacuation and shelter plans and
agreements;
(5) Mobilize community emergency response teams (CERT) and other
civil preparedness forces;
(6) Expend public funds from appropriations made for such purposes;
(7) Require partial or full evacuations from specific geographical areas
of Town;
(8) Close roads and restrict access to certain geographical areas of
Town;
(9) Impose travel and parking restrictions in order to keep roads clear
for emergency response vehicles;
(10) Remove from publicly or privately owned land or water any debris
or wreckage that threatens public health, safety, public or private
property;
(11) Secure and preserve any documents and evidence pertinent to and
necessary for a future investigation; and
(12) Take such other steps as are reasonably necessary in light of the
local emergency to protect the health, safety and welfare of the
people of New Canaan, to prevent or minimize loss or destruction
of property, and to minimize the effects of hostile action.
B. This section is intended to duplicate, supplement and complement the
powers and authority granted by other laws. This section shall not be
construed to limit any powers and authority granted by other laws.
§ 14A-5. Termination of state of emergency; duration of declaration.
When the hazardous conditions have stabilized and the state of emergency
no longer exists, the First Selectmen shall declare the termination of the
state of emergency in the same manner as the declaration of its existence.
A declaration of a local state of emergency shall expire after seven calendar
days unless the First Selectman declares a continuation for another seven
calendar days.
§ 14A-6. Absence or unavailability of First Selectman.
In the absence or unavailability of the First Selectman, the Chairman of the
Town Council may act in place of the First Selectman for all purposes under
this ordinance. In the event that both the First Selectman and the Chairman
of the Town Council are absent or unavailable, then the Vice-Chairman of
the Town Council may act in place of the First Selectman for all purposes
under this ordinance.
Chapter 15
EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES COMMISSION
§ 15-1. Establishment.
There shall be an Emergency Medical Services Commission composed of
three members who shall be electors of the town. The members shall serve
§ 14A-4 NEW CANAAN CODE § 15-1
C:126
without compensation and shall hold no other office of trust or emolument
in the town government.
§ 15-2. Appointment of members; term of office.
The Selectmen shall annually, on the first day of December, commencing
December 1, 1982, appoint one member of the Emergency Medical Services
Commission who, after qualification, shall hold office for a term of three
years from the first day of December until his or her successor has been
appointed and shall have qualified. As long as there shall be a volunteer
ambulance company in the Town of New Canaan receiving town aid, one
of the members of the Commission shall be a member of and a past or
present officer of such a volunteer ambulance company. Two members
of the Commission shall have no affiliation with the volunteer ambulance
company. Not more than two members of the same political party shall serve
on the Commission at the same time.
§ 15-3. Officers; initial appointments.
A. On or promptly after the first day of December of each year, the
Commission shall meet at the call of the First Selectman to choose one of
its members to be Chairman and one of its members to be Secretary. The
Chairman shall, when present, preside at all meetings of the Commission
and shall have a vote as a member thereof. The Secretary shall file in the
office of the Town Clerk a record of all proceedings, acts and resolutions
of the Commission, including the votes of each member on all actions
taken, and such record shall be a public record. Two members shall be a
quorum for the transaction of business at any meeting.
B. The Board of Selectmen shall make initial appointments to said
Commission as follows:
(1) One member to serve until December 1, 1982.
(2) One member to serve until December 1, 1983.
(3) One member to serve until December 1, 1984.
C. Except for the original appointments as hereinbefore stated, all
subsequent appointments shall be for a term of three years.
§ 15-4. Purpose; powers and duties.
A. The Commission is created for the purpose of providing to the Town of
New Canaan an emergency medical services system. The Commission
shall establish policy for the planning, coordination and administration
of emergency medical services organizations and providers serving the
Town of New Canaan.
B. As to volunteer ambulance companies providing emergency medical
services to the town, the Commission shall:
(1) Consult with each such company and furnish annually to the
Selectmen and itemized estimate of the amount that the Commission
recommends be appropriated for the support and maintenance
during the ensuing fiscal year of each such company, together with
an itemized statement of the expenditures for similar purposes
during the preceding fiscal year.
§ 15-1 CHARTER § 15-4
C:127
(2) Consult with the members of each such company and thereafter
adopt rules and regulations for governing their members and
establish standards for the delivery of emergency medical care, so
that the town will be assured adequate emergency medical services.
Chapter 16
INLAND WETLANDS COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Conservation Commission — See Ch. 11A.
§ 15-4 NEW CANAAN CODE § 15-4
C:128
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted 5-14-1980; effective 6-15-1980]
§ 16-1. Establishment. [Amended 3-19-2008, effective 4-11-2008;
5-20-2009; effective 6-12-2009]
There is established an Inland Wetlands Commission in the Town of New
Canaan whose powers and duties shall consist of the following:
A. All of the powers, duties and responsibilities vested in local inland
wetlands agencies under and by virtue of the "Inland Wetland and
Watercourses Act," Chapter 440 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as
now or hereafter amended.12
B. The power, duty and responsibility of reviewing applications and issuing
licenses for construction, excavation or filling within areas designated
as special flood hazards by the Flood Insurance Study prepared by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) and as shown on the
Flood Insurance Rate Maps issued by FEMA.
C. (Reserved)
D. All of the powers, duties and responsibilities vested in flood and erosion
control boards under and by virtue of Chapter 477, Part II, of the
Connecticut General Statutes of the State of Connecticut, entitled
"Municipal Flood and Erosion Control Boards," as now or hereafter
amended.13
§ 16-2. Members.
The Commission shall consist of seven members who shall be electors and
residents of the Town of New Canaan, together with the First Selectman
and the Town Engineer as ex officio members. The Town Engineer shall
have no vote, and the First Selectman shall vote only in the case of a
tie. With the exception of the First Selectman and the Town Engineer, the
members shall serve without compensation and shall hold no other office of
trust or emolument in the Town government. Not more than five members
of the same political party, with the exception of the First Selectman and
the Town Engineer, shall serve upon the Commission at the same time, and
they shall hold no other office of trust or emolument in the town, county or
state governments.
§ 16-3. Appointment of members; terms.
Within 10 days after this ordinance shall become effective, the Board of
Selectmen shall appoint the members of the Commission, three of whom
shall hold office for a term to expire on the first day of December 1980 and
thereafter for two-year terms from the first day of December 1980 and four
of whom shall hold office from the date of their appointment to the first day
of December 1981 and thereafter for two-year terms from the first day of
12.Editor's Note: See C.G.S. § 22a-28 et seq.
13.Editor's Note: See C.G.S. § 25-84 et seq.
§ 16-1 CHARTER § 16-3
C:129
December 1981. Each member shall hold office until his or her successor
shall have been appointed and shall have qualified. In case of vacancy in the
Commission by reason of death, resignation, removal of residence from the
town, removal from office or failure to qualify, the Board of Selectmen shall
forthwith fill the vacancy for the remainder of the term in such manner as
in making a regular appointment.
§ 16-4. Alternate members.
There shall be a panel of three alternate members, all of whom shall be
electors and residents of the Town of New Canaan and not more than two
of whom shall be members of the same political party. No alternate member
shall receive compensation for his services as such. Said alternate members
shall hold no other office of trust or emolument in the town, county or
state governments and shall be appointed by the Board of Selectmen, in the
first instance, to serve until December 1, 1980, and thereafter for two-year
terms. Each alternate shall hold office until his or her successor shall have
been appointed and shall have qualified.
§ 16-5. Seating of alternate members.
If a regular member of said board is absent or is disqualified, the Chairman
of the Commission shall designate an alternate to so act, choosing
alternates in rotation so that they shall act as nearly equal a number of
times as possible. If any alternate is not available in accordance with such
rotation, such fact shall be recorded in the minutes of the meeting.
§ 16-6. Organization; officers; records.
A. The Commission shall meet at the call of the First Selectman promptly
after its appointment to choose one of its members to be Chairman and
one to be Secretary, and annually thereafter, on or promptly after the
first day of December, the Commission shall meet for a like purpose. The
Chairman shall, when present, preside at all meetings of the Commission
and shall vote as a member thereof. In the absence of the Chairman or
Secretary, as the case may be, the Commission shall choose one of its
members Chairman pro tempore or one of its members Secretary pro
tempore, as the case may be, who shall not thereby lose his or her vote.
Four members shall constitute a quorum, and a majority vote of those
present shall be necessary for the transaction of business.
B. The Secretary shall file in the office of the Town Clerk a full and detailed
record of all proceedings, acts and resolutions of the Commission,
including the vote of each member on all actions taken, such record to
be a public record.
§ 16-7. Proceedings and actions of prior boards or commissions.
[Amended 5-20-2009; effective 6-12-2009]
A. All prior actions of the Conservation Commission, Flood and Erosion
Control Board, Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission, and
Environmental Commission, likewise all permits or licenses issued by
the said Board or Commissions, shall remain in full force and effect, and
§ 16-3 NEW CANAAN CODE § 16-7
C:130
any incomplete acts or actions of the said Board or Commissions as of
the effective date of this ordinance shall be completed by the Inland
Wetlands Commission as if such Commission was the originator thereof.
B. All rules and regulations of the Environmental Commission heretofore
publicly enacted or adopted and validly on file in the office of the Town
Clerk are hereby validated and shall remain in full force and effect
unless and until modified, repealed or amended by the Inland Wetlands
Commission.
§ 16-8. Severability.
Should any provision or portion of this ordinance be declared unlawful or
ultra vires, such action shall not affect the validity of any other provisions
or parts hereof.
§ 16-9. Effective date.
This ordinance shall become effective at 12:00 noon on June 15, 1980.
§ 16-7 CHARTER § 16-9
C:131

ARTICLE II
Aquifer Protection Agency
[Adopted 5-12-2004, effective 5-28-2004]
§ 16-10. Designation and membership.
A. In accordance with the provisions of C.G.S. § 22a-354a et seq., the Inland
Wetlands Commission is hereby designated as the Aquifer Protection
Agency (hereinafter the "Agency") of the Town of New Canaan. The staff
of the Inland Wetlands Commission shall serve as the staff of the Agency.
[Amended 5-20-2009, effective 6-12-2009]
B. Members of the Inland Wetlands Commission shall serve coexisting
terms on the Agency. The membership requirements of the Agency shall
be the same as those of the Inland Wetlands Commission, including,
but not limited to, the number of members, terms, method of selection
and removal of members, and the filling of vacancies. [Amended
5-20-2009, effective 6-12-2009]
C. At least one member of the Agency or staff of the Agency shall complete
the course in technical training formulated by the Commissioner of
Environmental Protection of the State of Connecticut, pursuant to C.G.S.
§ 22a-354v.
§ 16-11. Regulations to be adopted.
The Agency shall adopt regulations in accordance with C.G.S. § 22a-354p
and R.C.S.A. § 22a-354i-3. Said regulations shall provide for:
A. The manner in which boundaries of aquifer protection areas shall be
established and amended or changed.
B. Procedures for the regulation of activity within the area.
C. The form for an application to conduct regulated activities within the
area.
D. Notice and publication requirements.
E. Criteria and procedures for the review of applications.
F. Administration and enforcement.
§ 16-12. Inventory of land use.
A. In order to carry out the purposes of the Aquifer Protection Program, the
Agency will conduct an inventory of land use within the area to assess
potential contamination sources.
B. Not later than three months after approval by the Commissioner of
the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection of Level B
Mapping of aquifers, the Agency will inventory land uses overlying the
mapped zone of contribution and recharge areas of such aquifers in
accordance with guidelines established by the Commissioner pursuant
to C.G.S. § 22a-354f. Such inventory shall be completed not more than
one year after authorization of the Agency. (C.G.S. § 22a-354e).
§ 16-10 CHARTER § 16-12
C:133
Chapter 17
ETHICS, CODE OF
§ 17-1. Preamble.
A. The goal of this Code is to establish clear standards of ethical conduct
for all who serve the Town of New Canaan whether in a paid or volunteer
capacity, without discouraging participation in Town government by the
talented and committed individuals on whose service the Town relies.
B. Specifically, this Code seeks to (i) encourage independent and impartial
service to the public; (ii) discourage improprieties and the appearance
of improprieties; (iii) deter conduct that is incompatible with the proper
discharge of duties in the public interest or that would impair
independence of judgment or action in the performance of those duties;
and (iv) establish procedures for determining whether such conduct has
occurred or would occur.
§ 17-2. Standards of conduct.
A. Definitions. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
BOARD — Any board, committee, commission, council, authority, agency
or other body of Town government, including the Board of Selectmen,
the Board of Education and the Ethics Board.
BUSINESS — Any business organization, venture or operation of which
an official, employee or a relative is an owner, director, officer, partner,
employee, compensated agent, or holder of 5% or more of the
outstanding stock of any class.
EMPLOYEE — Any person employed full- or part-time by the Town or by
any Board, including the Board of Education.
ENTITY — Any business organization, venture or operation, including
nonprofits.
ETHICS BOARD — The Town of New Canaan Ethics Board.
FINANCIAL INTEREST — Any interest representing an actual or
potential economic gain or loss, which is neither de minimis nor shared
by the general public, that has accrued or may accrue to an official,
employee, relative, or business.
OFFICIAL — Any elected or appointed person serving on any Board,
including the Board of Education, whether paid or unpaid and whether
full- or part-time.
PERSONAL INTEREST — Any interest representing an actual or
potential noneconomic benefit or detriment, which is neither de minimis
nor shared by the general public, that has accrued or may accrue to an
official, employee, relative, or business.
RELATIVE — Any person related to an official or employee by blood,
adoption, or marriage.
§ 16-12 NEW CANAAN CODE § 17-2
C:134
TOWN — The Town of New Canaan.
B. Key provisions.
(1) Conflict of interest.
(a) No official or employee shall participate in any Town or Board
matter in which he or she has a financial interest or a personal
interest. The minutes or records of the relevant Town or Board
proceedings shall reflect the fact that the conflicted official or
employee disclosed his or her conflict and did not participate in
the matter.
(b) A violation of this conflict of interest rule shall occur when: (1)
the official or employee had a financial interest or a personal
interest in a matter; (2) the official or employee had the
authority, either individually or collectively with others, to
deliberate, decide or act for the Town or Board, or to influence
decision or action by the Town or Board, with respect to the
matter; and (3) the official or employee failed to disclose such
financial or personal interest and did not recuse himself or
herself from participation in the matter.
(2) Disclosure and recusal.
(a) Whenever a matter arises with respect to which an official
or employee may have a conflict of interest, the official or
employee shall disclose it in writing to his or her Board or
supervisor and shall abstain from participating in any
deliberation, decision-making and action with respect to the
matter unless and until he or she procures an advisory opinion
under this Code that provides otherwise.
(b) Candidates for Town or Board elective or appointive office or
for Town or Board employment are encouraged to familiarize
themselves with this Code and to disclose during the process
of election, appointment or employment any conflict of interest
that might impair their ability to perform in the office or
position that they seek or for which they are being considered.
(3) Disclosures of financial interest in transactions. Every official or
employee shall file with the Town Clerk, on forms provided for such
purpose, a signed statement disclosing any known transaction with
the Town involving the procurement of property, equipment, goods
or services in which such official, employee, relative or business
has a financial interest. A statement required pursuant to this
section shall be filed no later than 30 days after entering into any
such transaction. Such a statement shall thereafter be available
for public inspection and shall include the following information as
to each such transaction: the nature of the interest held and the
nature, date and total value of the transaction. For the purposes
of this section, a bid shall be deemed a transaction. No disclosure
pursuant to this section shall be required in the case of a
transaction consisting solely of the furnishing of services to the
Town as an official or employee thereof or in the case of a
transaction involving less than $500.
§ 17-2 CHARTER § 17-2
C:135
(4) Disclosure of financial or personal interest in legislation. Any
official or employee who has a financial or personal interest in
rules, ordinances, or other legislation being considered by the Town
or any Board and who plans to participate in discussions about
or render an official opinion to the Town or Board regarding such
rules, ordinance or legislation shall disclose to the Town or Board
the nature and extent of such Interest, prior to participating in such
discussions or giving any opinion.
(5) Gifts and preferential treatment.
(a) No official, employee, relative, or business shall solicit or accept
anything of value, including, without limitation, a gift, loan,
service, reward, or promise of employment, that could
reasonably be expected to influence the action or judgment of
the official or employee in any Town or Board matter.
(b) The gift exceptions enumerated in (i) Connecticut General
Statutes § 1-79(5), as duly amended from time to time, (ii) the
New Canaan Police Department's July 18, 2008, Acceptance of
Gifts Memorandum (as edited through September 23, 2009),
as duly amended from time to time, and (iii) the New Canaan
Public Schools Gift Policies, P1313(a) and P1313(b), as duly
amended from time to time, shall be recognized and given full
force and effect unless the Ethics Board expressly finds that
the otherwise excepted gift has actually influenced the action
or judgment of the official or employee in his or her handling
of any Town or Board matter. Copies of the aforementioned
exceptions are available on the Ethics Board web page and in
the Town Clerk's office.
(c) No official or employee shall, in the discharge of his or her
duties, grant (i) preferential treatment to any person or entity
beyond that which is available to all other persons or entities, or
(ii) any favor, service or thing of value except when such favors,
services or things of value are made available to the general
public.
(d) No official or employee shall, by reason of his or her status or
position, accept or endeavor to obtain a preferential treatment
from any entity or person, including another official or
employee.
(6) Use of Town property. No official or employee shall use, or permit
the use of, Town property of any nature, including vehicles,
equipment, resources, supplies or real property, for the benefit of
himself or herself, except when such (i) is provided as municipal
policy for the use of such official or employee in furtherance of the
official's or employee's conduct of official business, or (ii) is made
available to the general public and then on terms and conditions
not more favorable than those available to the general public.
(7) Representation of private interests. No official shall appear or act
in any material capacity on behalf of any person or entity before
any Board on which he or she serves, or represent any such persons
or entities in litigation involving an action of that Board. Disclosure
§ 17-2 NEW CANAAN CODE § 17-2
C:136
and recusal will not suffice to cure a violation of this provision.
This prohibition shall continue for six months after the termination
of the official's service to the Town or Board. Nothing contained
herein shall prevent an official from appearing on his or her own
behalf in a matter before the Town or a Board provided he or she
abstains from deliberating, deciding or acting with respect to the
matter.
(8) Use of Town position. No official or employee shall use his or her
position, or knowledge acquired through that position which is not
available to the general public, for the purpose of obtaining or
furthering a financial interest or a personal interest.
(9) Confidential information. No official or employee shall, without
legal authorization, disclose to others confidential information
about the Town, any of its Boards or their respective plans,
initiatives, governance, or affairs.
(10) Political activity and nepotism.
(a) No official or employee shall use Town or Board resources to
solicit any contribution to any political party, and no official
or employee shall compel or induce a subordinate official or
employee to make any political contribution.
(b) No official or employee shall promise an appointment to any
Town or Board position as a reward for any political activity.
(c) No official or employee shall participate in any decision to
appoint, hire, promote, discipline or discharge a relative for any
Town or Board position.
§ 17-3. Organization and administration.
A. Appointment and composition of Ethics Board. The Ethics Board shall
consist of five electors of the Town who shall serve without
compensation. No more than three shall be registered in the same
political party. No member shall serve on any Board other than the
Ethics Board or as an employee during his or her term of service on the
Ethics Board. Members shall be appointed to the Ethics Board by the
Board of Selectmen subject to confirmation by the affirmative vote of
seven members of the Town Council. Vacancies on the Ethics Board shall
be filled by the Board of Selectmen within 60 days of such vacancies
subject to confirmation by an affirmative vote of seven members of the
Town Council.
B. Terms of service. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection and
except for the staggered terms of those members initially appointed to
the first Ethics Board pursuant to the July 20, 2016, ordinance, members
shall serve for terms of three years. Service shall be limited to two
successive terms. After a lapse of one year, a former member shall
again be eligible for appointment. Terms shall commence on December
1. Members shall serve until their successors take office. Any term
that would otherwise expire during the pendency of an Ethics Board
proceeding shall automatically be extended to the end of that
proceeding.
§ 17-2 CHARTER § 17-3
C:137
C. Election of officers. The Ethics Board shall elect annually a Chair and a
Secretary.
D. Frequency of meetings, quorum, and duties of officers. Meetings shall
be held as needed and in any event, at least semi-annually. A majority
shall constitute a quorum for the conduct of business except as provided
elsewhere in this Code. The Chair shall call and preside over meetings;
the Secretary shall preside over meetings in the absence of the Chair.
The Secretary shall keep minutes of meetings and shall file agendas and
minutes with the Town Clerk.
E. Purpose; powers and duties of Ethics Board. The Ethics Board shall
operate in accordance with the Town's Code of Ethics, and pursuant to
Section 7-148h of the Connecticut General Statutes. The Ethics Board
has the following general authority, powers and duties:
(1) To periodically review, and recommend for adoption by the Town
Council, modifications to the Town's Code of Ethics and any related
ordinances.
(2) To receive, review, investigate, and address, in accordance with
the Town's Ethics ordinances, the Ethics Board's own rules and
regulations, and Section 7-148h of the Connecticut General Statutes,
written complaints of alleged violations of the Town Code of Ethics
by an official or employee.
(3) To render, for officials and employees, advisory opinions and
interpretations as to conflicts of interest or other issues arising
under the Town's Code of Ethics.
(4) To oversee, working in collaboration with the Board of Selectmen,
the Human Resources Department and related Town bodies, the
promulgation of the Town's Code of Ethics, the Town's employee
Whistle Blower Policy, and the administration of the Town's program
for the training of officials and employees about the Town's Code of
Ethics and its Whistle Blower Policy. A copy of the Town's Whistle
Blower Policy is available on the Ethics Board web page and in the
Town Clerk's office.
(5) To oversee the implementation and administration of a reporting
process for the receipt of complaints, tips or written or telephonic
reports made pursuant to the Town employee Whistle Blower Policy,
of alleged wrongdoing by officials or employees.
(6) To hear appeals of complaints from any employee aggrieved as to
his or her status or condition of employment, excluding employees
governed by the Board of Education and collective bargaining
agreements, after such employee follows the Grievance Procedure
provided by the Town of New Canaan employee Handbook.
F. No inquiry on own initiative. The Ethics Board shall have no authority to
present matters for inquiry or investigation on its own initiative.
G. Access to Town records and personnel. In furtherance of its duties,
the Ethics Board shall have access to Town records and personnel
as permitted by law. The Ethics Board may request assistance from
any official or employee and retain others to aid it in pursuing any
investigation. The Ethics Board may also request any official, employee,
or the Town's legal counsel, internal auditors, independent auditors and
§ 17-3 NEW CANAAN CODE § 17-3
C:138
consultants, upon reasonable notice, to attend meetings or hearings of
the Ethics Board.
H. Access to legal counsel. The Ethics Board shall have access to Town
Counsel and to special legal counsel of the Ethics Board's choosing
if Town Counsel is conflicted or disqualified from assisting the Ethics
Board, or if the Ethics Board deems it inadvisable to proceed with advice
from Town Counsel in the circumstances. If special counsel is retained,
the Town's Chief Financial Officer or his or her deputy shall negotiate
terms of engagement for special counsel.
I. Maintenance of Ethics Board records. The Ethics Board records shall be
stored in Town Hall. Those records that are designated as confidential by
the Ethics Board shall be stored accordingly and shall not be available
for public review except as required by law.
J. Delivery of this Code to each official and employee. Within 30 days
following the adoption of this Code, a copy shall be furnished by the
Town to each official and employee. Persons subsequently elected,
appointed or employed shall receive a copy of this Code at the time
their service commences. Each recipient shall acknowledge in a writing
deposited with the Town Clerk his or her receipt of a copy of this Code
and his or her agreement to abide by its terms.
K. Annual report. The Ethics Board shall prepare and send an annual report
of its activities to the Board of Selectman, the Town Council and the
Board of Education within 90 days after the end of each calendar year.
Subject to adherence to all matters deemed confidential under state
or federal law, the annual report shall be comprehensive in respect of
findings, opinions and recommendations issued; shall record or identify
by clear reference all advisory opinions rendered during the year; and
shall contain any observations or recommendations which the Board
may wish to express concerning the better fulfillment of the stated intent
of the Town Code of Ethics.
L. Amendment; adoption of rules. The Ethics Board may recommend to
the Board of Selectmen, the Town Council and the Board of Education
amendments to the Town's Code of Ethics and any enabling ordinances
and may also adopt internal rules in furtherance of, and not inconsistent
with, the Code and such ordinances. In the event amendments are
proposed, the Ethics Board shall submit the proposed amendments to
the Board of Selectmen, Town Council and Board of Education for review
and comment and a public hearing on such amendments shall be held.
Such amendments shall be adopted only upon approval by the Town
Council.
§ 17-4. Procedure: requests by official or employee for an advisory
opinion concerning his or her own position.
A. Making a request.
(1) An official or employee or a candidate for Town office or employment
may request an advisory opinion concerning the requirements of the
Town's Code of Ethics as applied to him or her.
(2) The request shall be made in a writing that is mailed to Chair, Town
of New Canaan Ethics Board, P.O. Box 583, New Canaan, CT 06840
§ 17-3 CHARTER § 17-4
C:139
in a sealed envelope. The request shall state the name and address of
the person making the request and all facts relevant to the matter in
question. The form to be used for making such requests is available
on the Ethics Board web page and in the Town Clerk's office.
B. Urgent requests. In the event an official or employee has an urgent need
for an Ethics Board advisory opinion, the request may be emailed to the
Chair and Secretary of the Ethics Board with a statement explaining
the need for urgency, and, if the Chair or Secretary finds that expedited
treatment is warranted, the Ethics Board will promptly convene to
consider the matter and render an advisory opinion on an expedited
basis.
C. Issuance of advisory opinion. The Ethics Board may request further
information from the person making the request. It shall issue its
advisory opinion by majority vote of the full Ethics Board and shall do
so as soon as practicable. The opinion shall be in writing and shall be
mailed to the person making the request. Advisory opinions shall be
available to the public except as prohibited by law.
D. Reliance. A person requesting an advisory opinion may rely on that
opinion provided the person has disclosed all relevant facts and acts in
good faith consistent with those facts.
E. Indemnification. Any opinion or advice expressed in good faith by the
Ethics Board shall be advisory only and the Town shall indemnify any
member of the Board from any personal liability on claims arising from
actions taken in good faith in exercise of honest judgment and not
maliciously or wantonly or in abuse of reasonable discretion.
§ 17-5. Procedure: complaints for alleged violations of the Town's
code of ethics and conflicts of interest rules.
A. Definitions. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
COMPLAINANT — The filer of a complaint.
COMPLAINT — A written request for determination made by a person,
entity or a board regarding an alleged violation of the Code of Ethics by
an official or employee.
DETERMINATION — A written final decision by the Ethics Board with
respect to a complaint.
HEARING — A public proceeding before the Ethics Board following a
finding of probable cause where testimony may be taken and documents
may be received.
RESPONDENT — The person against whom a complaint is filed.
RESPONSE — The respondent's written answer to the complaint.
B. Procedure.
(1) Filing of a complaint.
(a) A complaint may be made by any person, entity or Board. It
shall be made in writing, signed under oath before a notary and
shall state the name and address of the complainant, the identity
of the official, employee, relative or business involved in the
§ 17-4 NEW CANAAN CODE § 17-5
C:140
complaint, the conduct that allegedly violates the Code, and a
summary of the relevant facts. The form to be used for making
such complaints is available on the Ethics Board web page and
in the Town Clerk's office.
(b) A complaint must be filed within one year after the matter in
question has allegedly occurred.
(c) The complaint must be mailed in a sealed envelope, marked
confidential, and addressed to Chair, Town of New Canaan Ethics
Board, P.O. Box 583, New Canaan, CT 06840. The postmarked
date on the envelope shall constitute the date of filing.
(d) The Chair of the Ethics Board shall, within five business days
after receipt, notify the respondent of the filing and date of the
complaint and shall deliver copies of the complaint and this Code
to the respondent. The respondent shall be advised that the
complaint will be treated confidentially unless the respondent
waives such confidentiality in writing.
(e) Once the complainant has performed the function of raising a
possible violation of this Code, the Ethics Board shall decide, in
the circumstances of the individual case, what further role, if any,
the complainant should have in the matter.
(2) Probable cause and confidentiality.
(a) The Ethics Board shall review the complaint to determine
whether probable cause exists for further proceedings and may
conduct an investigation for this purpose. Any investigation
conducted prior to a probable cause finding shall be confidential
unless confidentiality is waived in writing by the respondent.
Respondent may submit a preliminary written reply to the Ethics
Board within 30 days after the filing of the complaint and before
a probable cause finding issues. If the respondent has not waived
confidentiality, any allegations supplied to or received by the
Ethics Board shall not be disclosed to any third party by a
complainant, respondent, witness or Ethics Board member
except to the extent necessary for the Ethics Board to conduct its
probable cause investigation.
(b) If the Ethics Board decides by majority vote of members eligible
to vote that the complaint does not warrant further investigation
because of its insufficiency, its untimeliness, its lack of factual
basis, its de minimis nature, or otherwise, including, without
limitation, the complainant's failure to maintain the
confidentiality of his or her complaint, the Ethics Board shall
issue a finding of no probable cause dismissing the complaint.
The finding and the complaint shall remain confidential unless
confidentiality is waived in writing by the respondent. A finding
of no probable cause shall be final. The Ethics Board shall
forward copies of the finding to complainant and respondent
within three business days thereafter.
(c) If, by majority vote of members eligible to vote or by tie vote,
the Ethics Board finds probable cause, the Ethics Board shall
forward copies of the finding to complainant and respondent
§ 17-5 CHARTER § 17-5
C:141
within three business days thereafter. Upon a finding of probable
cause, the complaint, the finding, and the information gathered
during the investigation, if any, shall be made available to the
public, and all filings and proceedings that follow shall be public
except as required by law, provided, however, that deliberations
may be held in executive session to the extent permitted by the
Connecticut Freedom of Information Act.
(3) Response. Respondent shall have 30 days after his or her notification
of a finding of probable cause to file a response with the Ethics
Board. The Ethics Board may, upon reasonable grounds, extend this
deadline.
(4) Hearing.
(a) The Ethics Board shall hold a hearing on any complaint as to
which it has found probable cause unless respondent waives a
hearing in writing and the Ethics Board decides not to hold one.
The hearing shall be held on written notice of no less than 30
days to complainant and respondent. The Ethics Board may, upon
reasonable grounds, extend the date of the hearing.
(b) If a hearing is held, respondent shall have the opportunity to
be represented by legal counsel, to present evidence, and to
examine and cross-examine witnesses including the complainant.
For purposes of its investigation and at the hearing, the Ethics
Board is empowered to administer oaths or affirmations and may
compel the attendance of witnesses by issuance of subpoenas. It
may also require the production of documents, whether in hard
copy or electronic format, by issuance of subpoenas for their
production. The Ethics Board shall give effect to the rules of
privilege recognized by law and will be guided by Connecticut
State rules of evidence. The Ethics Board may examine any
witness who appears before it, including complainant and
respondent. The Ethics Board may limit the number of witnesses
and the scope of testimony to matters it believes relevant,
material, not unduly repetitious, and necessary to reach a
reasoned determination. A taped or stenographic record shall be
made of all proceedings in the hearing.
(5) Determination.
(a) Following the hearing, the Ethics Board shall issue a
determination as soon as practicable and file it with the Town
Clerk and mail copies to complainant and respondent within
three business days thereafter. No member may vote on a
determination unless he or she has attended the entire hearing,
if any, and participated in all deliberations. Deliberations may
be held in executive session to the extent permitted by the
Connecticut Freedom of Information Act. A determination of
violation requires a majority vote of members eligible to vote. In
the event of a tie vote, the determination shall be that there is no
violation.
(b) A determination of no violation of this Code shall be final.
§ 17-5 NEW CANAAN CODE § 17-5
C:142
(c) If a violation is found, the Ethics Board's determination may
recommend sanctions which may include, but need not be
limited to, censure, required recusal, disclosure of conflicts, and
removal from appointive office or employment. Any sanctions
recommended under this Code shall be separate from, and not
in limitation of, any other actions that may be taken against
respondent in any proceedings outside this Code.
(6) Submission of determination of violation. A determination of
violation of this Code shall be submitted by the Town Clerk within
three business days to the Board of Selectmen for such action as it
deems appropriate; provided, however, that if the respondent is an
official or employee of the Board of Education, the submission by the
Town Clerk shall be to the Board of Education for such action as it
deems appropriate.
(7) No retaliation. Any individual or organization that files a complaint
in good faith will not be threatened, harassed, penalized or
discriminated against for reporting what was perceived to be
wrongdoing. Retaliation of any kind by an official or employee
toward any complainant who in good faith perceived violations of
the Town's Code of Ethics will not be tolerated and may constitute
a cause for removal from office or employment or other disciplinary
action by the body of which he or she is a member.
(8) Record retention/proceedings. All written records and proceedings
of the Ethics Board will be subject to the applicable Connecticut
State laws on record retention and confidentiality.
§ 17-6. Effective date.
The effective date of this chapter shall be November 3, 2017. This chapter
supersedes the Town Code of Ethics dated January 4, 1964, as
supplemented and amended by ordinances dated March 14, 1990 and June
12, 1996, in its entirety; it also supersedes the Ethics Board Ordinance,
Chapter 17A, passed by the Town Council on July 20, 2016.
Chapter 17A
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 17A, Ethics Board, approved by the Town Council of the Town
of New Canaan 7-20-2016, was superseded by the Code of Ethics adopted
11-3-2017. See Ch. 17, Code of Ethics.]
Chapter 18
EXPLOSIVES
§ 18-1. License requirements.
No person shall manufacture, receive, have or keep for sale, use or any
other purpose, or shall transport, within the limits of the town, any quantity
§ 17-5 CHARTER § 18-1
C:143
of gunpowder, explosive nitrocellulose or explosive guncotton exceeding
one pound in weight, or any quantity of dynamite, nitroglycerin or other
explosive substance or compounds exceeding six ounces in weight, without
having obtained a license so to do as provided in this chapter.
§ 18-2. Licensing for limited quantity for sale.
The Board of Selectmen may license such persons as they may deem proper
to have, receive and keep for sale, at such place within the town limits as
may be designated by the Board of Selectmen, gunpowder in quantity not
exceeding at any one time 50 pounds.
§ 18-3. License may be granted by Board of Selectmen.
The Board of Selectmen may license such persons as they may deem proper
to manufacture, transport, have, receive or keep for sale, use, storage
or any other purpose any quantity of explosive nitrocellulose, explosive
guncotton, dynamite, nitroglycerin or other explosive substances or
compounds. Such licenses may be granted under such conditions and
limitations as the Board of Selectmen may deem advisable to impose.
§ 18-4. Fire Department to maintain list of licensees.
The Fire Marshal shall notify the Chief of the Fire Department of all licenses
granted under this chapter. The Chief of the Fire Department shall cause to
be placed and maintained in the Fire Department building a complete list
containing the names of all such licenses, together with the places where
explosives are to be kept under such licenses.
§ 18-5. Inspection by Fire Marshal.
The Fire Marshal may enter at all reasonable times into or upon the
premises of any person licensed under this chapter for the purpose of
ascertaining whether the requirements of this chapter, and the regulation
of the Board of Selectmen relating thereto, are strictly complied with.
§ 18-6. License required for blasting.
No person shall use for blasting any gunpowder, nitrocellulose, guncotton,
nitroglycerin, dynamite or other explosive substance within the limits of
the town without first having obtained a license in writing from the Fire
Marshal for such use. Such license shall contain the name of the licensee
and the date on which, or the dates between which, the use for blasting is
to occur, and shall be valid only on or between such dates.
§ 18-7. Regulations required for blasting.14
No person shall do any blasting within the limits of the town under license
from the Fire Marshal without complying with the following regulations and
14.Editor's Note: See also § 22-1, p. 2201, infra.
§ 18-1 NEW CANAAN CODE § 18-7
C:144
any other regulations in relation thereto which the Board of Selectmen may
at any time adopt:
A. No dynamite of higher than 40% strength shall be used without special
permission from the Board of Selectmen.
B. All blasts must be covered when exploded by logs covering the entire
blast, and such logs shall be chained together, or a mat or matting
material, to be approved by the Fire Marshal, shall be used to cover the
entire blast when exploded.
C. Special care must be taken to prevent any material from flying.
D. Not more than one blast hole shall be exploded at one time unless the
explosion is induced by caps set off by electricity.
E. Before any blast is exploded, two or more persons, each provided with
a red flag to be used as a warning signal, shall be so stationed as to
warn any person who may be located within 300 feet of the location of
the blast, or who would be likely to approach within such distance of the
location of the blast, and the blast shall not be exploded until each of
such persons so stationed for warning purposes shall have reported that
there is no person within such distance from the location of the blast.
F. No dynamite which has been frozen shall be used for blasting if it shall
have been thawed out by immersing it in warm water, or by heating
otherwise than in a water-jacketed kettle adequate for such use.
§ 18-8. Fire Marshal to inspect work.
The Fire Marshal shall have authority to inspect any blasting work being
done within the limits of the town and to order any changes in the methods
of work or of safeguarding persons and property from injury from such
blasting as he shall deem necessary or expedient for the protection of
persons or property.15
Chapter 19
FINANCE, BOARD OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Board of Finance generally — See Charter,
Art. V.
15.For prohibition regarding disposal see § 25-6, p. 2504, infra.
§ 18-7 CHARTER § 18-8
C:145

ARTICLE I
Alternate Members
[Adopted 11-18-75]
§ 19-1. Number; qualification; compensation.
There shall be three alternate members of the Board of Finance, who
shall be electors and taxpayers of the town. They shall hold no other
office of trust or emolument in the town, county or state governments. No
alternate member shall receive compensation for his services as such, but
any necessary expenses shall be paid to him by the Treasurer when funds
have been appropriated therefor by the Town Council. Not more than two
alternate members of the Board of Finance shall be of the same political
party.
§ 19-2. Appointment; term of office.
The Selectmen shall, in the odd-numbered years commencing in 1975, on
or after December 1, appoint the three alternate members of the Board of
Finance, who, after qualification, shall hold office for a term of two years
from the first day of December in the odd-numbered years and until their
successors have been appointed and shall have qualified.
§ 19-3. Powers and duties.
The alternate members of the Board of Finance, when seated as provided in
§ 19-4, shall have all the powers and duties of regular members of the Board
of Finance as set forth in Article V of the Charter.
§ 19-4. Seating of alternate members.
A. In the event of the absence of a regular member from a meeting of the
Board, or if a regular member is disqualified, such absent or disqualified
member shall designate an alternate to act in his place.
B. The Board of Finance, by a majority vote of those members present,
shall designate and seat an alternate or alternates in the absence of
a designation by an absent regular member; in the absence of a
designation by a regular member, who has disqualified himself; or in the
absence of a designation by a regular member, who has been disqualified
under the laws of the State of Connecticut or the Charter of the Town of
New Canaan. [Added 3-8-78]
§ 19-1 CHARTER § 19-4
C:147
Chapter 20
FALLOUT SHELTERS
§ 20-1. Minimum dimensions.
The minimum area for fallout shelters shall be 80 square feet for one to
six persons. For each person over six, an additional 10 square feet shall be
added. The minimum height of shelters shall be six feet six inches.
§ 20-2. Access.
All passages giving access shall be constructed so that any nearby falling
objects will not crush them. All exits shall be at ground level and be
so arranged that occupants can get out without outside assistance. An
approved emergency exit shall be provided.
§ 20-3. Ventilation.
A hand-operated blower system shall be provided to supply filtered outside
fresh air at a minimum rate of six cubic feet per person per minute.
The intake system shall be of rigid metal pipe with approved tight joints
terminating at least three feet above the surrounding surfaces, shall include
an approved system to filter dust from the incoming air, and shall include
an approved outside screening cap. The associated exhaust system for
expelling stale air shall be of equal construction, and equally approved
screening. Caps shall be provided to close the exhaust and inlet vents from
the inside shelter.
§ 20-4. Radiation shielding.
Ceiling shall be of sufficient thickness at all points to provide the radiation
shielding effectiveness equal to eight inches of concrete of 1.2.3 proportions
of portland cement, clean sharp sand and washed gravel plus two feet
of earth or the equivalent. The walls of below-ground shelters shall be a
minimum of 12 inch block or equivalent. Aboveground shelters shall provide
equivalent protection. All walls, ceiling and floor must be of sufficient
thickness to provide a protection factor of 1,000.
§ 20-5. Structural strength.
All shelters shall be so constructed that an excess load of 300 pounds per
square foot will be carried without damage to the structure.
§ 20-6. Drainage.
All shelters shall be provided with a four inch metal trap and Orangeburg,
tile or cast-iron pipe to carry off all fluid material which may accumulate in
the shelter and deposit it at a level below the floor of the shelter.
§ 19-4 NEW CANAAN CODE § 20-7
C:148
§ 20-7. Fire-extinguishing equipment.
It is recommended that hand-operated fire-fighting equipment be available
in all shelters. Chemical extinguishers or compounds which employ or can
produce toxic or suffocating gases, such as carbon dioxide extinguishers
and bomb- or pump-type extinguishers employing carbon tetrachloride,
shall not be used.
§ 20-8. Permit required; fee. [Amended 3-19-68; effective 4-19-68]
Before any building construction of fallout shelters is commenced there
shall be issued, upon proper application and payment of the fee required
by the Town Building Code, a permit therefor by the Town of New Canaan
Building Inspector.
§ 20-9. Other requirements.
All shelters shall comply with the requirements set forth by the Office of
Civilian Defense. Where not otherwise specifically approved, all shelters
shall in all respects comply with the requirements of the Building Code of
the Town of New Canaan. All outside shelters shall comply with the Zoning
Regulations of the Town of New Canaan.16
A shielded or rubber-covered antenna lead shall be installed in an
approved manner at the time of construction of the shelter.
Chapter 21
FIREARMS AND HUNTING
§ 21-1. Exceptions to application of ordinance.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to peace officers or members
of the armed forces in the performance of their official duties, or to persons
acting in defense of life or property.
§ 21-2. Carrying loaded firearms prohibited; exceptions.
No person shall carry any loaded firearm within the limits of any public
highway within the town, except when authorized so to do by permit issued
by the Chief of Police of the town or by the Commissioner of State Police
under provisions of the General Statutes of the state.
§ 21-3. (Reserved)17
16.Editor's Note: For Building Code, see Ch. 9; Zoning see Ch. 60.
17.Editor's Note: Former § 21-3, Hunting distances regulated, was repealed by an ordinance
adopted 6-1-71; effective 7-9-71.
§ 20-7 CHARTER § 21-4
C:149
§ 21-4. Regulations for use by those under eighteen years of age.
No person under the age of 18 years shall discharge any firearm other than
a shotgun at any place within town, except:
A. On land owned or leased by his parent, grandparent or legal guardian.
B. On an indoor target range.
C. On an outdoor target range approved as to location, construction and
operation by the Commission of Public Safety.
§ 21-5. Violations to be reported.
Any evidence of conviction of any violation of this chapter shall be submitted
to the State Department of Fisheries and Game by the Clerk of the court.
Chapter 22
FIRE DEPARTMENT
§ 22-1. Powers and duties of Fire Marshal.
It shall be the duty of the Fire Marshal, from time to time, to thoroughly
inspect any or all stoves, stovepipes, chimneys and steam boilers, and give
any instructions or directions in regard to the same as, in his opinion, shall
be proper for the protection of the property within the town; and for that
purpose he at all reasonable times may enter upon and into all lands and
buildings of the town. He shall have jurisdiction over all matters pertaining
to explosives; issue licenses for the use of explosives used in blasting; and
have all violations of Chapter 18 of this Code,18 pertaining to explosives,
summarily dealt with. Every person neglecting or refusing to follow any
instruction or directions given to him by the Fire Marshal shall be fined not
more than $50 for every such violation.
§ 22-2. Powers of Fire Police.
All the members of the Fire Department designated as Fire Police shall have
the power of constables to arrest any person interfering with or trespassing
upon the rights, duties and work of such Department in cases of fires,
including the right to arrest any persons causing or aiding or abetting the
same, and all persons stealing or attempting to steal any property at or
during the progress of the fire, and all persons robbing or attempting to rob
at or connected with any fire, or where the services of the Fire Department
are employed and, having arrested any such person, the members of the
Fire Department making such arrest shall forthwith cause such person so
arrested to be detained by the Police Department, and prefer charges to the
prosecuting attorney of the town against such person so arrested for the
crime so committed or for which he so stands charged.
18.Editor's Note: See § 18-7, p. 1803, supra.
§ 21-4 NEW CANAAN CODE § 22-3
C:150
§ 22-3. Powers of officers at fires.
The Chief of the Fire Department or other officer in command shall have
the power to prescribe certain limits in the immediate vicinity of a fire
within which only members of the Fire Department on duty, members of
the Board of Selectmen and members of the Police Department shall be
admitted, except by permission of the officer in command. The Chief of the
Fire Department or other officer in command shall have power to cause the
immediate arrest and detention of any fireman or other person who shall
make any disturbance at a fire or alarm of fire. Any officer in charge of the
Fire Department, at any fire, may command the aid of any person present in
suppressing the fire, or to assist in the removal and preservation of property
exposed to the fire, and any person so commanded shall render the aid
required, and in default thereof shall be punished as provided in § 4-8 of this
Code.19
§ 22-4. Hindering Fire Department prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person in the town to willfully obstruct any
street in the town so as to render less effective the Fire Department in the
performance of its duty in going to, coming from or attending any fires.
§ 22-5. Use of fire hydrants restricted.
No person, except an officer of the town, a member of the Fire Department,
or other proper person of the town, shall open or use any fire hydrant
without written permission from the Warden or Chief of the Fire
Department, which permission shall designate the location of the hydrant to
be opened and used.
§ 22-6. Obstructing use of hydrants prohibited.
No person shall obstruct any fire hydrant in the town by piling building
or other material within 10 feet thereof, or by parking any motor or other
vehicle within 10 feet thereof; or by hitching any horse or other animal to
any such hydrant or to any object within 10 feet of such hydrant.20
§ 22-7. Encumbering fire escapes prohibited.
No person shall at any time place any encumbrance of any kind whatsoever
before or upon any fire escape, balcony or ladder.
§ 22-8. Injury to apparatus prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person in the town to run over any fire hose
in use by the Fire Department or in any way to injure or endanger any
apparatus or equipment belonging to the Department.
19.Editor's Note: See p. 404.
20.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 6, Animals and Fowl, p. 601, supra.
§ 22-3 CHARTER § 22-9
C:151
§ 22-9. Bonfires restricted.
The making or maintaining of any bonfire in any street or public place in
the town without written permission therefor from the First Selectman or
officers authorized by state law to issue such permission shall be unlawful.
§ 22-10. Outdoor fires.
No person shall leave any outdoor fire untended.
Chapter 23
FIRE ZONES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Citation hearing procedure — See Ch. 11.
Fire Department — See Ch. 22.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 54.
Traffic regulations — See Ch. 58.
§ 23-1. Authority; scope.
This ordinance is adopted pursuant to Sections 29-293 and 7-148 of the
Connecticut General Statutes, and it applies to all buildings or facilities
open to the public.
§ 23-2. Definitions.
As used in this ordinance, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FIRE ZONE — A designated, unobstructed passageway sufficient in size to
permit free passage of fire and other emergency equipment from a public
sheet to all necessary areas or portions of any public or private property
open to the public.
§ 23-3. Establishment.
A. Whenever the Fire Marshal or Fire Chief determines that the reasonable
safety of persons occupying or using any building or facilities open to
the public requires the establishment of a fire zone for orderly access
of fire and other emergency equipment, the Fire Marshal shall establish
such fire zone by written order. The Fire Marshal shall cause a copy
of such order to be delivered to the property owner either by personal
delivery or by certified mail. Any party aggrieved by any order of the
Fire Marshal under this ordinance may appeal such order to the Fire
Commission within 15 days of delivery.
B. In establishing any fire zone, the Fire Marshal shall take into
consideration the size, type of construction, and nature of use or
occupancy of any buildings or facilities to be served, the placement
and availability of fire hydrants, the type of fire equipment and their
§ 22-9 NEW CANAAN CODE § 23-3
C:152
turning radius, and the length of hoses available to the New Canaan Fire
Department. The Fire Marshal shall also take into account the lack of
adequate parking that exists in New Canaan and in all cases attempt to
preserve this precious commodity. The Fire Marshal shall consult with
the Chief Building Official and the Town Planner before issuing any order
establishing a fire zone to ensure that the proposed fire zone will not
conflict with the requirements of the Connecticut State Building Code
or the planning and zoning permits and regulations applicable to the
property.
§ 23-4. Copies of orders to be filed.
Whenever the Fire Marshal establishes a fire zone, the Fire Marshal shall
file a copy of the order with the Town Clerk, Police Department, Planning
and Zoning Commission, Chief Building Official, Fire Chief, Fire
Commission and the Department of Public Works of New Canaan.
§ 23-5. Minimum requirements.
Any such fire zone shall be from 14 feet to 24 feet in width, consisting
of either asphalt, gravel, or other suitable hard surface extending from
a public street to all premises open to the public, to provide access to
such premises for fire equipment and vehicles as deemed necessary by
the Fire Marshal or Fire Chief considering current and future apparatus
specifications.
§ 23-6. Delineation of fire zones; plan approval required.
The property owner, or the owner's agent, shall erect or install signs,
markings and other devices as ordered by the Fire Marshal to delineate said
fire zone in accordance with the standards hereinafter set forth in § 23-7.
The property owner, or the owner's agent, shall first submit a delineation
plan to the Fire Marshal within 30 days of the Fire Marshal's order
establishing the fire zone, for review and approval by the Fire Marshal. On
site inspection with the owner or the owner's agent may be required by the
Fire Marshal prior to implementation of the delineation plan.
§ 23-7. Installation of signs, markings and other devices.
A. Signs:
(1) Signs shall be installed in accordance with the Manual on Uniform
Traffic Control Devices published by the Federal Highway
Administration.
(2) Signs shall be mounted on a steel post or as otherwise approved by
the Fire Marshal.
(3) Signs shall be installed at a height of seven feet from the surface of
pavement to base of the sign.
(4) Signs shall be on a post facing both directions of travel (mounted
back to back).
(5) The distance between signs shall be a maximum of 50 feet.
B. Lettering on the driveway or other surface:
§ 23-3 CHARTER § 23-7
C:153
(1) Lettering in a fire zone shall read "FIRE ZONE - NO PARKING" and
shall be at least two feet in height with at least four-inch strokes.
(2) Lettering shall be done in both directions where applicable.
(3) A minimum of five-inch line shall be painted to designate the width
of the fire zone.
(4) All markings and lettering shall be painted traffic yellow in color.
§ 23-8. Maintenance.
Whenever the Fire Marshal establishes a fire zone under this ordinance,
the property owner shall maintain the area so designated and keep and
maintain it free of ice and snow and of any other materials which would
obstruct the use of said fire zone. In addition, the property owner shall
maintain the signs and lettering, and repaint or replace the same as
necessary.
§ 23-9. Parking violations; penalties.
A. No person shall leave unattended a motor vehicle in a fire zone which
has been established under this ordinance. The registered owner of a
motor vehicle shall be presumed to be the operator of such vehicle.
B. Whenever a vehicle is found in violation of this section, any police officer,
official of the Fire Department or Fire Marshal's office, or employee
of the Parking Bureau shall serve upon the owner or operator of such
vehicle or place upon such vehicle a parking ticket. Fines and late
fees shall be in accordance with the Town of New Canaan parking
regulations.
C. If a police officer, official of the Fire Department or Fire Marshal's office,
or employee of the Parking Bureau determines that a vehicle parked
in a fire zone constitutes such a serious hazard as to be a menace to
traffic or fire safety, that officer may, in addition to placing a parking
ticket on such vehicle, cause such vehicle to be removed pursuant to the
provisions of the General Statutes.
§ 23-10. Penalties for other offenses.
Any person violating any provision of this ordinance, other than those
in § 23-9, shall be fined $250 for each offense. Each day any violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense. Fines under this section shall
be imposed by municipal citation issued by the Fire Marshal or any assistant
or deputy Fire Marshal. The issuance, payment, and procedure to contest
a municipal citation shall be in accordance with Sections 7-148(c)(10)(A)
and 7-152c of the Connecticut General Statutes, and the citation hearing
procedure in Chapter 11 of the Code of the Town of New Canaan.
§ 23-7 NEW CANAAN CODE § 23-10
C:154
Chapter 25
GARBAGE AND REFUSE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Blight abatement and prevention — See Ch.
7A.
Housing Code — See Ch. 32.
Nuisances — See Ch. 37.
Peddlers and itinerant vendors — See Ch. 44.
Recycling — See Ch. 49.
§ 23-10 CHARTER § 23-10
C:155

ARTICLE I
In General
§ 25-1. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them:
ASHES — The residue of the combustion of any type of solid fuel such as
wood, coal, charcoal, or any other combustible materials.
DIRECTOR OF HEALTH — The Director of Health of the Town of New
Canaan, or any Health District of which New Canaan is a part, or his/her
duly authorized representative.
GARBAGE — All waste, animal, fish, fowl, fruit, vegetable matter or other
waste, produced from or resulting from the use and storage of food for
human consumption and includes spoiled food and soiled paper.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, association,
firm, group, or entity of any kind.
PRIVATE COLLECTOR — Any person who collects and carries, for payment
and by agreement with the user, refuse for disposal.
RECYCLABLES — All materials deemed by the State of Connecticut and
the Town of New Canaan as recyclable materials to be separated from the
garbage/refuse and brought to the Transfer Station to be properly recycled.
See Code of the Town of New Canaan Chapter 49, Recycling.
REFUSE — All putrescible and nonputrescible solids (except body wastes),
including but not limited to garbage, rubbish, ashes, dead animals,
excrement from pets or other animals.
RUBBISH — Nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible
and noncombustible waste materials (except garbage), such as wood, coal,
cardboard, paper, plastic, wrappings, containers, rags, cartons, boxes, tree
branches, brush, yard trimmings, cans, metal, glass, crockery, and building
materials.
USER — Every person owning or occupying premises located in the Town,
on which premises refuse is created or generated, and who intends to
deliver or transport such refuse to the Town Transfer Station for disposal.
§ 25-2. Time of use restricted.
All persons delivering refuse for disposal at the Town Transfer Station may
do so only on such days and at such times as may be prescribed by the
Board of Selectmen.
§ 25-3. Duties of Town regarding disposal.
It shall be the duty of the agent of the Board of Selectmen in charge of
the Town Transfer Station to dispose of all refuse and recyclable materials
properly delivered in accordance with the terms hereof.
§ 25-1 CHARTER § 25-4
C:157
§ 25-4. Use of Transfer Station restricted to Town.
No person shall use the facilities of the Town Transfer Station for the
disposal of refuse brought into the Town from elsewhere. Any person
violating this section shall be subject to payment of a special fee prescribed
by the Board of Selectmen and, in the discretion of the Board, to revocation
of license as provided by § 25-15 and to the penalties provided in § 4-8 of
the New Canaan Code.
§ 25-5. Responsibility of owners of premises.
The owner of any premises may dispose of garbage on such premises by
composting the same, provided such disposal does not create offensive
odors, invite the breeding or collection of flies, mosquitoes or rodents,
create a fire hazard or in any manner tend, in the opinion of the Director
of Health or First Selectman, to constitute a menace to public health or
create a nuisance. Disposal of rubbish or refuse on such premises shall
not be allowed unless permitted by the State of Connecticut Department of
Environmental Protection and unless the foregoing provisions are met.
§ 25-6. Explosives prohibited.
No person shall dispose of any explosive or dangerously inflammable
materials, such as shotgun shells, cartridges, dynamite, empty ether cans,
cleaning fluids, gasoline and the like, at the Town Transfer Station.
§ 25-7. (Reserved)
§ 25-8. Public dumps prohibited.
No person shall permit any land situated in the Town to be used as a public
garbage or refuse dump.
§ 25-9. Scattering of refuse prohibited.
No person owning or occupying land in the Town shall place, either on land
owned or occupied by such person or on land of another, or permit or allow
to remain on land owned or occupied by such person, in the open, that is,
outside of buildings or covered cans or boxes or other suitable receptacles,
any paper, refuse or rubbish of any kind whatever, which is likely to be
carried by the wind into highways or onto the land of others.
§ 25-10. Board may make additional regulations.
The Board of Selectmen and the Director of Health may from time to time
prescribe such rules and regulations, not inconsistent with the provisions of
this code relating to sanitation, as shall in their judgment be necessary for
the proper administration of this chapter.
§ 25-4 NEW CANAAN CODE § 25-10
C:158
ARTICLE II
Private Collectors
§ 25-11. Licensing requirements.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person who is not licensed by the Town of
New Canaan to engage in the business of collecting, transporting or
disposing of refuse in the Town of New Canaan for compensation. The
Director of Health shall issue licenses for such business subject to the
following conditions:
(1) The licensee shall have the equipment provided for under § 25-17
hereof, together with sufficient personnel to collect and dispose of
such refuse in accordance with Town regulations.
(2) The licensee shall be a resident of the State of Connecticut.
(3) Approval of the issuance by the Director of Health or his/her
authorized agent.
B. Every person desiring to engage in the collection, transportation or
disposal of refuse shall make written application to the Director of
Health on a form provided for that purpose, including but not limited
to the name of such person, his residence address or the address of his
place of business, number of employees, a description of the equipment
to be used in the collection, transportation or disposal of such refuse,
and the place of disposal. The application shall be accompanied by
a certificate of public liability insurance in an amount not less than
$1,000,000. Upon approval of such application by the Director of Health
or his authorized, agent, the Director of Health shall issue a license
to the applicant. The license fee shall be established by the Board of
Selectmen for each truck used by the licensee, payable in advance to
the Town of New Canaan. Licensees who do not dispose of their refuse
at the Town facility, and provided that the Director of Health or his
authorized agent approves of their alternate places of disposal, shall pay
any additional fee as may be established by the Board of Selectmen.
§ 25-12. Expiration and renewal of licenses.
A license issued under the preceding section shall expire on the 30th day of
April of each year. Permits shall be renewed annually in the same manner
and upon payment of the same annual fee as provided in § 25-11.
§ 25-13. License plates required.
Each truck used by the licensee in the business of hauling garbage and
refuse shall have attached to it a license plate on the side thereof. Such
plates shall be issued by the agent of the Board of Selectmen in charge of
the Transfer Station in such form and size as the Board of Selectmen shall
determine.
§ 25-14. Tipping fee required for use of Transfer Station.
Each private collector using the facilities of the Town Transfer Station for
disposing of refuse collected by such private collector within the Town
§ 25-11 CHARTER § 25-14
C:159
under the provisions of this chapter shall pay to the Board of Selectmen, for
the use of the Town, a tipping fee on each ton of refuse delivered by such
private collector to the Town Transfer Station. The amount of such fee and
the method of payment shall be determined by the Board of Selectmen and
published at least once. The Town may require a cash or surety bond from
any private collector not paying the tipping fee upon delivery of the refuse.
§ 25-15. Revocation of license.
In the event that there shall be a violation by a licensee under this article of
any provision of this chapter or if it shall be evident that the provisions of
this chapter cannot be complied with by a licensee, the Director of Health
or his authorized agent may recommend to the Board of Selectmen that
the license of such licensee be revoked or not be renewed. The Board of
Selectmen shall hold a hearing thereon and thereafter, for cause shown,
may revoke or refuse to renew such license.
§ 25-16. Regulations for use of Transfer Station by collectors.
A. Private collectors in using the facilities of the Town Transfer Station
must at all times keep refuse separate from all materials deemed
recyclable by the State of Connecticut and the Town of New Canaan.
B. Private collectors or their agents must, when on the premises of the
Town Transfer Station, obey the directions of the agent of the Board
of Selectmen in charge of the Town Transfer Station or his assistants
in unloading their vehicles or otherwise using the facilities of the Town
Transfer Station.
§ 25-17. Regulations for vehicles used.
No refuse shall be transported through any public street or public highway
in the Town except in covered vehicles so constructed as to prevent leakage,
access of flies or the scattering of contents or dust. The covers on such
vehicles shall be kept closed while such vehicle is in transit to or from the
point of collection of such refuse to or from the Town Transfer Station or
any other point at which such refuse is being disposed of. The covers on
such vehicles shall also be kept closed when the vehicles are not being
loaded or unloaded, and no such vehicles shall be parked on any public
highway, street or square except temporarily or for the purpose of loading
or unloading the contents thereof. One cover on such vehicle may be
left open while such vehicle is actively engaged in picking up refuse for
disposal, provided that no run shall be made of more than 1/2 mile between
points where refuse is being collected.
§ 25-18. Approval of vehicles required.
Before any vehicle is employed in the collection of refuse, its design,
construction and equipment shall be approved after inspection by the
Director of Health and the Police Department.
§ 25-14 NEW CANAAN CODE § 25-19
C:160
§ 25-19. Sanitary requirements for vehicles.
All vehicles and equipment used in the transportation of refuse shall be kept
reasonably clean and shall not present a public health hazard.
§ 25-20. Inspection permitted.
All vehicles and equipment used in the transportation and collection of
refuse or recyclables within the Town shall be subject to inspection by the
Director of Health at all times when such vehicles and equipment are being
so employed.
§ 25-19 CHARTER § 25-20
C:161

ARTICLE III
Users
§ 25-21. Rules and regulations.
A. Mixing refuse with recyclable materials. Users must not mix refuse, with
materials deemed recyclable by the State of Connecticut and the Town
of New Canaan. See Code of the Town of New Canaan Chapter 49,
Recycling.
B. Storage. All garbage must be stored in watertight, tightly covered cans.
C. Restrictions on contents of refuse. The Board of Selectmen or its agent
in charge of the Transfer Station may restrict or prohibit the mixing or
disposal of certain contents of refuse, such as ashes, tree branches and
yard trimmings, when the Town provides alternative disposal procedures
or locations, or when disposal of the same is not allowed by the Town's
municipal solid waste carriers or disposal sites.
D. Use of Transfer Station. Any user may deliver refuse directly to the Town
Transfer Station, subject to fees established by the Board of Selectmen.
§ 25-21 CHARTER § 25-21
C:163
Chapter 26
GOING-OUT-OF-BUSINESS SALES
§ 26-1. License required.
No person shall advertise, imply or hold out by any method that any sale
of goods, wares or merchandise is a removal or going-out-of-business sale
unless a license is first obtained from the Town Clerk to conduct such sale.
§ 26-2. Application for license.
Any applicant for a license required by this chapter shall state upon his
application the true name of the owner of the goods to be offered for sale,
the name of the operator of the sale and the address where such sale is to
be held. The applicant shall exhibit to the Town Clerk at the time of such
application a receipt or other evidence showing payment in full of all taxes
or assessments due the town on the goods to be sold at the sale for which
the application is made.
§ 26-3. Fees, etc. [Amended 5-19-65]
A license fee in accordance with the following schedule shall be paid to the
Town Clerk upon the issuance of any license under the provisions of this
chapter, and such fee shall cover the conduct of any such removal or goingout-
of-business sale for a period not exceeding 60 days, and there shall be
no renewal or extension of any such license: for a 15 day license period,
$25; for a 30 day license period, $50; for a 60 day license period, $75. In
addition a fee of $1 for each $1,000 of stated inventory shall be paid.
§ 26-4. Restriction on type of merchandise.
Only such goods, wares or merchandise which were in the possession of the
applicant for the license required in this chapter, and which were actually
on the premises where the sale is to take place at the time of the application
for the license shall be sold at a removal or going-out-of-business sale.
§ 26-5. Exceptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to sales conducted by sheriffs,
constables or other public or court officials or to any other person acting
under the directions of any authority or court, state or federal, selling
goods, wares or merchandise in the course of his official duties, nor to any
other person covered by any other provision of this code.
§ 26-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall willfully violate any provision of this chapter shall be
punished as provided in this Code.21 A second conviction shall cancel the
21.Editor's Note: See § 4-8, p. 404.
§ 25-21 NEW CANAAN CODE § 26-6
C:164
license of any person so convicted and no license shall be issued to any such
offender for six months after such conviction.
Chapter 27
HAIR AND BEAUTY SHOPS
§ 26-6 CHARTER § 26-6
C:165

ARTICLE I
General Standards and Requirements
§ 27-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words shall have the meaning
ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates
a different meaning. Words not specifically defined shall carry their
customary meaning.
BARBERING — Practices as defined in § 20-234 of the Connecticut General
Statutes, as the same may be amended from time to time, and includes
the following described practices upon the head, face, scalp, or neck for
cosmetic purposes and done for the public, with or without compensation
therefor: shaving or trimming the beard; cutting hair; styling or cutting
hairpieces and wigs; giving facial and scalp massage or application of
oils, creams, lotions or other preparations, either by hand or mechanical
appliances; singeing, shampooing or dyeing the hair, or applying hair tonic,
and applying cosmetic preparations, antiseptics, powders, oils, clays or
lotions to scalp, face or neck; provided nothing in this chapter shall permit
any of the services or acts herein described to be used for the treatment or
cure of any physical or mental disease or ailment.
BARBERSHOP — Any establishment engaged in the practice of barbering.
BEAUTY SHOP — Generally, any establishment offering any of the following
services covered by this chapter: barbering, hairdressing, cosmetology,
manicures, pedicures, and/or waxing. The following are specific types of
beauty shops: barbershops; hairdressing shops; cosmetology shops; nail
salons; waxing establishments; spas providing covered services.
DIRECTOR OF HEALTH — The Director of Health of the Town of New
Canaan or his/her duly authorized representative.
HAIRDRESSING AND COSMETOLOGY — Practices as defined in § 20-250
of the Connecticut General Statutes, as the same may be amended from
time to time, and includes: the art of dressing, arranging, curling, waving,
weaving, cutting, singeing, bleaching and coloring the hair and treating the
scalp of any person, and massaging, cleansing, stimulating, manipulating,
exercising or beautifying with the use of the hands, appliances, cosmetic
preparations, antiseptics, tonics, lotions, creams, powders, oils or clays
and doing similar work on the face, neck and arms, and manicuring the
fingernails of any person for compensation, provided nothing in this section
shall prohibit an unlicensed person from performing facials, eyebrow
arching, shampooing, manicuring of the fingernail or, for cosmetic purposes
only, trimming, filing and painting the healthy toenails, excluding cutting
nail beds, corns and calluses or other medical treatment involving the foot
or ankle, or braiding hair.
HAIRDRESSING OR COSMETOLOGY SHOP — Any establishment engaged
in the practice of hairdressing or cosmetology for the public.
§ 27-1 CHARTER § 27-1
C:167
MOBILE WORK STATION — A modular space which can be used for
multiple purposes through the use of mobile equipment.
NAIL SALON — Any establishment offering services primarily relating to
beautification of the nails of the hands and feet, for compensation, including
manicures or pedicures and other services offered by a nail technician.
NAIL TECHNICIAN — A person, who for compensation, cuts, shapes,
polishes, or enhances the appearance of the nails of the hands and/or feet,
including, but not limited to, the application and removal of sculptured or
artificial nails.
OPERATOR — Any person, including, but not limited to, a licensed
hairdresser/cosmetician or barber, or unlicensed person who is performing
tasks allowed under the scope of this chapter and the Public Health Code of
the State of Connecticut.
OTHER SERVICES — The following described practices can be performed
by an unlicensed individual under the supervision of a licensed hairdresser/
cosmetician in the State of Connecticut:
SHAMPOO STATION — A station consisting of a shampoo bowl (sink) and a
shampoo chair.
WAXING — The removal of superfluous hair from the surface of the skin by
means of hot wax applications.
WAXING ESTABLISHMENTS — Any establishment offering waxing services
for compensation. Any spa or other establishment offering waxing services
shall be covered by this chapter.
WORKING AREA — A separate room with more than one work station, or a
private room set aside to serve one customer at a time.
WORK STATION — A chair, countertop and floor space set aside for the
purpose of serving a customer, including floor space for the operator to
stand while serving the customer.
§ 27-2. Plan review and preoperational inspections.
A. No beauty shop shall be relocated, constructed, remodeled or
extensively altered, nor shall a structure be converted to use as a beauty
shop, except in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the
New Canaan Health Department.
B. Properly prepared plans drawn to scale of not less than one-quarter inch
equals one inch, and specifications for such construction, remodeling
or alteration, shall be submitted to the Director of Health for review
A. Manicuring nails of the hands and/or feet.
B. Performing facials.
C. Shampooing of the hair.
D. Eyebrow arching.
E. Braiding hair.
§ 27-1 NEW CANAAN CODE § 27-2
C:168
and approval before relocation, construction, remodeling, alteration or
conversion is begun. The plans and specifications shall indicate the
proposed layout, arrangement and construction materials of work areas
and the type and model of proposed fixed equipment and facilities. The
plans and specifications shall be submitted with forms furnished by the
Director of Health. The Director of Health shall approve the plans and
specifications if they meet the requirements of this chapter and the
Public Health Code of the State of Connecticut.
C. Prior to the beauty shop's opening, the Director of Health shall conduct
a preoperational inspection to determine compliance with the approved
plans and specifications and with the requirements of this chapter and
the Public Health Code of the State of Connecticut.
§ 27-3. Permits.
A. No person shall maintain or operate any beauty shop without having
a valid permit issued by the Director of Health. Only a person who
complies with the requirements of this code shall be entitled to receive
or retain such a permit. In addition to such permit for the shop, any
independent contractor operating within the shop shall have a separate
permit for his or her work stations.
B. Application for a permit shall be made on forms furnished by the
Director of Health, wherein the applicant shall state and sign his/her
name, address, the address of the place of business, and give such other
pertinent information as the Director of Health may require. All permits
are valid for one year or a portion thereof, and are renewable each year
on or before January 1 of each year.
C. Every applicant for a permit shall pay an annual permit fee as
determined by the New Canaan Board of Selectmen.
D. No permit shall be issued or renewed until a completed application has
been submitted, the permit fee has been paid and the applicant's beauty
shop meets the requirements set forth in this chapter and all other
applicable state and local regulations.
E. Permits shall be valid until the expiration date indicated on the permit
unless suspended or revoked by the Director of Health, or until such
time as the facility changes owners, closes or goes out of business.
F. Permits shall not be transferable from person to person or from location
to location.
G. The Director of Health, after proper identification, shall be permitted
to enter, during operating hours, any portion of any beauty shop for
the purpose of making inspections to determine compliance with this
chapter and the Public Health Code of the State of Connecticut. The
Director of Health may require proof of state licenses from each person
performing work that requires such a license.
H. A temporary permit to operate a beauty shop may be granted for a
period not to exceed 14 calendar days. A temporary permit would be
required for conducting a public demonstration, a fund-raising event or
a public convention.
§ 27-2 CHARTER § 27-4
C:169
§ 27-4. Annual inspections.
At least once a year, the Director of Health shall inspect each beauty shop
and shall make as many additional inspections as are necessary for the
enforcement of this chapter and the Public Health Code of the State of
Connecticut. Any shop offering pedicures as a service will be inspected a
minimum of twice a year.
§ 27-5. Permit suspension and revocation.
A. Failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter and applicable
regulations shall be grounds for revocation or suspension of any permit
issued under the provisions of this chapter.
B. In the event that the Director of Health finds unsanitary conditions in the
operation of a beauty shop, or if a violation or set of violations appears
on more than one consecutive inspection report, the Director of Health
may immediately issue a written notice to the permit holder, or person in
charge, citing such conditions, specify the corrective action to be taken
and time frame within which action shall be taken. If correction is not
made in the allotted time, the permit may be revoked or suspended.
C. The Director of Health may suspend, without warning, prior notice
or hearing, any permit to operate a beauty shop, in the following
circumstances:
(1) If the operation constitutes an imminent hazard to public health; or
(2) If the owner, operator or person in charge has interfered with the
performance of the Director of Health's duties; or
(3) For nonpayment of inspection fees or permit fees.
D. An imminent health hazard shall include, but is not limited to, any one
of the following:
(1) An ongoing outbreak of an infectious, pathogenic or toxic agent
capable of being transmitted to consumers.
(2) The absence of potable water, supplied under pressure, in a quantity
which, in the opinion of the Director of Health, is capable of meeting
the needs of the facility.
(3) A sewage backup into the facility.
(4) An unlicensed individual performing procedures requiring licensure
by the Public Health Code of the State of Connecticut.
E. Suspension shall be effective upon delivery of the written order to the
permit holder or person in charge of the facility by the Director of
Health. When a permit is suspended, all beauty shop services shall cease
immediately and shall not resume until written approval to resume has
been issued by the Director of Health. The Director of Health shall
remove a suspended permit from the premises.
F. When a permit is suspended, the holder of a permit, or the person in
charge, shall be notified in writing of the suspension, and an opportunity
for a hearing will be provided if a written request for hearing is filed with
the Director of Health by the holder of the permit within 48 hours. The
Director of Health may end the suspension at any time by giving written
notice to the permit holder if reasons for suspension no longer exist.
§ 27-4 NEW CANAAN CODE § 27-5
C:170
G. Upon receiving a request for a hearing, the Director of Health shall
immediately examine the merits of such suspension and may vacate,
modify or affirm such suspension.
H. The permit holder who is aggrieved by such action of the Director of
Health may, within 48 hours after the making of such decision, appeal
to the Commissioner of the State of Connecticut Department of Public
Health, who shall thereupon immediately notify the authority from
whose order the appeal was taken and examine the merits of such
suspension and may vacate, modify, or affirm such suspension.
§ 27-6. Permit revocation or nonrenewal.
A. The Director of Health, after providing opportunity for hearing, may
revoke or refuse to renew the permit of any person for serious or
repeated violations of any of the provisions of this code, or for
interference with the Director of Health in the performance of official
duties or for cases where the permit to operate has been obtained
through nondisclosure, misrepresentation or intentional misstatement of
a material fact.
B. Prior to revocation or nonrenewal, the Director of Health shall notify the
permit holder, or person in charge at the facility of the specific reason(s)
for such revocation or nonrenewal, and that the permit shall be revoked
or not renewed at the end of 10 calendar days following service of such
notice, unless a written request for hearing is filed with the Director
of Health by the holder of the permit within 48 hours of such notice.
If no request for a hearing is filed within 48 hours of such notice, the
revocation or nonrenewal becomes final. The Director of Health shall
remove a revoked permit from the premises.
§ 27-7. Permit reinstatement.
A. Suspension. Whenever a permit has been suspended, the holder of the
suspended permit may make written request for permit reinstatement.
Within 10 days following receipt of a written request, including a
statement signed by the applicant that, in his or her opinion, the
conditions causing the suspension have been corrected, the Director of
Health shall make a reinspection. If the Director of Health determines
that the applicant has complied with the requirements of this chapter
and the Connecticut State Public Health Code, the permit shall be
reinstated and returned to the permit holder upon payment of all
outstanding fees.
B. Revocation/nonrenewal. After a period of 60 days from the date of
revocation or refusal to renew, a written application may be made for
the issuance of a new permit. This application will be treated as a new
application. All appropriate procedures and inspections will be required,
including a plan review.
§ 27-8. Hearings.
The Director of Health shall conduct the hearings provided for in this
chapter at a time and place designated. The Director of Health shall
§ 27-5 CHARTER § 27-8
C:171
summarize the proceedings of such hearings and provide sufficient copies.
The Director of Health shall make a final finding based upon the complete
hearing record, and shall sustain, modify or rescind any notice or order
considered in the hearing. The Director of Health shall furnish a written
report of the hearing decision to the permit holder within 10 calendar days
of the hearing date.
§ 27-9. Service of notices or orders.
A notice or order provided for in this chapter is properly served when it
is delivered to the permit holder, or person in charge, or when it is sent
by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known
address of the holder of the permit. A completed and signed inspection
report shall constitute a written notice.
§ 27-8 NEW CANAAN CODE § 27-9
C:172
ARTICLE II
Specific Standards and Requirements
§ 27-10. Equipment and facilities.
A. Water supply. An adequate supply of hot and cold running water, at
proper temperatures, from a municipal or approved private source shall
be provided for service for customers, cleanliness of employees and for
washing floors, walls, ceiling and equipment.
B. Hot water. Hot water at any faucet shall not exceed 110 F.
C. Waste disposal. Wastewater from all fixtures shall be discharged into
municipal sewers. Otherwise, suitable facilities shall be installed for
the absorption of the wastes by the soil in subsurface sewage disposal
systems in accordance with provisions of the Public Health Code of the
State of Connecticut and the New Canaan Health Department.
D. Plumbing fixtures.
(1) Plumbing fixtures shall be of impervious material and of a type
which is easily cleanable. They shall be free from cracks and from
parts which are not readily accessible for cleaning. They shall be of
a type which does not constitute a hazard to a public supply through
backsiphonage, or cross-connection.
(2) All plumbing installation and fixtures shall conform to applicable
building and plumbing codes.
(3) Shampoo bowls shall be used for barbering, hairdressing and
cosmetology work only.
(4) A utility sink shall be provided for proper cleaning of surfaces and
equipment.
(5) At least one handwash facility shall be located in each private
treatment room and in each work area in order to provide for
proper handwashing before serving each customer. Those premises
in operation prior to the effective date of this ordinance are exempt.
(6) A mop sink must be provided for cleaning the facility. Those
premises in operation prior to the effective date of this ordinance
are exempt from this requirement.
E. Floors. Floors should be nonporous and of such construction as to be
easily cleaned. Floors where tinting or shampooing are done, or where
chemicals for bleaching hair are used, shall have hard and washable
surfaces. Floors shall be kept clean and in good repair. If carpeting or
similar material is used for floor covering, it shall be of light color with a
single loop pile of not more than 1/4 inch in height. Such floor covering
shall be kept clean by vacuuming at least daily and shampooing at least
once annually and more frequently if the covering is not clean.
F. Lighting. Lighting fixtures shall be in sufficient number and properly
placed so as to provide adequate illumination.
G. Ventilation. The shop shall be properly and adequately ventilated so as
to remove excess heat and odors. Salon ventilation shall comply with
state and local building codes and ordinances.
H. Cabinets. Cabinets shall be provided for storage of clean linen, towels,
blankets, and gowns. Cabinets shall have tight-fitting doors that shall be
§ 27-10 CHARTER § 27-10
C:173
kept closed to protect the linen, towels, blankets, and gowns from dust
and dirt.
I. Receptacle for used towels and gowns. A covered receptacle, which can
be readily emptied and cleaned, shall be provided and maintained in a
sanitary manner. Chemically soiled towels and linens shall be stored in
fire-retardant containers.
J. Refuse. Covered containers for hair droppings, paper and other waste
material shall be provided and maintained in a sanitary manner.
K. Toilet facilities.
(1) Adequate facilities and hand wash sinks must be provided for
customers and employees. Such facilities and washbasins shall be
kept clean and in working order.
(2) Adequate and conveniently located hand washing facilities shall be
provided with hot and cold running water, a sanitary soap dispenser
and single-use towels for customers and employees.
(3) The use of common soap for more than one person is prohibited.
(4) A covered refuse receptacle shall be provided in the ladies room.
(5) The doors of all toilet rooms shall be self-closing.
L. Work stations.
(1) Chairs in work stations shall be at least 54 inches apart, center to
center. Those premises in operation prior to the effective date of this
ordinance are exempt from this requirement.
(2) A two-foot-wide workspace shall be maintained behind each chair
for the operator. Those premises in operation prior to the effective
date of this ordinance are exempt from this requirement.
(3) Three-foot-wide aisles that are separate and discrete from work
areas shall be maintained throughout the shop.
(4) No hair dryers shall be placed in any waiting room or encroach on
the required three-foot-wide aisle space.
(5) Diagrams Xa and Xb provide schematic example for the proper
design of the floor plan.22
(6) Mobile stations must be designed to provide the same workspace
and separating distances as fixed stations. For a mobile station, it
is assumed that the dryer can be accommodated in the workspace
designated for the operator.
M. Beauty shop in residence. In addition to zoning and other permits that
may be required:
(1) A beauty shop located in a residence must be confined to a separate
room, separated with ceiling-high partitions and provided with a
door to be closed at all times.
(2) The area within a home operated as a beauty shop must be equipped
with the facilities and instruments required in all such
establishments.
§ 27-11. Maintenance and operation.
A. General cleanliness.
22.Editor's Note: Diagrams Xa and Xb are available in the Town offices.
§ 27-10 NEW CANAAN CODE § 27-11
C:174
(1) The permittee of every beauty shop shall keep it in a clean sanitary
condition at all times.
(2) No hair droppings shall be allowed to accumulate on floors. Hair
droppings shall be removed frequently and as soon as possible, in
such a manner as not to cause objectionable conditions.
B. Walls, ceilings and fixtures.
(1) Ceilings shall be kept in good repair, and cracks in walls, especially
around baseboards, shall be filled in so as to prevent the harboring
and breeding of insects.
(2) Cabinets, shelves, furniture, shampoo bowls and fixtures shall be
kept clean and free of dust, dirt and hair droppings. Arms, seats, and
rests of chairs shall be wiped of hair droppings after serving each
customer.
C. Sanitary services.
(1) No person affected with infectious disease shall be attended.
(2) A towel shall not be used for more than one person without being
properly laundered before each use.
(3) A sanitary paper strip or clean towel shall be placed completely
around the neck of each customer before an apron or any other
protective device is fastened around neck.
(4) Clean towels shall be delivered in closed container and kept in a
clean, closed cabinet or closet. A commercial linen service shall be
used for laundering if not done on premises.
D. Sanitation of equipment and implements.
(1) Hair brushes, combs, and all other implements used on a customer
shall be kept clean and sanitary at all times and shall undergo
thorough cleansing and sanitizing after serving each customer or
single-service disposable implements shall be used.
(2) Cleaned and sanitized implements shall be stored in sanitarycovered
containers which shall contain a disinfectant, or in a clean
drawer.
(3) After handling a customer affected with an eruption or whose skin
is broken out or is inflamed or contains pus, the instruments shall
be effectively cleaned, washed with soap or a detergent and water,
then rinsed with water having a temperature of at least 170° F. or
allowed to remain for five minutes in alcohol (70% to 80%) or some
other approved disinfectant or sanitizing process.
(4) Shaker-top containers must be provided for dispensing lotions and
powders.
(5) Single-service towels, papers and other material shall be disposed of
in the proper receptacle immediately after use and shall not be used
again.
(6) All disposable materials that come into contact with blood and/or
body fluids shall be disposed of in sealable plastic bags prior to
placing in the waste receptacle.
(7) All articles that come into contact with the customer's skin, nails,
or hair that cannot be effectively cleaned and sanitized shall be
disposed of in a covered waste receptacle immediately after use.
Exception: Orangesticks, emery boards, buffing squares, cosmetic
§ 27-11 CHARTER § 27-11
C:175
sponges, and disposable nail bits may be kept for the original
customer if kept in a covered container labeled with the customer's
name.
E. Shaving brushes, mugs, finger bowls and credo blades. The use of
shaving brushes, mugs and credo blades is prohibited. The use of finger
bowls for manicuring purposes is allowed, but the finger bowl must be
properly cleaned and sanitized after each customer. Disposable, singleuse
finger bowls may be used.
F. Alum and other astringents. Alum or other material used to stop the flow
of blood shall be applied in powdered or liquid form only.
G. Neck dusters, powder puffs, makeup brushes and sponges. Except as
otherwise provided in Subsection D(7), the use of brush neck dusters,
powder puffs, makeup brushes and sponges is prohibited unless they are
single-use disposable implements.
H. Foods and beverages. Foods and beverages shall not be prepared, stored
or sold on the permitted premises, except with a valid food permit from
the New Canaan Health Department. Coffee and tea may be prepared
and kept for the convenience of employees and patrons, but no charge is
to be made to patrons who are served. Food and nonalcoholic beverages
may, however, be brought into the permitted premises, from an approved
source, for immediate consumption and also may be dispensed by means
of automatic vending machines on premises.
I. Animals, pets, or live birds. No animals, pets, or live birds shall be kept
in any beauty shop. This prohibition does not apply to trained guide dogs
(or dogs in training) for the disabled, sightless, or hearing impaired.
§ 27-12. Hygiene of operators.
A. Cleanliness of operators. The hands of the operator shall be thoroughly
washed with soap and warm water before serving each customer and
immediately after using the toilet, or after eating.
B. Health of operators. No person known to be affected with any
communicable disease in an infectious stage shall engage in or be
employed in any beauty shop.
C. Operators shall not eat or drink while providing services to a customer.
§ 27-13. Smoking prohibited.
No operator shall smoke while providing services to a customer.
§ 27-14. Proper attire.
Operators shall wear, while attending any customer in a beauty shop,
clean, washable garments having at least one-quarter-length sleeves. Use of
single-service rubber or surgical gloves is recommended while performing
manicures or pedicures.
§ 27-15. Recommended sanitizers.
A. The proper use of an autoclave is recommended and shall be an acceptable
method for sanitization of implements.
§ 27-11 NEW CANAAN CODE § 27-15
C:176
B. The following chemical methods constitute satisfactory sanitization of
implements. No method is considered effective without prior cleaning with
detergent (soap, trisodium phosphate, etc.).
Disinfectant
Type of
Use Comments
Quanternary
ammonium
compounds
1:1000
dilution
for 30
seconds
One of the most recent developments because
they are odorless, nontoxic, highly stable and
noncorrosive
Boiling water 5 minutes The addition of 1% sodium carbonate will
prevent rusting
Lysol (or
compound
cresol solution
or phenolic
compound)
5%
solution
for 3
minutes
2%
solution
for 10
minutes
For use on colored gowns or towels
Commercial
formalin
10%
solution
for 1
minute
May be irritating; deteriorates on standing
Alcohol (70%
ethyl alcohol or
99% isopropyl
alcohol)
3 minutes
Lubricant
sanitizer
Recommended for electric clippers
Other EPAregistered
disinfectant
Use according to manufacturer's instructions
C. Chemicals suitable for low-temperature washing (less than or equal to 158°
F.) of towels and linens shall be used. Lysol or household bleach (sodium
hypochlorite) shall be used according to manufacturer's specifications.
Color safe bleach may not be used.
D. Nonchemical methods of sanitizing must be approved in writing by the
Director of Health. Equipment specifications shall accompany requests for
approval.
§ 27-16. Electrical clipper sanitizing techniques.
The following are recommended sanitizing techniques for electric clippers:
A. Detachable head-type (sanitary design):
(1) Detach blades.
(2) Clean thoroughly.
§ 27-15 CHARTER § 27-16
C:177
(3) Immerse in effective sanitizer for required time.
B. Nondetached head-type:
(1) Place covered shallow glass jar at work shelf opposite every barber
chair.
(2) After use, brush out excess hair and grease; wipe cutting blades
clean.
(3) Immerse blade in combination lubricant-sanitizer, run clipper while
immersed for 10 seconds.
(4) Remove clipper and allow blades to drain 10 minutes on a clean
towel or tissue, preferably in a cabinet reserved for tools all ready
for use. Wipe blades clean with a fresh disposable tissue.
§ 27-16 NEW CANAAN CODE § 27-16
C:178
Chapter 28
HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Requests for appropriations — See Charter,
§ C5-6.
Code of Ethics — See Ch. 17.
Health and sanitation — See Ch. 29.
§ 28-1. Composition; qualification of members.
There shall be, as successor to the Board of Social Services, the Youth
Commission, and the Commission for the Aging, a Health and Human
Services Commission of nine members. The members shall be electors of
the Town, and the First Selectman shall be a member ex officio but shall
vote only in case of a tie. With the exception of the First Selectman, the
members shall serve without compensation and shall hold no other office
of trust or emolument in the Town government. Service on committees of
the Town government is not prohibited by this section, provided that such
service does not create a conflict of interest as defined in the Town's Code
of Ethics.23 There shall be minority representation on the Commission in
accordance with § 9-167a of the Connecticut General Statutes.
§ 28-2. Appointment and terms of office.
The Selectmen shall annually on or promptly after the first day in December
appoint three members of the Commission, all of whom, after qualification,
shall hold office for a term of three years from the first day of December
until their successors have been appointed and have qualified.
§ 28-3. Organization, officers, records and quorum.
On or promptly after the first of December in each year, the Commission
shall meet at the call of the First Selectman to choose one of its members to
be Chairman and one of its members to be Secretary. The Chairman shall,
when present, preside at all meetings of the Commission and shall vote as
a member thereof. The Secretary shall file in the office of the Town Clerk
a full and detailed record of all proceedings, acts and resolutions of the
Commission, as required by the Freedom of Information Act,24 including
the votes of each member on all actions taken, and such record shall be
a public record; provided, however, that the names of needy persons and
confidential matters relating to their domestic, financial or other private
affairs, and the votes of the members of the Commission in specific
instances granting or refusing welfare, shall not be a public record. The
23.Editor's Note: See Ch. 17, Code of Ethics.
24.Editor's Note: See C.G.S. Ch. 14, § 1-200 et seq.
§ 27-16 CHARTER § 28-3
C:179
concurrence of a majority of the Commission shall be necessary for the
transaction of business.
§ 28-4. Powers and duties.
The Health and Human Services Commission shall have the following
general duties and responsibilities in serving Town needs in the areas of
human services, aging services, youth services and assigned public health
services:
A. The Commission shall possess and exercise all of the powers and duties
relating to the public's general welfare as described above, imposed
upon boards of selectmen or municipalities by the Town of New Canaan,
General Statutes of Connecticut or the United States Code.
B. The Commission shall establish policies and procedures to assist
qualified New Canaan residents in need of critical necessities such as
food, shelter, safety, and health services, including mental and physical
health.
C. The Commission shall recommend and, upon authorization, incur such
expenses and make such disbursements for public welfare in the Town
as may have been provided for in appropriations made by the Town, the
state or the federal government.
D. The Commission shall keep itself knowledgeable of the needs and
conditions of the health and general welfare of the citizens of the Town
of New Canaan as well as the services in the areas provided by public
and private agencies. The Commission shall develop and coordinate
information and programs concerning each assigned functional area
of health and human services responsibility in New Canaan. The
Commission shall encourage the development and coordination of public
and private agencies and organizations having like or kindred functions
and shall cooperate with them as it deems necessary or desirable.
E. The Commission shall make recommendations to the Board of Selectmen
regarding the development of any programs and services for the general
welfare of the Town, and to help develop new programs for unmet needs.
§ 28-5. Annual budget and reports.
A. The Commission shall prepare and present to the Board of Selectmen
a request for annual appropriations in accord with Charter § C5-6. As
relevant, the request shall also contain a statement of possible additional
or alternative funding available from both public (including federal or
state government grants) and private sources, and shall delineate the
efforts taken to obtain such funding.
B. The Commission shall submit an annual report of its activities to the
Board of Selectmen by February 1 of each calendar year as well as such
other reports as may be required.
§ 28-3 NEW CANAAN CODE § 28-5
C:180
Chapter 29
HEALTH AND SANITATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 51.
§ 29-1. Director of Health to be Sanitary Officer; powers and duties.
The Director of Health shall be the Sanitary Officer of the town. Reference
to the Director of Health herein shall be deemed to include his authorized
agent, and he shall have the power and it shall be his duty to:
A. Enforce the provisions of this chapter and other provisions of this Code
relating to health and sanitation.
B. Cause periodic sanitary inspections throughout the Town for the purpose
of ascertaining whether the provisions of this Code are being duly
observed.
§ 29-2. Private water supply; permit and fee required.
A. No person shall construct, drill, dig, install, provide or alter any private
source for the provision of potable water without first making
application, paying a fee and obtaining a permit from the Director of
Health. Such private water supply shall be constructed in accordance
with the standards as set forth in the State of Connecticut Department
of Consumer Protection Well Drilling Board Rules and Regulations and
operated in conformity with the approved plans and specifications of the
terms of the permit issued.
B. The Board of Selectmen, upon recommendation from the Department of
Health and Sanitation and by authority of the Town Council, shall, from
time to time, modify and establish fees.
§ 29-3. Restrictions where water supply and sewage facilities exist
on same lot.
A lot shall be efficient in area and have soil and drainage capable of
supporting both a private water supply and subsurface sewage disposal
system, as determined by the Director of Health.
§ 29-4. Location and protection of wells.
All private water supply sources shall be located in areas consistent with the
general layout and surroundings, protected against surface wash and as far
removed from any known or probable source of pollution as surroundings
will permit and in a direction opposite to the groundwater and shall be
constructed and maintained in such manner as to prevent the entrance
of surface water and any foreign material. The location shall be subject
to approval by the local Director of Health and in compliance with the
§ 28-5 CHARTER § 29-4
C:181
General Statutes of Connecticut and the Public Health Code of the State of
Connecticut.
§ 29-5. Distance from drains and streams restricted.
All separating distances shall be no less than the minimum standards as
contained in the Public Health Code of the State of Connecticut.
§ 29-6. Well accessibility and enclosure restrictions.
No structure shall be constructed over an existing well nor shall any private
water supply source be constructed inside any building unless the building
is specifically designed for such purpose. Every private water supply source
shall be so located and constructed so that it will be accessible for cleaning,
treatment, repair, testing and inspection.
§ 29-7. Testing required.
Before any private water supply source is used, it shall be disinfected with
a chlorine solution and, after final installation of pumping equipment, the
owner shall have the well sampled for bacteriological, physical and sanitary
chemical examination. The Director of Health shall approve a report of the
analysis of this examination before the well water is used. No person shall
use or permit to be used water from any source which, after laboratory
test, is determined by the Director of Health to be contaminated or in
which certain physical or chemical constituents are above limits set by the
Connecticut State Department of Health Services.
§ 29-8. Procedure for abandonment of use of contaminated water.
Whenever the Director of Health shall determine that water supplied,
furnished or delivered to consumers for drinking or other domestic use does
not meet the requirements of this Code, he shall so notify the person in
charge of such water supply or source. The Director of Health may order the
abandonment, posting, treatment or sealing of such water supply or source
or any portion of the distribution system or connections thereto not meeting
these requirements. Abandonment procedure shall be done according to
the State of Connecticut Department of Consumer Protection Well Drilling
Board Rules and Regulations.
§ 29-9. Labeling required.
Any water supply system originally designed for other than drinking
purposes and not meeting the requirements of this Code as to purity shall
have each and every outlet marked with a permanent, legible and visible
sign reading "NOT FOR DRINKING PURPOSES."
§ 29-4 NEW CANAAN CODE § 29-10
C:182
§ 29-10. Ice.
No person shall sell, offer for sale, use or deliver any natural or artificial
ice unless it shall have been produced from a potable water supply and
manufactured, stored and delivered under clean and sanitary conditions.
§ 29-11. Bottled water.
No person shall sell, offer for sale, use or deliver any bottled natural or
distilled water intended for human consumption unless such water comes
from a source adequately protected against contamination or such water is
so treated as to render it safe and sanitary, and all bottles and containers
used shall be effectively cleaned and sanitized. The bottling and delivery of
such water shall be performed in a sanitary manner.
§ 29-12. Drinking facilities in public places.
In every public place the use of any drinking vessel by more than one
person without adequate cleansing is prohibited. All public buildings having
a water supply shall be equipped with drinking facilities of a type approved
by the Director of Health.
§ 29-13. Deposit of matter prohibited.
No person shall allow or permit to remain, deposit or cause to be deposited
the contents of any privy vault or septic system, any garbage, shells or
bivalves, filth, dead animals or decayed animal or vegetable matter in or
upon any place that such materials may be exposed to air or to flies or
in such a manner that any waters or stream shall be contaminated or
disagreeable odors produced. Materials shall not be deposited so as to
cause stagnant water or to be scattered by wind.
§ 29-14. Permit required for transporting business.
No person shall engage in the business of collecting, transporting or
disposing of the contents of privies, septic tanks, cesspools or refuse
without first obtaining a permit from the Town Clerk. The Town Clerk
shall not issue any such permit until the issuance thereof shall have been
approved by the Director of Health and a fee for each truck used by
the licensee shall have been received. The Board of Selectmen, upon
recommendation from the Department of Health and Sanitation and by the
authority of the Town Council, shall, from time to time, modify and establish
fees. Each such permit shall expire on the 30th day of April following the
date of issuance and may be renewed annually thereafter as of the first day
of May upon approval of the Director of Health. Operations under any such
permit shall be in conformity with such rules and regulations as the Director
of Health may establish. Any such permit may at any time be revoked by the
Director of Health for cause.
§ 29-10 CHARTER § 29-15
C:183
§ 29-15. Spitting prohibited.
No person shall spit upon the sidewalk or the floor of any public building
within the limits of the town.
§ 29-16. Food establishments; permits, inspection, fees.
A. Food permit required. No food establishment shall be operated in the
Town of New Canaan unless a permit shall be obtained from the Director
of Health. Such permit shall be issued and will remain valid only if the
operation of any food establishment shall at all times comply with the
provisions of the Code of the Town of New Canaan and the Public Health
Code of the State of Connecticut. Each permit shall expire on the 31st
day of December following the date of issuance and may be renewed
annually thereafter as of the first day of January upon approval of the
Director of Health. [Amended 5-11-2005, effective 5-27-2005]
B. Permit to be posted. All food permits shall be posted in a conspicuous
place on the premises visible to customers.
C. Examination and condemnation of food. Any substance or article used
in the preparation or serving of food or drink in any food establishment
may be examined by the Director of Health as often as, in the opinion
of the Director of Health, may be necessary for the detection of
unwholesomeness or adulteration for the protection of public health.
The Director of Health may condemn and forbid the sale or serving of
any food, drink or other substances or articles used in the preparation
or serving of food which is unwholesome or is adulterated or which is
detrimental to the public health.
D. Inspection of food establishments and suspension of permits. The
Director of Health shall inspect all food establishments as often as
required by the Department of Health services and may inspect any
food establishment at any time for the purpose of ascertaining that the
same is complying with the requirements of the Code of the Town of
New Canaan and the Public Health Code of the State of Connecticut. If
any violation shall be found, immediate written notice thereof shall be
given, together with a demand that said violation be corrected. Within a
reasonable time thereafter, the food establishment shall be reinspected,
and if the violation has not been corrected, the permit of such food
establishment may be suspended forthwith.
E. Access to premises and food sources. Any food establishment having
obtained a permit from the Town of New Canaan shall be considered
to have granted free access to the Director of Health at all times to
the premises and all parts thereof relating to such food establishment
for the purpose of inspection. In addition, such food establishment shall
have available for inspection at all times all invoices and other records
relating to the source of food and drink served on the premises.
F. Reinstatement of permit. Any food permit suspended by the Director of
Health may, within one week, be reinstated if the owner corrects all
violations and the food establishment is in compliance with all provisions
of the Code of the Town of New Canaan and the Public Health Code of
the State of Connecticut to the satisfaction of the Director of Health.
§ 29-15 NEW CANAAN CODE § 29-16
C:184
G. Charging of fees. A fee shall be charged for a permit to operate a food
establishment in the Town of New Canaan. The Board of Selectmen,
upon recommendation from the Department of Health and Sanitation
and by the authority of the Town Council, shall, from time to time, modify
and establish fees.
§ 29-17. Selling impure foodstuffs prohibited.
No person shall sell or offer for sale any article of food that is adulterated
with an unhealthy compound or substance.
§ 29-18. Temporary food establishments restricted.
No food shall be offered for sale or stored upon any sidewalk or in front
of any place of business unless the temporary food establishment meets
the provisions of the Public Health Code of the State of Connecticut and is
satisfactory to the Director of Health.
§ 29-19. Adoption of standards.
The provisions of the Public Health Code of the State of Connecticut and the
Regulations and Technical Standards now in force or as hereafter amended
relating to matters not covered by the Code of the Town of New Canaan
are hereby adopted by reference and made a part hereof, except those
provisions related to penalties for the violation thereof.
§ 29-20. Requirements for individual sewage disposal systems.
A. Percolation tests. Percolation tests shall be performed according to the
Technical Standards and under conditions acceptable to the Director
of Health. Tests may be performed at any time of the year except
when the ground is frozen. The Director of Health has the opinion to
request additional testing during the driest season and/or may require
adjustment of the results to conform to seasonal conditions.
B. Type of soil for installation. The area reserved or intended for individual
sewage disposal systems shall preferably be located in original
undisturbed soil. The original ground shall be protected from surface or
subsurface drainage prior to the deposition of fill material. A subsurface
sewage disposal system requiring fill shall not be installed until the
Director of Health approves the depth, type of fill and the amount of time
required for settling.
C. (Reserved)25
D. Requirements for design, application and fees. In addition to the other
requirements, individual sewage disposal systems shall not be
constructed, reconstructed or altered until the Director of Health has
approved the location and issued a permit for the construction,
reconstruction or alteration of said individual sewage disposal systems.
Permits shall not be issued until:
25.[Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, Location restrictions, was repealed 9-16-2015.]
§ 29-16 CHARTER § 29-20
C:185
(1) A report of acceptable site conditions, i.e., soil characteristics, deep
test holes, percolation tests, ledge and ground water levels, has been
submitted to the Director of Health.
(2) A properly executed application has been submitted on a form
supplied by the Director of Health according to the Public Health
Code of the State of Connecticut and the Technical Standards for
the Design of Subsurface Sewage Disposal Systems for Household
and Small Commercial Buildings, State of Connecticut, Department
of Health Services.
(3) The Director of Health has determined that the subsurface sewage
disposal area will not be adversely affected by surface or subsurface
flooding conditions and that all surface or subsurface water will be
directed away from the sewage disposal area.
(4) A fee has been collected for a permit to repair, construct or alter a
subsurface sewage disposal system. The Board of Selectmen, upon
recommendation from the Department of Health and Sanitation and
by the authority of the Town Council, shall, from time to time, modify
and establish fees.
E. Conditions for subsurface sewage disposal systems.
(1) Individual subsurface disposal systems shall not be constructed until
rough grading of the area has been completed.
(2) Sewer lines leading to septic tanks shall be laid with tight joints
in a straight line and on a uniform grade except where accessible
manholes, Y-bends or one-eighth-bends with cleanouts are provided
at changes of direction or grade. All sewer lines extending from any
structure to a septic tank shall be a minimum diameter of four inches
and shall consist of cast iron or sewer pipe approved in Table 2 of
the Technical Standards of the Public Health Code of the State of
Connecticut.
(3) Leaching systems shall be constructed in accordance with the
Regulations and Technical Standards for Subsurface Sewage
Disposal Systems. [Amended 9-16-2015]
(4) The maximum trench width shall be in accordance with the
Regulations and Technical Standards for Subsurface Sewage
Disposal Systems. [Amended 9-16-2015]
(5) After final grading the disturbed area shall be stabilized with
suitable ground cover and/or methods of soil erosion control
approved by the Director of Health.
(6) Garbage grinders shall be constructed in accordance with the
Regulations and Technical Standards for Subsurface Disposal
Systems. [Amended 9-16-2015]
F. Inspection required. The Director of Health shall be notified a minimum
of 24 hours prior to the commencement of any work on any portion
of the subsurface sewage disposal system. All portions of a subsurface
sewage disposal system shall be subject to inspections and approvals by
the Director of Health prior to backfilling or operation of the system.
The Director of Health may order the owner/contractor to uncover any
portion of a system backfilled prior to inspection.
§ 29-20 NEW CANAAN CODE § 29-21
C:186
§ 29-21. Permit to discharge/certificate of approval.
Subsurface sewage disposal systems shall not be placed in operation or
dwellings served by sewage systems be occupied until the Director of
Health has issued a permit to discharge/certificate of approval to utilize
a subsurface sewage disposal system. Issuance of this certificate is also
required for alterations to an existing sewage system or where an exception
is granted.
§ 29-22. Exceptions.
The Director of Health may grant an exception, except with respect to the
requirements of the Public Health Code of the State of Connecticut and
Regulations and Technical Standards, for the repair, alteration or extension
of an existing subsurface sewage disposal system where he determines the
repair, alteration or extension cannot be effected in compliance with the
requirements of this chapter and upon finding that such an exception is
unlikely to cause a nuisance or health hazard.
§ 29-23. Location of swimming pools.
The minimum setback requirement between any portion of a septic system
and a below-ground pool is 25 feet and 10 feet for an above-ground pool.
§ 29-24. Disposition of wastewater from swimming pool backwash
filters. [Amended 6-12-1991, effective 6-28-1991]
A. For the purpose of this section, "wastewater" is defined as effluent
from a swimming pool backwash filter system having certain physical,
chemical or bacteriological characteristics that render it unsuitable for
drinking, recreational or other human uses or that does not meet the
minimum standards for water quality for a particular purpose as
established by the Public Health Code of the State of Connecticut.
B. Wastewater shall not be discharged into any watercourse, natural or
artificial, or into any stormwater drainage ditch which discharges into
any watercourse or any wetland, nor into a subsurface sewage disposal
system designed to handle residential or nonresidential buildings.
Wastewater may be discharged into a sanitary sewer system having
sufficient hydraulic capacity or a separate subsurface sewage disposal
system specifically designed for this purpose.
§ 29-25. Inspection of public swimming pools.
A. For the purposes of this section, a "public swimming pool" is defined as a
pool intended for recreational bathing, swimming, diving or therapeutic
purposes, located either indoors or outdoors, which is provided with a
controlled water supply and which is not owned or maintained as part of
a particular residential unit or residential complex.
B. The Director of Health may inspect all public swimming pools, and if
any such pool is deemed to be a public health hazard, the Director of
Health may order the pool closed until such time as, in the opinion of the
Director of Health, a health hazard no longer exists.
§ 29-21 CHARTER § 29-26
C:187
§ 29-26. (Reserved)
§ 29-27. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person who engages in the activities set forth in this chapter in
violation hereof shall be fined $100 or the maximum sum permitted by
state statutes, whichever shall be greater, for each offense.
B. The provisions of this chapter are designated for enforcement by citation
in accordance with Section 7-148(10) of the Connecticut General
Statutes, and the Board of Selectmen shall designate municipal officers
or employees to issue warnings and citations as therein provided.
C. It is intended that the provisions of this chapter shall also be the basis of
civil relief to the fullest extent possible in an action by the Town in any
court having jurisdiction.
Chapter 30
(RESERVED)
Chapter 31
HISTORIC DISTRICT AND COMMISSION
§ 31-1. Establishment.
Under the authority contained in Public Act No. 430, enacted by the 1961
General Assembly of the State of Connecticut there is established: (a)
An Historic District within the Town of New Canaan, and (b) An Historic
District Commission of five members and three alternates who shall be
residents and electors of the Town of New Canaan holding no public office
who shall be empowered to perform all functions appointed to them by said
Public Act No. 430.
§ 31-2. Intent.
It is the intent of this ordinance to promote the educational, cultural,
economic and general welfare of the Town of New Canaan through the
preservation and protection of buildings, places and districts of historic
interest within the Town of New Canaan.
§ 31-3. Administration.
The Historic District Commission shall administer the provisions of said
Public Act No. 430 as implemented by this ordinance within the limits of the
appropriation made by the Town and the budgetary allocation made by the
Board of Finance.
§ 31-4. Permitted exterior features and modifications.
In implementing Section 5 of said Public Act No. 430, the Commission shall
prepare a list of exterior architectural features which it shall designate as
§ 29-26 NEW CANAAN CODE § 31-4
C:188
being obviously congruous with the historic and architectural aspects of
the area. From time to time this list may be added to, in the light of the
experience and decisions of the Commission. Copies of the list shall be
placed in the office of the Building Inspector and shall there be available
to the public. The Commission shall not prohibit any proposed exterior
modification of an existing structure on the grounds of its incongruity with
the historic aspects of the area if the proposed modification, in the opinion
of the Commission, is congruous with the exterior features of the said
existing structure.
§ 31-5. Land use.
No powers of the New Canaan Town Planning and Zoning Commission and
the New Canaan Zoning Board of Appeals having to do with the use of land
within the Historic District shall be impaired by this ordinance.
§ 31-6. Procedure. [Amended 5-11-2005, effective 5-27-2005]
A. No work on any type of structure which would change the appearance
of any property within the Historic District when viewed from the street
line shall be begun until the property owner has filed an application with
the Building Inspector and has received a certificate of appropriateness
from the Historic District Commission. For the purpose of this ordinance,
the Building Inspector shall require the application to provide such
information on those forms devised by the Historic District Commission
as may be adopted or modified from time to time by the Commission.
The Commission shall hold a public hearing upon each application for
a certificate of appropriateness, unless the Building Inspector or the
Chairman of the Commission determines that the application is
substantially incomplete, or determines that such application involves
items not subject to approval by the Commission. The Commission shall
give notice of the time and place of the hearing, and shall pass upon such
application, and shall give written notice of its decision to the applicant,
in the manner and time required by Section 7-147e of the Connecticut
General Statutes, as the same may be amended from time to time. All
hearings and all meetings of the Commission at which decisions are
made shall be open to the public. The Commission may issue a certificate
of appropriateness with stipulations or conditions.
B. For purposes of this ordinance, the Building Inspector shall be the
enforcement agent of the Commission, and may (1) issue stop-work
orders, (2) issue municipal citations in the amount and manner provided
by Section 7-148(c)(10) of the Connecticut General Statutes, as the same
may be amended from time to time, (3) take any other enforcement
action authorized by the enabling statutes, Section 7-147a et seq. of the
Connecticut General Statutes, as the same may be amended from time
to time. The Building Inspector and members of the Commission shall
have the right to inspect the exterior of properties within the Historic
District at reasonable times, including, without limitation, when activity
or work occurs that might require a certificate of appropriateness, when
an application for a certificate of appropriateness is pending, while
approved work is progressing, and upon completion of approved work,
§ 31-4 CHARTER § 31-6
C:189
in order to determine the applicability of and compliance with this
ordinance.
§ 31-7. District boundaries.
The boundaries of the Historic District shall be as follows: Beginning at
a point on the northerly line of North Main Street where the westerly
line of Husted Lane intersects the northerly line of North Main Street;
running thence northerly along said westerly line of Husted Lane 200 feet;
running thence in a generally westerly and northwesterly direction on a
line 200 feet northerly of and parallel with the northerly line of North
Main Street and Oenoke Avenue to the easterly line of land of The New
Canaan Historical Society; running thence easterly, northerly and thence
westerly along land of said Society to the easterly line of Oenoke Avenue;
running thence westerly across Oenoke Avenue to the southerly line of
Oenoke Lane; running thence westerly along the southerly line of Oenoke
Lane 200 feet; thence running southerly and easterly on a line 200 feet
westerly and southerly of and parallel with Oenoke Avenue to the westerly
line of land of The Congregational Church; thence running southerly along
the westerly lines of land of said The Congregational Church and of land
of Carla Barratt-Brown to the northerly line of St. John's Place; thence
southerly across St. John's Place to the westerly line of land of The Christian
Science Church; thence southerly along the westerly line of land of said The
Christian Science Church to Seminary Street; thence running southwesterly
across Seminary Street to the westerly line of land of Louise Van A. Frank;
thence running southerly along the said westerly line of said Louise Van A.
Frank to a point 150 feet northerly of the north line of Elm Street; running
thence easterly through land of said Louise Van A. Frank and land of Louise
S. Perkins on a line parallel with and 150 feet northerly of the north line of
Elm Street to the westerly line of Park Street; thence running northeasterly
across Park Street to the southwesterly corner of land of Helen M. Ashwell;
thence running easterly along the southerly lines of lands of said Helen M.
Ashwell, of W. Harry Siemon and E. Tremain Bradley and of The American
Red Cross Society to the easterly line of land of said The American National
Red Cross Society; thence running northerly along the easterly line of land
of said The American Red Cross Society to the southerly line of said North
Main Street; and thence northerly across said North Main Street to the
point or place of beginning.
§ 31-8. Members.
There shall be appointed by the Board of Selectmen a Commission of five
regular members and three alternate members. The regular members shall
serve in the following order: three from the fifteenth day of November,
1963 and two from the fifteenth day of November, 1965 and quadrennially
thereafter for four year terms, the alternate members to serve two from
the fifteenth day of November, 1963 and one from the fifteenth day of
November, 1965 and quadrennially thereafter for four year terms. The
initial terms shall be three from date of appointment to the fifteenth day
of November, 1963 and two from the date of appointment to the fifteenth
§ 31-6 NEW CANAAN CODE § 31-8
C:190
day of November, 1965 for regular members, and two from the date of
appointment to the fifteenth day of November, 1963 and one from the
date of appointment to the fifteenth day of November, 1965 for alternate
members. In case of a vacancy by reason of death, resignation, removal
of residence from Town or failure to qualify, the Board of Selectmen shall
appoint a successor who shall serve for the remainder of the term of his
predecessor and until his successor shall have been appointed and shall
have qualified.
§ 31-9. Officers.
The Commission shall annually elect from its own number a Chairman, a
Vice-Chairman and a Secretary.
§ 31-10. Effective date.
The provisions of Public Act No. 430 of the 1961 General Assembly having
to do with the application for and issuance of certificates of appropriateness
shall take effect when the New Canaan Historic Commission has certified to
the Board of Selectmen that a Plan of Preservation and Protection and the
necessary Commission procedures have been developed.
A map showing the exact boundary lines of the area to be included within
the proposed Historic District has been filed with the New Canaan Town
Clerk for public inspection.
Chapter 32
HOUSING CODE
§ 32-1. Definitions.
In the interpretation of this chapter, all words other than the terms
specifically defined in this section or as specifically defined in The Code of
the Town of New Canaan, Connecticut, the State Health Code, the State
Fire and Safety Code or the Tenement House Act of the State of Connecticut
shall have their ordinary accepted meanings as implied by the context or as
customarily used in the construction industry.
DIRECTOR OF HEALTH — Shall mean the Director of Health or his
authorized agent.
DWELLING UNIT — Shall mean one or more rooms arranged for the use of
one or more individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit, with
cooking, living, sanitary and sleeping facilities.
GARBAGE AND REFUSE — Shall mean ashes, garbage and refuse, as
defined in Chapter 25 of The Code of the Town of New Canaan,
Connecticut.26
26.Editor's Note: See Ch. 25, Garbage and Refuse.
§ 31-8 CHARTER § 32-1
C:191
HEATED WATER — Shall mean water heated to a temperature of not less
than 120° F.
MULTIPLE DWELLING UNIT — Shall mean any dwelling unit attached to
one or more other dwelling units.
OCCUPANT — Shall mean any person over one year of age living, sleeping,
cooking or eating in, or having actual possession of, a dwelling, a dwelling
unit or rooming unit. A temporary guest of an occupant shall not be
considered as an occupant.
OWNER — Shall mean any person who alone, or jointly or severally with
others, shall have legal title to any dwelling or dwelling unit or rooming unit
or rooming house.
ROOMING UNIT — Shall mean any room or group of rooms forming a
dwelling unit in a rooming house.
ROOMING HOUSE — Shall mean any building or portion thereof used or
occupied by three or more boarders or roomers as defined in the New
Canaan Zoning Regulations and shall include hotels, motels and lodging
houses.27
STRUCTURE — Shall mean all permanent or temporary buildings or
structures.
§ 32-2. General provisions.
No multiple dwelling unit or rooming unit in a rooming house shall be
leased, rented, or occupied for human habitation unless the building or
structure and the use thereof shall comply with the applicable provisions
and requirements of The Code of the Town of New Canaan, Connecticut,
including by way of illustration but not of limitation the following provisions
thereof: The Building Code; The Electrical Code; the Health and Sanitation
Code; The Heating Code; The Plumbing Code; and the provisions of the
Code relating to garbage and refuse, to sewers and sewage disposal, to
subdivision and street regulations and the zoning regulations, all as the
same now exist or may hereafter be amended or changed and together
with all provisions of the State Health Code, the State Fire and Safety
Code and the Tenement House Act of the State of Connecticut, except
that multiple dwelling units and rooming units which shall be deemed by
the Building Inspector, the Fire Marshal and the Director of Health to
comply substantially with the requirements of sanitation, construction, and
fire safety are exempted from the necessity for full compliance with code
provisions as they pertain to this section.
§ 32-3. Responsibility of owners and occupants as to cleanliness.
No multiple dwelling unit, or rooming unit shall be offered for lease or rent,
or be leased, rented or used unless:
27.Editor's Note: See Ch. 60.
§ 32-1 NEW CANAAN CODE § 32-3
C:192
A. It shall be in a sanitary condition in accordance with standards
prescribed by the Director of Health.
B. The occupant shall maintain the building or structure which he occupies,
leases or rents in a clean and sanitary condition; however, the owner
shall maintain the shared or public areas and the surrounding premises
in a clean and sanitary condition.
C. The occupant shall dispose of all garbage and refuse in accordance with
Chapter 25 of The Code of the Town of New Canaan, Connecticut,28 and,
pending disposition thereof, the same shall be kept in containers which
shall be rodent and insect proof and watertight. The owner shall supply
the necessary facilities and containers on the premises for the retention
and ultimate disposal of refuse and garbage and shall be responsible for
the disposal of all refuse and garbage.
D. The owner shall provide screens and screen doors for all windows, doors
or other openings to outdoor space; however, he shall not be responsible
for maintaining the same after providing and installing the same for any
tenant or occupant.
E. The occupant shall provide and shall be responsible for the
extermination of any rodents or pests therein and the owner shall
provide and shall be responsible for extermination thereof in any shared
or public areas except that the owner of rooming units shall provide and
shall be responsible for all extermination.
§ 32-4. Minimum standard for basic equipment and facilities.
Each multiple dwelling unit leased, rented or occupied for human habitation
shall comply with the following requirements:
A. Shall have kitchen equipment consisting of (1) a kitchen sink with hot
and cold running water; (2) cabinets or shelves for the storage of food
and cooking equipment; and (3) a cooking stove.
B. Shall have toilet and bath facilities, connected with a public or private
water and sewerage systems, approved by the Director of Health,
consisting of (1) a flush water closet; (2) a lavatory sink; and (3) a
bathtub or shower; all flush water closets to be located in separate
rooms affording full privacy and the lavatory sink and the bathtub or
shower shall be in the same room with the flush water closet or in a
separate room affording full privacy.
C. Shall be furnished with heating facilities capable of maintaining heat
therein at a minimum temperature of 68° F.; space heaters, as defined
in the Building Code of the Town of New Canaan, will not qualify as a
heating facility and are strictly forbidden.29
D. Shall have exit facilities complying with the requirements of The Code
of the Town of New Canaan and with the State Fire Safety Code and
the Tenement House Act, where applicable. All multiple dwelling units
constructed after the effective date of this ordinance shall be provided
with a second means of egress to afford equal protection to occupants of
all buildings.
28.Editor's Note: Garbage and Refuse.
29.Editor's Note: See § 9-2U(2).
§ 32-3 CHARTER § 32-4
C:193
E. Shall have the minimum facilities for natural lighting and natural or
artificial ventilation as prescribed by The Code of the Town of New
Canaan.
F. Shall have electric service with all light fixtures and outlets as
prescribed by The Electrical Code of the Town of New Canaan.30
G. All shared public areas therein shall be adequately lighted at all times,
and the electrical current shall be metered separately.
§ 32-5. Minimum space use and location requirements.
All multiple dwelling units, leased, rented or occupied for human habitation
shall comply with the following space use and location requirements:
A. Every multiple dwelling unit shall contain at least 150 square feet of
floor area for the first occupant thereof and at least 130 square feet of
additional floor area for each additional occupant thereof, the floor area
to be calculated on the basis of habitable room area only.
B. In every multiple dwelling unit of two or more rooms the rooms occupied
for sleeping purposes shall each have at least 70 square feet of floor area
for the first occupant and at least 50 square feet of floor area for each
additional occupant thereof.
C. Not less than 75% of the floor area of each habitable room in any such
multiple dwelling unit shall have a ceiling height of not less than seven
feet, six inches in basement and upper stories, and not less than seven
feet, four inches in attic rooms and top half stories over not less than 1/3
of the floor area; and the floor area of that part of any such room where
the ceiling height is less than five feet shall not be considered as part of
the floor area in computing the floor area of a habitable room.
D. No space located below the average grade of the adjoining ground shall
be used in a multiple dwelling unit as a habitable room unless:
(1) The floors and walls are impervious to leakage of underground and
surface runoff water and are insulated against dampness.
(2) One-half of the room shall be above grade. The provisions of this
section shall not be construed to prohibit play, recreation or similar
rooms at a greater depth below grade.
E. The Building Inspector shall determine from time to time the maximum
number of occupants authorized for each multiple dwelling unit or
rooming house unit.
§ 32-6. Rooming houses.
A. No rooming house or rooming house unit shall hereafter be leased
or rented and occupied as a rooming unit or rooming house unless it
shall fully comply with the requirements of § 32-4C through G and the
requirements of §§ 32-2, 32-3 and 32-6 hereof.
B. Each rooming house shall have one flush water closet, one lavatory sink
and one bathtub or shower connected with water and sewerage systems
approved by the Director of Health for each six persons, including
members of the owner's family whenever they share and use the same
facilities.
30.Editor's Note: See Ch. 15.
§ 32-4 NEW CANAAN CODE § 32-6
C:194
C. Each room in a rooming house or rooming house unit occupied for
sleeping purposes by one person shall contain at least 70 square feet
of floor area and every room so occupied for sleeping purposes by
more than one person shall contain at least 50 square feet of area for
each additional occupant thereof. The provisions as to ceiling heights
appearing in § 32-5C and D hereof shall be applicable in computing the
aforementioned square foot areas.
D. No owner shall lease or rent rooming house units unless he holds a
rooming house permit issued by the Director of Health for the specific
rooming house in which the rooming house units are located. Such
permit shall be issued by the Director of Health after he and the Building
Inspector and Fire Marshal shall have approved the same. The permit
shall not be transferable and shall be displayed in a conspicuous place
on the premises at all times. Each rooming house permit shall expire
on the first day of April following the date of its issuance unless earlier
suspended or revoked. The fee for such permit shall be $25 for one year
or any portion thereof and shall be paid to the Director of Health for the
use of the town. [Amended 6-7-83, effective 9-1-83]
E. Any owner whose application for a rooming house permit has been
denied or who has received notice from the Director of Health that the
permit is to be suspended by a certain date unless existing conditions
or practices are corrected before such date may request and shall be
granted a hearing on the matter before the Building Committee of the
Town of New Canaan, provided that any request for such hearing shall
be filed within five days from the date of notice of the denial of a permit
or the date of the notice from the Director of Health.
F. The Building Committee shall hold a hearing within 10 days after a
hearing has been requested and the actions of the Director of Health
as to the denial of a permit or the corrections of existing conditions or
practices may be reversed or affirmed wholly or partly, or it may modify
the requirement of decision appealed from as in its opinion should be
made in the premises, and it shall have all the powers of the officer from
whom the appeal shall have been taken.
G. If an inspection of any rooming house or rooming house unit by the
Director of Health, the Fire Marshal or the Building Inspector reveals
that there are conditions or practices which are in violation of this
Chapter 32, the Director of Health shall give notice in writing to the
owner of such rooming house that unless the particular conditions or
practices are corrected within a reasonable period not exceeding 30
days, such rooming house permit shall be suspended. At the end of
such period, the Director of Health shall reinspect the rooming house
or rooming house unit and, if he finds that the conditions or practices
have not been corrected, he shall give immediate notice in writing
to the owner that the permit is suspended and upon receipt of such
notice of suspension, the owner shall cease operation of such rooming
house or rooming house unit and no person shall occupy, for sleeping or
living purposes, any such rooming house unit as may be directed by the
Director of Health.
§ 32-6 CHARTER § 32-6
C:195
H. Any owner of a rooming house, having applied for and having obtained
a rooming house permit from the Town of New Canaan, shall be
considered to have granted free access to the rooming house to the
Director of Health, the Fire Marshal or the Building Inspector at all
reasonable times to the premises and to all parts thereof relating to
rooming house units.
§ 32-7. Enforcement.
A. The Director of Health, Fire Marshal and Building Inspector are
authorized to make inspections to determine the condition of any
multiple dwelling unit, or rooming house unit, for the purpose of
determining compliance with the provisions of The Code of the Town of
New Canaan at reasonable hours and times.
B. Where the Director of Health, Fire Marshal or Building Inspector has
reasonable grounds to believe that there is a violation of any of the
provisions of The Code of the Town of New Canaan, he shall request
permission to inspect the premises. In the event such permission is
not granted, he is authorized to apply for a search warrant and, when
such search warrant is issued, he is hereby authorized to enter upon,
inspect, examine and survey the multiple dwelling units or rooming
house units, for the purpose of determining whether or not there has
been compliance with the provisions of this chapter. If it shall be
determined upon such inspection that a violation exists, the public
official making such inspection shall notify the owner of such building
in writing, setting forth the nature of the violation and establishing a
reasonable period not exceeding 30 days to discontinue, or remedy the
same.
C. This chapter and all other related provisions of The Code of the Town of
New Canaan and of the State Statutes and State Codes shall establish
the minimum requirements for the initial and continued occupancy of all
multiple dwelling units.
§ 32-8. Interpretation and appeals.
The Building Committee shall have power and it shall be its duty to hear
and determine all matters relating to the interpretation, requirements or
enforcement of this Code brought to it by the Building Inspector, Director
of Health or Fire Marshal, or an appeal from any rule, order or decision
of the Building Inspector, Director of Health or Fire Marshal by the person
affected thereby, and all such determinations by the Committee shall be
conclusive and binding upon all persons.
§ 32-9. Penalties.
A. Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall upon
conviction be fined not more than $100 or imprisoned not more than
30 days. Each day's failure to comply with any provisions hereof shall
constitute a separate violation.
B. Where any violation of any provision of this ordinance shall be continued
after notice has been given to discontinue the same, the Director of
§ 32-6 NEW CANAAN CODE § 32-9
C:196
Health, Fire Marshal or the Building Inspector, as the case may be, may
bring appropriate action to enjoin the continued use or occupancy of
any building or location where the violation is situated or to cause the
violation to be removed or corrected.
C. Whenever the number of occupants shall exceed the maximum provided
for under §§ 32-5 and 32-6, the Building Inspector shall order the
violation caused by such occupancy corrected within seven days
thereafter.
§ 32-10. Conflict of ordinances.
In any case where a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict
with a provision of any Zoning, Planning, Building, Fire, Safety or Health
ordinance or other provisions of The Code of the Town of New Canaan
existing on the effective date of this chapter, the provision which establishes
the higher standard for the promotion and protection of the safety and
health of the people shall prevail.
Chapter 33
IMPOUNDING MOTOR VEHICLES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Off-street parking regulations — See Ch. 41. Traffic regulations — See Ch. 58.
§ 33-1. Violations requiring impoundment. [Amended 11-12-86,
effective 11-28-86]
After a final notice is sent by mail to the registered owner of any motor
vehicle which has five or more outstanding and unpaid parking violations
against it, such motor vehicle may be removed by or under the direction
of a member of the Police Department, by towing or otherwise, if such
motor vehicle is found parked on any public street or public highway, any
portion of the entire width between the boundary lines of any way publicly
maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for
purposes of vehicular travel or on any property leased by or in possession or
control of the Town of New Canaan. In addition to or in lieu of towing, any
such vehicle may be immobilized in such manner as to prevent its operation,
except that no such vehicle shall be immobilized by any means other than by
the use of a device or other mechanism which will cause no damage to such
vehicle unless it is moved while such device or mechanism is in place. In
any case involving immobilization of a vehicle pursuant to this subsection,
such member of the Police Department shall cause to be placed on such
vehicle, in a conspicuous manner, notice sufficient to warn any individual to
the effect that any attempt to move such vehicle might result in damage to
such vehicle.
§ 32-9 CHARTER § 33-2
C:197
§ 33-2. Notification of impoundment. [Amended 11-12-86, effective
11-28-86]
Unless the owner of any motor vehicle which has been towed, immobilized
or removed in accordance with § 33-1 shall have repossessed the same
within 24 hours after the towing, immobilization or removal of any motor
vehicle in accordance with § 33-1, the Police Department shall notify the
owner of such vehicle by certified mail, return receipt, of the fact that such
motor vehicle has been towed, immobilized or removed, the place where it
may be recovered and the conditions under which it will be released.
§ 33-3. Payment of costs required prior to release of vehicle.
[Amended 11-12-86, effective 11-28-86]
Before the owner or person in charge of any motor vehicle immobilized
or taken into custody in accordance with § 33-1 hereof shall be allowed to
repossess or to secure the release of such motor vehicle, the owner or his
agent shall pay to the Police Department for the use of the town all of the
following:
A. The cost of towing or removing the motor vehicle.
B. The cost of storage for each day or portion of a day that such motor
vehicle is stored in excess of the first 24 hours of such storage.
C. All sums legally due to the Town of New Canaan for unpaid parking
tickets and fines outstanding against such motor vehicle.
§ 33-4. Identification by owner required. [Amended 11-12-86,
effective 11-28-86]
No immobilized or impounded motor vehicle shall be released until the
person claiming such vehicle shall establish his identity and right to
possession of the motor vehicle and until a receipt is signed therefor.
§ 33-5. Designation of motor vehicle pounds.
The Board of Selectmen shall establish one or more motor vehicle pounds
to which motor vehicles may be towed or removed at the direction of the
officer in charge of the Police Department of the Town of New Canaan
in accordance with the provisions of § 33-1. The pound or pounds so
established hereunder shall be either public storage garages or such other
appropriate places as shall be designated or established by the Board of
Selectmen.
§ 33-6. Authority of general statutes to prevail.
The provisions of this chapter shall not be considered to contravene or be
in derogation of the authority vested in the Police Department of the Town
of New Canaan by Sec. 14-150 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as
amended, relating to abandoned or unregistered motor vehicles and motor
vehicles which are a menace to traffic.
§ 33-2 NEW CANAAN CODE § 33-7
C:198
§ 33-7. Penalty for removing vehicle without payment of costs.
Any person who shall remove any motor vehicle which has been placed in a
pound without complying with § 33-3 shall be subject to a fine of not more
than $100.
Chapter 33A
INLAND WETLANDS AND WATERCOURSES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Citation hearing procedure — See Ch. 11. Environmental commission — See Ch. 16.
§ 33-7 CHARTER § 33-7
C:199

ARTICLE I
Fines
[Adopted 12-13-2000, effective 4-1-2001]
§ 33A-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish a means by which the Town
of New Canaan may more effectively enforce the Inland Wetlands and
Watercourses Regulations of the Town of New Canaan, with the
implementation of fines for violations and continued nonconformances.
§ 33A-2. Statutory authority.
This chapter, pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes, Section 22a-42g,
was adopted by the New Canaan Town Council on December 13, 2000, to
be effective April 1, 2001.
§ 33A-3. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases used in this chapter shall have the
following meanings:
AGENT — The employee of the Town of New Canaan responsible for the
supervision of the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations and who
implements the policies of the Environmental Commission.
COMMISSION — The New Canaan Environmental Commission, acting as
the inland wetlands agency under Section 22a-42 of the Connecticut
General Statutes.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company, organization or legal entity of any kind, including municipal
corporations, governmental agencies or subdivisions thereof.
REGULATIONS — The Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations of
the Town of New Canaan.
§ 33A-4. Issuance of citation.
A. The Environmental Agent and the Assistant Environmental Agent are
hereby authorized to issue citations to any person who commits a
violation of the town's Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations.
In such instances, each citation will apply jointly and severally to the
owner of the property in question and his/her agents, contractors and
subcontractors. Each day that any violation continues shall be deemed a
separate offense, for which a separate citation may be issued.
B. Any such citation may be delivered either by hand delivery or by certified
mail to the person named in such citation. The Environmental Agent or
Assistant Environmental Agent issuing a citation shall retain a copy of
the citation. In addition, a copy of the initial citation shall be reported to
The Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection, pursuant to
Sections 22a-39-14 of the Connecticut State Regulations.
C. The citation shall inform such person:
§ 33A-1 CHARTER § 33A-4
C:201
(1) Of the allegations against him or her and the amount of the fines;
(2) That the person has a period of 30 days from the date of the citation
(i.e., the date of hand delivery or the date the citation was mailed) to
make an uncontested payment of the fines;
(3) That payments shall be made payable to the Treasurer of the Town
of New Canaan at Town Hall.
§ 33A-5. Failure to pay fine.
If the person cited does not pay the fine within 30 days from the date
of the citation, then at any time within 12 months from the expiration of
the thirty-day period, the Environmental Agent or Assistant Environmental
Agent shall send a notice to the person cited, by hand delivery or certified
mail, informing such person:
A. Of the allegations against him or her and the amount of the fines;
B. That the person cited may contest liability before a hearing officer by
delivering, in person or by mail, within 30 days from the date of the
notice, a written demand for a hearing, pursuant to Chapter 11, Citation
Hearing Procedure;
C. That if the person cited does not demand such a hearing, an assessment
and judgment shall be rendered against him or her; and
D. That such judgment may issue without further notice.
§ 33A-6. Establishment of fine.
A. The fine shall be $1,000 per citation for activities in the wetlands or
watercourses and $500 per citation for activities within regulated areas
or buffer/setback areas that otherwise impact the wetlands or
watercourses. No such fine may be levied against the State of
Connecticut or any employee of the state acting within the scope of his/
her employment.
B. At its discretion, the Environmental Commission may seek additional
penalties and remedies in accordance with Section 15 of the Inland
Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations (as the same may be amended
from time to time).
§ 33A-7. Construal of provisions.
The provision of this chapter shall not be construed to limit or alter the
authority, duty and responsibility of the New Canaan Environmental
Commission as granted and established under Connecticut's Inland
Wetlands and Watercourses Act, Sections 22a-36 through 22a-45 of the
Connecticut General Statutes, New Canaan's Inland Wetlands and
Watercourses Regulations, and other legislation that may apply.
§ 33A-8. Current violations.
Violations or nonconformance to the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses
Regulations in existence at the effective date of this chapter shall be
deemed violations under this chapter, and may be issued fine(s) accordingly.
§ 33A-4 NEW CANAAN CODE § 33A-9
C:202
§ 33A-9. Disbursement of fines.
Any fine collected by the Town of New Canaan pursuant to this chapter shall
be deposited into the General Fund of New Canaan.
§ 33A-9 CHARTER § 33A-9
C:203
Chapter 34
INSPECTION FEES FOR SUBDIVISIONS
§ 34-1. Fee required to cover inspection costs.
At the time of posting the subdivision construction bond required by the
Town Subdivision Regulations guaranteeing the installation of the required
utilities, the developer or his agent shall pay to the Town of New Canaan
for the use of the town an amount equal to 1 1/2% of the construction bond,
said fee to cover the cost to the town of inspecting the installation of the
utilities by the Department of Public Works during the various phases of
construction.
Chapter 35
(RESERVED)
Chapter 36
NEWSRACKS
§ 36-1. Purpose; definitions.
A. The purpose of this chapter is to protect the safety and welfare of
the public and to safeguard the right to make orderly distribution of
newspapers and other publications within the Town of New Canaan.
B. For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and expressions
shall have the meanings assigned to them:
DISTRIBUTOR — Any person responsible for the installation or
maintenance of a newsrack in the Town of New Canaan.
ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY — Such official, agency or department
of the Town of New Canaan as may be designated by the Board of
Selectmen.
NEWSRACK — Any self-service or money-operated box, container,
storage unit or other dispenser installed, operated or maintained for
the display and sale or distribution of newspapers, periodicals or other
printed matter.
§ 36-2. Permit required. [Added 11-19-2008,31 effective 12-5-2008]
A. No person shall install or maintain any newsrack on any public sidewalk
or pedestrianway, or within any public street right-of-way, without first
obtaining a permit for each such newsrack from the Department of
Public Works. Any person desiring a permit shall submit an application
on forms provided by the Department of Public Works, together with the
31.Editor's Note: This ordinance also renumbered former §§ 36-2 through 36-7 as §§ 36-3
through 36-8, respectively.
§ 33A-9 NEW CANAAN CODE § 36-2
C:204
permit fee. The application shall include the following information and
documentation:
(1) The applicant's name, address, telephone number, and email
address.
(2) The distributor's name, address, telephone number, and email
address, if different from the applicant.
(3) The name of the publication.
(4) The requested location of the newsrack.
(5) A depiction or description of the proposed newsrack showing its
dimensions, coloring, and lettering.
(6) An indemnification agreement in a form satisfactory to the Town's
attorney, whereby the applicant agrees to indemnify and hold
harmless the Town, its officers, agents and employees for, from
and against any claim, loss, liability, cost or expense, including
reasonable attorney's fees, court costs and expert witness fees, for
personal injury or property damage sustained by any person directly
or indirectly relating to or resulting from the use, maintenance or
operation of the newsrack. The agreement shall also release the
Town from any claims for damage to the newsrack.
(7) A liability insurance policy issued by an insurance company licensed
to do business in the State of Connecticut, insuring the applicant
and naming the Town as an additional insured, against all claims of
personal injury or property damage which could arise in connection
with the applicant's newsrack. The policy, by its terms, shall include
a provision giving the Town a right to 30 days' advance written
notice prior to any cancellation of the policy.
B. The Board of Selectmen shall establish the permit fees, minimum liability
insurance coverage amounts, fines for violations, and other charges
required by this chapter. Fees, fines, and charges established under this
chapter shall be sufficient to defray the Town's costs and expenses. All
fees, fines, and charges paid under this chapter are nonrefundable.
C. Upon issuance of a newsrack permit, the Department of Public Works
shall assign the location for the newsrack, and that location shall be set
forth in the permit. Failure to install a newsrack at the location set forth
in the permit shall be a violation of this chapter. A permit shall be valid
only for the newsrack location specified in the permit.
D. A newsrack permit shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance,
and shall be renewable in accordance with the permit requirements set
forth in this chapter, provided that the newsrack remains in compliance
with the standards set forth in § 36-3 for the entire term of the permit.
E. On any coin-operated newsrack, the applicant shall provide the means
to report malfunctions of the dispenser or secure refunds, in the event
that the coin-return mechanism malfunctions, by displaying a working
toll free number.
F. If a successor distributor or applicant assumes responsibility for a
newsrack, or there is a change in the publication dispensed from a
newsrack while a permit for such newsrack is valid, the new distributor
or applicant must fulfill the permit application requirements set forth in
§ 36-2 CHARTER § 36-2
C:205
this chapter, with the exception of paying the fee for the duration of the
permit.
§ 36-3. Standards for location, installation and maintenance.
A. No person shall install or maintain any newsrack which rests wholly or
in part upon, or which projects onto, into or over any roadway.
B. No newsrack which rests wholly or in part upon, or which projects
onto, into or over any sidewalk or pedestrianway shall be installed or
maintained:
(1) Within five feet of any roadway intersection, crosswalk, public bench
or access ramp for disabled persons;
(2) Within 10 feet of any fire hydrant, fire or police callbox or other
emergency facility;
(3) Within 10 feet of any driveway;
(4) Within 15 feet of any school bus pick-up or drop-off location, or
parking space for the handicapped;
(5) In any location so as to reduce clear passage for pedestrians to less
than five feet;
(6) Within 100 feet of another newsrack on the same street containing
the same publication; or
(7) Upon any public area improved with lawn, flowers, shrubs, trees or
other landscaping.
C. Newsracks subject to this chapter shall conform to the following
standards:
(1) The dimensions of the newsrack shall not exceed five feet in height,
30 inches in width and two feet in depth.
(2) No newsrack shall be chained, bolted, locked or otherwise attached
to any property owned or maintained by the Town of New Canaan,
including without limitation, sidewalks, ramps, fences, posts,
railings, poles, trees, sewers, grates, and traffic and parking signs.
(3) No newsrack shall be chained, bolted, locked or otherwise attached
to property owned by any other person, including without limitation,
hydrants, telephone booths, billboards, advertising displays, and
lighting and utility poles, unless with the written consent of such
other person.
(4) Each newsrack shall be constructed freestanding on its own base
so as not to be susceptible to rocking, swiveling, tipping, toppling,
falling or being dislodged from its specific site in the ordinary course
of use.
(5) No newsrack shall display advertising signs or devices, promotional
announcements or other publicity material of any kind, except for
rack cards and except for a display of the publication itself, and, on
no more than two faces of the newsrack, the publication contained
therein may be identified in letters no more than three inches high.
(6) Each newsrack shall be maintained in a clean and neat condition and
shall be in good repair at all times.
(7) The exterior finish of each newsrack shall be of not more than a
single color, provided that the lettering permitted under Subsection
C(5) may differ from the color of the newsrack to the extent
§ 36-2 NEW CANAAN CODE § 36-3
C:206
reasonably required to afford legibility. No such finish shall
incorporate reflectorized paint or any other device or material
designed to reflect light in an unusual manner.
(8) The exterior of the newsrack shall display a notice setting forth the
name, address and telephone of the distributor.
§ 36-4. Existing newsracks.
This chapter shall apply to newsracks installed prior to the enactment
hereof, except that distributors responsible for such newsracks shall have
30 days from its effective date within which to comply with the provisions of
this chapter.
§ 36-5. Violations; hearings.
A. It shall be the responsibility of the Enforcement Authority to determine
whether or not a violation of this chapter has occurred, and if so, to
notify the distributor to correct such violation. Such notice of violation
shall be in writing, shall specify the nature of the violation, shall direct
correction within five business days and shall inform the distributors
of the right to a hearing. The notice of violation shall be served on
the distributor by certified mail, return receipt requested. During such
period of five business days the distributor may apply for a hearing
before a hearing officer designated by the Enforcement Authority to
review whether such violation has occurred. At such hearing, the
distributor shall have the right to examine and challenge the evidence
upon which the Enforcement Authority based the notice of violation, to
cross-examine witnesses and to present evidence tending to show that
no violation has occurred. The hearing officer shall promptly review such
evidence, notify the distributor of his decision with respect thereto and,
if required under the circumstances, afford the distributor a reasonable
period within which to comply with such decisions.
B. If the violation has not been corrected within five business days specified
in the notice of violation or, in the event of a hearing, within such further
period as may be specified by the hearing officer, the Enforcement
Authority shall request the New Canaan Director of Public Works (who
may be appointed the Enforcement Authority) to remove the newsrack
and place it in secure storage. The costs of removal and storage shall
be charged to the distributor. In the event of nonpayment, the Town of
New Canaan may bring a civil action for money damages against the
distributor in any court of competent jurisdiction.
C. Any newsrack removed under Subsection B and not claimed within 90
days of its removal shall be deemed to have been abandoned.
§ 36-6. Appeals.
A. Any distributor aggrieved by a finding, determination, notice, decision
or other action which has become final under the provisions of § 36-5
may appeal to the Board of Selectmen. Notice of such appeal shall be in
writing, signed by the distributor and filed with the Town Clerk within
five business days of receipt by the distributor of notice of such action.
§ 36-3 CHARTER § 36-6
C:207
The notice of appeal shall identify the newsrack in question and shall
contain a brief statement of the grounds for appeal. A hearing before
the Board of Selectmen shall be set to take place within 10 business
days of the filing of the notice of appeal. The distributor shall be given
at least five business days' notice of the time and place of the hearing.
The Board of Selectmen shall afford the appellant or any other interested
person a reasonable opportunity to be heard in order to show cause why
the action appealed from should not be upheld. The Board of Selectmen
shall make a final determination at the conclusion of the hearing or as
soon as practicable thereafter. In the event that the Board of Selectmen
reverses a determination resulting in the removal and storage of the
newsrack which was the subject of the appeal, no costs shall be charged
to the distributor under § 36-5B. The distributor may bring a civil action
to review the determination of the Board of Selectmen.
B. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed so as to limit, impair or delay
the exercise by the Town of New Canaan of its authority to remove
immediately any newsrack which presents a clear and present danger of
imminent personal injury or property damage to the users of the public
way.
§ 36-7. Abandonment.
Any newsrack which remains empty, or which remains unidentified as to
distributor pursuant to § 36-3C(8) for a period of 30 consecutive days shall
be deemed to have been abandoned.
§ 36-8. Severability.
If any portion of this chapter is held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any
court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect the validity of
any other portion thereof.
Chapter 36A
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm devices — See Ch. 4A.
Amusement noise — See Ch. 5, § 5-7.
Noise from animals — See Ch. 6, § 6-3.
Citation hearing procedure — See Ch. 11.
Explosives — See Ch. 18.
Nuisances — See Ch. 37.
Residential picketing — See Ch. 39A.
Peddlers and itinerant vendors — See Ch. 43.
§ 36A-1. Declaration of policy.
The Town Council finds that inadequately controlled or excessive noise
negatively affects the public health, safety, convenience, general welfare,
§ 36-6 NEW CANAAN CODE § 36A-1
C:208
and quality of life of persons within the Town of New Canaan, and that
the people have a right to, and should be ensured of, an environment free
from excessive and intrusive noise. This ordinance is enacted to preserve,
protect and promote the public health, safety, convenience, general welfare,
peace, quality of life, and property values for the citizens of New Canaan,
and to facilitate the enjoyment of the natural attractions and tranquility of
the Town, through the reduction, control and prevention of excessive noise
and vibration.
§ 36A-2. Definitions.
The words and phrases used in or implicated by this ordinance, unless
defined below, shall be construed with reference to the state statutes on
noise pollution control (Connecticut General Statutes § 22a-67 et seq.) and
the related state regulations (Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies
§ 22a-69-1 et seq.), as the same may be amended from time to time. In
addition, the following words shall have the meaning ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
DECIBEL — A unit of measurement of the sound level, the symbol for which
is dB.
IMPULSE NOISE — Noise of short duration, generally less than one second,
especially of high intensity, abrupt onset and rapid decay, and often rapidly
changing spectral composition.
NOISE — The intensity, frequency, duration and character of sounds from
a source or number of sources. Noise includes vibrations of subaudible or
superaudible frequency.
NOISE LEVEL, A-WEIGHTED — The sound pressure level as measured with
a sound level meter using the A-weighting network, the symbol for which is
dBA.
PEAK SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL — The absolute maximum value of the
instantaneous sound pressure level occurring in a specified period of time.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, association,
firm, group, or entity of any kind.
RECEPTOR — A property or parcel of land where sound is heard or received
from another property or parcel of land emitting the sound or noise.
§ 36A-3. Noise prohibited.
The Town Council finds that certain noise-producing activities and
situations are of particular concern to persons within the Town of New
Canaan, and therefore any violation of the following conditions or provisions
is specifically prohibited:
A. An exterior burglar or intrusion alarm of a building must be activated
in such a manner that the alarm terminates its operation within five
minutes for continuous airborne sound or for impulsive sound after it has
been activated.
§ 36A-1 CHARTER § 36A-3
C:209
B. Motorized equipment or machinery with engines powered by electricity,
gasoline or other fuel products, such as snow blowers, snow throwers,
leaf blowers, leaf vacuums, lawn mowers, tractors, trimmers, chainsaws,
wood chippers, log splitters, and generators, excluding motor vehicles,
shall be operated at all times with a muffler in working order to abate
the exhaust, combustion and explosive noises therefrom. In addition,
with the exception of snow blowers and snow throwers, such equipment
may not be operated in the following time periods such that the noise
therefrom exceeds 45 dBA measured at the receptor's property line:
[Amended 10-11-2006, effective 10-27-2006]
(1) Mondays to Fridays: before 7:00 a.m. or after 7:00 p.m.
(2) Saturdays, state or federal holidays: before 8:00 a.m. or after 6:00
p.m.
(3) Sundays: before 10:00 a.m. or after 4:00 p.m.
C. All motor vehicles operated within the limits of New Canaan, including,
without limitation, automobiles, motorcycles, recreational vehicles, allterrain
vehicles, snowmobiles, motorized dirt bikes, pocket bikes, gocarts,
and racing vehicles, shall be subject to the noise standards and
decibel levels established by the Connecticut Department of Motor
Vehicles, set forth in the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies
§§ 14-80a-1a through 14-80a-10a, as the same may be amended from
time to time. [Amended 10-11-2006, effective 10-27-2006]
D. Noise generated by construction (including demolition) equipment or
machinery, such as bulldozers or backhoes, pile drivers, pneumatic tools,
or by commercial or domestic power equipment such as, but not limited
to, power saws, sanders, grinders, drills, nail guns, air hammers,
vacuums, may not be operated in the following time periods such that
the noise therefrom exceeds 45 dBA measured at the receptor's property
line:
(1) Mondays to Fridays: before 7:00 a.m. or after 7:00 p.m.
(2) Saturdays, state or federal holidays: before 8:00 a.m. or after 6:00
p.m.
(3) Sundays: before 10:00 a.m. or after 4:00 p.m.
E. Noise generated by refuse and solid waste collection activities from 8:00
p.m. to 7:00 a.m. shall not exceed 45 dBA measured at the receptor's
property line, or 80 dB peak sound pressure for impulse noise.
§ 36A-4. Exclusions and special exemptions.
The following shall be exempt from this ordinance subject to any special
conditions noted:
A. Bells, carillons or chimes associated with specific religious observances,
or emanating from a building clock or school.
B. A public emergency sound signal.
C. Noise created as a result of, or relating to, an emergency, including
emergency generators, and public health and safety emergencies.
D. Sound created by safety and protective devices.
E. Warning sounds required by OSHA or other state or federal safety
regulations, provided they do not exceed the governmental standards.
§ 36A-3 NEW CANAAN CODE § 36A-4
C:210
F. Farming equipment or farming activity, as defined in § 1-1 and qualified
as tax exempt under § 12-91 of the Connecticut General Statutes.
G. Noise created by parades, carnivals and other special public social
events or celebrations after having attained a valid permit from the
Town.
H. Noise created by or relating to recreational, sporting, concerts, or
band events, provided that the events are permitted or sanctioned by
the state or the Town, or conducted or sponsored by a not-for-profit
organization. This provision shall not be construed to exempt music
from commercial establishments or from residential properties.
I. Noise created by blasting, provided that a permit for the blasting has
been obtained from state or Town authorities, and provided further that
the blasting is conducted between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. Mondays to
Saturdays, exclusive of state or federal holidays.
J. Noise created by snow plows and snow removal equipment, provided
that all motorized equipment complies with the other provisions of this
ordinance pertaining to mufflers.
K. Noise created by fireworks displays sanctioned by the Town.
L. Noise created by aircraft.
M. Activities conducted by the Town in a governmental capacity, or by
the state or federal agencies, or by their contractors, provided that
contractors doing road work for the Town shall operate during hours
specified by the Department of Public Works.
§ 36A-5. Relation to nuisance and other laws.
Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed as authorizing or legalizing the
creation or maintenance of a nuisance, and compliance with this ordinance
is not a bar to a claim of nuisance by any person. A violation of this
chapter shall not be deemed to create a nuisance per se. The provisions of
this ordinance shall not be construed to prevent the enforcement of other
ordinances, regulations, or statutes that prescribe other standards for the
type of noise or sound involved.
§ 36A-6. Severability.
If any provision or portion of this ordinance is held to be unconstitutional,
preempted by federal or state law, or otherwise invalid by any court of
competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions of the ordinance shall not
be invalidated.
§ 36A-7. Violations and fines.
A. This ordinance may be enforced by the New Canaan Police Department
and/or by any municipal officer or employee designated by the First
Selectman.
B. The Chief of Police may develop procedures consistent with this
ordinance for any enforcement by the Police Department, including but
not limited to metering procedures and training of officers. All metering
procedures and training shall be in accordance with the Regulations
of Connecticut State Agencies §§ 14-80a-1a et seq. for motor vehicles
§ 36A-4 CHARTER § 36A-7
C:211
noise, and §§ 22a-69-1 et seq. for non-motor vehicle noise. [Amended
10-11-2006, effective 10-27-2006]
C. The Police Department is hereby authorized to issue infraction ticket(s)
to any person who violates any provision of this ordinance, and the
amount of the fine shall be the maximum amount for infractions as set
forth by the State of Connecticut Superior Court infractions schedules.
Each violation shall constitute a separate offense.
D. Any municipal officer or employee designated by the First Selectman
to enforce this ordinance may issue municipal citations to any person
violating this ordinance, provided the officer or employee issues a
written warning providing notice of the specific violation before issuing
the citation, as required by Connecticut General Statutes
§ 7-148(c)(10)(A). The fine for each violation shall be the greater of $100
or the maximum amount allowed by § 7-148(c)(10)(A) of the Connecticut
General Statutes, as the same may be amended from time to time, for
each day that a violation continues, until the noise is abated. The fine
for each municipal citation shall be payable to the Treasurer of the
Town of New Canaan. The issuance, payment, and procedure to contest
a municipal citation shall be in accordance with Connecticut General
Statutes § 7-152c and the citation hearing procedure in Chapter 11 of
the Code of the Town of New Canaan.
E. The provisions of this ordinance are in addition to, and not in lieu of,
any other remedies available to the Town of New Canaan under the
Connecticut General Statutes and other sections of the Town Code.
The issuance of infractions tickets or municipal citations under this
ordinance shall not preclude the exercise of such other remedies. In
addition, the Town of New Canaan may seek injunctive relief and
monetary penalties for continued or repeated violations.
§ 36A-8. Variances.
A. Any person living or doing business in New Canaan may apply to the
Director of Environmental Health for a variance from one or more of
the provisions of § 36A-4 or 36A-5 of this ordinance, provided that the
applicant supplies all of the following information to the Director of
Environmental Health:
(1) Location and nature of activity.
(2) The time period and hours of operation of said activity.
(3) The nature and intensity of the noise that will be generated.
(4) Any other information reasonably required by the Director of
Environmental Health.
B. No variance from these regulations shall be issued unless it has been
demonstrated that:
(1) The proposed activity will not violate any provisions of the
Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection regulations.
(2) The noise levels generated by the proposed activity will not
constitute a danger to the public health.
(3) Compliance with the ordinance constitutes an unreasonable
hardship on the applicant, or the variance is justified by overriding
interests affecting the public safety, health and welfare.
§ 36A-7 NEW CANAAN CODE § 36A-8
C:212
(4) In the judgment of the Director of Environmental Health, every
reasonable effort has been made to reduce the level of the noise and
the duration of the variance activity.
C. The application for variance shall be reviewed and either approved or
rejected within 15 days of receipt by the Director of Environmental
Health. The approval or rejection shall be in writing and shall state
the condition(s) of approval, if any, or the reasons for rejection. The
variance may be approved with reasonable conditions, including without
limitation a noise reduction or mitigation plan, and a time schedule for
compliance. The Director of Environmental Health shall send a copy of
any approved variance to the Police Department.
D. Failure to rule on the application in the designated time shall constitute
approval of the variance.
E. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Director of Environmental
Health with respect to any variance may appeal to the Director of
Health within a period of 14 days of the issuance of the Director of
Environmental Health's decision.
Chapter 37
NUISANCES
§ 37-1. Nuisance defined.
In addition to nuisance expressly declared to be such in this code, every
condition or activity in the town which is offensive or prejudicial to the
health and welfare of the residents of the town shall be deemed to be a
nuisance, and where any activity or condition is not expressly declared to be
a nuisance in this code or any ordinance or bylaw of the town, the Director
of Health shall have the power and authority to determine that such activity
or condition constitutes a nuisance as defined in this section.
§ 37-2. Committing or abetting nuisances prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit, or aid, advise, abet or
encourage the commission of any declared to be a nuisance or prohibited as
such by the provisions of this code or any ordinance or bylaw of the town.
§ 37-3. Burning of certain matter prohibited. [Added 12-22-1965;
effective 1-28-1966]
No person shall burn within the town any matter or substance (other than
coal, charcoal, wood, gas or oils), which shall discharge into the air or cast
off, any foul, obnoxious, annoying or repulsive gas, smoke or odors of any
kind whatsoever, it being hereby declared that the discharge of the same
is a nuisance, offensive and prejudicial to the health and welfare of the
residents of the town. Nothing in this section, however, shall prohibit the
disposal, by burning, of combustible rubbish and garbage at home or at
commercial establishments, when done in a specially designed container
for the disposal of garbage and combustible materials, provided that no
§ 36A-8 CHARTER § 37-3
C:213
obnoxious smoke or odors are produced, nor shall it prohibit the burning of
leaves or other dry vegetation on private property in accordance with fire
regulations.32
§ 37-4. Officials of town to enforce.
The Chief of Police, Chief of the Fire Department, Director of Public Works
or Director of Health may cause any nuisance or activity or condition
prohibited by the provisions of this code or any ordinance or bylaw of the
town relating to the health and welfare of the town to be removed or abated.
Any such officer may enter for the purpose of inspection any place in which
he has reason to believe that nuisances, activities or conditions prejudicial
to health or the public welfare exists, and may order the person owning or
occupying the premises on which any such nuisance, activity or condition
is found to abate or remove the same in accordance with the terms of such
order within a time specified therein. All such orders shall be in writing.
§ 37-5. Police to enforce orders of officials.
The members of the Police Department shall execute any order of the Chief
of Police, Chief of the Fire Department, Director of Public Works or Director
of Health issued under the provisions of this chapter, when called upon by
such officer so to do.
§ 37-6. Service of abatement order.
The officer issuing the order referred to in the preceding section shall cause
any order for the abatement or removal of a nuisance to be served on the
owner of the premises on which such nuisance exists, or his agent, or on the
occupant or tenant of such premises, or on such of them as can be found in
the town, within a reasonable time before the date named in such order for
compliance therewith.
§ 37-7. Appeal to order of abatement.
If any person served with an order to abate or remove a nuisance as
provided herein, before the date specified in such order for compliance
therewith, applies to the Board of Selectmen to have its execution stayed
or terms modified, such order shall be temporarily suspended to allow
such person a reasonable and fair opportunity to be heard and to present
argument and proof against the execution of the order or in favor of its
modification.
§ 37-8. Compliance required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to fail or neglect to obey and comply with
any order given under the provisions of this chapter, unless such order is
set aside by the Board of Selectmen after hearing.
32.Editor's Note: See also supra, Ch. 22, Fire Department.
§ 37-3 NEW CANAAN CODE § 37-9
C:214
§ 37-9. Town may abate and collect charges.
If any person upon whom an order to abate or remove a nuisance is served
fails or neglects to comply with the terms of such order in the manner and
time specified therein, or as modified by the Board of Selectmen, the officer
who issued such order may cause such nuisance to be removed or abated
and the expense thereof shall be collected from such person by the Town
Attorney in an action in the name of the town.
Chapter 39
OFFENSES — MISCELLANEOUS
§ 39-1. Permission required to post advertising on property.
Every person who shall post or attach any bill or advertisement to any tree,
fence, building or property of another without permission first obtained
from the owner of such property shall be fined not more than $25 for every
such violation.
§ 39-2. Throwing or placing of waste material, paper or advertising
matter in public places. [Amended 12-22-1965, effective 1-28-1966;
8-4-1970, effective 9-12-1970; 11-10-197633]
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, in person or by
agent, employee or servant, to throw, deposit or place in or upon any public
land, public way or public place or building in the town or in any public
water drain, stormwater sewer or stormwater receiving basin within the
jurisdiction of the town any garbage, refuse, waste material, paper or other
solid substances whatsoever, including liquids which are not stormwater, or
to place handbills, circulars, dodgers, pamphlets, cards, pictures or other
advertising matter of any kind whatsoever in or upon any motor vehicle
standing or parked in a public street or public place in the town or to place
or attach the same to any receptacles used for the distribution of mail or
newspapers, which receptacles are located within the lines of any public
street or highway in the town. Any person, firm or corporation violating the
provision of this section shall be fined not more than $10 for each offense.
§ 39-3. (Reserved)34
§ 39-4. Injury to property prohibited.
Every person who shall willfully injure or deface any public or private
building, or remove, injure or destroy any fence, post, street lamp, tree,
33.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided that it become effective eight days after
publication unless notice of intent to petition for referendum should be filed under the
Charter.
34.Editor's Note: Former § 39-3, Disturbing noise prohibited, was repealed 4-11-2006,
effective 4-28-2006. See now Ch. 36A, Noise.
§ 37-9 CHARTER § 39-4
C:215
shrub or any fruit or produce growing in any garden within the town shall
be fined not more than $50 for every such violation.
§ 39-5. Abandoned wells, etc., to be filled.
The owner of property within the town whereupon there is situated an
abandoned well, cistern, cesspool, privy tank or other similar opening in
the ground shall, within 30 days after notification by the Chief of Police, fill
in such hole or cap the entrance thereto in such a manner as will prevent
persons or animals from falling into such hole.
In the event that any such property owner shall fail to comply with the
provisions of such notice, the Director of Public Works may fill in such hole
or cap the entrance thereto and the expense thereof shall be a debt due the
town to be collected in the same manner as taxes. In addition to the remedy
above described, every such property owner found guilty of violating the
provisions of this section shall be punished as provided in this Code.35
§ 39-6. Possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages on public
properties of Town of New Canaan prohibited. [Added 2-8-66,
effective 3-11-66]
A. It shall be unlawful for any minor to possess or drink any alcoholic
beverages upon or within the premises of any public park, school or
school grounds, parking lot, highway or any other property owned or
leased by the Town of New Canaan, including any building or structure
which may be located thereon. [Amended 10-27-70, effective
12-5-70]
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverages
upon or within the premises of any public park, school or school grounds,
parking lot, highway, the Town Hall or the Highway Garage, except
as provided in § 42-8A hereof, as amended. [Amended 10-27-70,
effective 12-5-70]
C. For the purpose of this section, "minor" shall mean any person under 21
years of age.
D. Any person violating any of the provisions of this ordinance shall be
subject to a fine not to exceed $25 for each offense.
E. If any provision of this ordinance shall be held invalid or ineffective by
any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the
validity of the remaining portions of this ordinance.
§ 39-7. Storage and maintenance of objectionable equipment and
portable structures regulated. [Added 11-14-67, effective 12-16-67]
The following requirements shall apply to all objectionable equipment and
portable structures stored or maintained in the town:
A. No objectionable equipment or portable structures shall be stored or
maintained closer to the street line than the building setback line.
35.Editor's Note: See § 4-8.
§ 39-4 NEW CANAAN CODE § 39-7
C:216
B. Where any such objectionable equipment or portable structures are
stored or maintained, the same shall be screened by means of a fence,
hedge, or otherwise, at the direction of the Board of Selectmen.
C. Any such fence, hedge or other screening shall not be less than the
height of the objectionable equipment or portable structures so stored
or maintained.
D. Before any such objectionable equipment or portable structures shall
be stored or maintained in accordance with the requirements of
Subsections A, B and C above, construction and location of the same,
together with the fence, hedge or other screening provided for in
Subsection B above, shall be approved in writing by the Board of
Selectmen.
§ 39-8. Unattended businesses or offices. [Added 6-4-68, effective
7-6-68]
No person, firm or corporation shall operate or maintain in the Town of New
Canaan, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m., any unattended
place of business or office open to the general public for the purpose of
selling goods or merchandise or for the furnishing of services.
§ 39-9. Aircraft restricted. [Added 6-1-71, effective 6-12-71]
Taking off or landing of airplanes, helicopters and any other kind of aircraft
is prohibited, except in emergencies or except as follows:
A. By federal, state or local government officials or their authorized agents
in the exercise of governmental responsibilities.
B. For other public purposes when authorized by a permit issued by the
Chief of Police which shall be issued only in accordance with regulations
adopted by the Police Commission and approved by the Board of
Selectmen.
§ 39-10. Automatic dialing devices. [Added 11-12-80, effective
1-1-81]
A. No person or corporation, except a public utility, engaged in the business
of providing communications services and facilities shall use or operate,
attempt to use or operate or cause to be used or operated or shall
arrange, adjust, program or otherwise provide or install any device or
combination of devices that will upon activation either mechanically,
electronically or by other automatic means initiate an intrastate call and
deliver a recorded message to any telephone number assigned to the
New Canaan Police Department or New Canaan Fire Company No. 1.
B. Within 90 days after the effective date of this ordinance, all existing
automatic dialing devices programmed to deliver a recorded message to
any telephone number assigned to the New Canaan Police Department
or New Canaan Fire Company No. 1 shall be reprogrammed or
disconnected.
C. "Automatic dialing device" means a device which is interconnected to a
telephone line and is programmed to select a predetermined telephone
§ 39-7 CHARTER § 39-10
C:217
number and transmit, by voice message or code signal, an emergency
message indicating a need for emergency response.
D. This ordinance shall take effect January 1, 1981.
Chapter 39A
PICKETING, RESIDENTIAL
§ 39A-1. Purpose.
It is declared that the protection and preservation of the home is the
keystone of democratic government; that the public health and welfare and
the good order of the community require that members of the community
enjoy in their homes and dwellings the feeling of well-being, tranquillity
and privacy, and when absent from their homes and dwellings, carry with
them the sense of security inherent in the assurance that they may return to
the enjoyment of their homes and dwellings; that the practice of picketing
before or about residences and dwellings causes emotional disturbance
and distress to the occupants; obstructs and interferes with the free use
of public sidewalks and public ways of travel; that such practice has as
its object the harassing of such occupants; and without resort to such
practice, full opportunity exists, and under the terms and provisions of this
ordinance will continue to exist, for the exercise of freedom of speech and
other constitutional rights; and that the provisions hereinafter enacted are
necessary for the public interest to avoid the detrimental results herein set
forth.
§ 39A-2. Unlawful acts.
It is unlawful for any person to engage in picketing before or about the
residence or dwelling of any individual in the Town of New Canaan.
§ 39A-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating the provisions of this section of the Town Code of the
Town of New Canaan shall be fined $100.
§ 39A-4. Severability.
The invalidity of any word, clause, section or provision of this ordinance
shall not affect the validity of any other part, which can be given effect
without such invalid part or parts.
§ 39A-5. Effective date.
This ordinance becomes effective on May 26, 1989.
Chapter 40
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
§ 39-10 NEW CANAAN CODE § 39A-5
C:218
ARTICLE I
Alternate Members
[Adopted 1-14-81, effective 5-15-81]
§ 40-1. Number; appointment; terms.
There shall be a panel of three alternate members of the Planning and
Zoning Commission, who shall be electors of the Town of New Canaan,
shall serve without compensation and shall hold no other office of trust or
emolument in the town government. The Selectmen shall forthwith appoint
the three alternate members of the panel, who shall hold office until
December 1, 1981. In the odd-numbered years, commencing on or after
December 1, 1981, the Selectmen shall appoint the three members of the
panel, who, after qualification, shall hold office for a term of two years
from the first day of December in the odd-numbered years and until their
successors have been appointed and shall have qualified.
§ 40-2. Powers and duties.
The alternate members of the Planning and Zoning Commission, when
seated, as provided in § 40-3, shall have all the powers and duties of regular
members of the Planning and Zoning Commission as set forth in Article XIII
of the Charter.
§ 40-3. Seating.
In the event of the absence of a regular member from a meeting of the
Planning and Zoning Commission or if a regular member shall disqualify
himself or be disqualified under the provisions of the General Statutes
relating to a disqualification of members of planning and zoning authorities
or as otherwise provided by law, the Chairman shall designate and seat
an alternate from the panel of alternates, but in designating and seating
such alternate, he shall choose alternates in rotation so that the alternates
chosen by the Chairman shall be seated as nearly an equal number of times
as is possible.
§ 40-1 CHARTER § 40-3
C:219
Chapter 41
OFF-STREET PARKING REGULATIONS
§ 41-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of these regulations the following definitions shall apply:
VEHICLE — Means any device in, upon, or by which any person or property
is or may be transported upon a highway.
PERSON — Means and includes any individual, firm, partnership,
association or corporation.
OPERATOR — Means and includes every individual who shall operate a
vehicle as the owner thereof, or as the agent, employee or permittee of the
owner, or is in actual physical control of a vehicle.
PARK or PARKING — Means the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or
not, upon an off-street parking lot, other than temporarily for the purpose
of, and while actually engaged in, receiving or discharging passengers or
loading or unloading merchandise or in obedience to traffic regulations,
signs or signals or an involuntary stopping of the vehicle by reason of causes
beyond the control of the operator.
PARKING METER — Means and includes any mechanical device or meter
not inconsistent with these regulations placed or erected for the regulation
of parking by authority of these regulations.
PARKING METER ZONE — Means and includes any area in which parking
meters are installed and in operation.
PARKING SPACE — Means any space within an off-street parking lot which
is duly designated for the parking of a single vehicle by lines painted or
durably marked or by signs.
§ 41-2. Purpose of regulations.
It is the purpose of these regulations to give effect to the provisions of the
New Canaan Town Charter which provided that the Parking Commission
shall maintain and operate all existing off-street parking facilities owned
or controlled in the Town of New Canaan and shall establish reasonable
fees for the parking of vehicles on the streets, highways, off-street parking
facilities and other public places owned or controlled by the town.
§ 41-3. Regulations pertaining to all off-street lots.
The following regulations shall pertain to all off-street parking lots:
A. No vehicle shall be parked in any lot for a period of time longer than 30
minutes between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. of any day.
B. No vehicle shall be parked except within the lined spaces or according
to signs. It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle in such a way that said
vehicle shall not be entirely within the limits of the space so designated.
§ 40-3 NEW CANAAN CODE § 41-4
C:220
§ 41-4. Parking limited.
A. Use of the parking lots shall be limited to the following specified time
periods:
(1) Upper Park Street: 12 hours.
(2) Town Hall, except spaces noted below: 12 hours.
(3) Railroad Station: 12 hours. [Amended 5-16-78, effective 7-1-78]
(4) Talmadge Hill: 12 hours.
(5) Telephone Company: 12 hours.
(6) Morse Court Lot (metered): two hours. [Amended 8-8-67,
effective 8-14-67; 5-16-78, effective 7-1-78]
(7) Morse Court, along north line: 12 minutes. [Amended 5-16-78,
effective 7-1-78]
(8) Playhouse: three hours.
(9) Town Hall, visitor parking spaces adjacent to building and marked
for visitor parking: one hour. [Amended 9-1-81, effective 9-1-81]
(10) Pine Street - Park Street, except spaces noted below: 12 hours.
[Amended 6-20-66, effective 6-20-66]
(11) Pine Street - Park Street, nine spaces adjacent to Park Street: two
hours. [Amended 6-20-66, effective 6-20-66]
(12) Richmond Hill, Locust Avenue and Center School: 12 hours.
[Added 7-1-84, effective 7-1-8436]
B. No vehicle which shall have been parked in any portion of any off-street
parking lot for the time permitted shall be reparked in the same lot
within four hours thereafter.
§ 41-5. Entrance and exits designated. [Amended 5-16-78, effective
7-1-78; 8-8-84, effective 8-21-84]
No vehicle shall be driven into or out of a parking lot contrary to the posted
directions.
§ 41-6. Further restrictions -- Playhouse and Town Hall.
A. No vehicles except those designated by the Playhouse shall be parked in
the spaces reserved in the Playhouse lot.
B. No vehicles except those of town officials or employees for whom they
are reserved shall be parked in the reserved spaces in the Town Hall
lot weekdays between the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 5:30 p.m. [Amended
8-8-84, effective 8-21-84]
C. No vehicles except those of paid members of the Police and Fire
Departments shall at any time be parked in the spaces reserved for the
Police Department.
§ 41-7. Fees established in certain lots. [Amended 6-20-1966,
effective 6-20-1966; 6-6-1967, effective 6-6-1967; 8-30-1967,
effective 8-30-1967; 2-20-1968, effective 7-1-1968; 5-19-1970,
36.Editor's Note: This regulation also repealed former Subsection A(12), which restricted
parking in the Union Trust Parking Lot, as added 9-8-66, effective 9-8-66, and amended
8-30-67, effective 8-30-67, and 5-16-78, effective 7-1-78.
§ 41-4 CHARTER § 41-7
C:221
effective 7-1-1970; 5-4-1971, effective 7-1-1971; 5-10-1977,
effective 7-1-1977; 5-16-1978, effective 7-1-1978]
A. No vehicle shall be parked from Monday through Friday in an unmarked allday
parking space in any town-owned lot unless a permit has been issued
therefor by the Parking Commission.
B. Fees for the permit and refunds on that portion of the permit not used
shall be in accordance with the following schedule: [Amended 4-28-1981,
effective 7-1-1981; 4-17-1984, effective 7-1-1984; 4-4-1987, effective
7-1-1987; 4-23-1991, effective 7-1-1991]
Beginning Date* Fee*** Rebate**
July 1 31 $240.00 $220.00
August 1 31 $220.00 $200.00
September 1 30 $200.00 $180.00
October 1 31 $180.00 $160.00
November 1 30 $160.00 $140.00
December 1 31 $140.00 $120.00
January 1 31 $120.00 $100.00
May 1 31 $40.00 $20.00
June 1 30 $20.00 -0-
NOTES:
* Expiration date for all permits shall be June 30.
** Rebate is computed from day permit is actually returned.
*** Annual renewal fee for nonresident permits at Talmadge Hill shall be
$360.
C. Application for permits shall be made to the Parking Commission and will
be issued in the order received, provided that spaces are available.
D. Each permittee shall be issued one parking sticker, which shall be valid only
in the lot for which it is issued and for the vehicle(s) identified on the permit
application form. [Amended 7-1-1980, effective 7-1-1980]
E. All stickers shall be displayed on the right side windshield of the vehicle(s)
for which they have been issued. [Amended 7-1-1980, effective
7-1-1980]
F. It shall be the responsibility of the permittee to have a sticker affixed to
his vehicle at all times. If it should become lost or destroyed or if another
vehicle is substituted, the permittee shall immediately notify the Parking
Commission. Failure to display a sticker shall be cause for issuance of a
parking violation ticket. A charge of $20 shall be levied for the issuance
of a replacement sticker. [Amended 7-1-1981, effective 7-1-198137;
4-23-1991, effective 7-1-1991]
37.Editor's Note: This regulation also repealed former Subsection F, which pertained to the
issuance of two stickers, and provided for the relettering of former Subsection G as
Subsection F.
§ 41-7 NEW CANAAN CODE § 41-8
C:222
§ 41-8. Parking meter zone.
A. Designation of zone. The following named lots or parking spaces shall
constitute a parking meter zone: [Amended 8-8-1967, effective
8-14-1967]
(1) New Canaan Railroad State Lot. [Amended 5-16-1978, effective
7-1-1978]
(2) Morse Court, except the twelve-minute spaces along the north line.
[Amended 5-16-1978, effective 7-1-1978]
(3) Pine Street: only those spaces within the two-hour zone.
(4) Talmadge Hill, except those spaces within the permit system zone.
[Amended 1-15-1979, effective 1-15-1979]
(5) Playhouse lot. [Added 12-3-1968]
(6) Locust Avenue, except those spaces within the permit system zone.
[Added 1-15-1979, effective 1-15-1979]
B. Operation of parking meters. When any vehicle shall be parked in any
parking space alongside of or next to which a parking meter is located,
the operator of such vehicle shall, upon entering the said parking meter
space, immediately deposit or cause to be deposited in such meter such
proper coin of the United States as is required for said parking meter
as is designated by directions on the meter, and, when required by the
directions on the meter, the operator of such vehicle, after the deposit
of the proper coin or coins, shall also set in operation the timing, and
failure to deposit such proper coin and operate any necessary timing
mechanism shall constitute a violation of these regulations. Upon the
deposit of such coin or coins, the parking space may be lawfully occupied
by such vehicle during the period of time which has been prescribed
for the area in which said parking space is located, provided that any
person placing a vehicle in a parking meter space adjacent to a meter
which indicates that unused time has been left by the previous occupant
shall not be required to deposit a coin so long as his occupancy does not
exceed the indicated unused parking time. If any vehicle shall remain
parked in any such parking space beyond the parking time limit and
if the meter shall indicate such illegal parking, then such vehicle shall
be considered as parking overtime and such parking shall be deemed
a violation of these regulations. [Amended 5-23-1978, effective
7-1-1978]
C. Parking time limits. [Amended 8-8-1967, effective 8-14-1967;
12-3-1968, effective 12-13-1968; 5-19-1970, effective 7-1-1970;
5-23-1978, effective 7-1-1978]
(1) Parking or standing a vehicle in a designated space in a twelve-hour
parking meter zone shall be lawful for 12 hours upon deposit of six
quarters; in a two-hour parking meter zone, it shall be lawful for two
hours upon deposit of $0.50; or in a three-hour parking meter zone
it shall be lawful for three hours upon deposit of $0.75. Parking for
shorter periods will be valid upon deposit of proportionate amounts
(quarters only). [Amended 4-17-1984, effective 7-1-1984;
4-23-1991, effective 7-1-1991]
(2) Parking meter shall be operated in twelve-hour parking meter zones
daily between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., except
§ 41-8 CHARTER § 41-8
C:223
Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays, and in two-hour and threehour
parking meter zones daily between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and
6:00 p.m., except Sundays and legal holidays.
§ 41-9. Parking of vehicles for business purposes prohibited.
[Added 3-6-1967, effective 3-6-1967]
No motor vehicle dealer, repairer of motor vehicles, retail dealer of gasoline
or motor oil or renter or lessor of motor vehicle shall park any vehicle in any
off-street parking facility of the Town of New Canaan when such vehicle is
for sale, is to be serviced or repaired or is for rent, lease or hire.
§ 41-10. Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of the employees of the Parking Commission and the
Police Department to enforce the provisions of these regulations.
§ 41-11. Penalties. [Amended and effective 12-14-1965]
A. The responsibility for the placing or leaving of a vehicle in violation of
these rules and regulations shall rest with the operator. Whenever there
occurs a violation of these regulations, proof of the registration number
of the vehicle therein concerned shall be prima facie evidence in any
criminal action that the owner was the operator thereof.
B. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of these
regulations or any regulation made in accordance herewith shall be
served either in person or by attaching to such vehicle a notice directing
the owner of such vehicle to surrender said notice at police headquarters
and to pay the sum stated thereon. In the event that the owner shall
fail to comply with such notice within 30 days from the date of issuance
thereof, such penalty shall be increased by the sum of $10. If the total
sum is not paid, the owner shall be subject to arrest and prosecution
in accordance with Chapter 249 of the General Statutes of Connecticut.
[Amended 1-7-1969, effective 1-11-1969; 10-13-1976; 9-1-1981,
effective 9-1-1981]
C. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate these regulations or
any regulations made in accordance herewith shall be further subject to
the provisions of § 33-3 of the Town Code relative to the impounding of
illegally parked vehicles.38
§ 41-12. Repeal.
All regulations heretofore in effect regulating parking in off-street parking
lots are hereby repealed.
Chapter 42
PARKS
38.Editor's Note: See Ch. 33, Impounding Motor Vehicles.
§ 41-8 NEW CANAAN CODE § 42-1
C:224
§ 42-1. Definitions.
DIRECTOR — Means the Director of Recreation of New Canaan or his
authorized agent.
PARK — Means a park or any other area, owned or used by the Town, and
devoted to active or passive recreation.
§ 42-2. Park property.
A. Defacing property. No person shall deface any property.
B. Climbing trees. No person shall climb any park tree.
C. Picking flowers. No person shall pick any park flower or other plant life
except in connection with an approved Nature Center course of study.
§ 42-3. Protection of wildlife.
No person shall hunt, kill, trap, wound, frighten or capture any bird or
animal in any park.
§ 42-4. Sanitation.
A. Polluting waters. No person shall throw, discharge, or otherwise place
or cause to be placed in the waters of any pond, lake, or stream in
or adjacent to any park or any tributary, stream, storm sewer, or drain
flowing into such waters, any substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid,
which will or may result in the pollution of said waters.
B. Cleaning vehicles. No person shall wash, clean or polish any vehicle in
any park.
C. Disposal of refuse. No person shall dump, throw, deposit or leave any
refuse in any park except in the proper receptacles where these are
provided; where receptacles are not so provided, all such refuse shall be
carried away by the person responsible for its presence, and disposed of
elsewhere.
§ 42-5. Traffic.
A. Driving and parking. No person shall drive or park any vehicle on
any area except the park roads or designated parking areas, or such
other areas as may on occasion be specifically designated as temporary
parking areas by the Director.
B. Traffic signs. No person shall fail to observe all traffic signs indicating
speed, directions, caution, stopping or parking, and all others posted for
proper control and to safeguard life and property.
C. Speed. No person shall ride or drive a vehicle at a rate of speed to exceed
15 miles an hour, except upon such roads as the Director may designate
by posted signs for speedier travel.
§ 42-6. Bicycles.
A. Confined to roads. No person shall ride a bicycle on other than a road or
path designated for that purpose.
B. Immobile bicycles. If a bicycle rack is provided, immobile bicycles shall
be placed in them and in no event shall they be left lying on the ground
§ 42-1 CHARTER § 42-6
C:225
or pavement, or be set against trees in any place or position where other
persons may trip over or be injured by them.
§ 42-7. Recreational activities.
A. Bathing and swimming.
(1) Only permitted in prescribed waters. No person shall swim, bathe or
wade in any water in or adjacent to any park, except in such waters
and at such places as are provided therefor, and in compliance with
such regulations as may be adopted for such areas.
(2) Issuance of permits. No person shall be admitted to any area
designated for swimming unless he has permission by the Director.
Permits shall be limited to New Canaan residents or property
owners. Permits will be issued after payment of the fee established
by the Director.
(3) Certain hours. No person shall frequent any waters or places
designated for swimming or bathing, or congregate there except
between such hours as shall be designated by the Director.
(4) Costume. No person shall allow himself to be so covered with a
bathing suit as to expose indecently his person.
B. Boating. No privately owned boat, canoe, raft or other floating craft shall
be placed in operation upon any park waters, except with permission of
the Director.
C. Fishing. No person shall fish in any park waters except those designated
by the Director for that use and under such regulations as may be
prescribed by the Director. No person shall at any time fish in any area
where bathing is permitted.
D. Camping. No person shall camp or lodge in any park except at sites
designated by the Director for that use and under such regulations as
may be prescribed by the Director.
E. Hunting and firearms. No person shall use, carry or possess firearms
in any park, of any description, including air rifles, bow-and-arrows,
fireworks, or other weapons potentially inimical to wildlife and
dangerous to human safety, except in any area that may be designated
by the Director.
F. Picnic areas and use.
(1) Regulated. No person shall picnic or lunch in any place other than
those designated for that purpose.
(2) Fires. No person shall light any fires except in fireplaces provided
for that purpose or in areas designated by the Director for the use of
charcoal burners.
(3) Duty of picnickers. No person shall leave a picnic area before the fire
is completely extinguished and before all trash is properly disposed
of.
G. Games. No person shall take part in or abet the playing of any games
involving thrown or otherwise propelled objects except in areas set
apart for such forms of recreation. The playing of athletic contests is
prohibited except in the areas provided for such activities.
H. Tennis. No person shall play on any tennis courts except during hours
designated by the Director. All persons shall wear the prescribed tennis
§ 42-6 NEW CANAAN CODE § 42-7
C:226
shoes. All users of New Canaan tennis courts must abide by the specific
rules and regulations for tennis court use established by the Director.
I. Riding of horses. No person shall ride, lead or take any horse in any park
except on trails set aside for that purpose. [Added 6-4-1968, effective
7-6-1968]
§ 42-8. Behavior.
A. Alcoholic liquors. [Amended 10-27-1970, effective 12-5-1970;
8-11-1976; 6-7-1978, effective 6-23-1978; 8-4-1983, effective
8-19-1983]
(1) Alcoholic liquors. No person shall sell, bring in or consume alcoholic
liquors at any time in any park except as herein provided.
(2) Exceptions. [Amended 3-11-1987, effective 3-27-1987;
11-13-1996, effective 11-13-1996]
(a) The Director may issue a permit to any qualified person, firm,
organization or corporation allowing alcoholic liquors to be
brought in, sold and consumed in or within the building known
as "Waveny House," located in Lapham Park, and on the
premises immediately adjacent thereto, that is to say within
200 feet from the outer terraces adjoining the house, and in or
within the buildings known as the "Waveny Carriage Barn," the
"Waveny Powerhouse," and the "Lapham Community Center,"
located in Lapham Park, and on the premises immediately
adjacent thereto, subject to the following conditions:
[1] Use and consumption. Alcoholic liquors may be brought in
and consumed on said premises if the same are not sold
or to be sold and if it is stated in the permit issued to
the applicant by the Director for the use of Waveny House,
Waveny Carriage Barn, Waveny Powerhouse or Lapham
Community Center and the adjacent premises that alcoholic
liquors may be brought in and consumed on the premises,
but not sold. [Amended 11-13-1996, effective
11-13-1996]
[2] Sale. Alcoholic liquors may be brought in, sold and
consumed on said premises, provided that an appropriate
permit shall be issued by the appropriate agency and, in
addition, the applicant shall have obtained all other state
or town permits which may be necessary for the proposed
activity. Copies of all state permits relating to alcoholic
liquor sales shall be filed with the application, and the permit
issued by the Director or his agent shall state that copies
of the permits necessary in connection with the proposed
sale of alcoholic liquor have been obtained and filed with the
Director. [Amended 11-13-1996, effective 11-13-1996]
[3] Permit.
[a] Application. A person seeking issuance of a permit
hereunder shall file an application, together with any
applicable fees in accordance with the regulations
adopted by the Parks and Recreation Commission.
§ 42-7 CHARTER § 42-8
C:227
[b] Standards of issuance. The Director or his agent shall
issue a permit hereunder when he finds:
[i] That the proposed activity or use of the park will
not unreasonably interfere with or detract from the
general public enjoyment of the park.
[ii] That the proposed activity and use will not
unreasonably interfere with or detract from the
promotion of public health, welfare, safety and
recreation.
[iii] That the proposed activity or use is not reasonably
anticipated to incite violence, crime or disorderly
conduct.
[iv] That the proposed activity will not entail unusual,
extraordinary or burdensome expense or police
operation by the town.
[c] Effect of permit. A permittee shall be bound by all park
rules and regulations and all applicable ordinances fully
as though the same were inserted in said permits.
[d] Liability of permittee. The person or persons to whom
a permit is issued shall be liable for any loss, damage
or injury sustained by any person whatever by reason of
the negligence of the person or persons to whom such
permit shall have been issued.
[e] Revocation. The Director or his agent shall have the
authority to revoke a permit upon a finding of violation
of any rules or ordinance or upon good cause shown.
[f] Appeal. Within seven days after receipt of an application,
the Director or his agent shall apprise an applicant in
writing of his reason for refusing a permit, and any
aggrieved person shall have the right to appeal in writing
within 10 days to the Board of Selectmen, which shall
consider the application pursuant to applicable
regulations and sustain or overrule the Director's
decision within seven days. The decision of the Board of
Selectmen shall be final.
(b) Nature Center. In addition to the foregoing, alcoholic liquors
may be brought in and consumed, but not sold, on premises
designated as the "Administration/Activities Building" and the
"Horticultural Building" and immediately adjacent thereto at the
New Canaan Nature Center, with the prior written approval of
the Director of the Nature Center.
(3) Regulations. The Park and Recreation Commission shall adopt
regulations concerning the use, consumption and sale of alcoholic
beverages in the locations prescribed in Subsection A(2)(a) and (b)
above, subject to the approval of such regulations or any amendment
thereto by the Board of Selectmen. [Amended 3-11-1987,
effective 3-27-1987]
B. Domestic animals. Dogs are regulated by Code § 6-8. As provided in
§ 6-8, dogs must be leashed in all public parks except in a dog run
§ 42-8 NEW CANAAN CODE § 42-8
C:228
established by the Town. The Park and Recreation Commission is hereby
authorized to adopt regulations concerning the use any dog run
established by the Town in a public park, e.g., Spencer's Run in Waveny
Park. Any violation of such regulations may be enforced by infractions
issued by any police officer or Animal Control Officer. Any person
violating such regulations may be fined up to $250 for each offense, and
for a subsequent offense may be fined the maximum amount allowed
for infractions as set forth in the Connecticut Superior Court infractions
schedules. [Amended 12-17-2008, effective 1-1-2009; 7-20-2011,
effective 8-5-2011]
C. Games of chance. No person shall gamble or participate in or abet any
game of chance.
D. Going onto ice. No person shall go onto the ice on any park water, except
those locations designated as skating areas and provided that a safety
signal is displayed.
E. Loitering and boisterousness. No person shall sleep or protractedly
lounge on seats, benches or other areas, or engage in loud, boisterous,
threatening, abusive, insulting or indecent language, or engage in any
disorderly conduct or behavior tending to a breach of the public peace.
F. Selling. No person shall sell or offer for sale any merchandise, article
or articles whatsoever in a park without the written consent of the
Selectmen, nor shall any person practice, carry on, conduct or solicit any
trade, occupation, business or profession.
G. Handbills. No person shall distribute any handbills or circulars or post
any bills, notices or advertising matter of any kind and nature in any
park.
H. Travel on trails. No person traveling on a trail shall take shortcuts, but
shall confine himself to the established trails.
§ 42-9. Park operating policy.
A. Hours. Except for unusual and unforeseen emergencies, parks shall be
open to the public every day of the year from sunrise to sunset unless
otherwise designated by the Director. Any person in a park after closing
hours shall be subject to the penalty provided in § 4-8 of this code.
[Amended 9-17-1968, effective 10-19-1968]
B. Restrictions. The use of parks shall be restricted to New Canaan
residents or property owners, or their guests. [Amended 6-4-1968,
effective 7-6-1968]
C. Permits to use parks.
(1) When required. Organizations or organized groups of more than 20
persons desiring to use the parks shall apply for a permit at least
seven days prior to the day requested.
(2) Application procedure. Application shall be filed with the Director
upon forms to be supplied by him seeking such information as
reasonably necessary for a fair determination as to whether a permit
should be issued. The application shall be accompanied by a cash
bond of $50 to guarantee that the permittee will clean up the park
after use to the satisfaction of the Director. [Amended 9-17-1968,
effective 10-19-1968]
§ 42-8 CHARTER § 42-9
C:229
(3) Standards for issuance. The Director shall issue a permit when he
finds:
(a) That the proposed activity or use of the park will not
unreasonably interfere with or detract from the general public
enjoyment of the park;
(b) That the proposed activity and use will not unreasonably
interfere with or detract from the promotion of public health,
welfare, safety and recreation;
(c) That the proposed activity or use is not unreasonably anticipated
to incite violence, crime or disorderly conduct;
(d) That the proposed activity will not entail unusual, extraordinary
or burdensome expense or police operation by the town;
(e) That the facilities desired have not been reserved for other use
on the day and at the hour required in the application;
(f) That a certificate of public liability coverage in the limits of
$100,000 and $300,000 for personal injury and $50,000 for
property damage to be in force during the time for which the
application is made. Liability insurance is required for groups
using the park facilities over a given period of time on a periodic
basis.
(g) That arrangements have been made with the Police Department
for the hiring of any police supervision as deemed necessary by
the Police Chief. [Added 6-4-68; effective 7-6-68]
(h) Appeal. Within seven days after receipt of an application the
Director shall apprise an applicant in writing of his reasons for
refusing a permit and any aggrieved person shall have the right
to appeal in writing within 10 days to the Board of Selectmen,
which shall consider the application under the standards set
forth in Subsection (3) and sustain or overrule the Director's
decision within seven days. The decision of the Board of
Selectmen shall be final.
(4) Effect of permit.
(a) A permittee shall be bound by all park rules and regulations and
all applicable ordinances fully as though the same were inserted
in said permit.
(b) The permit shall cover use of the described site only and shall
not include permission to use any other area.
(c) The permit shall only be valid for the date indicated. No area will
be held for a postponement date.
(5) Liability of permittee. The person or persons to whom a permit is
issued shall be liable for any loss, damage or injury sustained by any
person whatever by reason of negligence of the person or persons to
whom such has been issued. The permittee shall also be responsible
for any damage done to any physical properties of the Town of New
Canaan.
(6) Revocation. The Director shall have the authority to revoke a permit
upon a finding of violation of any rule or ordinance, or upon good
cause shown.
§ 42-9 NEW CANAAN CODE § 42-10
C:230
§ 42-10. Enforcement.
A. Officials. The Director and park attendants and members of the Police
Department shall, in connection with their duties imposed by law,
diligently enforce the provisions of this ordinance.
B. Ejectment. The Director and park attendants or police officers shall have
the authority to eject from the park any person acting in violation of this
ordinance.
C. Seizure of property. The Director and any park attendant or police officer
shall have the authority to seize and confiscate any property, thing or
device in the park, or used, in violation of this ordinance.
§ 42-11. Collection of fees.
All fees and revenues collected for the use of town park and facilities shall
be transmitted by the receiver to the Bureau of Accounts at least weekly.
§ 42-12. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this ordinance, except § 42-11,
shall be punished as provided in § 4-8 of this Code. Each day such violation
is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 42-13. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
ordinance is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct
and independent provision and such holdings shall not affect the validity of
the remaining portions hereof.
§ 42-14. Repealer.
All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of the
ordinances are hereby repealed.
Chapter 43
PEDDLERS AND ITINERANT VENDORS
§ 42-10 CHARTER § 42-14
C:231

ARTICLE I
Peddlers
§ 43-1. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them:
HIGHWAY — A public highway, street, park or other public place including
sidewalks.
PEDDLER/SOLICITOR — Any person who shall sell, offer or expose for
sale, peddle or barter goods, services, wares or merchandise at public or
private sale upon any public streets or other public place, or who shall go
from house to house or from place to place for such purposes or any of
them.[Amended 7-10-2002, effective 7-26-2002]
§ 43-2. License required. [Amended 7-10-2002, effective 7-26-2002]
No person shall sell or offer for sale at public or private sale, or peddle any
goods, wares or merchandise within the limits of any highway within the
town; or sell or offer to sell, peddle or barter goods, wares and merchandise
or take or solicit subscriptions to books, magazines, periodicals or other
publications, or solicit for home maintenance/improvement services, from
house to house or from place to place in the Town without first obtaining a
license so to do, as herein provided. No person shall make, place or erect
in any highway any stand, wagon, cart or other vehicle or any structure for
the sale or offering for sale of any goods, wares or merchandise or for the
conduct of any business or selling, unless such person shall have obtained a
license therefor as herein provided.
§ 43-3. Application procedure.
Any person desiring a peddler's license as required by this chapter, shall
make application to the Town Clerk at least seven days in advance of
the date for which such license is desired. Such application shall be
accompanied by a photograph of the applicant and a letter from some
reputable resident of the Town attesting to the good moral character of
the applicant. Such applicant shall also be fingerprinted by the Police
Department at the time of making the application. The Town Clerk shall
collect $10 from each applicant, for use of the town, to defray the cost of
administration of this Article.
§ 43-4. Issuance of license.
Upon written application as required in the preceding section and payment
of the fee herein provided to the Town Clerk, he may issue a license to such
applicant to sell or peddle such goods, wares and merchandise permitted
by law, in and upon the highways and public places of the Town and to go
from house to house and from place to place for the purposes specified in
the preceding section.
§ 43-1 CHARTER § 43-5
C:233
§ 43-5. License fees.
In addition to the application fee required by § 43-3 of this code license fees
for each person, team or vehicle engaged in any of the acts for which a
license may be issued under this Article shall be as follows:
For one day $1.00
For 10 days $10.00
For one month $15.00
For one year $25.00
§ 43-6. Term of license — display required.
Yearly licenses required by this Article shall be for the calendar year or the
balance thereof; and if issued after July first the fees for the balance of the
year shall be $12. Such annual licenses shall be in form of a durable tag or
plate with a license number and year for which issued stamped or printed
thereon, and which license plate or tag shall be conspicuously displayed
upon any vehicle employed by the licensee in the course of such peddling or
vending.
§ 43-7. Records to be kept by Clerk.
The Town Clerk shall keep a written record of all licenses issued to him and
of the fees received thereon and shall remit to the Town Treasurer at the
end of each month all fees so received together with a statement in detail
showing the date of issuance of each license, term of license, licensee's
name and nature of business licensed.
§ 43-8. Revocation.
Licenses issued under this Article may be revoked at any time by the First
Selectman of the town.
§ 43-9. Badge required.
The Town Clerk shall issue to each successful applicant for a license under
this Article a badge, the size and contents of which shall be determined by
the Board of Selectmen. Such badge shall be worn by each licensee in a
conspicuous place upon one of his outer garments while he is engaged in
peddling, as defined by this Article.
§ 43-10. Exceptions.39
The provisions of this Article shall not apply to:
39.Editor's Note: 3-19-68; effective 4-19-68 original § 43-10, Fees for Town Clerk, was
repealed and sections following renumbered.
§ 43-5 NEW CANAAN CODE § 43-10
C:234
A. Marketing and sales of farm products by farmers of the state, which
produce has been raised or produced by them on or from farms actually
occupied by them in this state.
B. The sale, distribution and delivery of milk, cream, except ice cream,
teas, coffees, spices, groceries, meats and bakery goods.
C. Sales on approval or to conditional sales of merchandise.
D. A resident of this state for two years who has served in the army, navy,
marine corps or coast guard of the United States in time of war and
who may otherwise qualify under and comply with the provisions of the
General Statutes.
E. Goods sold by any blind person manufactured by him with his own
hands.
F. Sales made to dealers by commercial travelers or selling agents in the
regular course of business, or by sample for future delivery.
G. Wholesalers selling and delivering their goods to the merchants of the
town.
H. Sales of newspapers; or sales of or soliciting subscriptions to other
publications by residents of the town.
§ 43-11. Hawking prohibited.
The hawking of goods, wares or merchandise upon highways or elsewhere
in the Town shall not be licensed or permitted.
§ 43-12. Violation and penalty.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Article shall be fined not
more than $50.
§ 43-10 CHARTER § 43-12
C:235

ARTICLE II
Itinerant Vendors
§ 43-13. Licensing.
Itinerant vendors holding a state license as such, in conformity to the
provisions of Chapter 233 of the General Statutes, as amended, shall be
granted by the Town Clerk a local license for the Town upon presenting to
the Town Clerk such state license and paying a fee to the Town of $25, and
otherwise complying with the provisions of the General Statutes above cited
relative to itinerant vendors, or as the same may be hereafter amended.
§ 43-14. Transient business; exceptions.
An itinerant vendor, conducting a temporary or transient business in the
exhibition and sale of goods, wares and merchandise in any tent, booth,
building or other structure in the town, shall procure the local license
specified in the preceding section, unless such place shall be open for
business during usual business hours, for a period of at least nine months
of each year.
§ 43-13 CHARTER § 43-14
C:237
Chapter 44
PERSONNEL RULES AND REGULATIONS
§ 43-14 NEW CANAAN CODE § 43-14
C:238
RULE I
General Provisions
§ 44-1. Definitions.
As used in this ordinance, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALLOCATION — The assignment by the Board of Selectmen of a position to
its proper class and grade in accordance with the duties performed, and the
authority and responsibilities exercised.
APPOINTING AUTHORITY — The Board of Selectmen or the Police
Commission.
APPOINTMENT — The offer to and acceptance by a person of a position in
the Town service in accordance with the provisions of these rules.
ASSEMBLED EXAMINATION — An examination for which applicants are
required to appear at a specific place for the purpose of taking a test.
CLASS — A group of positions sufficiently alike in duties, authority, and
responsibility to warrant the use of the same title, class specification and
pay range.
CLASS SPECIFICATION — Means a written description of a class consisting
of a class title, a general statement of the level of work and of the
distinguishing features of work, examples of duties, and the desirable
qualifications for the class.
CLASSIFICATION — Means the act by the Board of Selectmen of grouping
positions in classes with regard to duties and responsibilities, requirements
as to education, knowledge, experience and ability, and tests of fitness, and
grouping classes in grades with regard to ranges of pay.
COMPENSATION — Means the standard rates of pay which have been
established by the Board of Selectmen and the Board of Finance for the
respective classes and grades of work.
DEPARTMENT — Means all Town departments, boards, and commissions
except the Board of Education.
DEMOTION — Means a change in employment status from a position in one
class to a position of another class having a lower maximum rate of pay.
GRADE — Means a group of classes occupying the same pay range although
different in duties, responsibilities, and qualifications.
PAY RANGE — Means one or more specific pay rates having a percentage
relationship to one another, assigned to a class of positions or grade as the
compensation for that class or grade.
PAY RATE — Means a specific dollar amount as shown in the pay plan.
POSITION — Means any appointed, paid office, or employment in the Town
service, whether occupied or vacant.
§ 44-1 CHARTER § 44-1
C:239
PROBATIONARY PERIOD — Means the working test or trial period of
employment beginning with the date of an employee's first appointment to
the Town service.
PROMOTION — Means a change in employment status from a position in
one class to a position of another class having a higher maximum rate of
pay.
REGULAR EMPLOYEE — Means an appointed, paid employee who is
lawfully retained in his position after appointment and completion of the
probationary period as provided for in these rules.
SALARY — Means the amount of compensation received for service
rendered exclusive of mileage, travel allowances, and other sums received
for actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of the
Town's business, but including the reasonable value of board, housing, or
similar advantages received from the Town.
TOWN EMPLOYEE — Means all salaried officials or employees of the Town
whose appointment or dismissal is under the jurisdiction of the Board of
Selectmen or the Police Commission.
TRANSFER — Means a change of an employee from one position to another
position in the same class or another class having essentially the same
maximum rate of pay, involving the performance of similar duties, and
requiring substantially the same basic qualifications.
UNASSEMBLED EXAMINATION — Means a test consisting of an appraisal
of experience and training, or of any other means of evaluating the relative
qualifications of applicants.
§ 44-2. Purpose of ordinance.
It is the purpose of this ordinance to give effect to the provisions of the
New Canaan Town Charter providing for the establishment of rules and
regulations and a plan of classification and compensation for all Town
employees.
§ 44-3. How ordinance known and cited.
This ordinance shall be known and cited as "The Personnel Rules and
Regulations of the Town of New Canaan."
§ 44-4. Declaration of personnel policy.
Under the authority granted by the Town Charter the following personnel
principles and policies are established to encourage the recruitment and
retention of the high caliber employee needed to render effective service to
the public:
A. Employment in the Town government shall be based on merit and be free
of personal and political considerations.
§ 44-1 NEW CANAAN CODE § 44-4
C:240
B. Just and equitable incentives and conditions of employment shall be
established and maintained to promote efficiency and economy in
operation of the municipal government.
C. Positions having similar duties and responsibilities shall be classified and
compensated for on a uniform basis.
D. Appointments, promotions, and other personnel actions, requiring the
application of the merit principle shall be based on systematic tests and
evaluations.
E. Every effort shall be made to stimulate high morale by fair
administration of this ordinance and by every consideration of the rights
and interest of employees, consistent with the best interests of the Town.
F. Continuity of employment covered by this ordinance shall be subject
to good behavior, satisfactory performance of work, necessity for the
performance of work, and availability of funds.
§ 44-4 CHARTER § 44-4
C:241

RULE II
Classification Plan
§ 44-5. Purpose of classification plan.
The classification plan provides a complete inventory of all Town employee
positions and specifications for each class of employment. The plan
standardizes titles, each of which is indicative of definite range of duties
and responsibilities and has the same meaning throughout the service.
§ 44-6. Composition of the classification plan.
The classification plan shall be enacted by resolution of the Board of
Selectmen and shall consist of:
A. A grouping in classes of positions which are approximately equal in
duties, authority, and responsibility.
B. Class titles, descriptive of the work of the class, which identify the class.
C. Written specifications for each class of positions.
D. A list showing the class title of each position and the grade to which the
class has been assigned for purposes of assigning a pay range.
E. A list showing the class title and grade of each position in the service as
identified by the name of the incumbent.
§ 44-7. Use of class titles.
The class titles shall be used in all official personnel and financial records,
but any other titles satisfactory to the department head may be used in
official correspondence or for working purposes within a department.
§ 44-8. Use of class specifications.
Class specifications are deemed to be descriptive and explanatory of the
kind of work performed and not necessarily inclusive of all duties
performed. Positions shall be allocated to a class on the basis of the work
performed during a majority of the time, but the employee may be required
to perform the duties of either a higher or lower class, on a temporary basis,
as the need may arise.
§ 44-9. Administration of the classification plan.
The Board of Selectmen shall be responsible for the administration of the
classification plan. The Board shall allocate or reallocate each position
to its appropriate class whenever a new position is created or whenever
the organization structure of a department or the duties of a position are
changed.
§ 44-10. Request for reclassification.
Any employee who considers his position improperly classified shall submit
his request to his department head who shall review such request as to its
justification. If the department head finds that there is merit in the request,
§ 44-5 CHARTER § 44-10
C:243
he shall transmit it to the Board of Selectmen for its consideration, together
with complete reasons for recommending the change. If the department
head finds the request is not justified, he shall so advise the employee of his
decision and also of the employee's right of appeal.
§ 44-10 NEW CANAAN CODE § 44-10
C:244
RULE III
Compensation Plan
§ 44-11. Composition of the compensation plan.
The compensation plan shall include the schedule of pay ranges consisting
of minimum and maximum rates of pay and intermediate steps for all
classes of positions and grades included in the classification plan. It shall
be enacted by resolution of the Board of Selectmen with the approval of the
Board of Finance.
§ 44-12. Maintenance of the compensation plan.
The compensation plan is intended to provide fair compensation for all
classes in the classification plan with regard to range of pay for other
classes, general rates of pay for similar employment in private
establishments and other public jurisdictions in the area, current costs of
living, the financial conditions of the Town and other relevant factors. To
this end, the Board of Selectmen shall from time to time make comparative
studies of all the factors affecting the level of pay ranges and will
recommend to the Board of Finance such changes in pay ranges as appear
to be pertinent.
§ 44-13. Use of pay ranges.
New or promoted employees shall normally begin work at the minimum pay
for their class, with the following exceptions:
A. Where, in the opinion of the appointing authority, a prospective
employee has attributes which so qualify him, and provided that funds
are available, he may begin at a step other than the minimum, but, in no
event, at any step higher than the fourth step of his class.
B. When an employee is promoted, his pay rate shall be advanced to that
step in the new pay range which would provide at least the equivalent of
the next step in the range from which he was promoted.
§ 44-14. Effective date of increases. [Amended 11-3-1981, effective
11-3-1981]
A. All pay rate increases shall be effective as of July 1 or January 1 of each
year, but only upon authorization of the Board of Selectmen following a
recommendation for increase by the employee's immediate superior and
department head. In determining whether or not the authorized increase
shall be effective on July 1 or January 1, the following table shall apply:
Period during which employee
has been hired or promoted Effective date of pay increase
July 1 to October 1 July 1 of the following fiscal year
October 2 to April 1 January 1 of the following fiscal year
April 2 to June 30 One year from the following July 1
§ 44-11 CHARTER § 44-14
C:245
B. This table shall not apply to existing employees who are entitled to raises at
anniversary dates which occur earlier than those specified in the table.
§ 44-15. Pay for part-time work.
Whenever any employee works for a period of less than the regular
established number of hours per week, the amount of pay shall be
proportioned to the time actually employed.
§ 44-16. Other compensation.
Subsistence, including food, lodging and other compensation in kind, shall
be evaluated on an equitable basis determined by the Board of Selectmen,
and such values shall be deducted from the cash pay of employees receiving
such allowances.
§ 44-16.A. Longevity. [Adopted 11-25-69, effective 9-1-69; amended
9-12-73]
All Town employees shall receive an extra premium for longevity based on
the following:
A. After five years of service: $50.
B. After 10 years of service: $150.
C. After 15 years of service: $250.
D. After 20 years of service: $350.
§ 44-14 NEW CANAAN CODE § 44-16.A
C:246
RULE IV
Appointments, Training, Promotions
§ 44-17. Certification of vacancy.
A. Whenever a vacancy occurs in a position in any department except
the Police Department, the department head shall notify the Board of
Selectmen of said vacancy on a form prescribed by the Selectmen.
B. Whenever a vacancy occurs in other than the lowest class, the
department head shall include with the notification a list of all employees
in his department eligible for promotion to the vacant position.
§ 44-18. Application.
Application for employment with the Town must be filed on forms
prescribed by the appointing authority and must be signed by the applicant.
§ 44-19. Examination.
All appointments and promotions shall be made on the basis of merit and
after examination as to fitness. The character of all examinations shall be
determined in each case by the appointing authority, and shall be practical
in nature and designed to evaluate the actual qualifications of the applicant.
Examinations may be assembled or unassembled and may consist of
written, oral or performance tests, or a rating of experience and training
or any combination thereof. Prior to receiving a probationary appointment,
the applicant shall be given a physical examination by his physician at Town
expense. He shall not be appointed until a physician's medical certificate
has been placed on file to the effect that the appointee meets the
established physical requirements of the class and/or is physically capable
of performing the duties of the position for which appointment is being
considered.
§ 44-20. Appointment.
A. The appointing authority shall make the appointment with the advice
and assistance of the department head. In all instances the decision of
the appointing authority shall be final. The Selectmen shall make no
appointments of paid employees to any volunteer fire company except
from lists of qualified persons recommended by the Fire Commission.
B. Notification of the appointment shall be immediately made by the
appointing authority to the accounting office upon forms provided for
this purpose.
C. No applicant shall be discriminated against because of race, color, creed
or political affiliation.
D. Preference will be given, when all other qualifications are equal, to
residents of New Canaan, Connecticut.
E. Pursuant to § C11-1 of the Charter of the Town of New Canaan, and
Public Act 02-137 of the State of Connecticut, the appointment and
dismissal of assistant Town clerks and assistant registrars of vital
statistics shall be made by the Board of Selectmen, and the employment
of such assistants shall be governed by these Personnel Rules and
§ 44-17 CHARTER § 44-20
C:247
Regulations of the Town of New Canaan. The Town Clerk shall be
considered the department head for consultation purposes in accord
with § 44-20A. The appointment of such assistants shall be made by
the Board of Selectmen only on the positive recommendation of the
Town Clerk. All other employment decisions regarding such assistants,
including compensation changes, promotions, and dismissals, shall be
made by the Board of Selectmen, in consultation with the Town Clerk.
[Added 12-11-2002, effective 1-1-2003]
§ 44-21. Probationary appointment.
A. All original or promotional appointments shall be tentative and subject
to a probationary period of six months, except that all original
appointments to patrolman shall be tentative and subject to a
probationary period of 12 months. This probationary period is
established for the effective adjustment of the new employee and shall
be utilized to study the employee's work and, if necessary, for rejecting
any employee whose work does not meet required standards. [Amended
5-12-1976]
B. At any time during the probationary period, any employee may be
dismissed by the appointing authority upon the recommendation of the
department head. He shall be given one week's notice of dismissal.
C. Any rejected probationary employee who was promoted or transferred
shall be reinstated in his previous position unless charges are preferred
and he is discharged as otherwise provided in these rules.
D. Within two weeks prior to the termination of the probationary period, the
department head shall submit to the appointing authority, upon a form
provided for this purpose, his recommendation regarding the permanent
appointment of the employee.
E. If a department head requests an extension of the probationary period
prior to 30 days before expiration, the appointing authority may extend
the probationary period for an additional three months.
F. Upon receiving a permanent appointment by the appointing authority,
the employee shall become a regular employee and shall be entitled to
all the rights and privileges thereof.
§ 44-22. Temporary appointment.
When qualified applicants are not available, or pending the making of
a permanent appointment, or in the case of seasonal employees, the
appointing authority may make temporary appointments under such terms
and conditions as it may deem advisable under the circumstances.
§ 44-23. Training.
A. All Town employees may be required to engage in such on-the-job
training programs and other programs as may be deemed necessary or
desirable by the appointing authority.
B. Dependent upon the degree of benefit to the Town and provided that
funds are available for this purpose, the appointing authority may
§ 44-20 NEW CANAAN CODE § 44-23
C:248
authorize Town assumption of the tuition cost of training courses and
may authorize these courses to be taken on Town time.
§ 44-23 CHARTER § 44-23
C:249

RULE V
Separation and Disciplinary Action
§ 44-24. Demotion.
A. The appointing authority may reduce the salary of an employee within
the range provided in the pay plan, or demote the employee for just
cause.
B. Any employee who is demoted may appeal in writing to the Personnel
Advisory Board within 10 days after such action is taken.
§ 44-25. Suspension.
A. The appointing authority may suspend without pay any employee under
its jurisdiction for reasons of misconduct, negligence, inefficiency,
insubordination, disloyalty, unauthorized absence, or other justifiable
reasons.
B. Any employee who is suspended may appeal in writing to the Personnel
Advisory Board within 10 days after such action is taken.
§ 44-26. Dismissal.
A. The appointing authority may dismiss any employee for misconduct,
inefficiency, or other just cause.
B. Any employee who is dismissed shall be granted, prior to the effective
date of dismissal, a written statement setting forth the reasons for such
dismissal, and a copy of such statement shall be filed in the Selectmen's
office.
C. Any employee who is dismissed may appeal in writing to the Personnel
Advisory Board within 10 days after such action is taken.
§ 44-27. Layoff.
A. A department head may, with the approval of the appointing authority,
lay off employees for any of the following reasons:
(1) Reorganization resulting in the abolition of position.
(2) Shortage of work.
(3) Shortage of funds.
B. When layoff becomes necessary, the department head shall notify in
writing the affected employee at least five days prior to the effective
date of such action stating the reasons for such layoff. A copy of such
statement shall be filed in the Selectmen's office.
C. Necessary layoffs shall be made in the following order:
(1) Temporary employees.
(2) Probationary employees.
(3) Permanent employees in the inverse order of employment in the
class and department involved.
§ 44-28. Transfers.
A. Transfers may be made under the following conditions:
(1) When an employee applies for transfer to another vacant position of
the same classification.
§ 44-24 CHARTER § 44-28
C:251
(2) When a department head deems transfer necessary because of work
conditions.
B. All transfers shall be approved by the Board of Selectmen.
C. Transfers shall be made between positions of like classification.
D. Transfers shall in no way affect an employee's seniority.
§ 44-28 NEW CANAAN CODE § 44-28
C:252
RULE VI
Grievances
§ 44-29. Grievance procedure. [Amended 9-13-72]
Unless other procedures have been negotiated and are specified in labor
agreements, the following procedures shall apply.
A. An employee shall first present his grievance to his immediate
supervisor who shall make careful inquiry into the facts and
circumstances of the complaint. The supervisor shall attempt to resolve
the problem promptly and fairly.
B. An employee who is dissatisfied with the decision of his supervisor
may submit his grievance, in writing, to his department head. The
department head shall make a separate investigation and inform the
employee, in writing, of his decision and the reasons therefor within
seven days after receipt of the employee's grievance.
C. If the employee is dissatisfied with the department head's decision,
he may obtain a review by the Board of Selectmen by submitting a
request for review within seven calendar days following the receipt of
the decision to the department head. The Board of Selectmen shall make
such investigation and conduct such hearings as it deems necessary and
shall, within 15 calendar days after the receipt of the employee's request
for review, inform the employee, in writing, of its findings and decision.
D. At any time within 15 calendar days after receipt of the decision of the
Board of Selectmen, the employee may submit a written request for
further review to the Personnel Advisory Board. The Personnel Advisory
Board shall investigate such complaints made to it in writing and
transmit its recommendations, which shall be advisory in nature, in
writing, to the Board of Selectmen, and the decision of the Board of
Selectmen shall be final.
E. This rule shall not apply to employees of the Police Commission.
§ 44-29 CHARTER § 44-29
C:253

RULE VII
Attendance and Leave
§ 44-30. Hours of work.
A. Town Hall employees shall work 35 hours per week.
B. Public Works Department employees, other than employees of the
Engineering Division, shall work 40 hours per week.
C. The standard workweek for members of the Police Department shall
average 37.5 hours in accordance with the negotiated labor agreement.
[Amended 9-13-72; 9-12-73]
D. Fire Department employees shall work 42 hours per week. [Amended
9-17-68 effective 10-19-68; amended 5-20-69; effective 9-1-69]
§ 44-31. Overtime. [Amended 9-17-68; effective 10-19-68]
A. No overtime pay shall be paid to any employee, except Public Works,
Police and Fire employees, unless specifically authorized by the
appointing authority. Department heads shall arrange for time off in lieu
of overtime worked whenever necessary.
B. Public Works Department employees, except the Director of Public
Works, Highway Superintendent, Park Superintendent, and employees
of the Engineering Division, shall be paid at the rate of 1 1/2 times for
working time in excess of 40 hours. Fire Department employees shall be
paid at the rate of 1 1/2 times for working time in excess of 42 hours.
Police Department employees of the rank of Sergeant shall be paid at
the rate of 1 1/2 times for working time in excess of their regularly
scheduled workweek, or for any hour in excess of eight hours per day.
[Amended 9-13-72; 9-12-73]
§ 44-32. Attendance.
Employees shall be in attendance at their work in accordance with these
rules and general or departmental regulations. All departments shall keep
daily attendance records of employees, which shall be reported to the
Selectmen's office on the form and dates they shall specify.
§ 44-33. Holidays.
A. The following holidays shall be observed by Town employees: New Year's
Day; Martin Luther King's birthday observance; Presidents' Day; Good
Friday; Memorial Day; Independence Day; Labor Day; Columbus Day;
Veteran's Day; Thanksgiving Day; and Christmas Day. [Amended
11-25-69, effective 9-1-69; 3-12-86, effective 3-28-86]
B. In addition to the above holidays, employees may be granted other paid
holidays when offices are closed by action of the Board of Selectmen.
C. If an observed holiday falls during an employee's vacation period, he
shall be entitled to an additional day off.
D. Whenever a legal holiday falls on a Sunday, the following day shall be
considered a holiday except for employees whose regularly scheduled
workweek includes Sunday.
§ 44-30 CHARTER § 44-33
C:255
E. Employees who are required to work on an observed holiday because of
the nature of their work shall be granted another day off as arranged by
the department head. [Added 9-17-68, effective 10-19-68; amended
11-25-69, effective 9-1-69]
§ 44-34. Annual leave.
A. All permanent employees shall be entitled to one day of annual leave
(vacation) with pay for each month that the employee is in the employ
of the Town. Probationary employees shall accumulate annual leave at
the above rate during their probationary period but shall not be credited
with it until the successful completion of their probation. Employees with
five or more years of continuous service shall be annually entitled to 15
days' annual leave, accumulated at the rate of one and one-fourth (1 1/4)
days per month. Employees with 15 or more years of continuous service
shall be annually entitled to 21 days of annual leave, accumulated at
the rate of one and three-fourths (1 3/4) days per month. [Amended
11-25-1969, effective 9-1-1969; 9-12-1973; 11-9-1988]
B. Annual leave shall preferably be taken in the year earned, but, with
the permission of the department head, may be accrued for a period
not to exceed two years' accumulation (24, 30 or 42 days). [Amended
9-12-73]
C. Annual leave shall only be taken after a request for the same has been
made on forms provided by the Selectmen's office and the request has
been approved by the employee's department head and the Selectmen's
office. If more than two days' annual leave is requested, this must be
done at least 15 days prior to the start of the requested vacation period.
If two or fewer days are requested, the written request shall be in the
Selectmen's office no later than 24 hours prior to the vacation day or
days requested.
D. The vacation schedule shall be drafted by the head of each department
on March 1 of each year, and in the case of the Fire Company by
May 30, and shall be submitted to the Selectmen's office. It shall be
drafted in such a manner that a minimum number of employees shall
be on leave during the same period. If more than one employee in the
same department requests annual leave during the same period and the
department head decides that only one can be spared at that time, the
request of the employee with the greater seniority shall be granted.
E. Pay in lieu of vacation shall not be granted except in the following cases:
(1) If a permanent employee leaves the employ of the Town of New
Canaan and he has vacation leave to his credit, he shall be paid
the salary equivalent to the accrued vacation, limited to two years'
accumulation. [Amended 9-12-73]
(2) If a permanent employee, while in the Town service, dies and he
has vacation leave to his credit, the salary equivalent to the accrued
vacation shall be payable to the following classes in the following
order of priority:
(a) A named beneficiary whose name has been filed by said
employee with the Bureau of Accounts.
§ 44-33 NEW CANAAN CODE § 44-34
C:256
(b) When not having so filed a name of beneficiary, to his widow or
widower.
(c) When not having named a beneficiary or not having left a widow
or widower, to the estate of the deceased.
§ 44-35. Sick leave.
A. All permanent and probationary employees shall be entitled to accrue
one and one-fourth (1 1/4) days of sick leave for each month the
employee is employed by the Town. [Amended 6-20-78, effective
6-30-78]
B. Earned sick leave may be accumulated to a maximum of 130 days.
[Amended 9-13-1972; 6-20-1978, effective 6-30-1978; 11-9-1988]
C. Sick leave shall not be considered a privilege which an employee may
use at his discretion but shall be allowed only in case of necessity and
actual sickness, injury or disability of the employee or because of illness
or death in his immediate family or to meet dental appointments or to
take physical examinations or other sickness-preventative measures if
permitted by the department head.
D. To receive compensation while on sick leave, an employee must notify
his department head prior to or within one hour after the time set for the
beginning of his regular duties and shall immediately, upon returning
to his duties, notify the Selectmen's office of his absence, upon forms
provided for this purpose.
E. Proof of illness may be required by a department head or the Board of
Selectmen and, in the event of an absence for more than three days, a
physician's certificate may be demanded as proof.
F. Any employee who shall absent himself without leave in any month shall
forfeit the accrual of sick leave for that month.
G. No refund of vacation time shall be allowed due to illness incurred while
on vacation leave unless sufficient proof of such illness can be provided
to the Selectmen's office.
H. Temporary employees shall not be entitled to sick leave.
I. Payments made to any employee while on sick leave as compensation
insurance shall be deducted from the amount to be paid that employee
by the Town during each time that he is carried on the Town payroll.
J. In the event an employee entitled to sick leave benefits or benefits
under the Workmen's Compensation Act elects to waive his rights under
the Compensation Act and institutes legal action against the Town, the
sick leave benefits set forth herein shall not become payable until final
disposition of the legal action, and if the employee obtains judgment
against the Town, the total amount payable as sick leave benefits shall
be deducted from the judgment; provided, however, that if the judgment
is less than the sick leave benefits, an additional amount shall be paid
to the employee to make his total amount of judgment and sick leave
payment equal to the sick leave benefits he would have received had he
not instituted action.
K. Sick leave shall be charged in amounts of 1/2 day for an absence of two
to four hours and a full day for over four hours.
§ 44-34 CHARTER § 44-36
C:257
§ 44-36. Military leave.
Any permanent employee who is a member of the National Guard or Naval
Reserve or of the military or naval forces of the United States and is
required to undergo field training therein shall be entitled to military leave
for the period of such field training, provided that the amount of
compensation paid to such employee for such leave shall be the difference
between his compensation for military activities and the amount due as an
employee of the Town.
§ 44-37. Jury duty leave.
Employees while on jury duty shall be paid the difference between their
regular pay and the jury duty pay.
§ 44-38. Leave of absence.
A. With pay. Leave of absence may be granted by the appointing authority
to permit an employee to attend professional meetings or conferences in
the interest of the Town or for other justifiable reasons.
B. Without pay. Leave without pay may be granted by the appointing
authority when requested by an employee when such leave is deemed to
be justified. Such leave may be granted when, due to an extended illness,
the accumulated sick leave and annual leave has been used or for an
extension of vacation time when circumstances will permit or for other
similar purposes.
§ 44-39. Absence without leave.
A. An absence of an employee from duty, including any absence for a single
day or part of a day, that is not authorized by a specific grant of leave
of absence under the provisions of these rules shall be deemed absence
without leave.
B. Any such absence shall be without pay and may be subject to disciplinary
action. In the absence of such disciplinary action, any employee who
absents himself for three consecutive days without leave shall be
deemed to have resigned. Such action may be reconciled by a
subsequent grant of leave if the conditions warrant.
§ 44-40. Procedure in requesting leave.
An employee requesting a leave for any reason must fill out a request form
and the requested leave must be approved by the Selectmen's office as well
as by the employee's department head.
§ 44-36 NEW CANAAN CODE § 44-40
C:258
RULE VIII
Outside Employment
§ 44-41. Outside employment.
Since the Town does not favor an employee holding another job in addition
to his regular one with the Town (particularly if there is a possibility that
the other job would interfere with his satisfactory performance as a Town
employee), no employee may take any outside employment without first
securing the permission of the appointing authority. In the case of the Fire
Company, the advice and recommendation of the Fire Commission shall be
obtained by the appointing authority.
§ 44-41 CHARTER § 44-41
C:259

RULE IX
Travel Reimbursement
§ 44-42. Certain employees using cars to be reimbursed. [Amended
5-7-1968, effective 6-1-1968; 7-26-1990]
Employees authorized by the Board of Selectmen to use their personal cars
for business shall be reimbursed at the rate as established from time to time
by the Board of Selectmen.
§ 44-43. Certain employees to carry liability insurance. [Amended
9-13-72]
Employees authorized to use their personal cars shall carry liability
insurance with minimum limits of $20,000/$40,000/$10,000 and shall
furnish the Town with a certificate of insurance.
§ 44-42 CHARTER § 44-43
C:261

RULE X
Retirement and Group Insurance
§ 44-44. Eligible employees to become members of retirement plan.
[Amended 9-13-72]
All eligible Town employees shall become members of the Town Retirement
Plan on the first day of the month after they are employed and shall
contribute at the rate of 2% of that portion of their compensation which
is subject to social security and 5% on that portion not subject to social
security. Police officers shall contribute 7% of their compensation.
§ 44-45. Eligible employees to become members of group insurance
plan. [Amended 11-25-1969, effective 9-1-1969; 7-26-1990]
All eligible Town employees hired after September 1, 1959, shall become
members of the Town Group Insurance Plan upon completion of two months
of continual active service. Upon proper application, provisions of the
Town's health insurance plan are extended to dependents of eligible
employees.
§ 44-46. Retirement due to age. [Amended 9-13-72]
Retirement dates and benefits for policemen and firemen shall be as
prescribed by the applicable labor agreement for the respective groups. For
all other Town employees, the normal retirement date will be the first of
the month on or next following their 65th birthday. Firemen may continue
in active service up to their 65th birthday; for policemen, the provisions of
their labor agreement applies; all other employees may continue in active
service until their 70th birthday, provided that they are physically able to
perform the full duties of their assigned job in a satisfactory manner, and
provided that the appointing authority approves.
§ 44-46.1. Maximum payment. [Added 3-12-86, effective 3-28-86]
In the event that an employee is awarded payments under Section 7-433c
of the Connecticut General Statutes, the total amounts paid to that person
from the Town's retirement plan, including social security, workers'
compensation payments and benefits paid under Section 7-433c, shall not
exceed 75% of the average annual compensation, as defined in the Town's
pension plan, of the person whose services to the Town resulted in payment
of the aforementioned benefits; provided, however, that if any changes to
the Town retirement plan increases payments to all retirees or classes of
retirees, such changes shall be applied uniformly to all retirees or classes of
retirees as the case may be.
§ 44-46.2. Disability retirement benefits. [Added 6-18-2014]
A. If an eligible employee of the Town (other than a police officer or
firefighter) or the Board of Education of the Town who is a member of
the Town Retirement Plan incurs a total and permanent disability, then:
§ 44-44 CHARTER § 44-46.2
C:263
(1) If the disability is not occupational or service-connected, the
employee shall receive a disability retirement benefit equal to the
disability benefit percentage (as defined below) of his or her average
annual compensation (or such other percentage as is prescribed by
any applicable labor agreement), reduced by 50% of his or her Social
Security disability benefit. If the employee has five or more years of
credited service, the sum of his or her disability retirement benefit
and 50% of his or her Social Security benefit cannot exceed his or
her compensation at the time of disability.
(2) If the disability is occupational and service-connected, the employee
shall receive a disability retirement benefit equal to the disability
benefit percentage of his or her average annual compensation (or
such other percentage as is prescribed by any applicable labor
agreement), reduced by 50% of his or her Social Security disability
benefit; and reduced further by his or her workers compensation
benefit if the employee has less than five years of credited service.
If the employee has five or more years of credited service, the sum
of his or her disability retirement benefit, 50% of his or her Social
Security benefit, and workers compensation benefit cannot exceed
his or her compensation at the time of disability.
B. The disability benefit percentage equals 40% for an eligible employee of
the Town who is a collectively bargained employee of the Department of
Public Works of the Town, and 50% for each other eligible employee of
the Town (other than a police officer or firefighter) and for each eligible
employee of the Board of Education of the Town.
C. If a police officer who is a member of the Town Retirement Plan incurs a
total and permanent disability, then:
(1) If the disability is not occupational or service-connected, the police
officer shall receive a disability retirement benefit equal to the
greater of 50% of his or her average annual compensation (or such
other percentage as is prescribed by any applicable labor
agreement) or his or her accrued benefit. If the police officer has
five or more years of credited service, his or her disability retirement
benefit cannot exceed his or her compensation at the time of
disability.
(2) If the disability is occupational and service-connected, the police
officer shall receive a disability retirement benefit equal to the
greater of 50% of his or her average annual compensation (or such
other percentage as is prescribed by any applicable labor
agreement) or his or her accrued benefit, reduced by his or her
workers compensation benefit if the police officer has less than
five years of credited service. If the police officer has five or more
years of credited service, the sum of his or her disability retirement
benefit and workers compensation benefit cannot exceed his or her
compensation at the time of disability.
D. If a firefighter who is a member of the Town Retirement Plan incurs a
total and permanent disability, then:
(1) If the disability is not occupational or service-connected, the
firefighter shall receive a disability retirement benefit equal to 50%
§ 44-46.2 NEW CANAAN CODE § 44-46.2
C:264
of his or her average annual compensation (or such other percentage
as is prescribed by any applicable labor agreement). If the firefighter
has five or more years of credited service, his or her disability
retirement benefit cannot exceed his or her compensation at the time
of disability.
(2) If the disability is occupational and service-connected, the firefighter
shall receive a disability retirement benefit equal to 50% of his or
her average annual compensation (or such other percentage as is
prescribed by any applicable labor agreement), reduced by his or
her workers compensation benefit if the firefighter has less than
five years of credited service. If the firefighter has five or more
years of credited service, the sum of his or her disability retirement
benefit and workers compensation benefit cannot exceed his or her
compensation at the time of disability.
E. The administrator of the Town Retirement Plan (or any committee
serving as the plan administrator) shall have the discretion to determine
if a disability is occupational and service-connected.
§ 44-46.2 CHARTER § 44-46.2
C:265

RULE XI
Membership in Civil Defense
§ 44-47. Enrollment in civil defense. [Added 12-22-65, effective
1-28-66]
All regular full-time male employees shall be required to enroll as members
of the Town's Civil Defense Organization.
§ 44-48. (Reserved)
§ 44-47 CHARTER § 44-48
C:267

RULE XII
Other Post-Employment Benefits (OPEB) Trust
§ 44-49. Establishment of OPEB Trust. [Added 4-20-2010, effective
5-7-2010]
A. Authority; establishment of retiree benefit trust. Pursuant to the
authority granted to the Town Council of the Town of New Canaan,
connecticut, in § 4-11 of the Charter and § 7-450(b) of the Connecticut
General Statutes, there shall be created and established for such Town
an Other Post-Employment Benefits (“OPEB”) Trust to fund certain postemployment
benefits, other than pension benefits, pursuant to the terms
of previously established plans for the benefit of certain Town and Board
of Education employees, retirees, their spouses and dependents. The
provision of such OPEB Trust shall be as set forth in the OPEB
Declaration of Trust, including revisions thereto, as are hereafter
approved by the Town Council.
B. Transfer from reserve fund. In accordance with the provisions of
§ 7-403a(e) of the Connecticut General Statutes, the Town hereby
transfers the assets held in the "Special Revenue Funds-Reserve for
OPEB" to the Trust.
C. Establishment of OPEB Board. Immediately upon the enactment of this
ordinance, the Board of Finance shall constitute the OPEB Board for the
OPEB Trust, hereinafter referred to as the “OPEB Board.” The members
of said OPEB Board shall receive no compensation for serving and shall
serve terms coextensive with their respective terms as members of the
Board of Finance.
D. Duties of the OPEB Board. The OPEB Board shall perform the duties
set forth in the OPEB Declaration of Trust, as amended from time to
time, relating to the management of the assets held in the OPEB Trust.
The First Selectman, or his or her designee, shall have the care and
custody of all funds in the OPEB Trust and shall have the power, with the
approval of the OPEB Board, to invest such funds in securities legal for
investment for such trust funds.
§ 44-49 CHARTER § 44-49
C:269
Chapter 46
(RESERVED)
Chapter 48
POLICE
§ 48-1. Bank escorts; fee provided. [Amended 6-7-83, effective
9-1-83]
Owners of business and commercial establishments requesting police
escorts to or from local banking institutions shall be charged $10 for each
one-way trip. Escorts shall only be made to or from banks located in New
Canaan.
Chapter 49
RECYCLING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Garbage and refuse — See Ch. 25. Health and sanitation — See Ch. 29.
§ 49-1. Establishment of program.
There is established a town solid waste recycling program, with standards
to effect the maximum level of recycling of solid waste and source
separation.
§ 49-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this ordinance, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ACCEPTABLE RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Those items, including glass
food and beverage containers, metal food and beverage containers,
newspaper and certain HDPE and PET plastic food and beverage containers
and other recyclables determined by the Town of New Canaan.[Amended
7-21-2010, effective 8-27-2010]
CARDBOARD — Corrugated boxes and similar corrugated and kraft paper
materials which have a minimum of contamination by food or other
material.
COLLECTOR — Any person who holds itself out for hire to collect solid
waste from residential, business, commercial and other establishments
within the Town.
§ 44-49 NEW CANAAN CODE § 49-2
C:270
COMMISSIONER — The Commissioner of Environmental Protection of the
State of Connecticut or his or her authorized agent.40[Amended
7-21-2010, effective 8-27-2010]
GENERAL STATUTES — The General Statutes of Connecticut, as amended.
GLASS FOOD AND BEVERAGE CONTAINER — A glass bottle or jar of any
size or shape used to package food or beverage products suitable for human
or animal consumption.
HDPE (HIGH-DENSITY POLYETHYLENE) PLASTIC FOOD AND BEVERAGE
CONTAINER — Any high-density polyethylene bottle, jar or container of any
size or shape used to package food or beverage products suitable for human
or animal consumption or used for household laundry products or motor
oil, which are marked on the bottom with the number (2) encircled by the
recycling symbol.41
INTERMEDIATE PROCESSING FACILITY or INTERMEDIATE
PROCESSING CENTER — A facility where glass, metals, paper products,
batteries, household hazardous waste, fertilizers and other items are
removed from the waste stream for recycling or reuse.
LEAVES — The foliage of trees.
METAL FOOD AND BEVERAGE CONTAINER — An aluminum, bimetal,
steel, tin-plated steel or other metallic can, plate or tray of any size or shape
used to package food or beverage products suitable for human or animal
consumption.
NEWSPAPER — Used or discarded newsprint which has a minimum of
contamination by food or other material.
OFFICE PAPER — Used or discarded high-grade white paper and manila
paper, including but not limited to paper utilized for file folders, tab cards,
writing, typing, printing, computer printing and photocopying, which is
suitable for recycling and which has a minimum of
contamination.[Amended 7-21-2010, effective 8-27-2010]
PERSON — Any individual, organization, company, corporation, trust,
partnership, foundation, group, association or establishment, or any
combination of them.[Amended 7-21-2010, effective 8-27-2010]
PET (POLYETHYLENE TEREPHTHALATE) PLASTIC FOOD AND
BEVERAGE CONTAINER — Any polyethylene terephthalate bottle, jar or
container of any size or shape used to package food or beverage products
suitable for human or animal consumption, which is marked on the bottom
of the bottle, jar or container with the number (1) encircled by the recycling
symbol.
RECYCLABLES or ITEMS REQUIRED TO BE RECYCLED or STATUTORY
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Cardboard, glass food and beverage
40.Editor's Note: The former definition of "contracting community," which immediately
followed this definition, was repealed 7-21-2010, effective 8-27-2010.
41.Editor's Note: The former definition of "intercommunity agreement," which immediately
followed this definition, was repealed 7-21-2010, effective 8-27-2010.
§ 49-2 CHARTER § 49-2
C:271
containers, metal food and beverage containers, newspaper, certain HDPE
and PET plastic food and beverage containers, office paper, scrap metal,
storage batteries and waste oil, as defined herein, and such other items as
may be designated by the Commissioner.
RECYCLE — To separate or divert an item or items from the solid waste
stream for the purposes of processing it or causing it to be processed into a
material product, including the production of compost, in order to provide
for disposition of the item or items in a manner, other than incineration or
landfilling, which will best protect the environment.
RECYCLING PROGRAM — A program for the processing of solid waste to
reclaim material therefrom.
RECYCLING FACILITY or RECYCLING CENTER — Land and appurtenances
thereon and structures where recycling is conducted, including but not
limited to an intermediate processing center.
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — Real estate containing one or more dwelling
units, excluding hospitals, institutions, motels and hotels.
RESOURCES RECOVERY FACILITY — A facility utilizing processes to
reclaim energy from municipal solid waste and, particularly, the Greater
Bridgeport Resources Recovery Facility located in Bridgeport.
SCRAP METAL — Used or discarded items which consist predominantly
of ferrous metals, aluminum, brass, copper, lead, chromium, tin, nickel or
alloys thereof, including but not limited to white goods and metal food
containers.
SOLID WASTE — Solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous material that
is unwanted or discarded, including but not limited to material processed at
a recycling facility.
SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL AREA — Land and appurtenances thereon and
structures, including a landfill or other land disposal site, used for the
disposal of more than 10 cubic yards of solid waste.
SOLID WASTE FACILITY — Any solid waste disposal area, volume reduction
plant, transfer station, woodburning facility or biomedical waste treatment
facility.
STATE — The State of Connecticut.
STORAGE BATTERY — Lead-acid batteries or other batteries used in motor
vehicles such as automobiles, airplanes, boats, recreational vehicles,
tractors and like applications.42
TOWN — The Town of New Canaan, and includes authorized officers,
boards, commissions and agencies of the Town.
WASTE OIL — Crankcase oil that has been utilized in internal combustion
engines.
42.Editor's Note: The former definition of "SWEROC," which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed 7-21-2010, effective 8-27-2010.
§ 49-2 NEW CANAAN CODE § 49-3
C:272
§ 49-3. Administrator. [Amended 7-21-2010, effective 8-27-2010]
The Board of Selectmen is vested with full powers to develop and operate
a recycling program consistent with this ordinance and the laws and
regulations of the state. The Board of Selectmen shall appoint an
administrator of the recycling program to supervise the operation and
coordination of the recycling program established by the Board of
Selectmen.
§ 49-4. Scope; findings; Town obligations. [Amended 7-21-2010,
effective 8-27-2010]
A. The state has determined that not less than 25% of the solid waste
generated in the state after January 1, 1991, shall be recycled. Under
§ 22a-220 of the Connecticut General Statutes, the Town is required to
make provisions for the separation, collection, processing and marketing
of all items designated for recycling by the Commissioner.
B. In order to fulfill its statutory obligations, the Town Council finds it
necessary for the Town of New Canaan:
(1) To require residential acceptable recyclable materials generated
within its boundaries to be processed pursuant to this ordinance and
applicable regulations of the Commissioner;
(2) To have residential statutory recyclable materials that are not
processed at the regional intermediate processing center and all
commercial and nonresidential statutory recyclable materials
generated within its boundaries processed in accordance with
applicable regulations of Connecticut state agencies;
(3) To collect and/or receive and transfer to an intermediate processing
center all residential acceptable recyclable materials that are
required to be recycled by the Commissioner.
§ 49-5. Purpose of adoption. [Amended 7-21-2010, effective
8-27-2010]
By adoption of this ordinance, the Town shall comply with § 22a-220 of the
General Statutes, as amended by Section 2 of Public Act No. 90-220, "To
adopt an ordinance . . . setting forth measures to assure the compliance
of persons within its boundaries with the requirements of Subsection (c) of
§ 22a-241b, as amended by Section 1 of . . . Public Act 90-220 and to assure
compliance of collectors with the requirements of Subsection (a) of Section
4 of . . . Public Act 90-220."
§ 49-6. Regulations and instructions. [Amended 7-21-2010,
effective 8-27-2010]
The successful operation of the recycling program shall require the
issuance of regulations and instructions setting forth detailed procedures to
be followed by residents, businesses and institutions, collectors and others.
The Board of Selectmen is authorized and directed to promulgate such
regulations and instructions, to be binding upon all persons within the
§ 49-3 CHARTER § 49-6
C:273
Town, to effect an efficient and economical recycling program consistent
with this ordinance and applicable state laws and regulations.
§ 49-7. Separation of recyclables.
A. Residential.
(1) On and after January 1, 1991, each person who generates solid waste
from residential property within the Town shall separate from other
solid waste the following recyclable items:
(a) Cardboard.
(b) Glass food and beverage containers.
(c) Leaves.
(d) Metal food and beverage containers.
(e) Newspaper.
(f) Scrap metal.
(g) Storage batteries.
(h) Waste oil.
(i) Certain plastic food and beverage containers as described more
fully below.
(2) Each person who generates solid waste from residential property
within the Town shall place in an appropriate container the following
items required to be recycled:
(a) Glass food and beverage containers.
(b) Metal food and beverage containers.
(c) Newspaper.
(d) PET (polyethylene terephthalate) plastic food and beverage
containers which are marked on the bottom with the number one
encircled by the recycling symbol.
(e) HDPE (high-density polyethylene) plastic food and beverage
containers which are marked on the bottom with the number two
encircled by the recycling symbol.
(f) Such other items as may be designated by the Board of
Selectmen.
B. Nonresidential. On and after January 1, 1991, each person who
generates solid waste from property other than residential properties
shall make provision for the separation from other solid waste of the
following items required to be recycled:
(1) Cardboard.
(2) Glass food and beverage containers.
(3) Leaves.
(4) Metal food and beverage containers.
(5) Newspaper.
(6) Office paper.
(7) Scrap metal.
(8) Storage batteries.
(9) Waste oil.
(10) PET (polyethylene terephthalate) plastic food and beverage
containers which are marked on the bottom with the number one
encircled by the recycling symbol.
§ 49-6 NEW CANAAN CODE § 49-7
C:274
(11) HDPE (high-density polyethylene) plastic food and beverage
containers which are marked on the bottom with the number two
encircled by the recycling symbol.
(12) Such other items as may be designated by the Board of Selectmen.
§ 49-8. Collection, recycling and sale of recyclables.
A. The items listed in § 49-7A(2) above shall be collected and/or received
at the Town’s transfer station designated by the Board of Selectmen
and thereafter delivered to an intermediate processing center or to such
other site designated by the Board of Selectmen. [Amended 7-21-2010,
effective 8-27-2010]
B. Each owner, tenant and operator of property used for business,
institutional and other nonresidential purposes, at such owner’s or
tenant’s or operator’s expense, shall collect and have recycled the items
listed in § 49-7B which are generated from properties other than
residential property in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance
policies promulgated by the Board of Selectmen, and applicable state
laws and regulations. Such owner, tenant and operator shall be jointly
and severally liable to comply with this provision. [Amended
7-21-2010, effective 8-27-2010]
C. To assist the Town in monitoring the separation, collection, recycling and
sale of items required to be recycled that are generated from properties
other than residential property, the Board of Selectmen may require
such nonresidential generators to submit plans for such recycling and
periodic reports setting forth specified data relating to the amount and
nature of items recycled.
§ 49-9. Regulation of collectors.
A. Any collector hauling solid waste generated by residential, business
or other establishments within the Town shall register in the Town in
accordance with regulations to be adopted pursuant to this ordinance.
B. The two front doors of any vehicle used by a collector to haul solid waste
generated with the Town shall be clearly marked with the business name
and address of such collector.
C. The Board of Selectmen shall, by mail, give notice of this ordinance
and any regulations promulgated hereunder for the collection, hauling,
processing and marketing of items required to be recycled to all
collectors registered under Subsection A of this section. After receipt of
such notice, any collector who has reason to believe that a person from
whom it has collected solid waste has discarded items required to be
recycled with such solid waste shall promptly notify the Administrator
of the recycling program of the alleged violation. Upon request by the
Administrator of the recycling program, a collector shall provide a
warning notice, by tag or other means, to any person suspected by
the Administrator of the recycling program of violating the separation
requirements of this ordinance. Each collector shall also notify the
Administrator of the recycling program of any person depositing for
collection significant quantities of items required to be recycled mixed
§ 49-7 CHARTER § 49-9
C:275
with solid waste for delivery to a resources recovery facility or solid
waste facility by such collector.
D. On and after January 1, 1991, as required by Section 4(b) of Public Act
No. 90-220,43 the owner or operator of each resources recovery facility
or solid waste facility who has reason to believe, upon visual inspection,
that a load of solid waste which is delivered to the facility contains
significant quantities of any items required to be recycled is required to
provide prompt notification of such belief to the driver of the vehicles
delivering the load and to the Administrator of the recycling program if
the load originated within the town. Under said Section 4(b) of Public
Act 90-220, the owner or operator of each resources recovery facility or
solid waste facility is also required to conduct unannounced inspections
of loads delivered to resources recovery facilities or solid waste facilities.
E. Any collector who dumps more than one cubic foot in volume of solid
waste at one time in an area within the town not designated for the
disposal of such solid waste or who knowingly mixes other solid waste
with items required to be recycled shall, for a first violation, be liable for
a civil penalty of up to $1,000 and for each subsequent violation, shall
be liable for a civil penalty of up to $5,000. The Town or the Attorney
General, at the request of the Commissioner, may bring an action under
Section 3(f) of Public Act 90-220,44 which action shall have precedence
in the order of trial as provided in § 52-191 of the General Statutes.
§ 49-10. Charges.
The town, by action of its Board of Selectmen, may levy a charge for the
collection and/or receipt and/or processing of solid waste brought to a
facility for recycling.
§ 49-11. (Reserved)45
§ 49-12. Scavenging.
It shall be a violation of this ordinance for any person not authorized by
the town to collect or pick up or cause to be collected or picked up any
recyclables which have been set aside for collection.
§ 49-13. Violations and penalties.
A. Notwithstanding any other sections of the General Statutes to the
contrary, the town, acting by the Board of Selectmen, may impose a
penalty not to exceed $500 for each violation by a commercial
establishment of the requirements of Subsection (c) of § 22a-241b of the
General Statutes, as amended by Section 1 of Public Act 90-220, as set
forth in this ordinance.
43.Editor's Note: See C.G.S. § 22a-220c(b).
44.Editor's Note: See C.G.S. § 22a-220a(f).
45.Editor's Note: Former § 49-11, SWEROC to be regional agent, was repealed 7-21-2010,
effective 8-27-2010.
§ 49-9 NEW CANAAN CODE § 49-13
C:276
B. The owner or operator of any resources recovery facility or landfill
who fails to notify the town about the delivery of loads of solid waste
originating from the town containing significant quantities of items
required to be recycled as required by Section 4 of Public Act 90-22046
and as set forth in § 49-9D of this ordinance shall be subject to a warning
by the town or the Commissioner for a first violation and to a civil
penalty of $500 for any subsequent violation. If the town fails to receive
such notification as required, the town may bring an action pursuant to
Section 3(f) of Public Act 90-220.47
C. Any person who violates the provisions of this ordinance shall, in
addition to other legal remedies available to the town, be cited or
fined not more than $100 for each offense, and each violation of this
ordinance or of regulations and instructions promulgated pursuant to
this ordinance shall be a separate violation. This ordinance and the
regulations and instructions promulgated pursuant to this ordinance
may be enforced by citations issued by the Administrator of the recycling
program. Before issuing any citation, the Administrator of the recycling
program shall issue a written warning providing notice of the specific
violation in accordance with § 7-148(c)(10)(A) of the General Statutes.
D. The citation hearing procedure provided in § 7-152c of the General
Statutes is established as the town's citation hearing procedure to be
followed when citations pursuant to § 49-13C of this ordinance are
issued. The Board of Selectmen is authorized to issue such rules and
regulations governing the operation of the citation hearing procedure so
long as such rules and regulations are consistent with § 7-152c of the
General Statutes.
Chapter 49A
REGIONAL COUNCIL OF GOVERNMENTS
§ 49A-1. Adoption of general statutes; authority to join.
The Town of New Canaan hereby adopts Connecticut General Statutes,
§§ 4-124l through 4-124p, as amended, providing for the formation of a
Regional Council of Governments, and does hereby join such Regional
Council of Governments when and as such council is duly established in
accordance with said statutes, upon the adoption of said statutes by not
less than 60% of all municipalities within the Western Connecticut planning
region as defined or redefined by the Secretary of the Office of Policy and
Management or his designee, and upon certification by the Secretary or his
designee that a Regional Council of Governments has been duly established.
§ 49A-2. Appointment of representatives.
The First Selectman shall represent the Town on the Regional Council of
Governments. The Board of Selectmen shall appoint one of its members
46.Editor's Note: See C.G.S. § 22a-220c.
47.Editor's Note: See C.G.S. § 22a-220a (f).
§ 49-13 CHARTER § 49A-2
C:277
as an alternate representative to the Regional Council of Governments. An
alternate representative shall serve a term of two years or for the term of
their elected office, whichever is sooner.
§ 49A-3. Repeal of conflicting provisions.
Upon the establishment of a Regional Council of Governments and the
expiration of a transitional period provided for in Connecticut General
Statutes § 4-124l, the Town does hereby repeal Chapter 50 of the Code,
entitled "Regional Planning Agency," that authorizes the Town's
participation in the South Western Regional Planning Agency.
Chapter 50
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 50, Regional Planning Agency, adopted 12-1-70, effective
1-26-71, was repealed 6-18-2014. See now Ch. 49A, Regional Council of
Governments.]
Chapter 51
SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 2.
Blight abatement and prevention — See Ch.
7A.
Health and sanitation — See Ch. 29.
Housing Code — See Ch. 32.
Nuisances — See Ch. 37.
§ 51-1. Sewer connections required where available.
No new houses or buildings used for human habitation shall be constructed
on property abutting streets wherein public sewer lines are available,
unless such houses or buildings are provided with connections to such
public sewer lines. Existing houses or buildings used for human habitation
on property abutting streets where public sewer lines are available shall
be connected with such sewer lines when the Director of Health shall so
order. If such property owner fails to connect such house or building with
such sewer line upon reasonable notice by the Director of Health, the Town
may make such connection and the cost thereof shall become a lien on the
property to be collected in the same manner as taxes are collected.
§ 51-2. General requirements for sewage disposal.
A. Human excreta shall be disposed of in properly constructed and
maintained sewers, treatment tanks, privy vaults or by other sanitary
method as may be approved by the Connecticut Department of Public
Health.
§ 49A-2 NEW CANAAN CODE § 51-2
C:278
B. No dwelling, apartment house, boardinghouse, hotel or other building
to be used or inhabited by humans shall hereafter be constructed in
the Town and no alterations in or to existing dwellings, apartments,
boardinghouses, hotels or other buildings used or inhabited by humans
shall be made unless the sewage disposal facilities thereto are approved
by the Director of Health or an Inspector appointed by the Director of
Health, and unless such facilities comply with the provisions of this code
and with the sewer use rules and regulations established by the Town
Director of Health, Department of Public Works, and/or Water Pollution
Control Authority.
§ 51-3. Toilet facilities required.
Adequate and suitable toilet accommodations, separated for each sex, shall
be provided in all public buildings, in all places of public assembly, in hotels,
clubs, restaurants, taverns, office buildings, factories, schools and railway
stations, and all stores shall have such toilet accommodations as shall be
approved by the Director of Health.
§ 51-4. Ventilation required for privies.
No privy or toilet shall be built or maintained without provision being made
for its adequate ventilation by windows or airducts.
§ 51-5. Exceptions to use of sewers.
No privy vault, cesspool or treatment tank shall hereafter be constructed or
repaired on any premises accessible to a public sewer.
§ 51-6. Standards required for privy vaults and other disposal
systems.
Privy vaults, cesspools, septic systems, sewer lines, or other disposal
systems shall be so constructed and maintained as to eliminate odors,
prevent the escape of sewage and so as to exclude animals, flies and
mosquitos. All users of any such systems connected to the Town's
wastewater treatment plant, or the contents of which are delivered to the
Town's wastewater treatment plant, shall comply with the sewer use rules
and regulations established by the Town Director of Health, Department
of Public Works, and/or Water Pollution Control Authority, including all
regulations requiring pretreatment of fats, oil and grease (FOG).
§ 51-7. Nuisance privy vaults.
Every privy vault, the contents of which are or hereafter shall be within one
foot of the level of the surface of the adjoining land, is hereby declared a
nuisance.
§ 51-2 CHARTER § 51-8
C:279
§ 51-8. Construction near water supply restricted. [Amended
9-16-2015]
Except as permitted under the Connecticut Public Health Code and the
Regulations and Technical Standards, no septic system shall hereafter be
constructed less than 75 feet from any well used for supply of drinking
water for human beings.
§ 51-9. Disposal of contents restricted.
No person shall dispose of sewage sludge and liquids from septic tanks
or cesspools except at the Town wastewater treatment plant, unless the
Director of Health of the Town issues a written permit allowing the disposal
thereof on the property where it originated.
§ 51-10. Use of disposal plant limited; fees.
No person shall use the facilities of the Town wastewater treatment plant
for the disposal of sewage sludge and liquids brought into the Town from
any other Town. Any person using the facilities of the Town wastewater
treatment plant for the disposal of sewage sludge and liquids shall pay to
the Board of Selectmen for the use of the Town a gallonage fee, the amount
of such fee and the method of payment to be determined by the Board of
Selectmen and published at least once.
§ 51-11. (Reserved)48
Every privy vault and cesspool within the Town shall be cleaned with
disinfectants by the owner thereof as frequently as shall be necessary to
prevent such privy vault or cesspool from becoming dangerous to health.
§ 51-12. Transporting contents.
No person shall convey or carry through or upon any street in this Town
any filthy substance taken from any privy vault, cesspool, or septic system
unless such substance is contained in a watertight barrel or vehicle which
must be securely covered and so constructed that no leakage can escape
therefrom.
§ 51-13. Sewer permit required.
No person shall uncover, make any connection with or opening into, use,
alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenances thereof unless a proper
permit therefor shall have been duly issued by the Director of Public Works
or his or her authorized agent as hereinafter provided. No person shall
maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface
or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is part of
the public sewer system.
48.Editor's Note: Former § 51-11, Sanitation requirements for privy vaults, was repealed
9-16-2015.
§ 51-8 NEW CANAAN CODE § 51-14
C:280
§ 51-14. Application procedure; fee.
Application for a public sewer permit shall be made by the owner of the
building to be connected, his or her agent or representative and shall be
made on an application form provided by the Director of Public Works. Each
application shall be supplemented with the plans and specifications for the
sewer connection and such other information relating to the building and
the waste to be discharged as may be considered pertinent by the Director.
A permit and application fee shall be paid to the Town at the time the
application is filed. The amount of the fee shall be established by the Board
of Selectmen pursuant to Chapter 2 of the Town Code. All applications
and connections shall comply with the sewer use rules and regulations
established by the Town Director of Health, Department of Public Works,
and/or Water Pollution Control Authority.
§ 51-15. Inspection required; regulations to be complied with.
No sewer line or connection to a public sewer shall be covered until it has
been inspected by the Director or his or her authorized agent and found to
comply in all respects with the sewer use rules and regulations established
by the Town Director of Health, Department of Public Works, and/or Water
Pollution Control Authority.
§ 51-16. Designation of Water Pollution Control Authority.
The Board of Finance is hereby designated as the Water Pollution Control
Authority of the Town of New Canaan pursuant to § 7-246 of the Connecticut
General Statutes.
§ 51-17. Powers and duties of Water Pollution Control Authority.
The Water Pollution Control Authority shall have all the powers and duties
conferred upon such authorities in Chapter 103 of the Connecticut General
Statutes, § 7-245 et seq., as the same may be amended from time to time.
§ 51-18. Sewer use rules and regulations.
A. The Sewer Use Rules and Regulations dated March 9, 2006, approved
and established by the Director of Health and the Department of Public
Works, copies of which are available for public inspection in the offices of
the Health Department, the Department of Public Works, and the Town
Clerk, shall be the Sewer Use Rules and Regulations of the Town of
New Canaan until such rules and regulations are amended by the Water
Pollution Control Authority pursuant to Paragraph B.
B. The Water Pollution Control Authority may establish and revise rules and
regulations as allowed by § 7-247 of the Connecticut General Statutes,
including without limitation rules and regulations for the supervision,
management, control, operation and use of sewerage systems in the
Town of New Canaan. No rule or regulation shall become effective or
be established until after a public hearing in relation thereto is held
by the Water Pollution Control Authority. A copy of each proposed rule
§ 51-14 CHARTER § 51-18
C:281
or regulation shall be filed in the office of the Town Clerk for public
inspection at least 10 days before such public hearing. Prior to the public
hearing, a notice of the hearing shall be published in a newspaper having
a general circulation in the Town, at least once for two successive weeks,
showing the time and place of the public hearing, together with either
the full text of the proposed rule or regulation or a reference to the
filing of the full text with the Town Clerk. After such hearing the Water
Pollution Control Authority may adopt such rule or regulation, together
with any amendments thereto which it may make, and shall forthwith
file the same as so adopted with the Town Clerk, and publish a notice of
passage in such newspaper. The effective date of the rule or regulation
shall be established by the Water Pollution Control Authority but shall
not be sooner than the date of publication of the notice of passage.
§ 51-19. Fats, oils and grease pretreatment required for septic and
sewer systems.
Whether connected to a sanitary sewer system or to a septic system, all
Class III and Class IV food establishments (as defined by the State of
Connecticut Department of Public Health Code Section 19-13-B42), retail
food establishments, food service establishments, caterers, schools (public
and private) and processing establishments that are required to operate
under a New Canaan Health Department food license shall be required to
install and operate a pretreatment system for FOG (fats, oils, and grease),
in accordance with the Sewer Use Rules and Regulations of the Town of
New Canaan, and the State of CT DEP General Permit for the Discharge
of Wastewater Associated with Food Preparation Establishments issued
September 30, 2005, as the same may be amended from time to time.
§ 51-20. Public hearing on proposed acquisition or construction.
The Water Pollution Control Authority shall not acquire or construct all or
any part of a sewerage system until after a public hearing held and noticed
in accordance with § 7-247a of the Connecticut General Statutes.
§ 51-21. Collector of connection and use charges.
The Tax Collector of the Town of New Canaan is hereby designated as
the collector of sewerage system connection and use charges pursuant to
§ 7-258 of the Connecticut General Statutes.
§ 51-18 NEW CANAAN CODE § 51-21
C:282
Chapter 52
STORMWATER QUALITY MANAGEMENT AND DISCHARGE
CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building and demolition codes — See Ch. 9.
Conservation Commission — See Ch. 11A.
Inland Wetlands Commission — See Ch. 16.
Inland wetlands and watercourses — See Ch.
33A.
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 51.
Subdivision and street regulations — See Ch.
55.
Water — See Ch. 59.
§ 51-21 CHARTER § 51-21
C:283

ARTICLE I
Title, Purpose and General Provisions
§ 52-1. Title.
This ordinance shall be known as the "Stormwater Quality Management and
Discharge Control Ordinance" of the Town of New Canaan and may be so
cited.
§ 52-2. Purpose and intent.
The purpose and intent of this ordinance is to ensure the health, safety, and
general welfare of the public and to protect and enhance the water quality
of watercourses and water bodies in a manner pursuant to and consistent
with the Federal Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.) by reducing
pollutants in stormwater discharges to the maximum extent practicable and
by prohibiting nonstormwater discharges to the storm drain system.
§ 52-3. Definitions.
For the purpose of this ordinance, the following definitions shall apply:
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES — Activities, practices, and procedures
to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to
the municipal storm drain system and waters of the United States. Best
management practices include but are not limited to treatment facilities
to remove pollutants from stormwater; operating and maintenance
procedures; facility management practices to control runoff, spillage or
leaks of nonstormwater, waste disposal, and drainage from materials
storage; erosion and sediment control practices; and the prohibition of
specific activities, practices, and procedures and such other provisions as
the Town determines appropriate for the control of pollutants.
CFR — Code of Federal Regulations.
CLEAN WATER ACT — The federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C.
§ 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY — Activities subject to NPDES (National
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System) construction permits. These
include construction projects resulting in land disturbance of one acre or
more. Such activities include but are not limited to clearing and grubbing,
grading, excavating, and demolition.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS — Any material, including any substance, waste,
or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or
physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly
contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health,
safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored,
transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.
§ 52-1 CHARTER § 52-3
C:285
ILLEGAL DISCHARGE — Any direct or indirect nonstormwater discharge
to the storm drain system, except as exempted in Article II, § 52-8, of this
chapter.
ILLICIT CONNECTIONS — Either of the following:
INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY — Activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as
defined in 40 CFR 122.26(b)(14).
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES)
STORMWATER DISCHARGE PERMITS — General, group, and individual
stormwater discharge permits which regulate facilities defined in federal
NPDES regulations pursuant to the Clean Water Act. The Connecticut
Department of Environmental Protection has adopted general stormwater
discharge permits, including but not limited to the general construction
activity and general industrial activity permits.
NONSTORMWATER DISCHARGE — Any discharge to the storm drain
system that is not composed entirely of stormwater.
POLLUTANT — Anything which causes or contributes to pollution.
Pollutants may include, but are not limited to, paints, varnishes, and
solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; nonhazardous liquid and solid
wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded
or abandoned objects, articles, and accumulations, so that same may cause
or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides and fertilizers;
hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens;
dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that
result from constructing a building or structure (including but not limited to
sediments, slurries, and concrete rinsates); and noxious or offensive matter
of any kind.
POLLUTION — The human-made or human-induced alteration of the quality
of waters by waste to a degree which unreasonably affects, or has the
potential to unreasonably affect, either the waters for beneficial uses or the
facilities which serve these beneficial uses.
PREMISES — Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land, whether
improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking areas.
Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which
allows an illegal discharge to enter the storm drain system, including
but not limited to any conveyances which allow any nonstormwater
discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to
enter the storm drain system and any connections to the storm drain
system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain
or connection had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by
a government agency; or
A.
Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial
land use to the storm drain system which has not been documented in
plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by the Town.
B.
§ 52-3 NEW CANAAN CODE § 52-3
C:286
STORM DRAIN SYSTEM — Publicly owned facilities operated by the Town
by which stormwater is collected and/or conveyed, including but not limited
to any roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets,
piped storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins,
natural and human-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and
other drainage structures which are within the Town and are not part of a
publicly owned treatment works as defined at 40 CFR 122.2.
STORMWATER — Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely
of water from rain storm events.
TOWN — The Town of New Canaan.
U.S.C. — United States Code.
WATERS OF THE UNITED STATES — Surface watercourses and water
bodies as defined at 40 CFR § 122.2, including all natural waterways and
definite channels and depressions in the earth that may carry water, even
though such waterways may only carry water during rains and storms and
may not carry stormwater at and during all times and seasons.
§ 52-4. Applicability.
This ordinance shall apply to all water entering the storm drain system
generated on any developed and undeveloped lands lying within the Town
of New Canaan.
§ 52-5. Responsibility for administration.
The Public Works Director of the Town shall administer, implement, and
enforce the provisions of this ordinance. Any powers granted or duties
imposed upon the Public Works Director may be delegated in writing by the
Public Works Director to persons or entities acting in the beneficial interest
of or in the employ of the Town.
§ 52-6. Severability.
The provisions of this ordinance are hereby declared to be severable. If
any provision, clause, sentence, or paragraph of this ordinance or the
application thereof to any person, establishment, or circumstances shall
be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or
application of this ordinance.
§ 52-7. Ultimate responsibility of discharger.
The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this ordinance
are minimum standards; therefore this ordinance does not intend nor imply
that compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no
contamination, pollution, nor unauthorized discharge of pollutants into
waters of the U.S. caused by said person. This ordinance shall not create
liability on the part of the Town of New Canaan, or any agent or employee
thereof, for any damages that result from any discharger's reliance on this
ordinance or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
§ 52-3 CHARTER § 52-7
C:287

ARTICLE II
Discharge Prohibitions
§ 52-8. Prohibition of illegal discharges.
A. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the municipal
storm drain system or watercourses any materials, including but not
limited to pollutants or waters containing any pollutants that cause or
contribute to a violation of applicable water quality standards, other than
stormwater.
B. The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illegal discharge to
the storm drain system is prohibited, except as described as follows:
(1) Discharges from the following activities will not be considered a
source of pollutants to the storm drain system and to waters of the
United States when properly managed to ensure that no potential
pollutants are present, and therefore they shall not be considered
illegal discharges unless determined to cause a violation of the
provisions of the Clean Water Act or this ordinance:
(a) Potable water line flushing;
(b) Uncontaminated pumped groundwater and other discharges
from potable water sources;
(c) Landscape irrigation and lawn watering;
(d) Diverted stream flows;
(e) Rising groundwater;
(f) Groundwater infiltration to the storm drain system;
(g) Uncontaminated foundation and footing drains;
(h) Uncontaminated water from crawl space pumps;
(i) Air-conditioning condensation;
(j) Uncontaminated nonindustrial roof drains;
(k) Springs;
(l) Individual residential and occasional noncommercial car
washing;
(m) Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands;
(n) Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges;
(o) Street wash waters;
(p) Flows from firefighting.
(2) The prohibition shall not apply to any nonstormwater discharge
permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order
issued to the discharger and administered by the State of
Connecticut under the authority of the Federal Environmental
Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance
with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other
applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval
has been granted by the Town of New Canaan for any discharge to
the storm drain system.
(3) With written concurrence of the Connecticut Department of
Environmental Protection, the Town of New Canaan may exempt in
writing other nonstormwater discharges which are not a source of
pollutants to the storm drain system nor waters of the United States.
§ 52-8 CHARTER § 52-9
C:289
§ 52-9. Prohibition of illicit connections.
A. The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit
connections to the storm drain system is prohibited.
B. This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections
made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible
under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection.
§ 52-10. Waste disposal prohibitions.
No person shall throw, deposit, leave, maintain, keep, or permit to be
thrown, deposited, left, or maintained, in or upon any public or private
property, driveway, parking area, street, alley, sidewalk, component of the
storm drain system, or water of the United States, any refuse, rubbish,
garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects, articles, and
accumulations, so that the same may cause or contribute to pollution.
Wastes deposited in streets in proper waste receptacles for the purposes of
collection are exempted from this prohibition.
§ 52-11. Discharges in violation of industrial or construction
activity NPDES stormwater discharge permit.
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES
stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such
permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form
acceptable to the Public Works Director prior to or as a condition of a
subdivision map, site plan, building permit, or development or improvement
plan; upon inspection of the facility; during any enforcement proceeding or
action; or for any other reasonable cause.
§ 52-9 NEW CANAAN CODE § 52-11
C:290
ARTICLE III
Regulations and Requirements
§ 52-12. Prevention, control and reduction of stormwater
pollutants.
A. Authorization to adopt and impose best management practices. The
Town will adopt requirements identifying best management practices
for any activity, operation, or facility which may cause or contribute
to pollution or contamination of stormwater, the storm drain system,
or waters of the United States. Where best management practices
requirements are promulgated by the Town or any federal, State of
Connecticut, or regional agency for any activity, operation, or facility
which would otherwise cause the discharge of pollutants to the storm
drain system or water of the United States, every person undertaking
such activity or operation, or owning or operating such facility, shall
comply with such requirements.
B. New development and redevelopment. The Town may adopt
requirements identifying appropriate best management practices to
control the volume, rate, and potential pollutant load of stormwater
runoff from new development and redevelopment projects as may be
appropriate to minimize the generation, transport and discharge of
pollutants. The Town shall incorporate such requirements in any land
use entitlement and construction or building-related permit to be issued
relative to such development or redevelopment. The owner and
developer shall comply with the terms, provisions, and conditions of such
land use entitlements and building permits as required in this ordinance.
C. Responsibility to implement best management practices.
Notwithstanding the presence or absence of requirements promulgated
pursuant to Subsections A and B, any person engaged in activities or
operations or owning facilities or property which will or may result
in pollutants entering stormwater, the storm drain system, or waters
of the United States shall implement best management practices to
the extent they are technologically achievable to prevent and reduce
such pollutants. The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial
establishment shall provide reasonable protection from accidental
discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the municipal
storm drain system or watercourses. Facilities to prevent accidental
discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes shall be provided and
maintained at the owner or operator's expense.
§ 52-13. Requirement to eliminate illegal discharges.
Notwithstanding the requirements of Article IV, § 52-19, herein, the Public
Works Director may require by written notice that a person responsible for
an illegal discharge immediately, or by a specified date, discontinue the
discharge and, if necessary, take measures to eliminate the source of the
discharge to prevent the occurrence of future illegal discharges.
§ 52-14. Requirement to eliminate or secure approval for illicit
connections.
§ 52-12 CHARTER § 52-14
C:291
A. The Public Works Director may require by written notice that a person
responsible for an illicit connection to the storm drain system comply
with the requirements of this ordinance to eliminate or secure approval
for the connection by a specified date, regardless of whether or not the
connection or discharges to it had been established or approved prior to
the effective date of this ordinance.
B. If, subsequent to eliminating a connection found to be in violation of
this ordinance, the responsible person can demonstrate that an illegal
discharge will no longer occur, said person may request Town approval
to reconnect. The reconnection or reinstallation of the connection shall
be at the responsible person's expense.
§ 52-15. Watercourse protection.
Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such
person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within
the property reasonably free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and
other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the
flow of water through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee
shall maintain existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a
watercourse so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use,
function, or physical integrity of the watercourse. The owner or lessee shall
not remove healthy bank vegetation beyond that actually necessary for
maintenance, nor remove said vegetation in such a manner as to increase
the vulnerability of the watercourse to erosion. The property owner shall be
responsible for maintaining and stabilizing that portion of the watercourse
that is within its property lines in order to protect against erosion and
degradation of the watercourse originating or contributed from its property.
§ 52-16. Requirement to remediate.
Whenever the Public Works Director finds that a discharge of pollutants is
taking place or has occurred which will result in or has resulted in pollution
of stormwater, the storm drain system, or water of the United States, the
Public Works Director may require by written notice to the owner of the
property and/or the responsible person that the pollution be remediated
and the affected property restored within a specified time pursuant to the
provisions of §§ 52-21 through 52-25 below.
§ 52-17. Requirement to monitor and analyze.
The Public Works Director may require by written notice of requirement
that any person engaged in any activity and/or owning or operating any
facility which may cause or contribute to stormwater pollution, illegal
discharges, and/or nonstormwater discharges to the storm drain system
or waters of the United State to undertake at said person's expense such
monitoring and analyses and furnish such reports to the Town of New
Canaan as deemed necessary to determine compliance with this ordinance.
§ 52-14 NEW CANAAN CODE § 52-18
C:292
§ 52-18. Notification of spills.
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person
responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency
response for a facility or operation, has information of any known or
suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in illegal
discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the storm drain
system, or water of the United States from said facility, said person shall
take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup
of such release. In the event of such a release of a hazardous material,
said person shall immediately notify emergency response officials of the
occurrence via emergency dispatch services (911). In the event of a release
of nonhazardous materials, said person shall notify the Town's Public Works
Department in person or by phone or facsimile no later than 5:00 p.m.
of the next business day. Notifications in person or by phone shall be
confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the Town's Public
Works Department within three business days of the phone notice. If the
discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial
establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain
an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent
its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years.
§ 52-18 CHARTER § 52-18
C:293

ARTICLE IV
Inspection and Monitoring
§ 52-19. Authority to inspect.
Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any provision of this
ordinance, or whenever the Public Works Director has cause to believe that
there exists, or potentially exists, in or upon any premises, any condition
which constitutes a violation of this ordinance, the Director may enter such
premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same and to inspect and
copy records related to stormwater compliance. In the event the owner
or occupant refuses entry after a request to enter and inspect has been
made, the Town is hereby empowered to seek assistance from any court of
competent jurisdiction in obtaining such entry.
§ 52-20. Authority to sample, establish sampling devices, and test.
During any inspection as provided herein, the Public Works Director may
take any samples and perform any testing deemed necessary to aid in the
pursuit of the inquiry or to record site activities.
§ 52-19 CHARTER § 52-20
C:295

ARTICLE V
Enforcement
§ 52-21. Notice of violation.
A. Whenever the Public Works Director finds that a person has violated
a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this ordinance, the
Director may order compliance by written notice of violation to the
responsible person. Such notice may require, without limitation:
(1) The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
(2) The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;
(3) That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and
desist;
(4) The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property;
and
(5) Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs; and
(6) The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.
B. If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is
required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such
remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall further
advise that should the violator fail to remediate or restore within the
established deadline, the work will be done by the Town or a contractor
designated by the Public Works Director and the expense thereof shall
be charged to the violator pursuant to § 52-23 below.
§ 52-22. Appeal.
Notwithstanding the provisions of § 52-25 below, any person receiving a
notice of violation under § 52-21 above may appeal the determination of the
Public Works Director to the Board of Selectmen. The notice of appeal must
be received by the Board of Selectmen within five days from the date of the
notice of violation. Hearing on the appeal before the Board of Selectmen or
its designee shall take place within 30 days from the date of Town's receipt
of the notice of appeal. The decision of the Board of Selectmen or designee
shall be final.
§ 52-23. Abatement by Town.
If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set
forth in the notice of violation or, in the event of an appeal under § 52-22,
within 10 days of the decision of the Board of Selectmen upholding the
decision of the Public Works Director, then the Town or a contractor
designated by the Public Works Director shall enter upon the subject private
property and is authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate
the violation and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person,
owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the
Town or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes
set forth above.
§ 52-24. Charging cost of abatement; liens.
§ 52-21 CHARTER § 52-24
C:297
A. Within 30 days after abatement of the nuisance by Town, the Public
Works Director shall notify the property owner of the property of the
cost of abatement, including administrative costs. The property owner
may file a written protest objecting to the amount of the assessment with
the Town Clerk within 15 days. The Town Clerk shall set the matter for
public hearing by the Board of Selectmen. The decision of the Board of
Selectmen shall be set forth by resolution and shall be final.
B. If the amount due is not paid within 10 days of the decision of the
Board of Selectmen or the expiration of the time in which to file an
appeal under this section, the charges shall become a special assessment
against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the
amount of the assessment.
§ 52-25. Urgency abatement.
The Public Works Director is authorized to require immediate abatement
of any violation of this ordinance that constitutes an immediate threat to
the health, safety or well-being of the public. If any such violation is not
abated immediately as directed by the Public Works Director, the Town
of New Canaan is authorized to enter onto private property and to take
any and all measures required to remediate the violation. Any expense
related to such remediation undertaken by the Town of New Canaan shall be
fully reimbursed by the property owner and/or responsible party. Any relief
obtained under this section shall not prevent the Town from seeking other
and further relief authorized under this ordinance.
§ 52-26. Violations.
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply
with any of the requirements of this ordinance.
§ 52-27. Compensatory action.
In lieu of enforcement proceedings, penalties, and remedies authorized
by this ordinance, the Public Works Director may impose upon a violator
alternative compensatory actions, such as storm drain stenciling,
attendance at compliance workshops, stream cleanup, etc.
§ 52-28. Violations deemed a public nuisance.
In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties hereinbefore
provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of
the provisions of this ordinance is a threat to public health, safety, and
welfare and is declared and deemed a nuisance and may be summarily
abated or restored by the Town at the violator's expense, and/or a civil
action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance
may be taken by the Town.
§ 52-24 NEW CANAAN CODE § 52-29
C:298
§ 52-29. Acts potentially resulting in violation of Federal Clean
Water Act.
Any person who violates any provision of this ordinance or any provision of
any requirement issued pursuant to this ordinance may also be in violation
of the Clean Water Act and may be subject to the sanctions of the Act,
including civil and criminal penalties. Any enforcement action authorized
under this ordinance shall also include written notice to the violator of such
potential liability.
§ 52-29 CHARTER § 52-29
C:299
Chapter 54
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
§ 52-29 NEW CANAAN CODE § 52-29
C:300
ARTICLE I
General
§ 54-1. Definition.
Whenever the words Director of Public Works are mentioned in this
ordinance, they shall be held to mean such director or his authorized agent.
§ 54-2. Duties of Director of Public Works.
In the administration of this ordinance the Director of Public Works shall
receive all applications for and issue the permits herein prescribed. He shall
keep an account of all fees received by him for permits issued hereunder
and shall promptly pay to the Town Treasurer, for the use of the town, all
such fees so received by him.
§ 54-3. Building lines designated.
Until a building line is established in any highway the property line thereon
shall be the building line.
§ 54-4. Extension prohibited.
No building or any part thereof and no stoop, piazza, step or steps, cornice
or bay window, except temporary structures authorized by the Building
Inspector by written permit shall be erected or placed extending towards
the street beyond the building line.
§ 54-5. Encroachments prohibited.
No building or any part thereof, no step, fence, stoop or other structure,
except temporary structures, expressly authorized by the Building
Inspector, shall be erected in such place and manner as to constitute an
encroachment on any public street or highway in the town.
§ 54-6. When guard rails required on sidewalks.
The owner of any lot or land abutting upon a highway, the surface of which
lot or land is lower than the sidewalk grade, shall, when ordered so to do
by the Director of Public Works, cause to be erected and maintained on the
line of such lot adjoining the street a suitable fence of rails, boards or other
material to render such sidewalk safe for pedestrians. The Director of Public
Works is authorized to erect such fence at the expense of the owner when
such owner neglects or refuses to construct the same within five days after
service upon him of such an order in writing by the Director and the Board
of Selectmen shall, if the cost thereof is not promptly paid to the town, file
a lien against the property of such owner for the sum so expended with the
same force and effect and subject to enforcement and to the penalties as
provided by law for liens for taxes.
§ 54-1 CHARTER § 54-7
C:301
§ 54-7. Cellar or street openings to have guard rails, etc.
Any entrance or flight of steps which descends immediately from or near
the line of any public highway into any cellar or to any lower level shall,
unless such structure or flight of steps is securely or safely covered, be
guarded by a strong rail at least three feet in height with an intermediate
rail 18 inches above the sidewalk grade on each side of such entrance or
flight of steps and also in front of such entrance or flight of steps a gate
shall be maintained at least three feet high above the sidewalk grade to
open outward and to be kept closed while not in use, or in lieu of such gate
two substantial chains, one at a height of 18 inches and the other three feet
above the sidewalk grade. Such covering, rail, guards or chains shall be
kept closed during the night unless there be maintained over such entrance
or steps a continuously burning light to insure safe passage to the public.
§ 54-8. Hazardous openings prohibited.
No person shall leave open any trap door or coal hole in any sidewalk or
crosswalk in the town. Any person violating any provision of this section
shall be fined not more than $10 for every such violation.
§ 54-9. Waste discharge prohibited.
No sewage or waste water from building of any kind shall be discharged into
any gutter, street, sidewalk, roadway, public place or into any waterway.
§ 54-10. Privy vault contents in streets prohibited.
No person shall cause or allow any wash or the outflow from any sink, privy
vault or cesspool to flow in any manner into any street or upon any sidewalk
or other public place in the town.
§ 54-11. Water draining on highways prohibited.
No owner or occupant of land adjoining any highway in the Town shall drain
any water from such land onto such highway or into the gutter thereof;
provided, however, that if there be any convenient drains existing in such
highway, the owner may, on application to the Director of Public Works,
receive a permit to pipe such water to such drains.
§ 54-12. Deposit of injurious materials prohibited.
Every person who shall place or deposit any salt brine, chemicals, glass,
tacks or anything else that may cause injury to pavements, vehicles or
vehicle tires on the traveled roadway of any highway in the Town shall be
punished as provided in § 4-8 of this Code.
§ 54-13. Depositing fruit prohibited.
No person shall throw or place any fruit, except when properly exposed for
sale, or rind of the same upon any sidewalk in the town.
§ 54-7 NEW CANAAN CODE § 54-14
C:302
§ 54-14. Throwing snow or ice into streets. [Amended 3-24-1964;
effective 4-25-1964]
No person shall lay, throw, place or cause to be laid, thrown or placed any
snow or ice into any highway within the town.
§ 54-15. Reserved.49
§ 54-16. Awnings and signs.50 [Added 10-27-1964; effective
11-28-1964]
No sign, awning or other structure now extending over any sidewalk
accessible to the public shall be maintained unless the lowest point thereof
is at least seven feet above the sidewalk. No new awning shall be erected
without first obtaining a permit from the Building Inspector. Prior to
issuance, a fee of $5 shall be paid to the Inspector for the use of the town.
§ 54-17. Trees and shrubbery obstructing sidewalks.
No owner or occupant of any land within the Town shall set out, maintain
or allow to grow upon any such land adjoining a highway in the Town
any hedge, grass, trees, shrubs or other vegetation in such a position as
to extend over the sidewalk in any such highway or interfere with the
free use of any such sidewalk to its full width by pedestrians. The owner
or occupants of such land shall keep vegetation growing upon their land
trimmed back to the line between their land and the highway, except the
branches of trees or shrubs over eight feet above the sidewalk may be
allowed to extend out over the same.
§ 54-18. Water cutoff devices restricted.
No person shall place or maintain in any public highway, street or sidewalk
in the town, any water box or water cutoff, the purpose of which is to control
the turning on or off of the water supply from the street pipes to adjacent
buildings or property, unless the top of such water box or water cutoff shall
be on a level with the established street or sidewalk grade at the place
where such water box or water cutoff is located.
§ 54-19. Structures or objects on public property and plantings on
private property regulated. [Amended 3-19-68; effective 4-19-68]
No owner or occupant of land shall erect, place or maintain any fence,
structure or object within the right-of-way of a public highway, except
mail- or newspaper boxes or name signs; nor shall he plant or maintain
any shrubbery, planting, tree or other growth within the right-of-way of a
public highway or upon any private property in such a position or of such
49.Editor's Note: Former § 54-15, Removal of snow and ice from sidewalks required -- time
limits, as amended 3-24-1964, effective 4-25-1964, was repealed 11-10-1993, effective
11-10-1993.
50.Editor's Note: See also Art. XVIII of Ch. 60, Zoning Regulations.
§ 54-14 CHARTER § 54-19
C:303
height, density or character as to render traffic on or along any highway
or any private roadway, which is open to the public connecting with any
highway, hazardous or dangerous to persons having a right to the use of
such highway or private roadway. Such owner or occupant of land shall,
upon written notice from the Director of Public Works, remove such object
or obstruction within five days after receipt of such notice.
§ 54-20. Construction and maintenance of private driveways
entering highways. [Amended 3-24-959, effective 3-28-59; 9-17-68,
effective 10-19-68; 2-9-83, effective 2-25-83]
A. Permit required; application and fee for permit; information to be shown
in application. Before any driveway which opens on or into any highway
or highway right-of-way, whether public or private, shall be constructed
and before the location or grade of any existing driveway which opens
on or into any such highway or highway right-of-way, whether public
or private, is altered, a permit therefor shall be obtained from the
Town Engineer. An application for such permit shall be made to the
Town Engineer upon a form provided for that purpose, and a fee, in
an amount fixed by the Board of Selectmen from time to time, shall be
paid to the Town Engineer for the use of the Town with the filing of
any such application. Such application form shall make provision for the
furnishing of the following information:
(1) The name of the owner of record of the premises being served or to
be served by such driveway and the location of the premises.
(2) A plot plan showing:
(a) The location of the driveway in respect to the property lines of
the premises on which the driveway is located or is to be located
and to the highway lines within 100 feet of either side thereof,
together with the location of such driveway within the highway
right-of-way.
(b) The proposed grades of the driveway at its intersection with the
traveled portion of the highway and at a point 20 feet therefrom.
(c) The actual dimensions of the opening of the driveway which is
being constructed or reconstructed onto the highway right-ofway.
(3) The proposed disposition of stormwater from the driveway and of
stormwater accumulations on the traveled portion of the highway
within the highway right-of-way or in any of the gutters thereof as
the same may relate to such driveway.
B. Minimum construction and reconstruction requirements. No permit for
the construction or reconstruction of any driveway shall be issued unless
the following minimum requirements are complied with:
(1) It shall not interfere with the proper drainage of the highway, it
being understood that, if the grade of the highway shall make it
necessary, it may be required that the owner of the premises to be
served by such driveway shall install culverts of approved design at
his own cost and expense at approved locations.
§ 54-19 NEW CANAAN CODE § 54-20
C:304
(2) The location and alignment of the driveway shall not create a traffic
hazard, danger or nuisance, and the view of the highway at the point
where such driveway opens onto the highway shall be unobstructed.
(3) The grade of the driveway from its intersection with the traveled
portion of the highway and for a distance of 20 feet therefrom shall
not exceed 5%. [Amended 9-16-1998, effective 9-24-1998]
(4) If necessary to prevent road drainage from entering the driveway, a
berm shall be constructed and maintained at the approved location
by the owner of the premises served by such driveway.
(5) All new driveways shall be paved with a minimum of two inches
of blacktop or equivalent in the area of the highway right-of-way
between the highway pavement and the property line.
C. Conditions of permit. Any driveway permit issued under the provisions
of this section or any driveway permit issued under any prior bylaw or
ordinance of the Town is subject at all times to the following conditions:
(1) The Town or the owner of the right-of-way in which the highway
is located shall have the right, at any time, to extend the width of
the traveled way or to change the grade of any portion thereof, to
change the manner of disposal of stormwater or to make any other
improvements in the highway and, if a driveway is affected thereby,
there shall be no obligation on the part of the Town or of the owner
of the right-of-way to reimburse the owner of the premises served
by such driveway, and such owner shall be liable for the cost of any
reconstruction work on such driveway made necessary by reason
thereof.
(2) Such driveway or driveway opening shall not disturb or interfere
with the pavement or finish of the traveled portion of the highway.
(3) Such driveway permit may be revoked by the Town Engineer at any
time if the requirements of the permit are not met.
(4) When a driveway permit is issued in conjunction with a building
permit, no certificate of occupancy shall be issued until the
construction of such driveway shall comply with all of the
requirements of the permit.
(5) Any violation of this section, in addition to penalties provided herein,
shall be subject to injunctive procedures and to prosecution in
accordance with the provisions of § 4-8 of this Code.
D. Variances. The Board of Building Appeals may vary the strict application
of this section if there shall be difficulty or unreasonable hardship in
carrying out the same, provided that the spirit thereof shall be observed
and the public safety and welfare are secured.
§ 54-21. Playing games, etc., prohibited.
No person shall play at football or any game of ball or quoits or throw any
stones, snowballs or any other thing liable to injure any person within any
of the public highways or public places in the town.
§ 54-22. Bicycling and skating prohibited on sidewalks; penalty.
[Amended 9-13-1995, effective 9-13-1995]
§ 54-20 CHARTER § 54-22
C:305
A. No person shall ride any bicycle or tricycle or travel upon or use in any
way any roller skates, in-line skates, skateboard or any similar device
upon any sidewalk of the Town within the Business and Retail Zones as
defined in the town's Zoning Regulations.51
B. The penalty for each violation of this section shall be a fine of $25.
§ 54-23. Coasting and sleds restricted; penalty.
A. No person shall coast or sled upon any public highway or public place
or sidewalk in the town, except such public highway, public square
or sidewalk that has been set aside and designated by the Board of
Selectmen for such purposes.
B. The penalty for each violation of this section shall be a fine of not more
than $10.
§ 54-24. Slingshots, kite flying, etc., prohibited.
No person shall shoot with a slingshot or use a bow and arrow or fly any
kite in any public highway or public place in the town.
§ 54-25. Loitering prohibited. [Amended 6-4-68, effective 7-6-68]
No person shall loiter or loaf upon any highway, public street, bridge or
sidewalk in the Town or upon any fence or other structure adjacent to any
street or sidewalk in the town, or in any public building, on any area used
by the Town for the public parking of motor vehicles, or upon any grounds
belonging to or leased by the Town of New Canaan, except that nothing
in this section shall be construed as prohibiting the normal use of such
facilities as public parks, playgrounds or other facilities which are intended
for the recreation and enjoyment of the public during the hours when such
facilities are declared to be open for such use.
§ 54-26. Permission required for public meetings in streets; penalty.
A. No public meeting of any kind shall be held in any public highway or
place in the Town without permission from the Board of Selectmen.
B. Every person convening, conducting or speaking at any such meeting
held without permission as aforesaid shall be punished as provided in
§ 4-8 of this Code.
§ 54-27. Obstructing free passage on sidewalks prohibited.
No person shall collect in crowds or groups on any of the sidewalks or
crosswalks in the Town in such a manner as to obstruct free passage of any
person. It shall be the duty of any member of the police force of the Town
to direct any and all persons collected as aforesaid to immediately disperse,
and such policeman shall forthwith, arrest any and all persons who shall
neglect or refuse to comply with such direction and commit him or them to
the lockup to be proceeded against according to law.
51.Editor's Note: See Ch. 60, Zoning Regulations.
§ 54-22 NEW CANAAN CODE § 54-28
C:306
§ 54-28. Music playing prohibited.
No person shall persist in playing upon any hand organ, drum or other
musical instrument in any street or public place in the Town after being
notified by any policeman of the Town to desist.
§ 54-29. Permission required for parades.
A. All street parades and processions bearing banners, accompanied with
music or any disturbing sounds, except parades of the National Guard,
Police and Fire Departments and funeral processions, are prohibited,
unless permission therefor is first obtained as hereinafter provided.
B. The Board of Selectmen may issue a permit under such restriction as it
may deem proper for any street parade or procession, which permit shall
be in writing.
C. No commercial filming shall be conducted on any public highway or in
any public place unless a permit has been issued therefor by the Board
of Selectmen, in writing, under such restrictions as it may deem proper,
and provided that the filming will not inconvenience the general public
or hinder any business in town, and further subject to payment of a fee
of $50 or, if extensive, a fee as established by special review committee,
and the hiring of any necessary special police. [Added 3-19-68,
effective 4-19-68; amended 6-7-83, effective 9-1-83]
§ 54-30. Penalty for extinguishing street lights.
Every person who shall extinguish any public light of the Town shall be
punished as provided in this Code.52
§ 54-31. Vehicles on highways -- adoption of state law.
The provisions of the General Statutes of the state, as amended, prescribing
weights, dimensions and speed of vehicles and the weights ad dimensions
of other objects moved or operated over or upon highways and bridges
controlled by the state are hereby referred to and incorporated herein by
reference and are hereby made applicable to highways and bridges of the
town.
§ 54-32. Merchandise on sidewalks restricted. [Added 7-29-59;
effective 9-5-59]
No merchant shall display or advertise any merchandise in any public place
owned by the Town of New Canaan or on any sidewalk which is located
within any street or highway line, between the building line and the street
or highway line or on any sidewalk owned by the town, except that food may
be displayed in accordance with the provisions of § 29-16 of this Code and
except that this section shall not apply to peddlers licensed or exempted
from licensing as provided by Chapter 43 of this Code.
52.Editor's Note: See Ch. 4, General Provisions, § 4-8.
§ 54-28 CHARTER § 54-33
C:307
§ 54-33. Repairs to vehicles restricted. [Added 11-30-59; effective
1-2-60]
No person shall make repairs to any vehicles in any street, highway or
public place, except repairs of an emergency nature, nor shall any person
install new equipment to or on any vehicles in any street, highway or public
place.
§ 54-33 NEW CANAAN CODE § 54-33
C:308
ARTICLE II
Excavations
[Amended 2-24-59, effective 3-28-59; 10-13-59, effective 11-14-59;
5-19-65; 3-19-68, effective 4-19-68; 6-7-83, effective 9-1-83;
3-11-87, effective 3-27-87]
§ 54-34. Title.
This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the "Street Excavation
Ordinance of the Town of New Canaan."
§ 54-35. Definitions.
A. For the purpose of this ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words
and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein:
APPLICANT — Any person making written application to the Director of
Public Works for an excavation permit hereunder.
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS — The Director of Public Works of the
Town of New Canaan or his agent.
EXCAVATION WORK — The excavation and other work permitted under
an excavation permit and required to be performed under this ordinance.
PERMITTEE — Any person who has been granted and has in full force
and effect an excavation permit issued.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
STREET — Any street, highway, sidewalk, alley, avenue or other public
way or public grounds in the town.
TOWN — The Town of New Canaan.
B. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense
include the future; words in the plural number include the singular
number; and words in the singular number include the plural number.
The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
§ 54-36. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person, except a duly authorized officer, agent
or employee of the town, to dig up, excavate, tunnel, undermine or in any
manner break up any street or to make or cause to be made any excavation
in or under the surface of any street for any purpose or to place, deposit
or leave upon any street any earth or other excavated material unless such
person shall first have obtained an excavation permit therefor from the
Director of Public Works as herein provided.
§ 54-37. Application.
No excavation permit shall be issued unless a written application for the
issuance of an excavation permit is submitted to the Director of Public
§ 54-34 CHARTER § 54-37
C:309
Works. The written application shall state the name and address of the
applicant, the nature, location and purpose of the excavation, the date
of commencement and date of completion of the excavation and other
data as may reasonably be required by the Director of Public Works. The
application shall be accompanied by plans or sketches showing the extent
of the proposed excavation work, the dimensions and elevations of both
the existing ground prior to said excavation and of the proposed excavated
surfaces, the location of the excavation work and such other information as
may be prescribed by the Director, and shall be signed by the applicant.
§ 54-38. Permit fees.
A permit fee shall be charged by the Director of Public Works for the
issuance of an excavation permit which shall be in addition to all other
fees for permits or charges relative to any proposed construction work. The
excavation permit fee shall be in an amount established by the Board of
Selectmen pursuant to Chapter 2 of this Code.
§ 54-39. Surety bond.
Before an excavation permit is issued, the applicant shall deposit with the
Director of Public Works a surety bond payable to the Town in the amount of
100% of the estimated cost, as prescribed by the Director of Public Works,
of restoring the street opening, and in no event shall such bond be in an
amount of less than $10,000.
A. The required surety bond must be:
(1) With good and sufficient surety.
(2) Issued by a surety company which is authorized to transact business
in this state.
(3) Satisfactory to the Town Attorney in form and substance.
(4) Conditioned upon the permittee's compliance with this ordinance
to secure and hold the Town and its officers harmless against any
and all claims, judgments or other costs arising from the excavation
and other work covered by the excavation permit or for which the
Town or any Town officer may be made liable by reason of any
accident or injury to persons or property through the fault of the
permittee, either in not properly guarding the excavation or for any
other injury resulting from the negligence of the permittee, and
to fill up and restore in good and safe condition as near as may
be to its original condition and to the satisfaction of the Director
of Public Works all openings and excavations made in streets, and
to maintain any street where an excavation is made in as good
condition for the period of 24 months after said work shall have been
done, usual wear and tear excepted, as existed before said work
was undertaken. Any settlement of the surface within said two-year
period shall be deemed conclusive evidence of defective backfilling
by the permittee. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to
require the permittee to maintain any repairs to pavement made by
the Town if such repairs should prove defective.
§ 54-37 NEW CANAAN CODE § 54-39
C:310
B. Recovery on such bond for any injury or accident shall not exhaust
the bond, but it shall in its entirety cover any or all future accidents
or injuries during the excavation work for which it was given. In the
event of any suit or claim against the Town by reason of the negligence
or default of the permittee, upon the town's giving written notice to
the permittee of such suit or claim, any final judgment against the
Town requiring it to pay for such damage shall be conclusive upon the
permittee and his surety.
C. An annual bond may be given under this provision which shall remain
in force for one year, conditioned as above, in the amount as above
prescribed and in other respects as specified above and applicable as to
all excavation work in streets by the principal in such bond during the
term of two years from the completion of the work.
§ 54-40. Issuance of permit; expiration. [Amended 7-10-2002,
effective 7-26-2002]
Upon the filing of the application accompanied by the bond and certificate
of insurance, as provided in the preceding section, and payment to the
Director of Public Works, for the use of the town, of the application fee as
required, the Director of Public Works may issue a permit to the applicant to
make the opening or excavation in the street designated in the application.
Prior to the issuing of the permit, the Director of Public Works or his
designee shall forward the application to the Police Department for
notification and approval. The Chief of Police or his designee will, within
one business day, return the application to the Director of Public Works
with recommendations on whether traffic control is required. The earliest
date of the opening of the street shall be set at seven business days from
the date the Police Department returns the application to the Director of
Public Works. In the case of any work which disrupts public roadways but
does not require a permit (e.g., utilities, tree removal or maintenance) the
Police Department shall notify the Director of Public Works of such work
and any traffic disruptions that it may cause. In addition to the fee, the
Director of Public Works may, in lieu of the bond under § 54-39, require of
the applicant the deposit of an amount of cash or collateral sufficient to
cover the reasonable costs of resurfacing the highway upon completion of
the opening or excavation, which deposit may be used as provided in § 54-39
of this ordinance. Unless work shall commence under the permit within 30
days from the date of issuance, such permit shall expire, unless the same is
renewed by the Director of Public Works for a like term upon the payment
of a like fee.
§ 54-41. Routing and control of traffic. [Amended 7-10-2002,
effective 7-26-2002]
In order to protect the public from accidents and to minimize the
impediment of vehicular and/or pedestrian traffic within the limits of any
town or state roadway within the limits of the Town of New Canaan, the
Chief of Police or his/her designee may require that traffic control services
and/or devices be employed by the person or entity conducting such work or
§ 54-39 CHARTER § 54-41
C:311
responsible for such activity, consistent with such rules and regulations as
the traffic authority of the town may enact. Traffic control services may be
required for excavation work, for which a permit has been approved. They
may also be required for any contractors' and/or utilities' operations which
are engaged in work that disrupts normal traffic or pedestrian movement.
The permittee or contractor shall take appropriate measures to assure that,
during the performance of the excavation or other work, traffic conditions
shall be maintained as nearly normal as practicable at all times so as to
cause as little inconvenience as possible to the occupants of the abutting
properties and to the general public. In addition, the Director of Public
Works may require the closing of streets to all traffic for a period of time if,
in his opinion, it is necessary. The permittee or contractor shall route and
control traffic, including its own vehicles, as directed by the Town Police
Department. The following steps shall be taken before any highway may be
closed or restricted to traffic:
A. The permittee or contractor must receive the approval of the Director of
Public Works and/or the Police Department, as appropriate.
B. The cost and expense of such traffic control measures shall be borne by
the person or entity conducting or responsible for such work or activity.
In the event that traffic direction services are required, such services
shall be obtained from the New Canaan Police Department, provided
that, if the New Canaan Police Department is unable within a reasonable
time to furnish the officer or officers that may be required, a qualified
traffic flag person or persons may alternatively be employed until a
police officer is available to be assigned.
C. The permittee or contractor will insure that notifications are made to
all emergency services and the Director of Public Works regarding any
approved street closure, the duration of the closure, and the resumption
of normal traffic flow following removal of the closure. These
notifications may be conveyed by the Police Department if department
personnel have been hired to regulate such closure.
D. Through traffic shall be maintained without detours, if possible. In
instances where prolonged detours are required, they shall be
designated by the Director of Public Works. Temporary detours may
be designated by the Police Department. The town shall maintain the
surfaces of existing highways designated as detours without expense
to the permittee or contractor; however, in the event that there are no
existing highways, the permittee or contractor shall construct all detours
at his expense and in conformity with the specifications of the Director
of Public Works.
E. The permittee or contractor will be responsible for any unnecessary
damage caused to any highways by the operation of his equipment.
§ 54-42. Clearance for fire equipment.
The excavation work shall be performed and conducted so as not to
interfere with access to fire stations and fire hydrants. Materials or
obstructions shall not be placed within 15 feet of fire plugs. Passageways
leading to fire escapes or fire-fighting equipment shall be kept free of piles
of material or other obstructions.
§ 54-41 NEW CANAAN CODE § 54-42.1
C:312
§ 54-42.1. Barricades; protection of traffic.
The permittee shall erect and maintain suitable timber barriers to confine
earth from trenches or other excavations in order to encroach upon
highways as little as possible. The permittee shall construct and maintain
adequate and safe crossings over excavations and across highways under
improvement to accommodate vehicular and pedestrian traffic at all street
intersections. Vehicular crossings, decking and pedestrian crossings shall
be provided as required by the Director of Public Works.
§ 54-42.2. Removal and protection of utilities.
A. The permittee shall not interfere with any existing utility without the
written consent of the Director of Public Works and the utility company
or person owning the utility. If it becomes necessary to remove an
existing utility, this shall be done by its owner.
B. No utility owned by the Town shall be moved to accommodate the
permittee unless the cost of such work is borne by the permittee. The
cost of moving privately owned utilities shall be similarly borne by the
permittee unless it makes other arrangements with the person owning
the utility. The permittee shall support and protect by timbers or
otherwise all pipes, conduits, poles, wires or other apparatus which
may be in any way affected by the excavation work and do everything
necessary to support, sustain and protect them under, over, along or
across said work. In case any of said pipes, conduits, poles, wires or
apparatus should be damaged, they shall be repaired by the agency or
person owning them, and the expense of such repairs shall be charged to
the permittee and his or its bond shall be liable therefor. The permittee
shall be responsible for any damage done to any public or private
property by reason of the breaking of any water pipes, sewer, gas pipe,
electric conduit or other utility and the bond shall cover such damage.
C. The permittee shall be responsible for determining the existence and
location of all underground utilities and shall protect the same against
damage.
§ 54-42.3. Protection of adjoining property.
A. The permittee shall at all times and at his or its own expense preserve
and protect from injury any adjoining property by providing proper
foundations and taking other measures suitable for the purpose.
B. Where, in the protection of such property, it is necessary to enter upon
private property for the purpose of taking appropriate protective
measures, the permittee shall obtain a license from the owner of such
private property for such purpose, and, if he cannot obtain a license from
such owner, the Director of Public Works may authorize him to enter the
private premises solely for the purpose of making the property safe.
C. The permittee shall, at his expense, shore up and protect all buildings,
walls, fences or other property likely to be damaged during the progress
of the excavation work and shall be responsible for all damage to public
or private property or highways resulting from his failure to protect and
carry out properly said work.
§ 54-42.1 CHARTER § 54-42.3
C:313
D. Whenever it may be necessary for the permittee to trench through
any lawn area, the sod shall be carefully cut and rolled and replaced
after ditches have been backfilled as required in this ordinance. All
construction and maintenance work shall be done in a manner calculated
to leave the lawn area clean of earth and debris and in a condition as
nearly as possible to that which existed before such work began. The
permittee shall not remove, even temporarily, any trees or shrubs which
exist in parking strip areas or easements across private property without
first having notified and obtained the consent of the property owner
or, in the case of public property, the appropriate Town department or
official having control of such property.
§ 54-42.4. Sidewalk excavations.
Any excavation made in any sidewalk or under a sidewalk shall be provided
with a substantial and adequate footbridge over said excavation on the line
of the sidewalk, which bridge shall be at least three feet wide and securely
railed on each side so that foot passengers can pass over safely at all times.
§ 54-42.5. Protective measures.
The permittee shall erect such fence, railing or barriers about the site of
the excavation work as shall prevent danger to persons using the Town
street or sidewalks, and such protective barriers shall be maintained until
the work is completed or the danger removed. At twilight there shall be
placed upon such place of excavation and upon any excavated materials
or structures or other obstructions to streets suitable and sufficient lights
which shall be kept burning throughout the night during the maintenance
of such obstructions. It shall be unlawful for anyone to remove or tear down
the fence or railing or other protective barriers or any lights provided there
for the protection of the public.
§ 54-42.6. Attractive nuisances.
It shall be unlawful for the permittee to suffer or permit to remain
unguarded at the place of excavation or opening any machinery, equipment
or other device constituting an attractive nuisance.
§ 54-42.7. Care of excavated material.
All material excavated from trenches and piled adjacent to the trench or in
any street shall be piled and maintained in such manner as not to endanger
those working in the trench, pedestrians or users of the streets and so
that as little inconvenience as possible is caused to those using streets and
adjoining property. Where the confines of the area being excavated are too
narrow to permit the piling of excavated material beside the trench, such as
might be the case in a narrow alley, the Director of Public Works shall have
the authority to require that the permittee haul the excavated material to a
storage site and then rehaul it to the trench site at the time of backfilling.
It shall be the permittee's responsibility to secure the necessary permission
§ 54-42.3 NEW CANAAN CODE § 54-42.7
C:314
and make all necessary arrangements for all required storage and disposal
sites.
§ 54-42.8. Damage to existing improvements.
All damage done to existing improvements during the progress of the
excavation work shall be repaired by the permittee. Materials for such
repair shall conform to the requirements of any applicable code or
ordinance. If, upon being ordered, the permittee fails to furnish the
necessary labor and materials for such repairs, the Director of Public Works
shall have the authority to cause said necessary labor and materials to be
furnished by the town, and the cost shall be charged against the permittee,
and the permittee shall also be liable on his or its bond therefor.
§ 54-42.9. Property lines and easements.
Property lines and limits of easements shall be indicated on the plan of
excavation submitted with the application for the excavation permit, and
it shall be the permittee's responsibility to confine excavation work within
these limits.
§ 54-42.10. Cleanup.
As the excavation work progresses, all streets and private properties shall
be thoroughly cleaned of all rubbish, excess earth, rock and other debris
resulting from such work. All cleanup operations at the location of such
excavation shall be accomplished at the expense of the permittee and shall
be completed to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Works. From time
to time, as may be ordered by the Director of Public Works and in any event
immediately after completion of said work, the permittee shall, at his or its
own expense, clean up and remove all refuse and unused materials of any
kind resulting from said work, and, upon failure to do so within 24 hours
after having been notified to do so by the Director of Public Works, said
work may be done by the Director of Public Works and the cost thereof
charged to the permittee, and the permittee shall also be liable for the cost
thereof under the surety bond provided hereunder.
§ 54-42.11. Provisions for watercourses and runoff.
The permittee shall provide for the flow of all watercourses, sewers or
drains intercepted during the excavation work and shall replace the same
in as good condition as existed before undertaking such work or shall make
such provisions for them as the Director of Public Works may direct. The
permittee shall not obstruct the gutter of any street, but shall use all proper
measures to provide for the free passage of surface water. The permittee
shall make provision to take care of all surplus water, muck, silt, slickings
or other runoff pumped from excavations or resulting from sluicing or other
operations and shall be responsible for any damage resulting from its failure
to so provide.
§ 54-42.7 CHARTER § 54-42.12
C:315
§ 54-42.12. Breaking through pavement.
Whenever it is necessary to break through existing pavement for excavation
purposes and where trenches are to be four feet or over in depth, the
pavement in the base shall be removed to at least six inches beyond the
outer limits of the subgrade that is to be disturbed, in order to prevent
settlement, and a six-inch shoulder of undisturbed material shall be
provided in each side of the excavated trench. The face of the remaining
pavement shall be approximately vertical. A power-driven concrete saw
shall be used so as to permit complete breakage of concrete pavement or
base without ragged edges. Asphalt paving shall be scored or otherwise cut
in a straight line.
§ 54-42.13. Tunnels.
Tunnels under pavement shall not be permitted except by permission of the
Director of Public Works and, if permitted, shall be adequately supported
by timbering and backfilling under the direction of the Director of Public
Works.
§ 54-42.14. Backfilling.
Backfilling in any street opened or excavated pursuant to an excavation
permit issued hereunder shall be compacted to a degree equivalent to that
of the undisturbed ground in which the trench was dug. Compacting shall
be done by mechanical tappers or vibrators, by rolling in layers or by
water settling, as required by the soil in question and sound engineering
practices generally recognized in the construction industry. The decision
as to whether a trench shall be backfilled by water settling shall be based
upon such engineering practices and shall be made by the Director of Public
Works.
A. Backfilling by water settling. When backfilling is done by water settling,
excavated materials above utility installations shall be deposited
uniformly in layers of not more than five feet in thickness and shall be
thoroughly flooded. During the flooding, the water shall be allowed to
flow slowly to the trench from high points and shall be worked down
to the full depth of the layer of backfill with bars. All bars used shall
be long enough to extend entirely through the layer being filled and
shall be forced down through the loose backfill material. As the bars are
withdrawn, the water shall be allowed to flow downward around the bar.
The channel or hole formed by the bar shall be kept open and the water
kept running into it until the fill has settled. All work shall be done in
such manner as to obtain a relative compaction through the entire depth
of the backfill of not less than that existing adjacent to the excavation.
B. Dry backfilling. Backfilling up to the first 18 inches above the top of
the utility pipes or similar installations shall be done with thin layers.
Each layer is to be tamped by manual or mechanical means. Layers that
are hand tamped shall not exceed four inches in thickness. Layers that
are power tamped shall not exceed six inches in thickness. The same
requirements shall apply to the remainder of the backfilling if tamping is
§ 54-42.12 NEW CANAAN CODE § 54-42.14
C:316
the method used for backfilling. Backfilling of all pipes of over 24 inches
in diameter shall be carried up to the spring line of the pipe in three-inch
layers, with each layer moistened and thoroughly tamped with suitable
mechanical equipment. The backfill around all pipes 24 inches or less
in diameter shall be flooded or tamped as specified above to a depth of
18 inches above the top of the pipe before any additional backfilling is
placed thereon.
C. Backfill material. Whenever any excavation for the laying of pipe is made
through rock, the pipe shall be laid six inches above the rock bottom of
the trench and space under, around and six inches above the pipe shall
be backfilled with clean river sand, noncorrosive soil or one-fourth (1/4)
inch minus gravel. Broken pavement, large stones and debris shall not
be used in the backfill.
D. Backfilling at the surface. Backfilling shall be completed by placing the
backfill material well over the top of the trench. For dry backfilling, the
material shall be compacted with a roller of an approved type or with the
rear of a truck carrying at least five tons until the surface is unyielding.
The surface shall then be graded as required.
§ 54-42.15. Restoration of surface.
The permitted shall restore the surface of all streets broken into or
damaged as a result of the excavation work to its original condition in
accordance with the specifications of the Director of Public Works.
A. Temporary restoration.
(1) The permittee may be required to place a temporary surface over
openings made in paved traffic lanes. Except when the pavement is
to be replaced before the opening of the cut to traffic, the fill above
the bottom of the paving slab shall be made with suitable material
well tamped into place, and this fill shall be topped with a minimum
of at least one inch of bituminous mixture which is suitable to
maintain the opening in good condition until permanent restoration
can be made. The crown of the temporary restoration shall not
exceed one inch above the adjoining pavement. The permittee shall
exercise special care in making such temporary restorations and
must maintain such restorations in safe traveling condition until
such time as permanent restorations are made. The asphalt which is
used shall be in accordance with the specifications of the Director of
Public Works.
(2) If, in the judgment of the Director of Public Works, it is not expedient
to replace the pavement over any cut or excavation made in the
street upon completion of the work allowed under such permit by
reason of the looseness of the earth or weather conditions, he may
direct the permittee to lay a temporary pavement of wood or other
suitable material designated by him over such cut or excavation to
remain until such time as the repair of the original pavement may be
properly made.
B. Permanent restoration of the street shall be made by the permittee in
strict accordance with the specifications prescribed by the Director of
§ 54-42.14 CHARTER § 54-42.15
C:317
Public Works to restore the street to its original and proper condition or
as near as may be.
C. Acceptance or approval of any excavation work by the Director of Public
Works shall not prevent the Town from asserting a claim against the
permittee and his or its surety under the surety bond required hereunder
for incomplete or defective work if discovered within 24 months from
the completion of the excavation work. The Director of Public Works'
presence during the performance of any excavation work shall not
relieve the permittee of its responsibilities hereunder.
D. Town's right to restore surface. If the permittee shall have failed to
restore the surface of the street to its original and proper condition
upon the expiration of the time fixed by such permit or shall otherwise
have failed to complete the excavation work covered by such permit, the
Director of Public Works, if he deems it advisable, shall have the right to
complete all work necessary to restore the street and to complete such
work. The permittee shall be liable for the actual cost thereof and 25% of
such cost in addition for general overhead and administrative expenses.
The Town shall have a cause of action for all fees, expenses and amounts
paid out and due for such work and shall apply in payment of the amount
due any funds of the permittee deposited as herein provided and the
Town shall also enforce its rights under the permittee's surety bond
provided pursuant to this ordinance.
E. It shall be the duty of the permittee to guarantee and maintain the
site of the excavation work in the same condition as existed prior to
the excavation, for two years after restoring such site to its original
condition.
§ 54-42.16. Trenches for pipe laying.
Except by special permission from the Director of Public Works, no trench
shall be excavated more than 250 feet where pipe has been laid. The length
of the trench that may be opened at any one time shall not be greater than
the length of pipe and the necessary accessories which are available at
the site ready to be put in place. Trenches shall be braced and sheathed
according to generally accepted safety standards for construction work as
prescribed by the Director of Public Works. No timber bracing, lagging,
sheathing or other lumber shall be left in any trench.
§ 54-42.17. Prompt completion of work.
The permittee shall prosecute with diligence and expedience all excavation
work covered by the excavation permit and shall promptly complete such
work and restore the street to its original condition, or as near as may be,
as soon as practicable and in any event not later than the date specified in
the excavation permit therefor.
§ 54-42.18. Urgent work.
If, in his judgment, traffic conditions, the safety or convenience of the
traveling public or the public interest require that the excavation work be
§ 54-42.15 NEW CANAAN CODE § 54-42.18
C:318
performed as emergency work, the Director of Public Works shall have full
power to order, at the time the permit is granted, that a crew be employed
by the permittee 24 hours a day, to the end that such excavation work may
be completed as soon as possible.
§ 54-42.19. Emergency action.
In the event of any emergency in which a sewer, main, conduit or utility in
or under any street breaks, bursts or otherwise is in such condition as to
immediately endanger the property, life, health or safety of any individual,
the person owning or controlling such sewer, main, conduit or utility,
without first applying for and obtaining an excavation permit hereunder,
shall immediately take proper emergency measures to cure or remedy the
dangerous conditions for the protection of property, life, health and safety of
individuals. However, such person owning or controlling such facility shall
apply for an excavation permit not later than the end of the next succeeding
day during which the Director of Public Works office is open for business
and shall not proceed with permanent repairs without first obtaining an
excavation permit hereunder.
§ 54-42.20. Noise, dust and debris.
Each permittee shall conduct and carry out the excavation work in such
manner as to avoid unnecessary inconvenience and annoyance to the
general public and occupants of neighboring property. The permittee shall
take appropriate measures to reduce to the fullest extent practicable, in
the performance of the excavation work, noise, dust and unsightly debris
and, during the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., shall not use, except
with the written permission of the Director of Public Works or in case of an
emergency as herein otherwise provided, any tool, appliance or equipment
producing noise of sufficient volume to disturb the sleep or repose of
occupants of the neighboring properties.
§ 54-42.21. Preservation of monuments.
The permittee shall not disturb any surface monuments or hubs found in
the line of excavation work until ordered to do so by the Director of Public
Works.
§ 54-42.22. Inspections.
The Director of Public Works shall make such inspections as are reasonably
necessary in the enforcement of this ordinance. The Director of Public
Works shall have the authority to promulgate and cause to be enforced such
rules and regulations as may be reasonably necessary to enforce and carry
out the intent of this ordinance.
§ 54-42.23. Drawings and maps.
Users of subsurface street space shall maintain accurate drawings, plans
and profiles showing the location and character of all underground
§ 54-42.18 CHARTER § 54-42.23
C:319
structures, including abandoned installations. Corrected maps shall be filed
with the Town Director of Public Works within 60 days after new
installations, changes or replacements are made.
§ 54-42.24. Application to Town work.
The provisions of this ordinance shall not be applicable to any excavation
work under the direction of Town authorities by employees of the Town or
by any contractor of the Town performing work for and in behalf of the Town
in connection with openings or excavations in streets.
§ 54-42.25. Application to public utilities.
Any person operating any such public utility shall comply with the bonding
requirements of this ordinance, unless exempted by § 16-230 of the
Connecticut General Statutes.
§ 54-42.26. Insurance.
A permittee, prior to the commencement of excavation work hereunder,
shall furnish the Director of Public Works satisfactory evidence, in writing,
that the permittee has in force and will maintain in force during the
performance of the excavation work and the period of the excavation permit
public liability insurance of not less than $500,000 for any one person
and $500,000 for any one accident and property damage insurance of not
less than $100,000 duly issued by an insurance company authorized to do
business in this state.
§ 54-42.27. Liability of town.
This ordinance shall not be construed as imposing upon the Town or any
official or employee any liability or responsibility for damages to any person
injured by the performance of any excavation work for which an excavation
permit is issued hereunder; nor shall the Town or any official or employee
thereof be deemed to have assumed any such liability or responsibility by
reason of inspections authorized hereunder or the issuance of any permit or
the approval of any excavation work.
§ 54-42.23 NEW CANAAN CODE § 54-42.27
C:320
ARTICLE III
Construction and Maintenance of Sidewalks
§ 54-43. New sidewalks located by Planning and Zoning
Commission.
New sidewalks in highways, streets or other public places where artificial
sidewalks have not been constructed shall be laid out and located by the
Planning and Zoning Commission pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 45
of the General Statutes, as now or hereafter amended.
§ 54-44. Rough grade and survey made by town.
The survey for any new sidewalk specified in the preceding section, and
the rough grade required therefor shall be made and prepared by the town,
without expense to the owner of the abutting land.
§ 54-45. Artificial sidewalks and cost of new sidewalks. [Amended
9-17-2008, effective 10-3-2008]
A. Any artificial sidewalk laid out and located pursuant to § 54-43 of this
Code shall be constructed and at all times maintained and repaired
by the owner of the abutting property at his own cost and expense
whenever the sidewalk is installed by the owner or at the owner's
request. The Town shall bear financial responsibility for the construction,
maintenance and repair of any sidewalk that is installed on the Town's
initiative.
B. When sidewalks are installed by the Town at the request of abutting
property owners, the abutting property owners may elect to pay the cost
of newly constructed sidewalks by payment of 1/5 of the total costs as
a down payment and the remainder of the cost in four equal annual
installments. Such costs shall be collected by the Tax Collector upon
warrants issued by the Board of Selectmen. Failure to pay any one
installment upon the date fixed by the warrant shall cause all remaining
payments to be due immediately.
§ 54-46. Artificial sidewalks — materials, etc.
In the construction, maintenance or repair of any artificial sidewalk under
the provisions of this Article, the Board of Selectmen or its agent, shall
prescribe the material with which any such sidewalk shall be constructed,
maintained or repaired and the width and grade of any such sidewalk and
may prescribe the curb line to which any such sidewalk shall be constructed
and maintained.
§ 54-47. Cost a lien against premises. [Amended 9-17-2008,
effective 10-3-2008]
In the case of any sidewalk installed by or at the request of the abutting
property owner under the provisions of § 54-45, upon the default or neglect
of any such owner of land to construct, maintain or repair any sidewalk in
§ 54-43 CHARTER § 54-47
C:321
front of such premises and to construct and maintain a suitable guardrail
or fence, for 15 days after written notice from the Board of Selectmen or
its agents so to do, the Board may construct or repair such sidewalk, and
the expense of such construction or repair shall be a lien upon the premises
adjoining such sidewalk, provided that the Board of Selectmen shall cause
a certificate of lien against such premises for the amount of such costs to
be recorded in the Town Clerk's office within 60 days from the completion
of such construction, maintenance or repair of such sidewalk pursuant to
Section 632 of the General Statutes, and such lien shall be prior to all other
liens, except tax liens or other sidewalk liens of prior date or filing.
§ 54-48. Snow removal from sidewalks. [Added 9-17-2008,53
effective 10-3-2008]
Applicability. The following subsections of this section shall apply to public
sidewalks in the retail or business zones, as classified under the New
Canaan Zoning Regulations and Zoning Map, excluding sidewalks abutting
single-family or two-family residential uses. The Town shall be responsible
for snow removal from public sidewalks abutting single-family or two-family
residential uses in the business zones, as well as from public sidewalks in
the residential zones.
A. Pursuant to § 7-163a of the Connecticut General Statutes, and
notwithstanding the provisions of § 13a-149 of the Connecticut General
Statutes or any other general statute or special act, the Town of New
Canaan shall not be liable to any person injured in person or property
caused by the presence of ice or snow on a public sidewalk unless
the Town is the owner or person in possession and control of the land
abutting such sidewalk other than land used as a highway or street,
provided the Town shall be liable for its affirmative acts with respect to
such sidewalk
B. The owner or person in possession and control of land abutting a public
sidewalk shall have the same duty of care with respect to the presence
of ice or snow on such sidewalk toward the portion of the sidewalk
abutting such property as the Town had prior to the effective date of this
ordinance adopted pursuant to the provisions of Connecticut General
Statutes § 7-163a and shall be liable to persons injured in person or
property where a breach of said duty is the proximate cause of said
injury.
C. The owner or person in possession and control of land abutting a public
sidewalk shall cause to be removed therefrom any and all snow, sleet or
ice as soon as reasonably practical, but no later than six hours of daylight
after the same shall have stopped falling, been deposited or formed.
Where snow or ice cannot be removed entirely from a sidewalk, such
owner or person shall cause sand or salt or other suitable substance to
be spread over the snow or ice to render such sidewalk reasonably safe
for public travel.
53.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former § 54-48, Artificial sidewalks to be
maintained by owners.
§ 54-47 NEW CANAAN CODE § 54-48
C:322
D. If any such owner or person fails, neglects or refuses to remove snow
or ice from a public sidewalk, or to apply sand, salt or other substance
as required within the time limits above, then the Town of New Canaan
may cause the same to be done at the expense of such owner or person.
Notice of any such violation and expense shall be mailed to the
responsible owner or person within 10 days of the violation. If any such
charge is not paid by the owner within 30 days thereafter, the same
shall be a lien upon the premises abutting the sidewalk provided that the
Town of New Canaan shall cause a certificate of lien to be recorded in
the Town Clerk's office within 60 days of the date of mailing of the notice
of violation. Such lien may be enforced and collected in the same manner
as is provided by law for the collection and enforcement of tax liens.
E. Additionally, any such owner or person who fails, refuses or neglects
to remove snow or ice as required above may be fined the maximum
amount for infractions as set forth in § 4-8 of the Town Code, and each
day any violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 54-49. Sidewalk obstructions prohibited. [Added 9-17-2008,54
effective 10-3-2008]
The owner of land abutting on any highway, street or public place in front
of whose premises an artificial sidewalk is constructed shall not install or
place, or allow any tenants or occupants to install or place, any obstructions
on the sidewalk that restrict traffic visibility or pedestrian passage upon
the sidewalk without written permission from the Board of Selectmen.
Examples of such obstructions include, without limitation, benches, chairs,
tables, planters, signs, and retail or commercial displays.
54.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former § 54-49, Owners to make passageway
safe.
§ 54-48 CHARTER § 54-49
C:323

ARTICLE IV
Moving Buildings and Other Heavy Objects
Part
I
Buildings
§ 54-50. Permits required.
No building or structure shall be drawn or moved over any highway or
bridge in the Town without a written permit from the Director of Public
Works upon application therefor, as provided in the following section, but
such permit shall not authorize the use of any highway in the Town
controlled by the state, unless approved by, or a similar permit is issued by,
a competent authority of the state.
§ 54-51. Application for permits.
Every applicant to move any building or structure over or upon any highway
or bridge shall be made in writing, signed by the applicant, upon a form
prescribed by the Director of Public Works and shall state:
A. The name of the owner of the building and location thereof.
B. The names of persons who shall move the same.
C. The highways or bridges, if any, over which the same is to be moved.
D. The location to which the same is to be moved.
E. The dates and hours during which the same will be moved.
F. The length of time to be occupied in such moving.
G. The dimensions thereof and the material of which such building is
constructed.
H. Such other facts as the Director of Public Works may require. A permit
from the Planning and Zoning Commission or its agent authorizing
the placing of such buildings on its proposed new site shall also be
submitted to the Director of Public Works with such application.
§ 54-52. Bond requirements. [Amended 2-24-59, effective 3-28-59]
At the time of making the application specified in the preceding section,
the applicant shall file with the Director of Public Works a bond with one
or more sureties approved by the Director of Public Works or a surety
company bond likewise approved in the penal sum of $10,000, conditioned
to indemnify and save harmless the Town from all damage to any highway
or surface thereof or to any bridge or to public or private property or to
persons caused by the movement of such building or structure through or
upon any highway or bridge or by any unlawful or negligent act or omission
of the permittee, his agent or employees in any way relating to or growing
out of the moving of such building or structure under such permit.
§ 54-50 CHARTER § 54-53
C:325
§ 54-53. Issuance of permit; fees paid. [Amended 6-7-83, effective
9-1-83]
Upon receiving and filing the application and the zoning permit specified in
§ 54-51 of this Code, the deposit and approval of the bond specified in the
preceding section and a fee of $10, the Director of Public Works shall issue a
permit for moving such building or structure, which permit shall recite that
it is issued in conformity with and subject to the conditions of this Article.
§ 54-54. When permit may be refused.
The Director of Public Works may refuse to issue a permit referred to in the
preceding sections if, in his judgment, operations thereunder would result
in material injury to any highway or bridge of the town; or he may restrict
or qualify such permit as he may deem necessary to safeguard any highway
or bridge of the Town from damage or injury.
§ 54-55. Obstructions on highway.
Nothing in the preceding section shall be construed as requiring the Town
to remove any obstructions along any highway, nor to incur any expense
therefor. If the moving of such building or structure through any highway is
obstructed by any trees, the permittee shall apply to the Town Tree Warden
who may grant such relief as in his judgment may be proper and reasonable,
and the permittee shall pay to the Tree Warden the reasonable cost of any
service rendered by him in removing any such obstructions.
§ 54-56. Procedures and safety during moving.
In moving any building or structure through or upon any highway, the same
shall be supported on wheels or rollers or other device and in a manner
approved by the Director of Public Works, to avoid damage or injury to
the surface of the highway. If it is necessary for such building or structure
to remain in the highway during the nighttime, it shall be protected by a
sufficient number of lighted red lanterns or flame torches from sundown
until daylight to assure the safety of public travel on such highway at night.
Part
II
Other
Heavy
Objects
§ 54-57. Permit required and fee paid. [Amended 6-7-83, effective
9-1-83]
No vehicle, machine, machinery, tractor or other object exceeding in weight
and dimensions those limited by the provisions of Section 1376d of the
General Statutes of the state, as amended, shall be operated or moved over
or upon any Town highway or bridge without a permit issued by the Director
§ 54-53 NEW CANAAN CODE § 54-57
C:326
of Public Works, upon written application therefor and upon the payment
of a fee of $10 for the use of the town; such application shall contain a
description of the vehicle or object to be so operated or moved, its gross
weight and dimensions and shall state the highways upon or over such
vehicle or object is to be operated or moved.
§ 54-58. Conditions for refusal of permit.
The Director of Public Works may refuse to issue a permit specified in the
preceding section if, in his judgment, operations thereunder would result in
material injury to any highway or bridge of the town; or he may restrict or
qualify such permit as he may deem necessary to safeguard any highway or
bridge of the Town from damage or injury.
§ 54-59. Bond required.
Before the issuance of a permit under § 54-57 of this Code, the applicant
therefor shall file with the Director of Public Works a bond approved by him
in the penal sum required by § 54-52 of this Code, conditioned to indemnify
and save harmless the Town from all damage to any highway or surface
thereof, bridge or public or private property or persons caused by the
operation or movement of such vehicle or other object upon any highway or
bridge in the town, and for any unlawful or negligent act or omission of the
permittee, his agents or employees in any way relating to or growing out of
the moving of such vehicle or other object under such permit.
§ 54-60. Devices required for moving and safety.
In moving any object specified in § 54-57 of this Code, other than a vehicle
on wheels, through or upon any highway or bridge, the same shall be
supported on wheels or rollers or other device and in a manner approved by
the Director of Public Works to avoid damage or injury to the surface of the
highway or to any bridge.
§ 54-61. Safety requirements for nighttime.
If it shall be necessary for the vehicle or object specified in § 54-57 of this
Code to remain in the highway during the nighttime, it shall be protected by
a sufficient number of lighted red lanterns or flame torches from sundown
until daylight to assure the safety of public travel on such highway at night.
§ 54-57 CHARTER § 54-61
C:327

ARTICLE V
Littering of Streets with Dust, Dirt and Stones
[Added 5-3-57, effective 6-1-57]
§ 54-62. Definitions.
When used in this Article the following terms shall have the meanings
shown herein:
DUST — All dust, soot, ash or other fine particles of matter.
DUST-PRODUCING SUBSTANCE — All earth, ashes, cinders or loam or any
other substance composed of, mixed with, producing or otherwise capable
of spreading or disseminating dust.
OVERLOADING — Filling a vehicle in such a manner as will cause the
contents to spill onto the street. For this purpose a vehicle shall not be
construed to be overloaded if it is filled in such a manner as to have the
periphery of the load four or more inches below the upper level of the four
sides of the body so that, if and when the load shifts in transit, it will not
overflow and spill over the sides.
TRACKAGE — Any substance which would tend to litter a street as a
result of falling or dropping from the tires, body or undercarriage of a
vehicle when or after said vehicle enters said street from a construction or
excavation area.
§ 54-63. Restrictions regarding transportation of dust-producing
substance.
No dust-producing substance shall be transported through any public
highway within the Town of New Canaan without covering or protection,
at all times, sufficient effectually to prevent the spreading or dissemination
of dust from such dust-producing substance into the air or upon any public
or private property. For the purpose of this Article wetting the load shall
constitute protection.
§ 54-64. Transportation of sand, stones, gravel, dirt or similar
substances.
No person or persons shall operate or cause to be operated any vehicle
in the Town of New Canaan transporting, therein or thereon, sand, stone,
gravel, dirt or similar substances in such a manner as shall constitute
"overloading" as defined in § 54-62 of this Article.
§ 54-65. Trackage restrictions.
It shall be the responsibility of the general contractor or developer in an
area where there is construction or excavation in progress to prevent the
littering of the street within 400 yards of the point of entrance from such
area into such street by "trackage" as defined in § 54-62 of this Article.
§ 54-62 CHARTER § 54-65
C:329
Violation of this section shall occur when trackage is present at the end of
the working day upon the street within the 400 yard limits set forth above.
§ 54-66. Violations and penalties.
Each violation of any provision of this Article shall constitute a separate
offense.
All persons, firms and corporations, as principals or agents, causing,
participating in or in any way responsible for any violation of this Article
shall be severally guilty of such violation and shall each be fined not more
than $25 for each offense.
§ 54-65 NEW CANAAN CODE § 54-66
C:330
Chapter 55
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Chapter 56
(RESERVED)
Chapter 57
TAXATION
§ 54-66 CHARTER § 54-66
C:331

ARTICLE I
Tax Relief for the Elderly or Disabled
[Adopted 6-11-1975, effective 7-1-1975; amended in its entirety
1-11-2006, effective 1-27-2006]
§ 57-1. Program of tax relief adopted.
The Town of New Canaan hereby adopts a program of tax relief for the
elderly or disabled, pursuant to § 12-129n of the General Statutes of
Connecticut, as amended.
§ 57-2. Qualifications.
A. Any person who owns real property in the Town of New Canaan or is
liable for the payment of taxes thereon or who is the unit owner of a
cooperative in the Town of New Canaan and who occupies such real
property or unit as such person's principal residence shall be eligible for
tax relief as hereafter set forth, provided that all of the conditions and
restrictions set forth in § 12-129n of the General Statutes of Connecticut,
as amended, are met.
B. Applicants must be either 1) 65 years of age or older, or whose spouse
is 65 years of age or over, or over 60 years of age and the surviving
spouse of a taxpayer qualified under this section at the time of his or
her death, or 2) under 65 years of age and eligible to receive permanent
total disability benefits under Social Security or comparable program.
Age shall be determined as of the close of the preceding calendar year.
[Amended 4-7-2009, effective 4-24-2009]
C. Applicants must have had, as applicable, in the last concluded calendar
year an income not exceeding $60,000. This income shall be construed
as adjusted gross income as defined by the Internal Revenue Service,
plus 100% of Social Security benefits and all nontaxable income.
D. Applicants must have been a resident of the Town of New Canaan for
one year immediately preceding receipt of benefits, and must have paid
the full amount due in the year previous to the first application.
E. Applicants must have applied for and accepted any real property tax
relief from the State of Connecticut that may be available to such
taxpayer under the provisions of the Connecticut General Statutes for
the year of application.
F. The subject property must be the principal residence of the applicant,
which shall mean, for purposes hereof, occupancy of the property by the
applicant for at least 183 days of the fiscal year for which tax relief is
claimed. The subject property must also be the only real property owned
by the applicant and his or her spouse. A single applicant shall not have
more than $350,000 in financial assets (such as cash, stocks, bonds,
commodities, and ownership interests in LLCs or other companies), and
a married couple shall not have more than $450,000 in financial assets.
[Amended 12-19-2007, effective 1-4-2008; 4-7-2009, effective
4-24-2009; 3-26-2014]
§ 57-1 CHARTER § 57-2
C:333
G. Failure to confirm eligibility by presenting such relevant documentation
as may be required by the Assessor without good and reasonable cause
shall result in disqualification for benefits hereunder.
H. The value of the subject property cannot exceed the average sale price
of all residential properties sold in the Town of New Canaan during the
previous tax year, as determined by the Town's Tax Assessor.
§ 57-3. Amount of property tax relief; income requirements.
A. Subject to the provisions of Subsection C, persons who otherwise qualify
for real property tax relief under this article may receive a real property
tax credit in accordance with the following income schedule: [Amended
4-7-2009, effective 4-24-2009; 3-26-2014]
Annual Income Tax Credit
$0 to $19,999 Single $2,500 Couple $3,000
$20,000 to $29,999 Single $2,000 Couple $2,500
$30,000 to $39,999 Single $1,750 Couple $2,500
$40,000 to $49,999 Single $1,250 Couple $1,500
$50,000 to $60,000 Single $1,000 Couple $1,200
Such schedule sets forth the maximum income allowable during the
calendar year immediately preceding the year in which application is made
for the tax relief provided in this article.
B. (Reserved)55
C. The total amount of tax relief provided under this program in each year shall
be capped at 1/2 of 1% of the amount to be raised by taxation. In any year
in which the total amount of tax relief for eligible applicants would exceed
the cap, then the total benefits shall be reduced and the tax relief shall be
provided to eligible applicants on a pro rata basis.
D. A committee shall be appointed by the Chairman of the Town Council every
two years to reassess the real property tax credit and deferral programs.
§ 57-4. Application. [Amended 4-7-2009, effective 4-24-2009]
In order to receive any property tax relief provided for by this article, each
person who claims to be qualified shall file an application between January 1
and May 15 with the Assessor of the Town of New Canaan. Such application
shall be on a form prescribed by the Assessor and shall set forth the basis
for qualification. If the Assessor finds such applicant to be qualified, the
Assessor shall grant such application, subject to the provisions of § 57-3C,
provided that the applicant must reapply each year.
55.Editor's Note: Former Subsection B, concerning deferral of real property taxes, was
repealed 4-7-2009, effective 4-24-2009.
§ 57-2 NEW CANAAN CODE § 57-5
C:334
§ 57-5. Elimination of tax relief.
If at any time it is found and determined by the Assessor of the Town
of New Canaan that any person who has been granted tax relief under
this article no longer meets the requirements therefor, the Assessor shall
thereupon issue a certificate of error to the Tax Collector removing such
tax relief in full on the applicable Grand List. If at any time it shall come
to the attention of either the Tax Collector or the Town Clerk of the Town
of New Canaan that the requirements therefor of any person receiving the
benefits hereunder are no longer met, the Tax Assessor shall be notified
forthwith. If any person entitled to the tax relief pursuant to this ordinance
transfers, assigns, grants or otherwise conveys the property on which the
tax relief is granted, no additional tax relief shall be allowed for his or her
interest in the property commencing after the date of the conveyance of the
property, provided further that the new owner of such property shall pay
the Town a prorated share of the tax relief as provided by § 12-129b(d) of
the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
§ 57-6. Notifications to Tax Collector.
The Assessor of the Town of New Canaan shall notify the Tax Collector, on
appropriate forms, of the total grant to be given to each person for tax relief
under the provisions of this ordinance, and a copy of the grant computation
shall be provided to each qualifying person.
§ 57-7. List of qualified persons.
The Assessor of the Town of New Canaan shall annually prepare a certified
list of all persons whom the Assessor shall find to be eligible for tax
relief under this ordinance, copies of which shall be filed annually in the
Tax Assessor's office and the Town Clerk's office by the Assessor upon
completion of the applicable Grand List.
§ 57-8. Lien on real property. [Amended 4-7-2009, effective
4-24-2009]
The property tax credit provided by this article shall not result in a lien
against the property in an equivalent amount except as required by
§ 12-129n of the General Statutes of Connecticut, as amended.
§ 57-9. Appeal.
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Assessor as to tax relief
under this ordinance may appeal to the Board of Assessment Appeals, in
accordance with the provisions of §§ 12-111 and 12-112 of the General
Statutes of Connecticut, as amended.
§ 57-5 CHARTER § 57-10
C:335
§ 57-10. When effective. [Amended 4-7-2009, effective 4-24-2009;
XXXX]
This Article I, as amended, shall be effective with respect to real property
taxes relating to the Grand List of each year commencing with the year
beginning October 1, 2013.
§ 57-10 NEW CANAAN CODE § 57-10
C:336
ARTICLE II
Tax Exemption for Solar Energy
[Adopted 1-12-1977]
§ 57-11. Program for systems.
The Town of New Canaan hereby adopts and authorizes the property tax
exemption for solar energy heating or cooling systems pursuant to Section
12-81(56)(a), (b) and (c) of the General Statutes of Connecticut, Revision of
1958, as amended.
§ 57-12. When effective.
Section 57-11 of this ordinance shall apply to the taxes on the Grand List of
each year commencing July 1, 1977, and shall continue in accordance with
the provisions of the General Statutes relating to the tax exemption of solar
energy systems.
§ 57-11 CHARTER § 57-12
C:337

ARTICLE III
Properties of Tax Exempt Organizations
[Adopted 3-10-1999, effective 3-19-1999]
§ 57-13. Adoption of statutory provisions.
The Town of New Canaan hereby adopts the provisions of Section 12-81b of
the Connecticut General Statutes (revised to January 1, 1997), as the same
may be renumbered or amended from time to time, relating to the effective
date of tax exemptions for certain organizations. Accordingly, the property
tax exemption authorized by Subsections (7) to (16), inclusive, of Section
12-81 of the Connecticut General Statutes shall be effective as of the date
of acquisition of the property to which the exemption applies.
§ 57-14. Notification of Tax Collector.
When any exempt organization as defined by § 12-81(7) to (16) of the
Connecticut General Statutes receives by purchase, conveyance, gift or
otherwise any property that would be exempt from property taxation under
Subdivisions (7) to (16), inclusive, of § 12-81, the exempt organization shall
notify the Tax Collector of the receipt of such property. The notice shall
contain all information that the Tax Collector requires, including certified
copies of instruments of conveyance to the recipient. Upon such
notification, the tax collector shall declare such property exempt for said
taxation effective on the date of acquisition, and shall not levy any property
tax against the exempt organization for such property.
§ 57-15. Reimbursement of taxes paid.
The tax exempt organization shall be reimbursed, without interest, for any
tax paid by it for a period subsequent to the date of such acquisition and
shall also be reimbursed, without interest, for any tax paid by the prior
owner for a period subsequent to the date of such acquisition for which
such tax exempt organization reimbursed the prior owner upon the transfer
of title to such property. The right of reimbursement shall be available for
taxes becoming due and payable on or after January 1, 1997, but the right
of reimbursement shall not apply to taxes that are paid in arrears for any
period prior to the date of acquisition.
§ 57-13 CHARTER § 57-15
C:339

ARTICLE IV
Tax Overpayments
[Adopted 7-21-2010, effective 8-27-2010]
§ 57-16. Retention of tax overpayments.
Pursuant to § 12-129 of the Connecticut General Statutes, the Tax Collector
is authorized to retain tax payments made in excess of the amount due if the
excess payment is less than $5.
§ 57-16 CHARTER § 57-16
C:341

ARTICLE V
Delinquent Motor Vehicle Taxes
[Adopted 10-19-2011, effective 11-4-2011]
§ 57-17. Fee on delinquent motor vehicle taxes.
Pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes § 7-148 and § 12-166, the Tax
Collector shall, in addition to all interest, charges, fees, and penalties
otherwise provided by law, add and collect the following fee, which shall be
enforceable in any manner allowed by law for the collection of delinquent
taxes, and shall be included within any lien securing such tax, and shall be
paid before such tax is deemed to have been satisfied: $3 on each motor
vehicle tax bill that remains delinquent for two months after the due date.
Motor vehicle taxes that are due on July 1 shall be increased by the amount
of this fee if the taxes are still delinquent on September 1, and motor vehicle
taxes that are due on January 1 shall be increased by the amount of this
fee if the taxes are still delinquent on March 1. The Board of Selectmen
shall adjust this fee in the same manner as other fees under Chapter 2 of
the Town Code, so that the amount of the fee is sufficient to offset related
charges from the Department of Motor Vehicles and related administrative
expenses incurred by the Office of the Tax Collector.
§ 57-17 CHARTER § 57-17
C:343

ARTICLE VI
Tax Abatement Ordinance
[Adopted 11-14-2018]
§ 57-18. Authority to provide tax abatements.
Upon the written request of an owner of real property located within the
Town of New Canaan:
A. Pursuant to Section 8-215 of the General Statutes, the Town of New
Canaan is hereby authorized and empowered to abate, in part or in
whole, the real property taxes on "housing solely for low- or moderateincome
persons or families" as that phrase is defined in Section 8-202(c)
of the General Statutes and as the same may be amended from time to
time in accordance with the provisions of this article.
B. Pursuant to Title 12 of the General Statutes, the Town of New Canaan is
hereby authorized and empowered to enter into agreements with owners
of real property abating the real property taxes for certain real property
as set forth in the General Statutes.
§ 57-19. Contract requirements for abatements pursuant to C.G.S.
§ 8-215.
Any abatement pursuant to Section 8-215 of the General Statutes shall
be made pursuant to a contract between the Town acting by and through
its Board of Selectmen, who are hereby authorized and empowered to
negotiate and execute such contracts on behalf of the Town, and the owner
of any such housing. The contract need not be conditioned upon state
reimbursement to the Town for such abatement but shall provide:
A. The terms of such abatement;
B. That such abatement shall terminate at any time when such housing is
not solely for low- or moderate-income persons or families as defined by
the General Statutes; and
C. That moneys equal to the amount of such abatement shall be used by
said owner for one or more of the following purposes:
(1) To reduce rents below the levels which would be achieved in the
absence of such abatement and to improve the quality and design of
such housing;
(2) To effect occupancy of such housing by persons and families of
varying income levels within limits determined by the Commissioner
of the Connecticut Department of Housing by regulation; or
(3) To provide necessary related facilities or services in such housing.
§ 57-20. Tax Abatement Committee.
A. Any written request for tax abatement, together with a proposed
contract between the subject property owner and the Town of New
Canaan, shall be first submitted to a Tax Abatement Committee. Said
Committee shall be composed of the First Selectman, Chief Financial
Officer, Administrative Officer, Assessor, the Chairman the Board of
§ 57-18 CHARTER § 57-20
C:345
Finance, or his or her designee, and the Chairman of the Town Council,
or his or her designee.
B. The Tax Abatement Committee shall ascertain the factors upon which a
tax abatement may be granted in each case, including, for abatements
pursuant to Section 8-215 of the General Statutes, the amount of
potential reimbursement for such tax abatement from the state for which
the Town is eligible.
C. The Tax Abatement Committee shall then determine the amount and any
other pertinent terms of the tax abatement and negotiate the contract
to the extent the Tax Abatement Committee deems necessary. Upon
the conclusion of successful negotiations, the Tax Abatement Committee
shall submit the contract to the Town Council, and thereafter the Board
of Selectmen, for review and approval, together with reasons for its
decision.
D. The Tax Abatement Committee shall be responsible for an annual review
to determine if the property to which a tax abatement has been granted
remains eligible for such tax abatement according to the terms of the
contract between the owner and the Town, and shall notify the Tax
Collector of the Town of any determination that the property has ceased
to be eligible for the tax abatement. In such an event, termination of the
tax abatement will become effective as of the date that the property shall
have ceased to be eligible for the tax abatement.
§ 57-21. State reimbursement.
The Town, acting by and through the Board of Selectmen, is hereby
authorized and empowered to enter into agreements with respect to state
reimbursement for tax abatements or state payment in lieu of taxes, as
provided in Section 8-216 of the General Statutes, as the same may be
amended from time to time.
§ 57-20 NEW CANAAN CODE § 57-21
C:346
Chapter 57A
(RESERVED)
Chapter 58
TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
§ 58-1. Definitions.
In interpreting these rules, the following definitions of words and phrases
shall govern, namely:
RIGHT HAND or LEFT HAND and RIGHT SIDE or LEFT SIDE and RIGHT
or LEFT — Shall be construed to indicate direction to the right or left as
viewed by the driver of a vehicle when sitting in the driver's seat.
STREET — Shall be deemed to include any road, highway, park or any other
public place, and to embrace all area within the legal limits of such street
or other public place.
INTERSECTION — Shall be held to describe any place where two or more
streets meet or cross each other.
PARKING — Shall be sufficient to define the status of any vehicle permitted
to remain stationary on any street or other public place.
VEHICLE — Shall include any device used or suitable for use as a means of
conveying, drawing or transporting persons or property.
COMMISSION — Shall be sufficient to designate the Police Commission,
which is the Traffic Authority of the town.
§ 58-2. Violations; responsibility of driver and owner of vehicle.
The responsibility for the operation, placing or leaving a vehicle in any
street in violation of these rules and regulations shall rest with the operator.
Whenever there occurs a violation of the parking regulations established
hereunder, proof of the registration number of any vehicle therein
concerned shall be prima facie evidence in any criminal action that the
owner was the operator thereof.
§ 58-3. Regulation to govern.
All operation or parking of vehicles, and the designation of all streets
limited to one-way traffic, and all streets temporarily closed to traffic, and
all other matters relating to the use of the streets by vehicles, shall conform
to and be governed by these regulations and by such modifications thereof
and amendments thereto as may, from time to time, be adopted by the
Commission as evidenced by resolution or resolutions duly entered upon its
minutes and as indicated by police regulation signs placed by such order of
the Commission in various streets and other public places of the town.
§ 57-21 CHARTER § 58-4
C:347
§ 58-4. Use of signs.
Police regulation signs shall be of such construction, design and color
as shall conform to the regulations of the State Traffic Commission and
shall bear such lettering as shall plainly indicate the rule or regulation
controlling traffic or parking in the locality where placed.
§ 58-5. Commission to designate control devices.
The Commission may, from time to time, by resolution, adopt and order the
use of such lines placed upon the pavements or curbs, such stop and go and
other lighting devices and such other means of indicating the manner in
which streets shall be used by vehicles as the Commission may determine,
and all such devices or means shall be sufficient notice of such regulation.
Traffic control signals and speed limits shall comply with the requirements
of the State Traffic Commission as provided in the General Statutes of
Connecticut.
§ 58-6. Where state law to apply.
In all streets and other public places in which no police regulation signs or
other notice of regulations are placed, the operation and parking of vehicles
therein shall be governed by the General Statutes of Connecticut.
§ 58-7. Parking time restrictions.
Wherever the use of a parking area shall be limited to a definite period, no
vehicle which shall have been parked in any portion of that area for the time
permitted shall be reparked in the same block within one hour thereafter.
§ 58-8. Diagonal parking regulations.
Except where otherwise designated, all diagonal parking spaces shall be
entered only by a turn from the direction in which the vehicle is moving,
and upon leaving any such parking space, a vehicle shall proceed only in the
direction in which it was moving before entering such parking space. Where
diagonal parking spaces are indicated by lines painted on the pavement,
all vehicles shall be parked approximately parallel with and equidistant
between such parking lines, with the front wheel nearest the curb within six
inches thereof.
§ 58-9. Parallel parking regulations.
Wherever parking is directed to be parallel with the curb, all vehicles shall
be parked entirely within the area between the curb and a parking line
placed on the pavement to designate the limits of such parking area. Except
where otherwise designated, each vehicle shall be parked in said area in
such manner that the right side of the vehicle is toward the curb.
§ 58-4 NEW CANAAN CODE § 58-10
C:348
§ 58-10. Overnight parking prohibited.
No vehicle shall be parked overnight in any street or public place. Any
vehicle parked over 30 minutes between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00
a.m. shall be considered to have been parked overnight.
§ 58-11. Violations and penalties; parking. [Amended 10-13-1976;
9-1-1981, effective 9-1-1981]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the regulations
relating to parking established hereunder shall be served either in person
or by attaching to such vehicle a notice directing the owner of such vehicle
to surrender said notice at police headquarters and to pay the sum stated
thereon. In the event that the owner shall fail to comply with such notice
within 14 days from the date of issuance thereof, the penalty shall be
increased by the sum of $10. If the total sum is not paid within 30 days, the
owner shall also be subject to arrest and prosecution in accordance with
Section 14-307 of the General Statutes of Connecticut.
§ 58-12. Violations and penalties; other.
Any person who shall violate any of these traffic regulations or any of the
police regulation signs adopted by resolution of the Commission shall be
subject to a fine not to exceed $25 for a single violation.
§ 58-13. Repeal of prior enactments.
All rules heretofore in effect regulating traffic or parking in the streets or
other public places in the Town are hereby repealed, except:
A. All resolutions heretofore adopted by this Commission or by the
Commission of Public Safety relating to one-way traffic, police regulation
signs and control devices shall remain in full force and effect as part of
these regulations.
B. Any and all violations of any such previously enacted traffic regulations
shall still be subject to prosecution and the imposition of fines or other
penalties provided in such previous regulations.
§ 58-14. Weight-restricted streets. [Added 10-17-2000, effective
12-4-2000]
A. Trucks are hereby excluded from streets or portions of streets that exceed
the gross vehicle weight limit as designated in Schedule A, attached to and
made a part of this chapter, except for the pickup and delivery/dropoff of
materials or passengers on such streets.
B. This regulation shall not apply to public safety, educations municipal or
municipal purpose vehicles, nor public utility companies in connection with
the construction, installation, operation or maintenance of public facilities.
§ 58-10 CHARTER § 58-14
C:349
Schedule A
Weight-Restricted Streets
In accordance with the provisions of § 58-14, trucks exceeding the gross
weight limit as designated in this schedule are hereby excluded from the
following streets:
Name of Street
Weight Limit
(tons)
Oenoke Lane 6
St. John's Place 6
Seminary Street 6
Chapter 58A
TREE BOARD
GENERAL REFERENCES
Conservation Commission — See Ch. 11A.
Code of Ethics — See Ch. 17.
Parks — See Ch. 42.
§ 58A-1. Composition; qualification of members.
There shall be a Public Tree Board of five members who shall be electors
of the Town. The members shall serve without compensation and shall hold
no other office of trust or emolument in the Town government. Service
on committees of the Town government is not prohibited by this section,
provided that such service does not create a conflict of interest as defined
in the Town Code of Ethics.56 There shall be minority representation on
the Board as required by § 9-167a of the Connecticut General Statutes. The
Town Tree Warden shall serve as an ex officio nonvoting member.
§ 58A-2. Appointment and terms of office.
The Selectmen shall annually on or promptly after the first day of December
appoint members of the Public Tree Board as follows: in even-numbered
years, the Selectmen shall appoint two members; and in odd-numbered
years, the Selectmen shall appoint three members. Such appointments shall
be for a term of two years from the first day of December and until their
successors have been appointed and shall have qualified. Within 30 days of
the initial adoption of this ordinance, the Selectmen shall appoint the initial
members of the Public Tree Board for staggered terms of office so that the
56.Editor's Note: See Ch. 17, Code of Ethics.
§ 58-14 NEW CANAAN CODE § 58A-2
C:350
initial term of three members expires on December 1, 2011, and the initial
term of two members expires on December 1, 2012.
§ 58A-3. Organization, officers, records and quorum.
On or promptly after the first day of December in each year, the Public
Tree Board shall meet at the call of the First Selectman to choose one of
its members to be Chairman and one of its members to be Secretary. The
Chairman, when present, shall preside at all meetings of the Board and
shall have a vote as a member thereof. The Secretary shall file in the office
of the Town Clerk a full and detailed record of all proceedings, acts and
resolutions of the Board, including the votes of each member on all actions
taken. All votes, minutes, agendas, and notices shall be filed in the time and
manner required by the Freedom of Information Act.57 Three members of
the Board shall constitute a quorum, and the concurrence of a majority of
those present shall be necessary for the transaction of business.
§ 58A-4. Purpose and scope.
The purpose of this ordinance is to promote and protect the public health,
safety, general welfare, and environmental well-being of the Town by
regulating the planting, maintenance, pruning, and removal of trees along
public streets and rights-of-way, in public parks, and on land owned by
the Town of New Canaan. Public trees provide important benefits to the
Town, including beautification of streets and parks, provision of shade,
improvement in air quality, buffering of noise, reduction of erosion, and
enhancement of property values. The intent of this ordinance is to establish
procedures to ensure the proper care of existing public trees and the proper
selection and location of new public trees. The scope of this ordinance is
limited to public trees, meaning trees on Town-owned land and trees within
the limits of public streets or rights-of-way. This ordinance does not regulate
any trees on private property.
§ 58A-5. Powers and duties.
The Public Tree Board shall exercise powers and perform duties as follows:
A. Assist the Tree Warden in developing and updating a comprehensive
public tree inventory program.
B. Assist the Tree Warden in writing and implementing an annual
community forestry work plan, which plan shall provide guidance for
tree management, species diversity, planting procedures, and response
to insect and disease problems. The community forestry work plan
shall be updated annually and filed with the Town Clerk, the Board of
Selectmen, and the Town Council.
C. Develop community educational programs concerning trees, including
an annual Arbor Day observance and proclamation.
57.Editor's Note: See C.G.S. § 1-200 et seq.
§ 58A-2 CHARTER § 58A-5
C:351
D. Recommend to the Board of Selectmen policies and procedures for
the selection and hiring of contractors for tree planting, pruning and
removal, both for routine work and for emergency work.
E. Consider offers of gifts of new public trees or money to be used for any
purposes of this ordinance, and recommend to the Board of Selectmen
acceptance or rejection thereof.
F. Adopt policies concerning the selection of new public trees. With respect
to street trees, the Board shall compile a list of acceptable trees in the
categories of small trees; medium trees; and large trees.
G. Assist the Tree Warden in developing regulations concerning acceptable
locations for planting new public trees; spacing of street trees; distance
from curbs and sidewalks; and distance from street corners, fireplugs
and utilities; as well as the care and watering of new public trees until
such time as the trees are established.
H. With regard to trees in public parks, the Board shall consult with the
Park and Recreation Commission.
§ 58A-6. Permits.
Anyone planting any tree on Town property shall first obtain a permit from
the Tree Warden.
§ 58A-7. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating any regulations adopted by the Tree Warden may be
fined up to $250 for each offense, and for a subsequent offense may be fined
the maximum amount allowed for infractions as set forth in the Connecticut
Superior Court infractions schedules.
§ 58A-8. Other remedies and laws not excluded.
Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed as limiting or excluding such
other remedies or penalties as are available to the Town or the Tree Warden
for the improper removal of public trees. The provisions of this ordinance
shall not be construed to limit or alter the authority, duty and responsibility
of the Tree Warden as granted and established under Chapter 451 of the
Connecticut General Statutes.58
Chapter 59
WATER
58.Editor's Note: See C.G.S. § 23-58 et seq.
§ 58A-5 NEW CANAAN CODE § 58A-8
C:352
ARTICLE I
Conservation Measures
[Adopted 5-11-2005, effective 5-27-2005]
§ 59-1. Purpose.
It is in the best interest of the public health and safety to regulate and
restrict the use of water from the public water supply and from private
wells during emergencies caused by drought, or periods of unusually high
demand, or other circumstances affecting the supply of water or posing
a threat of significant impairment to water potability. This ordinance is
enacted to plan for, and implement, water usage restrictions during times
of such water supply emergency.
§ 59-2. Definitions.
For purposes of this ordinance, the following words shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates
a different meaning:
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, association,
firm, group, or entity of any kind.
§ 59-3. Declaration of water supply emergency.
The First Selectman may declare the existence of a water supply emergency
when advised by the Director of Health, and after consultation with state
governmental authorities and local water company officials such as BHC
or its successor, that circumstances warrant the determination of such an
emergency, in the phases set forth below, in the interest of public health
and safety in the Town of New Canaan. In addition to general media and
public service announcements, the First Selectman shall cause a legal
notice of such declaration(s) to be published in a local newspaper having
general circulation in the Town of New Canaan, and the restrictions shall be
effective upon the date of such publication. The restrictions shall continue
until the First Selectman makes a public announcement of the termination
of the emergency.
§ 59-4. Water supply emergency - Phase I.
Upon the declaration of a water supply emergency - Phase I, the following
uses of water shall be prohibited:
A. Sprinkling, watering or irrigation of shrubbery, trees, lawns, grass,
ground cover, plants, vines and flowers not used in the furtherance of a
person's livelihood or enterprise;
B. The filling or draining of pools, ponds, rivers or lakes used for private or
public recreational purposes;
C. The washing of automobiles if the same is not in furtherance of a
person's livelihood or enterprise;
D. The allowance of plumbing to remain out of repair, resulting in the
escape of water;
§ 59-1 CHARTER § 59-4
C:353
E. The use of water from fire hydrants, unless used for the protection,
safety and welfare of residents and the Town by a public agency;
F. The use of ornamental or display fountains of any kind;
G. The use of water for any air-conditioning system, unless such airconditioning
system has a system of recirculating water;
H. The use of water for flushing or wetting down any streets, sidewalks,
driveways or parking areas; and
I. Restaurants providing water to patrons without request.
§ 59-5. Water supply emergency - Phase II.
Upon the declaration of a water supply emergency - Phase II, the following
uses of water shall be prohibited in addition to those above:
A. The use of water at nursery facilities for nonagricultural irrigation,
watering or sprinkling, except daily between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and
6:00 a.m. and between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 10:00 p.m.;
B. The use of water for watering or sprinkling any portion of a golf course,
except for daily between 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m., and hand
watering of greens once per day;
C. The use of water at public athletic fields for nonagricultural irrigation,
watering or sprinkling, except for daily between the hours of 4:00 a.m.
and 6:00 a.m.; and
D. The noncommercial use of water or steam for the cleaning of buildings
or any other structure's exterior, including decks.
§ 59-6. Water supply emergency - Phase III.
Upon the declaration of a water supply emergency - Phase III, the following
uses of water shall be prohibited in addition to those above:
A. The use of water or steam for cleaning of buildings or any other
structure's exterior, including decks;
B. The use of water for the commercial washing or cleaning of automobiles,
trucks, trailers, or any other vehicle;
C. The use of water for watering or sprinkling of any portion of a golf
course;
D. The use of water for watering or sprinkling at nursery facilities;
E. The use of water for watering or sprinkling public athletic fields;
F. The use of water from any stream, creek or other surface water supply;
and
G. The use of water for water-cooled air-conditioning units and heat pumps,
except during such times as specifically authorized by the Director of
Health in writing.
§ 59-7. Exemptions; variances.
The Director of Health may, upon written application of any person, or upon
his/her own initiative, grant an exemption and/or variance relieving such
person from compliance with any of the requirements of this ordinance
when, in the opinion of the Director of Health, such an exemption and/
or variance would be in the general public interest and would not
§ 59-4 NEW CANAAN CODE § 59-7
C:354
unnecessarily endanger the public health and safety. In connection with any
exemption and/or variance which may be granted, the Director of Health
shall impose such terms and conditions as he/she deems appropriate. Any
exemption and/or variance granted shall be fashioned to comply as closely
as possible with the intent of this ordinance.
§ 59-8. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
The New Canaan Police Department shall be responsible for the
enforcement of this ordinance, provided that the police may refer
complaints to the New Canaan Health Department, or any health district of
which New Canaan is a part, for preliminary investigation during normal
business hours. Any person who violates any of the provisions of the water
supply restriction regulations as implemented by the First Selectman shall
be fined the maximum amount for infractions as set forth by the State
of Connecticut Superior Court infractions schedules, and each day any
violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 59-7 CHARTER § 59-8
C:355
Chapter 60
ZONING REGULATIONS
Chapter 61
ZONING ENFORCEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Citation hearing procedure — See Ch. 11. Zoning — See Ch. 60.
§ 61-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this ordinance is to establish a means by which the Town
of New Canaan may more effectively enforce the Zoning Regulations of the
Town of New Canaan, with the implementation of fines for zoning violations.
§ 61-2. Statutory authority.
This ordinance is adopted pursuant to §§ 8-12a and 7-152c of the
Connecticut General Statutes.
§ 61-3. Definitions.
For purposes of this ordinance, the following words shall have the meaning
ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates
a different meaning. Words not specifically defined shall carry their
customary meaning.
COMMISSION — The Planning and Zoning Commission of the Town of New
Canaan.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company, organization or legal entity of any kind.
REGULATIONS — The Zoning Regulations of the Town of New Canaan, as
the same may be amended from time to time.
ZONING INSPECTOR — The person or persons designated by the
Commission to enforce the Zoning Regulations, and includes any Assistant
Zoning Inspectors.
§ 61-4. Issuance of citations.
A. The Zoning Inspector is hereby authorized to issue citations to any
person who commits a violation of the New Canaan Zoning Regulations
adopted by the Planning and Zoning Commission, to the extent and in the
manner provided by this ordinance. In such instances, each citation will
apply jointly and severally to the owner of the property in question and
the person in possession and control of the property, and his/her agents,
§ 59-8 NEW CANAAN CODE § 61-4
C:356
contractors and subcontractors. Each day that any violation continues
shall be deemed a separate offense for which a separate fine may be
applied.
B. Any such citation may be delivered either by hand delivery or by certified
mail to the person named in such citation. The Zoning Inspector issuing
a citation shall retain a copy of the citation. In addition, the issuance of
a citation shall be reported to the Planning and Zoning Commission.
§ 61-5. Violations subject to fines.
A citation may be issued by the Zoning Inspector for any violation of
the New Canaan Zoning Regulations, including, without limitation, the
following types of violations:
A. The construction, installation, alteration, conversion, or maintenance of
any building or structure without a proper zoning permit allowing the
same;
B. The use of any building, structure or land without a proper zoning permit
allowing the same;
C. Any violation concerning signage;
D. Any violation concerning earth excavation, filling, or grading;
E. Any violation of the parking regulations;
F. Any violation of any other Zoning Regulation; and
G. Any violation of the conditions of a zoning permit.
§ 61-6. Establishment of fine.
The fine for each occurrence of a violation shall be the greater of $150,
or the maximum amount allowed by § 8-12a of the Connecticut General
Statutes, as the same may be amended from time to time. The fine shall
be payable to the Treasurer of the Town of New Canaan. Each day that
any violation continues shall be deemed a separate occurrence, for which a
separate fine may be applied.
§ 61-7. Citation hearing procedures.
The issuance, payment, and procedure to contest a citation shall be in
accordance with Connecticut General Statutes § 7-152c and the citation
hearing procedure in Chapter 11 of the Code of the Town of New Canaan.
§ 61-8. Hearing officers.
The First Selectman of the Town of New Canaan shall appoint one or more
Citation Hearing Officers to conduct the hearings provided by Connecticut
General Statutes § 7-152c, provided that no New Canaan Zoning Inspector,
New Canaan Building Inspector, nor any member of the New Canaan
Planning and Zoning Commission, nor any member of the New Canaan
Zoning Board of Appeals, nor any police officer or other Town employee may
be appointed as a hearing officer.
§ 61-4 CHARTER § 61-9
C:357
§ 61-9. Supplemental remedies.
The provisions of this ordinance are in addition to, and not in lieu of, any
other remedies available to the Zoning Inspector, the Planning and Zoning
Commission, and the Town of New Canaan, under the Zoning Regulations,
the Town Code, the Connecticut General Statutes, or the common law. The
issuance of citations under this ordinance shall not preclude the exercise of
such other remedies.
Chapter 62
AUDIT COMMITTEE
§ 62-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FINANCIAL EXPERT — An individual who has substantial audit experience
in the corporate or government sectors and who possesses or obtains a
basic understanding of governmental financial reporting and auditing.
MANAGEMENT — Any Town officer or employee of the Town or Board of
Education.[Added 2-10-2016]
TOWN BODIES — Collectively, the Town Council, the Board of Selectmen,
the Board of Finance and the Board of Education.
§ 62-2. Establishment.
There shall be an Audit Committee of three regular members, and two
alternate members, who shall be electors of the Town and who shall each be
a financial expert. The members shall serve without compensation and shall
hold no other office of trust or emolument in the Town government or serve
on any other committees of the Town government. No member may accept
any consulting, advisory or other compensatory fee from the Town, nor shall
a member have had any material financial relationship (i.e., any transaction
involving $5,000 or more in any year) with the Town in the three years prior
to appointment to the Committee.
§ 62-3. Appointment of members; term of office.
A. Within 30 days after this chapter shall become effective, the Board of
Selectmen shall appoint members of the Committee as follows:
(1) One regular member and one alternate member shall be appointed
to serve until December 1, 2015.
(2) One regular member and one alternate member shall be appointed
to serve until December 1, 2016.
(3) One regular member shall be appointed to serve until December 1,
2017.
B. Except for the initial appointments as hereinbefore stated, all
subsequent appointments of members and alternate members by the
§ 61-9 NEW CANAAN CODE § 62-3
C:358
Board of Selectmen shall be made for a term of three years to begin
on December 1 each year. Members may serve for no more than three
successive three-year terms or part thereof.
C. Each member, after qualification, shall hold office from their initial
appointment and until a successor has been appointed and shall have
qualified. In the event of a vacancy due to death, resignation or removal,
within 60 days of such vacancy the Selectmen will appoint a successor
member of the Committee. There shall be minority representation on
the Committee in accordance with § 9-167a of the General Statutes. No
appointment to the Committee, for a full term or to fill a vacancy, shall
be effective unless confirmed by an affirmative vote of seven members of
the Town Council. [Amended 2-10-2016]
§ 62-4. Organization; officers; records; reports; authority.
A. On or promptly after the first day of December in each year the Audit
Committee shall meet at the call of the First Selectman to choose one of
its members to be Chairman and one of its members to be Secretary. The
Chairman shall, when present, preside at all meetings of the Committee
and shall have a vote as a member thereof. In the absence of the
Chairman or Secretary, as the case may be, the Committee shall choose
one of its members Chairman pro tempore or one of its members
Secretary pro tempore. Two members shall be a quorum for the
transaction of business at any meeting. Alternate members, when seated
as provided herein, shall have all the powers and duties of regular
members of the Committee. Alternate members shall have no vote, and
shall not count towards a quorum or for other purposes, unless seated
for a regular member. In the event of the absence of a regular member
from a meeting of the Committee, or if a regular member is disqualified,
such absent or disqualified member shall designate an alternate to act in
his or her place. In the absence of such designation, the Committee, by
majority vote of those members present and voting, shall designate and
seat an alternate or alternates.
B. The Secretary shall file in the office of the Town Clerk agendas and
minutes of all meetings of the Committee, including the votes of each
member on all actions taken.
C. The Committee shall prepare and send an annual report of its activities
to the Town Bodies within 60 days after filing of the financial statements
with the State Office of Policy and Management. [Amended 2-10-2016]
D. The Committee shall have full authority:
(1) To investigate any matters directly related to the purposes of the
Committee, on its own motion or brought to its attention with full
access to all books, records (except such records that are
confidential under state or federal law), facilities and personnel of
the Town and Board of Education; and
(2) To request any officer or employee of the Town and Board of
Education, the Town's and Board of Education's legal counsel,
internal auditor, independent auditors or other consultants to attend
a meeting of the Committee or to meet with any members of, or
consultants to, the Committee.
§ 62-3 CHARTER § 62-5
C:359
§ 62-5. Purpose; powers and duties of Committee.
A. The purpose of the Audit Committee is to assist the Town Bodies in
fulfilling their oversight responsibilities relating to: 1) the integrity of the
Town's financial statements, financial reporting processes and systems
of internal accounting and controls; 2) the annual independent audit
of the Town's financial statements, the engagement of the independent
auditors and the evaluation of the independent auditors' qualifications,
independence and performance; 3) compliance with legal and regulatory
requirements that could materially impact the Town's financial
statements; 4) the evaluation of enterprise risk issues; and 5) overseeing
the Town's plan for corrective action which should include appropriate
and timely follow-up measures. In performing the Committee's duties,
members may reasonably rely upon management to prepare financial
statements in accordance with applicable standards and to maintain an
effective system of internal controls that provide reasonable assurances
regarding the reliability of financial reporting.
B. Acting as an ad hoc committee with the First Selectman and the
Chairman of the Town Council, the members of the Committee shall
recommend to the Town Council annually one or more independent
accounting firms qualified to perform the annual audit of the Town (See
Town Charter § C5-27, System of Accounting). The ad hoc committee
shall review and recommend to the Town Council the fees to be paid
to the independent auditors, including in connection with any non-audit
services. The ad hoc committee shall oversee, evaluate and, where
appropriate, recommend to the Town Council the replacement of the
independent auditors. [Amended 2-10-2016]
C. The Committee shall receive reports, from time to time, from the
independent auditors regarding their independence, and shall discuss
such reports with the auditors, if necessary, to satisfy itself of the
independence of the auditors.
D. The Committee shall meet with the independent auditors during the
annual audit period to discuss the overall scope of the audit plan,
including the adequacy of staffing and other factors that may affect
the effectiveness and timeliness of the audit. The Committee shall also
discuss with management and the independent auditors the Town's risk
exposures (whether financial, operating or other), the adequacy and
effectiveness of the accounting and financial controls, and the steps
management has taken to monitor and control such exposures and
manage legal compliance programs, among other relevant
considerations.
E. The Committee shall review with management and the independent
auditors the annual financial statements of the Town, including their
judgment about the reasonableness of significant judgments, the clarity
of the disclosures in the financial statements and the adequacy of
internal controls. Based on such review and discussion, the Committee
shall make a determination whether to recommend to the Town Council
the acceptance of the audited financial statements. In addition, the
Committee may make recommendations, if any, to the Town Bodies
regarding the following: i) Annual audited financial statements; ii)
§ 62-5 NEW CANAAN CODE § 62-5
C:360
Management letter submitted by the independent auditor; iii) Response
to the management letter submitted by Town CFO/BoE Finance Director;
and iv) Financial management policies. The Committee shall review
periodically with management and the independent auditors the effect
of new or proposed regulatory and accounting initiatives on the Town's
financial statements. [Amended 2-10-2016]
F. The Committee shall meet with the independent auditors to discuss any
problems or difficulties the auditors may have encountered in connection
with the annual audit or otherwise and any management letter provided
by the auditors and the Town's response to that letter. Such meeting
shall address any difficulties encountered in the course of the audit
work, including any restrictions on the scope of activities or access to
required information, any disagreements with management regarding
generally accepted accounting principles and other matters, material
adjustments to the financial statements recommended by the
independent auditors and adjustments that were proposed but passed
regardless of materiality.
§ 62-5 CHARTER § 62-5
C:361


ZONING 
REGULATIONS 

Effective: June 16, 2007 
As Amended, Effective December 13, 2018 

PREAMBLE 


These Zoning Regulations are intended to guide land use activities in New Canaan in ways that will main­tain and enhance community character and protect the public health, safety, and welfare. 
The Planning and Zoning Commission, in recognition of the need to balance numerous factors when es­tablishing or revising Zoning Regulations, has given careful consideration to the following: 
1. 	
Protecting natural resources; 

2. 	
Protecting existing properties and neighborhoods; 

3. 	
Allowing for new development that will be in keeping with overall community standards and meet community needs; 

4. 	
Establishing a positive approach to community development that will encourage appropriate de­velopment; 

5. 	
Promoting good civic design and arrangements; 

6. 	
Ensuring the reasonableness and legality of regulatory provisions; and 

7. 	
Furthering implementation of the New Canaan Plan of Conservation and Development. 


It is the general purpose and intent of these Regulations to foster the use and development of land in an orderly manner by both private and public interests with special consideration given to the appearance of the community as a result of such development. 
It is recognized that the appearance of property has a direct bearing on the economic value of such prop­erty and also the economic value of adjacent and surrounding property. The appearance of a single prop­erty affects not only surrounding property, but the cumulative effect is to enhance or diminish the beauty of the entire Town, and consequently the values of property within the Town. 
It is further recognized that the appearance of property not only has economic effects but also affects the general welfare, health, and safety of Town citizens. An aesthetically pleasing environment is a clean, healthy, and safe environment. 
These Regulations provide standards and procedures by which development of property within the Town may be reviewed and modified in order to enhance the aesthetic beauty of the Town, and consequently, the economic value of property and general welfare of the citizens. 
These Regulations are intended to be a dynamic document, not a static document. It is anticipated that these Regulations will be regularly reviewed and updated, as necessary, to anticipate and reflect the ever changing needs of the community and to guide land use activities in New Canaan in ways that will contin­ue to maintain and enhance community character and protect the public health, safety, and welfare. 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ARTICLE 1 -INTRODUCTION ......................................1 

Section 1.1. Authority ..................................................................................... 1 

Section 1.2. Purposes..................................................................................... 1 

Section 1.3. Jurisdiction................................................................................. 2 

Section 1.4. Zoning Districts.......................................................................... 2 

A. Districts and Boundaries ........................................................................2 

B. Boundary Interpretation..........................................................................2 

Section 1.5. Interpretation Of Regulations ................................................... 3 

A. Permitted Uses and Activities................................................................. 3 

B. Minimum Requirements .........................................................................3 

C. In The Event of Conflict..........................................................................3 

Section 1.6. Conformity Required ................................................................. 4 

A. Conformity Required ..............................................................................4 

B. Exceptions..............................................................................................4 

Section 1.7. Administrative Provisions......................................................... 6 

A. Severability.............................................................................................6 

B. When Effective.......................................................................................6 

ARTICLE 2 -DEFINITIONS...........................................7 

Section 2.1. Use Of Terms.............................................................................. 7 

A. Definitions to be Applied.........................................................................7 

B. Specific Terms........................................................................................7 

C. Terms Not Defined .................................................................................7 

Section 2.2. Defined Terms ............................................................................ 8 

ARTICLE 3 -RESIDENCE ZONES .............................42 

Section 3.1. Purposes................................................................................... 42 

Section 3.2. Permitted Principal Uses &  Structures ................................. 43 

A. Permitted Without Permit .....................................................................43 

B. Permitted by Zoning or Other Permit....................................................43 

C. Permitted by Special Permit................................................................. 43 

Section 3.3. Permitted Accessory Uses ...................................................... 47 

A. Permitted Without Permit .....................................................................47 

B. Permitted by Zoning or Other Permit....................................................48 

C. Permitted by Special Permit.................................................................50 


Section 3.4. Permitted Accessory  Structures ........................................... 51 

A. Permitted Without Permit .....................................................................51 

B. Permitted by Zoning or Other Permit....................................................51 

C. Permitted by Special Permit .................................................................53 


Section 3.5. Area and Dimensional  Requirements ................................... 54 

A. Minimum Lot Area ................................................................................54 

B. Maximum Density.................................................................................55 

C. Minimum Width and Shape ..................................................................56 

D. Maximum Building Coverage................................................................57 

E. Minimum Yard Setbacks.......................................................................58 

F. Height of Buildings and Walls...............................................................60 


Section 3.6. Special Provisions For  Residence Zones............................. 63 

A. Preservation of Modern Houses...........................................................63 

B. Flexibility for Open Space Provision .....................................................64 

C. Design Review......................................................................................65 

D. Driveways In Residence Zones............................................................65 


Section 3.7. Dimensional Exceptions ......................................................... 66 

A. Height Exceptions.................................................................................66 

B. Yard Exceptions ...................................................................................67 

C. Lot Width Exceptions............................................................................68 

D. Lot Area Exceptions .............................................................................69 

E. Exceptions for Building Coverage ........................................................69 

F. Maximum Density Exceptions...............................................................70 


ARTICLE 4 -BUSINESS ZONES................................71 

Section 4.1. General Purposes .................................................................... 71 

Section 4.2. Retail A Zone  (Village District)...............................................72 

A. Purpose................................................................................................72 

B. Design Review Authorized....................................................................72 

C. Uses Permitted with Site Plan Approval...............................................72 

D. Uses Requiring Special Permit.............................................................73 

E. Sidewalk Cafés.....................................................................................74 


Section 4.3. Retail B Zone  (Village District)............................................... 75 

A. Purpose................................................................................................75 

B. Design Review Authorized....................................................................75 

C. Uses Permitted with Site Plan Approval...............................................75 

D. Uses Requiring Special Permit.............................................................76 

E. Sidewalk Cafés.....................................................................................76 


Section 4.4. Business A Zone  (Village District)......................................... 77 

A. Purpose................................................................................................77 

B. Design Review Authorized....................................................................77 

C. Uses Permitted with Site Plan Approval...............................................77 

D. Uses Requiring Special Permit.............................................................77 

E. Sidewalk Cafés.....................................................................................78 


Section 4.5. Business B Zone  (Village District) ........................................ 78 

A. Purpose ................................................................................................78 

B. Design Review Authorized ...................................................................78 

C. Uses Permitted with Site Plan Approval ...............................................78 

D. Uses Requiring Special Permit.............................................................79 

E. Sidewalk Cafés.....................................................................................80 

Section 4.6. Business C Zone  (Village District)......................................... 81 

A. Purpose ................................................................................................81 

B. Design Review Authorized ...................................................................81 

C. Uses Permitted with Site Plan Approval ...............................................81 

D. Uses Requiring Special Permit.............................................................81 

Section 4.7. Business D Zone  (Village District)......................................... 81 

A. Purpose ................................................................................................81 

B. Design Review Authorized ...................................................................81 

C. Uses Permitted with Site Plan Approval ...............................................82 

D. Uses Requiring Special Permit.............................................................82 

E. Sidewalk Cafés.....................................................................................83 

Section 4.8. Area And Dimensional  Requirements ................................... 84 

A. Minimum Lot area.................................................................................84 

B. Minimum Frontage ...............................................................................84 

C. Minimum Front Yard Setback ...............................................................84 

D. Maximum Front Yard Setback..............................................................85 

E. Building Lines .......................................................................................85 

F. Minimum Side/Rear Yard Setbacks......................................................85 

G. Minimum Distance between Buildings on the Same Lot ......................86 

H. Maximum Building Height.....................................................................86 

I. Minimum Building Height......................................................................88 

J. Maximum Building Wall Length ............................................................88 

K. Size of Second Floor............................................................................88 

L. Maximum Floor Area Ratio...................................................................89 

Section 4.9. Special Provisions For  Business Zones............................... 90 

A. Height Exceptions for Structures ..........................................................90 

B. Height Exceptions for Roof-Top Appurtenances ..................................90 

C. Driveways and Accessways ................................................................. 90 

D. Yard Exceptions ...................................................................................91 

E. Floor Area Ratio Exceptions................................................................. 92 

ARTICLE 5 -SPECIAL ZONES...................................93 

Section 5.1. Waveny Zone ............................................................................ 93 

A. Purposes..............................................................................................93 

B. Uses Permitted by Right.......................................................................93 

C. Uses Permitted in Accordance with Guidelines....................................93 

D. Use Guidelines .....................................................................................93 

E. Uses Permitted by Special Permit........................................................94 

F. Dimensional Standards........................................................................94 

G. Special Setback Standards..................................................................94 

H. Temporary Signage Limitations............................................................95 

I. Lighting Limitations...............................................................................95 

Section 5.2. Park, Recreation &  Open Space Zone................................... 96 

A. Purposes..............................................................................................96 

B. Uses Permitted by Right.......................................................................96 

C. Uses Permitted by Special Permit........................................................96 

D. Dimensional Standards........................................................................96 

Section 5.3. Multi-family Zone ..................................................................... 97 

A. Purposes ..............................................................................................97 

B. Permitted by Zoning or Other Permit....................................................97 

C. Permitted by Special Permit .................................................................97 

D. Dimensional Standards ........................................................................98 

E. Specific Lot-Related Standards ............................................................99 

F. Specific Building-Related Standards....................................................99 


Section 5.4. Apartment Zone...................................................................... 100 

A. Purposes ............................................................................................100 

B. Permitted By Zoning or Other Permit .................................................100 

C. Permitted By Special Permit...............................................................100 

D. Dimensional Standards ......................................................................101 

E. Specific Lot-Related Standards ..........................................................101 

F. Specific Building-Related Standards..................................................102 

G. Specific Parking-Related Standards...................................................102 

H. Other Standards.................................................................................103 


Section 5.5. Floodplain Overlay Zone ....................................................... 104 

A. Purpose..............................................................................................104 

B. Standards...........................................................................................104 


Section 5.6. Aquifer Protection  Overlay Zone ......................................... 104 

A. Purpose..............................................................................................104 

B. Standards...........................................................................................104 


Section 5.7. MILLPORT HOUSING ZONE.................................................. 104 

A. Purpose..............................................................................................104 

B. Properties Eligible for Rezoning to Millport Housing Zone .................104 

C. Uses Permitted by Site Plan Approval................................................104 

D. Accessory Uses Permitted by Site Plan Approval..............................105 

E. Dimensional Standards ......................................................................105 

F. Site Plan Standards............................................................................105 

G. Standards and Regulations for Household Income and Sale / Resale Price Limitations ...............................................................................................107 
H. Affordable Apartment Home Requirements........................................107 

I. Conflicts..............................................................................................108 

J. Submission Requirements..................................................................108 


Section 5.8. PEDESTRIAN ORIENTED MULTI-Family zone (pomz) ....... 109 

A. Purpose..............................................................................................109 

B. Properties Eligible for rezoning to POMZ Zone ..................................109 

C. Uses Permitted by Special Permit Approval.......................................110 

D. Accessory Uses Permitted by Special Permit ....................................110 

E. Dimensional Standards ......................................................................110 

F. Specific Lot-Related Standards ..........................................................111 

G. Specific Parking-Related Standards...................................................111 

H. Site Plan and Other Standards...........................................................111 

I. Submission and other Approval Requirements ..................................112 

J. Design Review....................................................................................112 


Section 5.9. cANAAN PARISH HOUSING ZONE ....................................... 115 

ARTICLE 6 -BASICSTANDARDS...........................119 

Section 6.1. Landscaping...........................................................................119 

A. Applicability ........................................................................................119 

B. Overall Landscaping Standards .........................................................119 

C. Perimeter Landscaping Standards.....................................................120 

D. Parking Area Landscaping Standards................................................120 

E. Maintenance.......................................................................................121 

F. Landscaping Materials .......................................................................121 

G. Bonding..............................................................................................121 

H. Modification of Requirements.............................................................121 

Section 6.2. Parking and Loading.............................................................. 122 

A. Purpose ..............................................................................................122 

B. Applicability ........................................................................................122 

C. Minimum Amount of Parking and Loading Facilities ..........................122 

D. Handicapped Parking Facilities ..........................................................125 

E. Reduction of Parking Facilities ...........................................................126 

F. Location of Parking and Loading Facilities.........................................128 

G. Size of Parking and Loading Facilities ...............................................129 

H. Specifications for Parking and Loading Facilities...............................130 

I. Access Drives.....................................................................................130 

J. Existing Off-Street Parking and Loading Facilities .............................130 

K. Policing of Parking Spaces................................................................. 131 

Section 6.3. Signs........................................................................................ 132 

A. Purpose ..............................................................................................132 

B. Applicability ........................................................................................132 

C. Signs Permitted In Residential Zones ................................................132 

D. Signs Permitted In Business Zones ...................................................133 

E. Sign Illumination .................................................................................134 

F. Prohibited Signs.................................................................................134 

G. Fees ...................................................................................................134 

H. Applications ........................................................................................134 

Section 6.4. Grading, Drainage, and  Tree Removal................................135 

A. Purposes............................................................................................135 

B. Removal of Trees or Vegetative Ground Cover ................................. 135 

C. Applicability ........................................................................................135 

D. Other Approvals May Be Required.....................................................135 

E. Allowed Without Permit......................................................................136 

F. Permitted by Zoning or Other Permit..................................................136 

G. Permitted by Special Permit...............................................................136 

H. Bonding and As-Built Plan..................................................................137 

I. Permit Standards and Conditions.......................................................137 

J. Drainage Standards ...........................................................................139 

Section 6.5. Fences And Walls................................................................... 140 

A. Purposes............................................................................................140 

B. Retaining Walls..................................................................................140 

C. Fences and Freestanding Walls.........................................................141 

Section 6.6. Import / Export of  Earth Materials ....................................... 143 

A. Purposes............................................................................................143 

B. Permitted by Right..............................................................................143 

C. Permitted by the Zoning Inspector .....................................................143 

D. Permitted by the Commission ............................................................143 

Section 6.7. Erosion and Sedimentation  Control.................................... 144 

A. Purpose ..............................................................................................144 

B. Applicability ........................................................................................144 

C. Exemptions.........................................................................................144 

D. Minimum Acceptable Standards.........................................................144 

E. Issuance or Denial of Certification......................................................145 

F. Conditions Relating to Soil Erosion and Sediment Control ................145 

G. Inspection...........................................................................................145 


Section 6.8. Traffic Management ...............................................................146 

A. Purpose..............................................................................................146 

B. Applicability.........................................................................................146 

C. Traffic Impact Analysis .......................................................................146 

D. Review Considerations.......................................................................146 


Section 6.9. Obstructions at Intersections ............................................... 147 

A. Visibility at Intersections.....................................................................147 

B. Driveway Obstructions........................................................................147 


Section 6.10. Sidewalks................................................................................ 148 

Section 6.11. Outdoor Lighting.................................................................... 149 

A. Purpose..............................................................................................149 

B. Standards...........................................................................................149 

C. Exemptions and Modifications............................................................151 


Section 6.12. Design Review........................................................................ 152 

A. Purpose..............................................................................................152 

B. Applicability.........................................................................................152 

C. Procedure...........................................................................................152 

D. Design Guidelines ..............................................................................152 

E. Additional Village District Considerations ...........................................154 


ARTICLE 7 -SPECIAL PROVISIONS.......................156 

Section 7.1. Nonconforming Conditions .................................................. 156 

A. Nonconforming Uses ..........................................................................156 

B. Nonconforming Structures..................................................................157 

C. Nonconforming Parcels......................................................................157 


Section 7.2. Temporary and Conditional  Permits ................................... 158 

Section 7.3. Land In Two Municipalities ................................................... 158 

Section 7.4. Trailers .................................................................................... 158 

Section 7.5. Sale of Alcoholic Liquor ........................................................ 158 

Section 7.6. Affordable Housing................................................................159 

A. Inclusionary Zoning Fee.....................................................................159 

B. Affordable Housing Developments.....................................................159 


Section 7.7. Preservation of Historic  Structures .................................... 160 

A. Purpose..............................................................................................160 

B. Historic Structure Designation Criteria ...............................................160 

C. Application Requirements...................................................................160 

D. Considerations....................................................................................161 


E. Limitations..........................................................................................162 

Section 7.8. Telecommunication Facilities............................................... 163 

A. Purpose ..............................................................................................163 

B. Antennae Permitted Without Zoning Permit.......................................163 

C. Antennae Permitted by Zoning or Other Permit (Staff).......................163 

D. Antennae Permitted by Site Plan Approval (PZC)..............................164 

E. Antennae Permitted by Special Permit (PZC)....................................164 

F. Antennae Regulated By State Authorities (State) ..............................165 

G. Standards ...........................................................................................166 

H. Application Requirements / Requests................................................170 

ARTICLE 8 -PROCEDURES ....................................175 

Section 8.1. General Procedures ............................................................... 175 

A. Application Submittal Requirements ..................................................175 

B. Date of Receipt...................................................................................175 

C. Incomplete Applications .....................................................................175 

D. Sequence of Hearings........................................................................175 

E. Consultations......................................................................................176 

F. Notice by Newspaper .........................................................................176 

G. Notification of Property Owners..........................................................176 

H. Notification of Abutting Municipalities.................................................177 

I. Notification of Water Companies........................................................177 

J. Beneficiaries of a Trust.......................................................................177 

K. Bonds................................................................................................. 178 

Section 8.2. Commission Procedures....................................................... 179 

A. Site Plan Application ..........................................................................179 

B. Special Permit Application..................................................................183 

C. Regulation Amendment Application ...................................................189 

D. Zone Change Application ...................................................................192 

E. Change in Use Application ................................................................. 195 

F. Concept Plan Submission..................................................................195 

G. Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plan ............................................195 

Section 8.3. Zoning Board of Appeals  Procedures................................. 196 

A. General Provisions.............................................................................196 

B. Appeal of Order..................................................................................198 

C. Variance.............................................................................................201 

Section 8.4. Staff Procedures .................................................................... 205 

A. Zoning Permit .....................................................................................205 

Section 8.5. Enforcement ........................................................................... 207 

A. Enforcement Authority........................................................................207 

B. Inspections.........................................................................................208 

C. Violations............................................................................................208 

APPENDICES 

ARTICLE 1 -INTRODUCTION 

SECTION 1.1. AUTHORITY 

These Regulations are adopted under the authority of Chapter 124 of the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut, as amended. 
These Regulations are adopted for the purposes of: 
SECTION 1.2. PURPOSES 

a.  Guiding the future growth and development of the Town in accordance with the Plan of Conservation and Development.  
b.  Providing adequate light, air and privacy; securing safety from fire and other danger; and preventing overcrowding of the land and undue concentration of population.  
c.  Protecting the character and the historic, social and economic stability of all parts of the Town and ensuring that development is orderly and beneficial.  
d.  Protecting and conserving the value of land and buildings appropriate to the various zones established by these Regulations and throughout the Town.  
e.  Bringing about the gradual conformity of the uses of land and buildings to the Comprehensive Zoning Plan set forth in these Regulations and minimizing conflicts among the uses of the land and buildings.  
f.  Promoting the most beneficial relationship between the uses of land and buildings and the circulation of traffic throughout the Town, having particular regard for the avoidance of congestion in the streets and the provision of safe and convenient vehicular and pedestrian circulation appropriate to the various uses of land and buildings throughout the Town.  
g.  Aiding in providing a guide for public policy and action in the efficient provi­sion of public facilities and services and for private enterprise in building de­velopment, investment, and other economic activity relating to uses of land and buildings throughout the Town.  
h.  Controlling development to an amount commensurate with the capacity of the land and the availability and capacity of public facilities and services, thereby facilitating adequate provision for vehicular and pedestrian circulation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other public requirements.  
i.  Conserving and protecting the natural resources of the Town, especially groundwater and drinking water, in recognition of their importance to the health, safety and general welfare of New Canaan and its larger environs.  
j.  Assuring that proper provision is made for sedimentation control and the con­trol of erosion caused by wind or water for any project for which a permit is required or sought from the Town.  
k.  Encouraging the development of housing opportunities, including opportuni­ties for multi-family dwellings, consistent with soil types, terrain and infrastruc­ture capacity, which will promote housing choice and economic diversity in housing, including housing for both low and moderate income households, and encouraging the development of housing which will meet identified hous­ing needs.  

1 


Section 1.3 
SECTION 1.3. JURISDICTION 
These Regulations apply to all areas within the Town of New Canaan and to the use to which any area and any and all buildings or structures may be devoted. 
SECTION 1.4. ZONING DISTRICTS 
A. Districts and Boundaries 
1. 	
To accomplish the purpose of these Regulations, the Town of New Canaan shall be and is divided into different classes of districts or zones as enumer­ated in these Regulations. 

2. 	
The boundaries of zoning districts shall be as shown on the official Zoning Map, as may be amended, which is on file in the office of the Planning and Zoning Commission. 


B. Boundary Interpretation 
If not clearly delineated on the Zoning Map, zone district boundaries shall be con­strued in the following sequence: 
1. 	
Following the center line of a street, railroad, right-of-way, or easement. 

2. 	
Following lot lines, such being lines of record at the time of adoption of these Regulations or relevant amendments hereto. 

3. 	
Where zone boundaries are set back from street lines, they shall be consid­ered running generally parallel thereto, at distances indicated as follows: 

4. 	
Following the lines of a particular physical feature including brooks, streams, floodplains, or steep slopes. 

5. 	
In case of uncertainty regarding zone boundaries on the Zoning Map, the zone boundary shall be determined by the Commission. 


Zone  Distance (feet)  
Four Acre Residence Zone  500  
Two Acre Residence Zone  400  
One Acre Residence Zone  300  
One-Half Acre Residence Zone  200  
One-Third Acre Residence Zone  150  
A Residence Zone  100  
B Residence Zone  100  
Retail A Zone  150  
Retail B Zone  150  
Business A Zone  150  
Business B Zone  150  
Business C Zone  150  

SECTION 1.5. INTERPRETATION OF REGULATIONS 
A. Permitted Uses and Activities 
1. 	
Any principal use of land, buildings or structures not expressly permitted by these Regulations in the various zoning districts is prohibited.  

2. 	
Any activity not expressly permitted in the Regulations is prohibited. 

3. 	
For a principal use permitted by these Regulations, accessory uses which are customarily incidental and are actually subordinate thereto are permitted. 

4. 	
In the event of uncertainty as to whether a use or activity is permitted, the Commission shall be responsible for interpreting these Regulations. 


B. Minimum Requirements 
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of these Regulations shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safe­ty, comfort, convenience and general welfare, unless the context clearly indicates that such provision is intended to be a maximum limitation. 
C. In The Event of Conflict 
Where any conflict arises between the provisions of these Regulations and any other law, ordinance, easement, covenant, rule, regulation, or permit, the provi­sion that imposes the highest standard or establishes the greatest restriction up­on the use of land, buildings or structures shall control. 
3 


Section 1.6 
SECTION 1.6. 	CONFORMITY REQUIRED 
A. Conformity Required 
Except as may be provided in Subsection 1.6.B: 
1. 	
No building, structure or land shall be used or occupied except in conformity with these Regulations for the zone in which the land, building, or structure is located. 

2. 	
No building or other structure or part thereof shall be erected, moved, re­placed, reconstructed, extended, enlarged, or altered except in conformity with these Regulations for the zone in which the building, structure, or land is located. 

3. 	
No land shall be sold or divided in a manner which results in a use of all or a part thereof ceasing to conform to these Regulations. 

4. 	
No land shall be sold or divided in a manner which results in a dimensional or any other standard that does not conform to the requirements of these Regu­lations. 

5. 	
No lot shall be diminished in area except in conformity with the provisions of these Regulations.  

6. 	
No yard, setback, or other minimum requirement shall be reduced except in conformity with the provisions of these Regulations.  

7. 	
No height, building coverage, or other maximum requirement shall be in­creased except in conformity with the provisions of these Regulations.  


B. Exceptions 
1. 	The following types of activities shall not, to the extent provided below, be required to: 
a. 	
make any changes in the plans, construction, or designated use of any such building or structure authorized, or 

b. 	
conform with any change in the Regulations or the boundaries of zoning districts taking effect during the indicated period of exception. 



2. 	Certificate of Occupancy Applied For -An application for a Certificate of Occupancy for a building, structure, use, or activity was filed with the Building Official prior to the effective date of any regulation change or zoning district change. 
Period of Exception 	From the date the application for the Certificate of Occupancy was submitted until the Certificate of Oc­cupancy is issued or the application is denied for non-compliance with the Zoning Regulations in effect on the date the Certificate of Occupancy was applied for 
What Excepted 	The improvements authorized by the original Building Permit and included in the application for the Certifi­cate of Occupancy 
Applicable Standard 	The Zoning Regulations in effect on the date the Certificate of Occupancy was applied for 

3. 	Under Construction -A building or structure has a valid Building Permit is­sued by the Building Official prior to the effective date of any regulation change or zoning district change. 
Period of Exception 	From the date the Building Permit was applied for and subsequently issued until the Certificate of Oc­cupancy is issued or the Building Permit lapses 
What Excepted 	The improvements authorized by the valid Building Permit 
Applicable Standard 	The Zoning Regulations in effect on the date the val­id Building Permit was applied for 
4. 	Building Permit Applied For -An application for a Building Permit was filed with the Building Official prior to the effective date of any regulation change or zoning district change. 
Period of Exception 	From the date the Building Permit was applied for until the Certificate of Occupancy is issued, the Building Permit lapses, or the permit application is denied for non-compliance with the Zoning Regula­tions in effect on the date the Building Permit was applied for 
What Excepted 	The improvements shown on the application for the Building Permit 
Applicable Standard 	The Zoning Regulations in effect on the date the Building Permit was applied for 
5. 	Zoning Application Approved by the Commission or Board of Appeals ­A building, structure, use, or activity was approved by the Commission or Board prior to the effective date of any regulation change or zoning district change. 
Period of Exception 	From the date the zoning application was submitted to, and subsequently approved by, the Commission or Board until the Certificate of Occupancy is issued, the approval is otherwise implemented, or the time period for completion of improvements, if applicable, as provided in CGS 8-3 has elapsed 
What Excepted 	The improvements shown on the plan(s) submitted to the Commission or Board and subsequently ap­proved 
Applicable Standard 	The Zoning Regulations in effect on the date the ap­plication was submitted to the Commission or Board 
5 


Section 1.7 
6. 	
Subdivision Application Approved by the Commission -A subdivision or resubdivision plan was approved by the Commission prior to the effective date of any regulation change or zoning district change and the subdivision plan was filed or recorded with the Town Clerk. 

7. 	
Application Filed with the Commission or Board -An application was filed with the Commission or the Board prior to the effective date of any regulation change or zoning district change and subsequently approved. 


Period of Exception  For each lot in the subdivision that was vacant, from the date the subdivision application was submitted to, and subsequently approved by, the Commission until the date a Building Permit is issued with respect to that lot and a foundation has been completed in accordance with such Building Permit  
What Excepted  The improvements authorized by the Building Permit  
Applicable Standard  The Zoning Regulations in effect on the date the subdivision application was submitted to the Com­mission and subsequently approved  

Period of Exception 	From the date the application was submitted to the Commission or Board until the Certificate of Occu­pancy is issued, the Building Permit lapses, the time period for completion of improvements, if applicable, as provided in CGS 8-3 has elapsed, or the applica­tion is denied for non-compliance with the Zoning Regulations in effect on the date the application was submitted 
What Excepted 	The improvements shown on the application submit­ted to the Commission or Board 
Applicable Standard 	The Zoning Regulations in effect on the date the ap­plication was submitted to the Commission or Board 

SECTION 1.7. 	ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS 
A. Severability 
Should any provision of these Regulations be declared unconstitutional or beyond the powers granted to the Commission by law, such action shall not affect the validity of any other provision or part hereof. 
B. When Effective 
These Regulations and any amendments hereto shall be effective from and after the effective date established by the Commission. 
ARTICLE 2 -DEFINITIONS 
SECTION 2.1. USE OF TERMS 
A. Definitions to be Applied 
In the interpretation and enforcement of these Regulations, the words and phrases set forth in these Regulations shall be construed as defined in this Arti­cle, unless otherwise clearly qualified by their context. 
B. Specific Terms 
In the interpretation and enforcement of these Regulations, certain words con­tained herein shall be interpreted as follows: 
1. 	
The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary.  

2. 	
The word "may" is permissive. 

3. 	
When not inconsistent with the context: 

a. 	
Words in the present tense include the future and vice-versa. 

b. 	
Words in the singular include the plural and vice-versa. 

c. 	
Words in the masculine include the feminine and neuter and vice-versa. 



4. 	
The words "occupied" or "used" include the words "designed, arranged or intended to be occupied or used." 

5. 	
The words "zone", "zoning district", and "district" have the same meaning. 

6. 	
The word "person" also includes a partnership, association, trust, corpo­ration or other legal entity. 

7. 	
“Filed” shall mean “submitted” and vice-versa. 


C. Terms Not Defined 
In the interpretation and enforcement of these Regulations, words not defined in this Article shall be interpreted by the Commission after consulting one or more of the following: 
1. 	
The State Building Code, as amended. 

2. 	
The Connecticut General Statutes, as amended. 

3. 	
The Illustrated Book of Development Definitions (Rutgers University, Center for Urban Policy Research (Piscataway, NJ), as amended. 

4. 	
Black's Law Dictionary. 

5. 	
A comprehensive general dictionary. 


7 


Section 2.2 
SECTION 2.2. DEFINED TERMS 
ACCESSORY – Subordinate and customarily incidental to a principal building, structure, or use on the same property. 
ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT – See “Dwelling Unit, Accessory”. 
ACCESSORY BUILDING --See “Building, Accessory”. 
ACCESSWAY – Land containing a driveway intended to provide access to a rear lot or to land(s) of others.  
For lots established prior to June 18, 2005, the extent of an accessway shall be that area labeled as an accessway and shown on a map which has been approved by the Commission and is on file in the land records provided that the Commission may require legal documentation establishing the accessway and its location.  
In all other situations, the extent of an accessway shall be that area beginning at the public street providing access and ending at the point where fifty per­cent (50%) of the required lot width is obtained, or that area as approved by the Commission. 


AFFORDABLE HOUSING -A single-family dwelling, a unit in a multi-family build­ing or complex, an accessory dwelling unit, or a residential unit in a mixed-use building or complex for which, as defined in CGS 8-39a, persons and families pay thirty per cent or less of their annual income, where such income is less than or equal to the area median income (see definition). 
AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT -a housing development which: 
1. 	
contains or will contain one or more units of affordable housing, or 

2. 	
is or will be a set-aside development (see definition), or 

3. 	
is receiving, or will receive, financial assistance under any governmental program for the construction or substantial rehabilitation of low and mod­erate income housing, or 

4. 	
is, or will be, occupied by persons receiving rental assistance under chapter 319uu or Section 1437f of Title 42 of the United States Code. 


ALTER --To change or rearrange the use, function, intended use, structural parts or the existing facilities of a building, structure or use of land. 
ANTENNA -any device that transmits or receives electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analog signals, radio frequencies (excluding radar signals), wireless telecommunications signals or other electromagnetic communication signals.   
ANTENNA HEIGHT -See “Height, Antenna”. 
ANTENNA MOUNT -The structure or surface upon which telecommunications antennas are mounted, including building roof mounts, building side mounts, ground mounted tower and structure mounted. 
ANTENNA TOWER -Any structure, including a tower or building, and any sup­port appurtenant thereto that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas. 
ARTICLE – A separate part of these Zoning Regulations. See “Chapter” and “Section”. 
ATTIC --The space between the roof rafters and the ceiling beams or floor joists below. See definition of “Story”. 
AVERAGE GRADE --See “Grade, Average”. 
9 


Section 2.2 
BASEMENT --That part of a building that is partly below and partly above ground and having one-half (1/2) or more of its total height above average grade. 
See "Story”, “Cellar", and “Grade, Average.” 


BED & BREAKFAST --An owner-occupied residence that provides overnight accommodations in six (6) or fewer rooms and a morning meal to guests for compensation and where stays are limited to thirty (30) days or less. 
BEDROOM --A room which is designated and primarily used for sleeping and including, in the case of any multi-family development, libraries, dens, studi­os, studies, lofts and other similar spaces. 
BOARD --The Zoning Board of Appeals. 
BREEZEWAY --A roofed passageway, which is open-sided or screened, con­necting a building or structure to another building or structure. 
BUFFER, BUFFER AREA or BUFFER STRIP --A strip of land along a property line or zone boundary which is free of any building or use other than natural woody growth, landscaping, fencing or screening and which provides visual and noise separation. 
BUILDABLE LAND --Land area of a lot or parcel, exclusive of any area classi­fied as wetlands, watercourses, 100-year floodplain, or containing pre­development slopes greater than twenty-five (25) percent as defined by a ten 
(10) foot change of grade in a horizontal distance of less than forty (40) feet. 
BUILDING --Any structure having a roof and intended for the shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, animals, goods, or personal possessions. 
BUILDING, ACCESSORY --A building, the use of which is subordinate and customarily incidental to that of the principal building on the same lot. A building shall be considered an accessory building unless it shares a common wall or a common roof with the principal building (a breezeway roof shall not be considered a common roof). 
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL --A building in which is conducted the main or prin­cipal use of the lot on which said building is situated. 
BUILDING CODE --Regulations that govern building design, construction, and maintenance and require Building Permits, electrical permits, mechanical permits, plumbing permits, Certificates of Occupancy, and other approvals to do work pertaining to building construction, improvement, and occupancy in New Canaan. 
August 1, 2013 
11 


Section 2.2 
BUILDING COVERAGE – As provided below, the horizontal area covered by the indicated buildings and other structures on the lot: 
Building coverage includes: Building coverage excludes: 
. 	The ground area of all buildings on . Exterior stairs the lot (buildings, garages, outbuild-. Basement hatchway doors ings, etc.) generally as measured by the exterior walls or columns 
. 	That portion of a roof overhang, gutter, or leader located more than 24 inches from the building 
. 	That portion of a bow or bay win­dow projecting more than 24 inches 
. 	That portion of a chimney projecting more than 24 inches 
. 	That portion of a roof overhang, gutter, or leader located no more than 24 inches from the building 
. 	That portion of bow or bay window projecting no more than 24 inches 
. 	That portion of a chimney projecting no more than 24 inches 

. 	The ground area of all structures on the lot, generally as measured by the exterior walls or columns, ex­cept those specifically excluded in this definition 
Measurement of Eave 	Measurement of Eave 


Continued on next page 

12 

Section 2.2  
Continued from previous page  
Building coverage includes:  Building coverage excludes: . Driveways  

. 	Covered walkways and breezeways . Uncovered walkways generally as measured by the exte-. Trellis, pergola, or other similar rior walls or columns structure with no roof 
. Carports . Porte cochere 
Definitions 

. Patios 

. 	That portion of a deck or terrace, generally as measured by the area of the floor or decking, that: . has the surface elevated more 
than 36 inches above finished 
grade, or . is not attached to a building, or . is attached to a building and 
extends more than 10 feet from the building, or 
. 	exceeds 40 percent of the pe­rimeter of the building meas­ured at the points of attach­ment 
. That portion of a deck or terrace that: . has the surface elevated no more than 36 inches above fin­ished grade+o, and extends no more than 10 feet from, the building, and 
. 	does not exceed 40 percent of the perimeter of the building measured at the points of at­tachment 

. 	That portion of a porch attached to a building generally as measured by the area of the floor or decking, that: 
. 	has the porch surface elevated more than 36 inches above fin­ished grade, or 
. 	extends more than 10 feet from the building, or 
. 	exceeds 40 percent of the pe­rimeter of the building meas­ured at the points of attach­ment 
. 	That portion of a porch attached to a building that: 
. 	has the porch surface elevated no more than 36 inches above finished grade, and 
. 	extends no more than 10 feet from the building, and 
. 	does not exceed 40 percent of the perimeter of the building measured at the points of at­tachment 

.  Any above ground pool more than 400 square feet in area  In-ground pools . Above ground pools no more than 400 square feet in area  
.  Paddle tennis courts  .  Tennis courts, sports courts, or other on-grade recreation surfaces  

Continued on next page 
April 1, 2014 
13 


Section 2.2 
Continued from previous page 


Building coverage includes: Building coverage excludes: 
. 	Minor detached accessory structure if: . the second or greater on a lot, 
or . on a permanent foundation, or . greater than 200 square feet in 
area. 
. 	One minor detached accessory structure (less than 200 SF in area) not situated on a permanent foun­dation. 
. 	Small accessory or ornamental features such as a bird bath, trellis, well casing, etc. 

.  Any dish antenna mounted off the ground on a base or riser on the ground  .  Any dish antenna mounted on a building or structure  
.  That portion of an emergency gen­erator or HVAC equipment located more than ten (10) feet from the principal structure  .  That portion of an emergency gen­erator or HVAC equipment located within ten (10) feet of the principal structure  
.  Transformers or signal boxes on private property  

. Signs . Fences . Freestanding walls . Retaining walls 

BUILDING HEIGHT -See “Height, Building”. 
BUILDING LINE --A line, established by the Commission or other competent municipal authority, in back of the street line defining an area between said lines upon which buildings or structures are regulated or prohibited. 
14 

BUILDING WING (or Distinct Portion) --A portion of a building (defined by the footprint or outline), which does not share a roof plane with another portion of the same building and where the roof ridge is offset from another roof ridge. 
Buildings Without A Building Wing Buildings With A Building Wing 
or Distinct Portion or Distinct Portion 


CARPORT --A roofed structure, generally located in a parking area, providing space for the parking of motor vehicles, usually attached to a structure and may be supported by columns.  
CELLAR --That part of a building that is partly below and partly above ground and having more than one-half (1/2) of its height below average grade. See "Story”, “Basement", and “Grade, Average.” 
CERTIFICATION – With regard to a soil erosion and sediment control plan, a signed, written approval by the Commission or its designated agent that a soil erosion and sediment control plan complies with applicable requirements of these Regulations. 
CGS – The Connecticut General Statutes, as amended. 
CHAPTER – The entire Zoning Regulations.  See “Article”. 
CHURCH – See “Religious Institution”. 
CLUB --A voluntary or corporate association whose objects, purposes and pur­suits are social, fraternal, religious, political, educational, recreational or charitable, operating without profit or division of any revenues to its members, except as reasonable compensation for special services actually rendered, and devoting all net revenues received to supporting its purposes and objects or to eleemosynary uses. 
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE --See “Vehicle, Commercial”. 
COMMISSION --The New Canaan Planning and Zoning Commission. 
April 1, 2014 
15 


Section 2.2 
COMPREHENSIVE ZONING PLAN --These Regulations and the accompanying map(s) and schedules which address the use of all areas in the Town of New Canaan. 
CONSERVATION RESTRICTION --An encumbrance on real property filed on the land records of the Town for the protection and permanent preservation of fragile, vulnerable or valuable areas such as natural features, open space, natural habitats, buffer zones, scenic areas, historic sites, riding and walking trails, and land devoted to other similar purposes. 
CONVALESCENT HOME --A facility that provides nursing services and custodial care for compensation on a 24-hour basis for three or more unrelated individ­uals who for reasons of illness, physical infirmity, or advanced age require such services. 
CORNER LOT --See “Lot, Corner”. 
COVERAGE, BUILDING --See “Building Coverage”. 
CRAFTSPERSON --An individual having creative skills in manufacturing or ar­rangement of materials, resulting in a finished product or commodity such as wearing apparel, home decorations, jewelry, toys, furniture, dried flowers, or similar products.  
CRAFTSPERSON SHOP --An establishment primarily engaged in the manufac­turing, fabrication, or assembling of wearing apparel, home decorations, jew­elry, toys, furniture, dried flowers, or similar products.  
CURB CUT --The opening along the curb line at which point vehicles may enter or leave the roadway. 
CURB LEVEL --The permanently established grade of the sidewalk along the front of a lot based on a height of six (6) inches above the average street lev­el at the gutter line in front of a lot, or along both fronts in the case of a corner lot. 
DATE OF APPROVAL – The date an application is approved: . by affirmative action of the Commission or Board under any provision of these Regulations or, . by conclusion of any appeal which results in a judgment approving or af­firming approval of the application, or . by reason of failure of the Commission to act within the statutory timeframe in the case of a Site Plan application. 
DAY CARE – The care of people on a regularly recurring but part-time basis in a place other than the person’s own dwelling unit. 
DAY CARE CENTER – A facility which offers or provides a program of sup­plementary day care to more than twelve (12) related or unrelated people. 
DAY CARE HOME, FAMILY– Day care provided in a private family home for not more than six (6) people and where the principal provider of the ser­vices resides on the premises. 
August 1, 2013 

DAY CARE HOME, GROUP– Day care provided in a private family home for more than six (6) but not more than twelve (12) people on a part-time, but regu­larly recurring, basis and where the principal provider of the services resides on the premises. 
DECK --A roof-less structure or portion of a structure which is usually construct­ed of wood with structural supports which hold the walking surface off the ground. 
DEPOSIT --With respect to the movement of earth material, the placement of earth material on land which includes, but shall not be limited to, fill, grade, dump, place, discharge, or emit. 
DEVELOPMENT --Any construction or grading activities to improved or unim­proved real estate. 
DISTURBED AREA --An area where the ground cover is destroyed, removed, or changed, leaving the land subject to potential accelerated erosion. 
DORMER --A projection from a sloping roof, usually containing a window or a ventilating louver, which is clearly subordinate in area and volume to the slop­ing roof and does not exceed 50% of the linear distance of the sloping roof and does not exceed 50% of the linear distance of the sloping roof. 
DRAINAGE --The controlled or uncontrolled removal or discharge of surface or ground water from land by drains, grading or other means which may include runoff controls to minimize erosion, reduce suspended solids and maximize groundwater recharge during and after construction or development. 
DRIVEWAY – An area primarily on private property used by vehicles to access or exit a property. 
DWELLING --A structure maintained for human habitation erected on a closed solid foundation, equipped with at least one customary form of heating appa­ratus and constructed with ceilings and walls finished in some acceptable manner to give proper insulation and to be capable of maintaining a healthful interior room temperature of sixty-eight degrees Fahrenheit (68° F.) and healthful ventilation when the outside temperature is zero. 
DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY --A building arranged, intended or designed to be occupied by three (3) or more families living independently of each other and doing their cooking upon the premises, or by four (4) or more unrelated individuals living independently. 
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY --A building arranged, intended or designed to be occupied by one family. 
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY --A building arranged, intended or designed to be occupied by two (2) families living independently of each other and do­ing their cooking upon the premises. 
DWELLING UNIT --A building or part thereof, providing provisions for cook­ing and related housekeeping facilities for one family. 
DWELLING UNIT, ACCESSORY – A secondary dwelling unit on a sin­gle-family residential property which is clearly accessory to the single-family dwelling and is a complete independent living facility with pro­visions within the unit for cooking, eating, sanitation, and sleeping. 
August 1, 2013 
17 

Section 2.2 
EARTH --Includes, in addition to earth as commonly understood, soil, loam, sand, gravel, rock, stone, clay or any other material of which the ground is composed. 
EAVE --The portion of a roof overhanging the wall of a building. 
EFFECTIVE DATE -In the case of a zone change application or a regulation amendment application, the date specified by the Commission and published in the legal notice of the decision. 
ELEEMOSYNARY --Organized and operated for the purpose of providing a pub­lic service or activity without profit. 
EMERGENCY SERVICES COMMUNICATIONS -Communications service and equipment needed for local police, fire, or ambulance services. 
ENCROACHMENT --Any obstruction or illegal or unauthorized intrusion in a de­lineated area (such as property line encroachment or setback encroach­ment). 
EROSION --The process of wearing away and removal of the earth’s surface by natural agents including weather, running water, waves, currents, ice, wind or gravity. 
EXCAVATION --The digging out, extraction, regrading or removal of earth, whether exposed or covered by water, so as to alter its pre-existing contour or its natural contour. 
FAA -The Federal Aviation Administration. 
FACADE --The face of any exterior wall of a building exposed to public view. 
FAMILY --Any number of individuals related by blood, legal adoption, or marriage and up to two additional unrelated individuals living and cooking together on the premises as a single housekeeping unit, as distinguished from a group occupying a boarding or rooming house or hotel. 
FAMILY DAY CARE HOME– See “Day Care Home, Family”. 
FARMING --The use of any tract of land or building, either as a principal use or an accessory use as outlined in §CGS 1-1 (q), except that gardens incidental to the dwelling on the premises shall not constitute a farm. 
FCC -The Federal Communications Commission. 
FENCE --A barrier of any material or combination of materials, other than trees or other living plant material, erected to enclose, separate, screen or buffer areas of land. 
FLOOD --A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land from the overflow of water or the unusual and rapid accu­mulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
August 1, 2013 

FLOODPLAIN OVERLAY ZONE – Any area designated by the Federal Emer­gency Management Agency in the Flood Insurance Study, as amended, as having a one percent (1%) chance of a theoretical flood event being equaled or exceeded in any given year (a “one-hundred-year-flood”). 

FLOOR AREA, GROSS --The total of all floor area measured from the outside surface of the exterior walls of all stories of a building, exclusive of parking garage areas. 
FLOOR AREA RATIO --The ratio of the gross floor area of a building to the area of the lot. 
FOOD SHOPS, RETAIL --A retail establishment engaged in the sale of prepared food, primarily for offsite consumption including, but not limited to, establish­ments commonly known as delicatessens, bakeries, ice cream shops, or sim­ilar uses as determined by the Commission. Such establishments shall be limited to a total of eight (8) seats. Nothing in this definition is intended to in­clude a restaurant of any variety as a principal use. 
FRONTAGE --The extent of land along a front lot line. See “Lot Width”. 
FRONT YARD --See “Yard, Front”. 
FUR-BEARING ANIMAL --An animal customarily bred and raised for the use of its pelt for clothing or decoration of clothing, such as mink, fox or rabbit. 
GARAGE, COMMERCIAL --Any lot, building or part thereof, used for the stor­age, service or repair of motors, engines or more than one vehicle or boat for remuneration, including any rental, lease or sale of any motors, engines, ve­hicles or boats. 
August 1, 2013 
19 


Section 2.2 
GRADE, AVERAGE -­
(Residential Zones and Special Zones) --For Article 3 -Residence Zones and Article 5 -Special Zones, the average grade for a building or other structure or building wing or distinct portion is a horizontal plane, the ele­vation of which shall be determined by averaging the lowest exterior ground elevations on the same property within ten (10) feet of designated sample points, such sample points being located twenty (20) feet apart along a line located ten (10) feet outside of the building or other structure or building wing or distinct portion. For any building or other structure or building wing or distinct portion with less than four (4) measurement points, the Zoning Inspector shall determine the average grade. 
(Business Zones) --For other zoning districts, the average grade for a build­ing or other structure shall be an elevation determined by averaging the finished grades at the four (4) outermost corners of the building or other structure. 
Average Grade For Average Grade For 


Calculating Average Grade 


GRADE, FINISHED --The elevation of a particular point above or below a given reference datum (such as mean sea level) measured after completion of con­struction, grading, landscaping, and similar improvements. 
GRADE, PRE-EXISTING --The elevation of a particular point above or below a given reference datum (such as mean sea level) measured prior to construc­tion, grading, landscaping, or similar improvements intended to manipulate the overall contour of the land. 
GRADING --Any excavating, grubbing, filling (including hydraulic fill) or stockpil­ing of earth materials or any combination thereof which results in a change of contour or elevation, either permanent or temporary. 
GREEN GROCER --A retail establishment engaged primarily in the sale of gro­ceries including perishable and non-perishable food items and food related items. In such stores, the sale of non-food items such as household, health and beauty goods and other miscellaneous wares may also be offered but the supply of such items must be clearly incidental and secondary to the pri­mary purpose of the store which is the retail sale of groceries directly to the consumer for offsite consumption. 
GROSS FLOOR AREA --See “Floor Area, Gross”. 
GROUP DAY CARE HOME– See “Day Care Home, Group”. 
GROUP HOME --A community residence as defined in CGS 17a-220 which is licensed under the provisions of CGS 17a-227, or a child-care residential fa­cility and which is licensed under CGS 17a-145 to 17a-151, inclusive. 
GUEST HOUSE --An accessory building used solely by the owner or occupant of the premises for the temporary accommodation of guests or family members and for which use no rental or other charge is made or received; or an acces­sory building used solely as accommodations for an employee of the owner or occupant of the premises. 
HEIGHT, ANTENNA -The distance measured from the ground elevation at the base of an antenna or any appurtenances thereto to the highest point of the antenna or any appurtenances thereto. 
HEIGHT, BUILDING --The vertical distance from the average grade for a build­ing or other structure, or for a building wing or distinct portion of a building or other structure, to the highest of the following elevations on the building or other structure: . the elevation of the highest point of the highest dome, flat, shed, or man­sard roof, including the top of any parapet; . for roofs which are gable, hip, or A-frame roofs, the mean elevation of the roof (other than a dormer) with the highest mean elevation between its highest ridge and its lowest corresponding eave, . for roofs which are gambrel roofs, the mean elevation of the roof (other than a dormer) with the highest mean elevation between its highest ridge and its lowest corresponding eave or the elevation of the highest pitch-break, whichever is greater, and . for roofs which are salt box roofs, the mean elevation of the side of the salt box roof (other than a dormer) with the highest mean elevation be­tween its highest ridge and its lowest corresponding eave. 
August 1, 2013 
21 


Section 2.2 
HEIGHT, TOTAL BUILDING --The vertical distance from the average grade for a building or other structure, or for a building wing or distinct portion of a building or other structure, to the highest of the following elevations on a building or other structure: . the elevation of the highest point of the highest dome, flat, or mansard 
roof, including the top of any parapet; or . the highest point of the highest ridge, including any dormer, of all gable, hip, gambrel, shed, A-frame, and salt box roofs. 


Continued on next page 

Continued from previous page 
Building Height / Total Building Height  

 

 

 

HIGH-TECHNOLOGY INCUBATOR BUSINESS --Establishments primarily en­gaged in the research, design, development and marketing of a certain prod­uct and/or technology. 
August 1, 2013 
23 


Section 2.2 
HISTORIC STRUCTURE --Any structure which, in the opinion of the Commis­sion, has a special character or special historic interest or value as part of the development, heritage or cultural characteristics of the Town, state or nation. 
HOME-BASED BUSINESS --The use of a portion of a dwelling for business pur­poses by the resident occupants (specifically excluding barbershops; beauty parlors; manufacturing; commercial woodworking; animal hospitals; dance studios; mortuaries; restaurants; metal working; automobile, boat or other ve­hicle repair or painting; and other uses as may be determined by the Com­mission) in the following general hierarchy of intensity: 
HOME OFFICE --The use of a dwelling for occasional business use (as part of employment typically occurring elsewhere) or a home-based business involving minimal visits to the premises by non-residents. 
HOME OCCUPATION, MINOR --The use of a dwelling for a home-based business, which may include one (1) non-resident employee, involving no more than five (5) patron, client, or associate visits per week. 
HOME OCCUPATION, MAJOR --The use of a dwelling for a home-based business involving two (2) or more non-resident employees or six or more patron, client, or associate visits per week. 

HOTEL --Any building or other structure kept, used, maintained, advertised or held out to the public to be a place where: . more than six (6) rooms are used or offered for pay to transient or other guests for sleeping accommodations, and . there is one (1) or more dining rooms where meals are served to such guests, and . such sleeping accommodations and dining rooms are provided in the same building or buildings in connection therewith, and . there is adequate kitchen and dining room equipment and capacity for preparing, cooking and serving suitable food for its guests. 
HOUSING AFFORDABILITY PLAN --a written narrative which complies with the requirements of CGS 8-30g, the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies, and the Housing Affordability Plan Requirements adopted by the Commis­sion. 
INN --Any building or other structure kept, used, maintained, advertised or held out to the public to be a place where: . more than six (6) rooms but fewer than twenty (20) are used or offered for pay to guests for sleeping accommodations, and . there is one (1) dining room where meals are served to such guests as well as the public, and . such sleeping accommodations and dining rooms are provided in the same building, and . there is adequate kitchen and dining room equipment and capacity for preparing, cooking and serving suitable food for its guests and for mem­bers of the public. . guest stays are limited to thirty (30) days or less. . parking shall be provided at 1 space per room & 1 space per every 100 SF of dining room space. However, if the Inn is located within 300’ of a municipal parking lot the number of spaces may be reduced to 1 for every 2 rooms. 
August 1, 2013 

INSPECTION --The periodic on-site review of property for the purpose of deter­mining compliance with these Regulations, as authorized by these Regulations and the Connecticut General Statutes. 
INSPECTOR --The Zoning Inspector. 
KITCHEN --A room, place or space within a structure designed, equipped, or used for the preparation, cooking, and storage of food. 
LAND FILLING --The placement of any material over the surface of the natural ground, which has the effect of altering its natural contour. 
LEVEL OF SERVICE (LOS) --The ability of a road or intersection to move traffic safely and efficiently, measured by the ratio of traffic volume to its corre­sponding capacity and expressed in one of six letters as established by the Transportation Research Board of the National Academy of Sciences. 
LICENSED CARRIER -A company authorized by the FCC to construct and op­erate a wireless communication facility. 
LIGHT, DIRECT --Light emitted directly from the lamp, off of the reflector or re­flector diffuser, or through the refractor or diffuser lens, of a luminaire. 

LIGHT FIXTURE, FULL CUT-OFF TYPE --A luminaire or light fixture that, by design of the housing, does not allow any light dispersion or direct glare to shine above a 90 degree horizontal plane from the base of the luminaire. 
LIGHT, FULLY SHIELDED --Fully shielded luminaire light fixtures which can control the glare in any direction. 
LIGHT GLARE --Light emitting from a luminaire with intensity great enough to reduce a viewer's ability to see. 
LIGHT, INDIRECT --Direct light that has been reflected or has scattered off of surfaces other than those associated with the light fixture. 
25 


Section 2.2 
LIGHT ISODIAGRAM --A graphical representation of illuminance used to show the level and/or evenness of a lighting design and to show how light fixtures will perform on a given site. 
LIGHT POLLUTION --Stray or reflected light that is emitted into the atmosphere above the 90-degree horizontal plane from the luminaire and which can or does cause unwanted sky glow or which can or is seen from an abutting property. 
LIGHT TRESPASS --Direct light from an artificial light source on one property that is intruding into an area where it is not wanted or does not belong. 
LIGHTING, OUTDOOR --The night-time illumination of an outside area or object by any man-made device located outdoors that produces light by any means. 
LOADING SPACE --The required off-street area for the vehicular loading or un­loading of goods. 
LOT --A parcel of land capable of being lawfully built upon in conformity with these Regulations and may contain one or more zone units. Also see "Par­cel." 
LOT, CORNER --A front lot that abuts two (2) intersecting streets and, as a result, has two front yards. 
LOT, FRONT – A lot: . fronting on a public street, and . having direct driveway access to the street, and . where the building site is generally located on or near the front yard set­
back as measured from the front lot line. See “Lot, Rear”. 
LOT, REAR --A lot: . not having the required lot width on a public street, and . having access to the street via an accessway or a strip of land that may 
be part of the rear lot, and . where the building site is located generally to the rear of other lots having frontage on the same street. See “Lot, Front”. 


27 


Section 2.2 
LOT AREA --The total horizontal area included within lot lines but excluding: 
• 	
the area of any accessway or vehicular easement or right-of-way for ve­hicular travel to the subject lot or any other lot, 

• 	
any portion of the parcel separated from the remainder of the parcel by an area used for vehicular access to any other parcel, and 

• 	
any portion of the lot having less than fifty percent (50%) of the required lot width. 




LOT CIRCLE --A circle of a diameter prescribed in Section 3.5.C, intended to control the shape of lots. 

LOT DEPTH --The mean horizontal distance between a front lot line and the op­posite, most nearly parallel lot line measured in the general direction of the side lot lines or a line parallel thereto. 
LOT LINE --A boundary which separates a lot from another parcel or a street. 
LOT LINE, FRONT --A boundary which separates a lot from the street, or the boundary located adjacent to the accessway and most parallel to the street that provides access to the lot. 
LOT LINE, REAR --A boundary line which separates two (2) lots and is lo­cated most directly opposite the front lot line except that a corner lot, a through lot, or a pie-shape lot shall not be required to have a rear lot line. 
LOT LINE, SIDE --A boundary line which is not a front lot line or a rear lot line and which separates two (2) lots. 
LOT WIDTH --The "width" of a lot as measured generally parallel to the street front except that: 
• 	
it shall not include any portion of the parcel which is used for vehicular access to any other parcel, and 

• 	
it shall not include any portion of the parcel separated from the remainder of the parcel by an area used for vehicular access to any other parcel. 


LUMEN --A unit of luminous flux, determined from the initial lumen output ratings of a lamp, where one foot-candle is one lumen per square foot. 
LUMINAIRE --A complete lighting system, including a light source component (lamp or lamps that produce the actual light) and a fixture. 
LUMINAIRE, HEIGHT OF --The vertical distance from the ground directly below the centerline of the luminaire to the lowest direct-light-emitting part of the luminaire. 
MEDIAN INCOME --after adjustments for family size, the lesser of the most re­cently reported state median income or the most recently reported area me­dian income for the Stamford-Norwalk PMSA as determined by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development. 
MEDICAL MARIJUANA DISPENSARY – A place of business where marijuana may be dispensed or sold at retail to qualifying patients and primary caregiv­ers, and for which the CT Department of Consumer Protection has issued a dispensary facility permit to an applicant in accordance with Section 21a-408­14 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies. 
MEDICAL MARIJUANA PRODUCTION FACILITY – A secure, indoor growing facility where the production of marijuana occurs, and that is operated by a person to whom the CT Department of Consumer Protection has issued a producer license in accordance with Section 21a-408-20 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies. 
MIXED USE DEVELOPMENT --A development which contains more than one type of use in a building or set of buildings. These developments must in­clude residential units and may contain multiple combinations of the allowed uses as outlined and permitted in that zone. 
MODERN HOUSE --A structure built in the style of the Modern Movement, gen­erally between 1947 and 1968, which is identified on a list of Modern houses maintained by the New Canaan Historical Society. 
May 14, 2018 
29 


Section 2.2 
MOTOR VEHICLE JUNKYARD --A parcel of land used for the storage or main­taining of two or more unregistered motor vehicles or two or more vehicles or equivalent parts thereof no longer in condition for legal use on the public roadways, other than the site of a duly-licensed "motor vehicle junkyard" or the site of a duly-licensed "general repairer" as provided for in Chapter 246 of the General Statutes. 
MULTI-FAMILY --See “Dwelling Unit, Multi-Family”. 
NONCONFORMING --The situation where a use, activity, building, structure, or lot does not conform to the requirements of these Regulations. 
August 1, 2013 

NONCONFORMING BUILDING --A building that does not conform to these Regulations with respect to size, area, height, setback or other require­ment for the zone in which it is situated. 
NONCONFORMING LOT --A lot which fails to conform to these Regulations with respect to area, width, or other requirement for the zone in which it is situated. 
NONCONFORMING USE --A use of land or of a building that does not con­form to these Regulations for the zone in which it is situated. 
NONCONFORMITY, PRE-EXISTING --The situation where a nonconforming use, activity, building, structure, or lot existed or was lawful prior to the time these Regulations or amendments thereto which created the non­conformity became effective. 
OFFICE, GENERAL --An office used for conducting the affairs of a business, profession, service or industry which may involve interaction with the public.  Such uses may consist of architects, engineers, lawyers, accountants, finan­cial or other consultants or real estate brokers but excludes those associated with the medical profession. 
OFFICE, MEDICAL --An establishment engaged in the diagnosis, prevention and/or treatment of human medical conditions or mental ailments provided by persons certified or licensed by the State of Connecticut to perform such ser­vices, provided that no such office or facility shall offer services requiring overnight stays. Such establishments may also include imaging centers, blood-draw facilities, physical therapy and out-patient treatment facilities. 
OPEN SPACE --Land preserved in perpetuity for protection of natural resources, natural features, scenic resources, or community character. 
PARCEL --The land contained within one continuous property line. Also see "Lot". 
PARKING SPACE --The area required for the temporary storage of a motor ve­hicle, not including aisles and driveways giving access thereto, located in oth­er than a public street or other public way and having a permanent means of access to a public street without requiring passage through another parking space. 
PATIO --An improved or graded area located at-grade, with no structural sup­ports or roof, whose surface is no higher than 36 inches above the adjacent grade. A patio located at grade or ground level shall not be deemed a struc­ture. 
PATIO, elevated or raised --See "Terrace". 
PERSONAL SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT --See “Service Establishment, Per­sonal”. 
PHILANTHROPIC --See "Eleemosynary". 
PITCHBREAK --The intersection of two slopes of a gambrel roof, other than the ridge. 
August 1, 2013 

Section 2.2 
POOL HOUSE --An accessory structure, incidental to a swimming pool on the 
same premises, which: . may contain changing areas, showers, toilets and entertainment facilities, . shall not contain bedrooms, kitchens or other types of daily living areas 
and . shall not be used as a guest house or for the accommodation of domestic staff. PORCH --A portion of a structure which has a roof and a floor and is open to the air without walls or screened-in or glassed-in openings. 
PORTE COCHERE --A covered area at an entrance to a building which will allow a vehicle to pass through while allowing occupants to alight under cover, pro­tected from the weather. 
PREMISES --The real property, either land or buildings or both, which is being evaluated. 
PRIVATE EMERGENCY SHELTER --A structure designed and available for use for protection of the occupants. 
REAR YARD --See “Yard, Rear”. 
RECREATION FACILITY, INDOOR --A commercial establishment which pro­vides indoor recreation facilities, such as tennis clubs, skating rinks, bowling alleys, health clubs, racquetball clubs and other similar uses. 
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE --Any type of vehicle used primarily for recreational pleasure including but not limited to motor homes, travel trailers, campers, camping trailers, boats, snowmobiles, and associated trailers. 
RELIGIOUS HOUSE --A religion-related facility such as a parish house and, if used for dwelling purposes, housing persons associated with said religious facility and consisting of not more than four unrelated individuals or two family units. 
RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION – A place where persons regularly assemble for reli­gious worship, and which is maintained and controlled by a religious body which is organized to sustain public worship. 
REMOVE --Includes, but is not limited to, drain, excavate, mine, dig, suck, bull­doze, dragline or blast. 
REQUIRED YARD --See “Yard Setback”. 
RESIDENCE --See “Dwelling Unit”. 
RESTAURANT --A business or use whose principal function is the preparation and serving of food for consumption on the premises at tables, booths or sim­ilar sit-down accommodations. 
RETAIL BUSINESS --A business whose primary activity is the sale of merchan­dise kept and displayed on the premises to customers visiting the premises. 
April 1, 2014 

SECTION – A separate part of an Article within these Zoning Regulations. See “Article” and “Subsection”. 
SEDIMENT --Solid material, either mineral or organic, that is in suspension, is transported or has been moved from its site of origin by erosion. 
SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT --An establishment whose primary activity is the provision of services or assistance, as opposed to products, to individuals, business, government, or other enterprises except that service establish­ments shall not be construed to include laundries, dry-cleaning establish­ments which clean or launder materials on the premises, rug or carpet clean­ing commercial recreation, undertakers' establishments, any service opera­tion which involves use of heavy equipment, or comparable uses. 
SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT, PERSONAL --A service establishment whose primary activity or activities is the provision of services relating to the re­pair, adjustment, alteration, cleaning or servicing of items owned by or being provided to a customer including hair care, clothing rental, photo­graphic studios, garment repair, tailoring, shoe repair, wellness activities or comparable use. 
SET-ASIDE DEVELOPMENT -a development approved by the Planning & Zon­ing Commission in accordance with a Housing Affordability Plan (see defini­tion) approved by the Planning & Zoning Commission in which: 
1. 	
not less than fifteen per cent of the dwelling units are or will be encum­bered by covenants or restrictions which require that, for at least forty years after the initial occupancy, such dwelling units shall be sold or rent­ed at, or below, prices where households earning sixty per cent of the median income (see definition) will pay thirty per cent or less of their an­nual income for such housing, and 

2. 	
not less than fifteen per cent of the dwelling units are or will be encum­bered by covenants or restrictions which require that, for at least forty years after the initial occupancy, such dwelling units shall be sold or rent­ed at, or below, prices where households earning eighty per cent of the median income (see definition) will pay thirty per cent or less of their an­nual income for such housing. 


SETBACK --See “Yard Setback”. 
SIDE YARD --See “Yard, Side”. 
SIGN --A letter board or plane or the like, placed on, within, or before a building or other object or otherwise displayed to advertise a business or products, in­cluding lettering on buildings or windows, flags or banners and any device with or without lettering used for such purposes. 
SIGN, REAL ESTATE – A sign containing only the words "for sale" or "for lease," followed by "by broker" or "by owner," followed by a telephone number and no other identifying words, symbols, logos or characters. 
SIGN, SECURITY – A sign indicating that the parcel on which it is located contains an alarm system or is protected by a professional security ser­vice and stating only the foregoing and the name and telephone number of the provider of the system or service. 
SCHOOL --A nursery school, kindergarten school or a school having a compre­hensive curriculum of study comparable to that of a public school. 
May 14, 2018 
33 


Section 2.2 
SOIL --Any unconsolidated mineral and organic material of any origin. 
SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN --A scheme that minimizes soil erosion and sedimentation in compliance with these Regulations. 
STATE --The State of Connecticut. 
STOOP --A landing and/or steps to a door of a building without a roof of any kind. 
STORY --A part of a building, a building wing or distinct portion, or other struc­ture between any floor and the floor above or, in its absence, the ceiling or roof above; except that if a floor above a cellar, slab or crawlspace is elevat­ed at the front wall of the building two-and-a-half (2.5) feet or more above the curb level (business zone per Article 4) or two-and-a-half (2.5) feet or more above the average level of the ground along the front wall of the building or building wing or distinct portion (any other zone district), then such cellar, slab or crawlspace shall be deemed to constitute one story. See “Attic”, “Base­ment”, and “Cellar”. 
STORY, FULL --Any story within a building, a building wing or distinct por­tion, or other structure, including any basement, except that the following shall not be considered a full story: . a half-story, or . an attic provided that no area of the attic has a height of seven feet 
six inches (7’-6”) or greater between the top of the floor joists and the bottom of the rafters, or 
. 	a cellar provided that the finished first-floor elevation of the building is less than two-and-a-half (2.5) feet above the curb level (business zone per Article 4) or less than two-and-a-half (2.5) feet above the average level of the ground along the front wall of the building, a building wing or distinct portion (any other zone district). 
STORY, HALF --Any story within a building, a building wing or distinct por­tion, or other structure that is an attic in which the area with a height of seven feet six inches (7’-6”) or greater between the top of the floor joists and the bottom of the rafters: . of the main roof of that building wing, excluding any dormers, is fifty 
percent (50%) or less of the attic floor area under that roof, and . of the same roof and any dormers is sixty percent (60%) or less of the attic floor area under that roof. 


35 


Section 2.2 

STREET --A public roadway or private roadway, laid out and maintained in ac­cordance with the laws of the State of Connecticut and the ordinances of the Town of New Canaan, used or designed to be used for travel of vehicles and in­cluding the right-of-way and the traveled way. 
STREET LINE --The lot line between the street right-of-way and the abutting lot or parcel. 
STRUCTURE --Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires loca­tion on, in or under the ground or attachment to something having location on, in or under the ground including, but not limited to, buildings, swimming pools, tennis and other game courts, towers, paddle or platform tennis courts, docks, balconies, open entries, porches, decks, handicap ramps, signs, a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground, transformer or sig­nal box that is above ground, ground-mounted antennas, ground-mounted solar panels and satellite dishes and fences or walls more than six (6) feet in height, including retaining walls and deer fences. 
SUBSECTION --A separate part of a Section within these Zoning Regulations. 
See “Section”. 

SUPERMARKETS --A retail establishment engaged primarily in the sale of gro­ceries including perishable and non-perishable food items and food related items. In such stores, non-food items such as household, health and beauty goods and other miscellaneous wares are also permitted. 
SWIMMING POOL --Any structure capable of containing water and intended for swimming, bathing or recreational use, provided that the same has a potential water depth of at least twenty-four (24) inches at any point or at least one hundred (100) square feet of water surface area. 
TAG SALE --The public sale of personal household goods by the owner of the premises and specifically excluding the sale of any goods brought to the premises for the purpose of public sale (includes "garage sale," "barn sale," "yard sale" and other similar activities). 
TENNIS AND OTHER GAME COURTS --A specially prepared level playing sur­face for tennis, basketball, paddle ball, platform tennis, racquetball or similar games which may include a full or partial enclosure or fence protecting the playing area.  Any such court is considered a structure in these Regulations. 
TERRACE --An elevated, roofless structure that may be improved with retaining walls and may contain structural supports such as footings and is attached to a dwelling unit. 
TOTAL BUILDING HEIGHT --See “Height, Total Building”. 
TOWN --The Town of New Canaan. 
TRAILER --A vehicle on wheels, designed to be towed or propelled on public roadways by another vehicle which is self-propelled, and which may or may not be equipped to afford sleeping and cooking accommodations for its pas­sengers or to afford traveling accommodations or for the transportation of goods, wares or merchandise. 
37 


Section 2.2 
UNIVERSITY or COLLEGE --An institution offering a program of higher learning leading to the award of an academic, professional or graduate degree and ac­credited and licensed as a college or university by the Commission for Higher Education of the State of Connecticut. 
UPLIGHTING --Any light source that distributes illumination above a 90-degree horizontal plane. 
USE --The specific purpose for which a building, structure or land is designed, arranged, intended or for which it is or may be occupied or maintained. 
USE, ACCESSORY --A use which is customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use of a lot or a building and located on the same lot therewith. 
USE, COMMERCIAL --Activity carried out for monetary gain. 
USE, PERMITTED --A use allowed by these Regulations, but specifically ex­cluding any nonconforming use. 
USE, PRINCIPAL --The primary or predominant use of any lot or building, except that, where multiple uses are allowed by these Regulations, this term may be used to refer to one or more of such use(s). 

VEHICLE --Any motor vehicle as defined by the General Statutes, as amended. 
VEHICLE, COMMERCIAL --Any motor vehicle with commercial license plates or with lettering, markings, racks or other apparent accessories in­dicating that it is intended for use other than personal and/or recreational transportation. 
VEHICLE, RECREATIONAL --Any vehicle designed or intended primarily for use in recreational activities, including boats, boat trailers, campers, camp trailers, horse trailers, horse vans, house trailers, motor homes, snowmobiles and utility trailers. 

WATERCOURSE --Any river, stream, brook, waterway, lake, pond, marsh, swamp, bog or any other body of water, natural or artificial, vernal or intermit­tent, public or private which lies wholly or partially within the Town. 
WELLNESS CENTER – A facility providing multi-disciplined exercise, fitness programs and equipment including some or all of the following: physical ther­apy, strength training, yoga, spinning and dance classes, personal training, cardio/aerobic programs, nutritional counseling, retail sale of related products and all necessary supportive equipment and facilities.  
WETLAND --Any land area, including submerged land, which consists of any soil types generally designated as "poorly drained," "very poorly drained," "alluvi­al" and "floodplain" by the National Cooperative Soils Survey, of the Soil Con­servation Service of the United States Department of Agriculture. 
April 1, 2014 

YARD --An area on the same lot with a building or group of buildings, which space lies between the building or group of buildings and the nearest lot line or line of any easement for any traveled way. See “Yard Setback”. 
YARD, FRONT --A yard extending across the full width of the lot and situat­ed between the principal building and the street line(s) of the lot or, in the case of a rear lot, between the principal building and the location of the accessway serving that lot. 
YARD, REAR --A yard extending across the full width of the lot and situated between the principal building and the rear line of the lot. 
YARD, SIDE --A yard extending from the front yard to the rear yard between the principal building and the side line of the lot. 

February 26, 2018 
39 


Section 2.2 
YARD, REQUIRED --See “Yard Setback”. 
YARD SETBACK --The minimum required distance from any street line, lot line, or edge of an accessway (in the case of a parcel encumbered by an access-way) to a building, structure or use (for instance, see Section 3.5.E for yard setback requirements in residential zones). See “Yard”. 

ZONE UNIT --An area of land having the minimum width and area required by the schedule for a conforming use in any zone. 
ZONING INSPECTOR --As provided in CGS 8-12 as may be amended, the per­son or persons designated by the Commission to interpret and enforce the Regulations. 
41 


Section 3.1 
ARTICLE 3 -RESIDENCE ZONES 
SECTION 3.1. PURPOSES 
A. 	The various residential districts are intended to provide suitable areas for res­idential use and development appropriate to the environmental characteristics of the land and the character of the neighborhood.  
B. 	The differentiation among the residential districts is intended to provide for variety in the size and density of residential neighborhoods and a diversity of housing opportunities after consideration of soil types, terrain, and infrastruc­ture capacity.  
C. 	The residential districts may allow for certain non-residential uses when it can be demonstrated that they are compatible with nearby residential uses and preserve neighborhood character and property values. 
Single-family Residential Use Multi-Family Residential Use 


Special Permit Use 	Accessory Structure 


SECTION 3.2. PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES & 



STRUCTURES 
A. Permitted Without Permit 
1. 	Open Space -Unimproved and undeveloped open space, a pedestrian or bicycle greenway trail, a wildlife sanctuary, flood protection, conservation area, or vacant land retained in a natural and undeveloped condition without structures of any kind. 
B. Permitted by Zoning or Other Permit 
1. 	Residential -Single-family dwelling. 
C. Permitted by Special Permit 
One or more of the following permitted principal uses may be allowed by the Commission under the procedures and criteria set forth for Special Permits in Section 8, below. 
Residential-Type Uses 
1. 	Two-Family Dwelling -In the B Residence Zone: 
a. 	
One (1) two-family dwelling provided that: 

i. 	the building shall have side yards of at least fifteen (15) feet, 
ii. 	required parking spaces are provided behind the front lot line, and 
iii. 	the lot has continuously been used for a two family structure since prior to July 25, 1969; or the lot contains at least 12,000 square feet, has a lot width upon a public street of at least 100 feet, and contains a lot circle diameter of at least 100 feet. 

b. 	
Two (2) detached dwelling units on common land provided that: 


i. 	the building shall have side yards of at least fifteen (15) feet, 
ii. 	required parking spaces are provided behind the front lot line, 
iii. 	the lot has continuously contained two detached, single-family struc­tures since prior to July 25, 1969; or the lot contains at least 15,000 square feet, has a lot width upon a public street of at least 100 feet, and contains a lot circle diameter of at least 100 feet, and 
iv. 	the Commission shall determine the appropriate separation between the units. 
2. 	
Elderly Housing Facility -Multi-family dwelling(s) specifically designed for and occupied by persons over fifty-five (55) years of age when located in any vacated public school building within the sewer district and served by public water. 

3. 	
Adult Housing Development -Independent dwelling units specifically de­signed for and occupied by persons over fifty-five (55) years of age, whether constructed as attached or detached units, where: 

a. 	
the lot is located on and served by a collector or arterial road as identified in the Plan of Conservation and Development, and 

b. 	
the facility is served by public water and is located within the sewer dis­trict, and 

c. 	
the facility has no more than 1.5 times the number of units per acre of buildable land allowed in the zone, and 

d. 	
building coverage does not exceed that allowed by Subsection 3.5.D un­less modified by the Commission as provided in Subsection 3.7.E, and 




43 


Section 3.2 
e. 	adequate parking will, in the opinion of the Commission, be provided for residents, and visitors. 

4. 	Congregate Housing -Congregate housing units, assisted living units, and/or skilled nursing accommodations in a continuing care facility or life care facility for persons age fifty-five (55) and over provided that: 
a. 	
the lot is located on and served by a collector or arterial road as identified in the Plan of Conservation and Development, and 

b. 	
the facility is served by public water and is located within the sewer dis­trict, and 

c. 	
the facility has no more than twice the number of congregate units per acre of buildable land allowed in the zone and where an assisted living unit shall equate to 0.5 congregate units and skilled nursing accommoda­tions shall equate to 0.25 congregate units, and 

d. 	
building coverage does not exceed that allowed by Subsection 3.5.D un­less modified by the Commission as provided in Subsection 3.7.E, and 

e. 	
adequate provision has been made for dining areas, kitchen facilities, medical or clinical care rooms, physical therapy rooms, meeting or activi­ty rooms, recreation rooms, administrative offices, and similar uses in support of the residents of the facility, and 

f. 	
adequate parking will, in the opinion of the Commission, be provided for residents, employees, and visitors. 


Lodging-Type Uses 

5. 	Rooming House -Rooming house in the B Residence Zone when it is the sole permitted use on the parcel and provided that: 
a. 	
the property is occupied by the owner of the premises at all times as his principal residence, and 

b. 	
no more than four (4) rooms, all located in the principal building, are used for the rooming house, and 

c. 	
it complies with the provisions of § 32-6 of the Town Code relating to rooming houses, and 

d. 	
the lot shall contain at least 15,000 square feet, and 

e. 	
the lot width upon a public street shall be at least 125 feet, and 

f. 	
the lot shall contain a lot circle in accordance with Subsection 3.5.C.1 ex­cept that the lot circle diameter shall be 125 feet, and 

g. 	
the principal building shall have side yards of at least 15 feet, and 

h. 	
required parking spaces are provided behind the front lot line. 



6. 	Bed And Breakfast -Bed and breakfast operation conducted by the owner resident(s) of the premises provided that: 
a. 	
all requirements of the Public Health Code, Building Code, and Fire Code as they apply to Bed and Breakfasts shall be met, and 

b. 	
the residential character of the building, the property, and the neighbor­hood is maintained, and 

c. 	
a maximum of six (6) guest rooms are provided, and 

d. 	
the maximum length of stay per guest is 30 days, and 

e. 	
additional off-street parking in the amount of one (1) space per guest room is provided and is adequately screened from the street and adja­cent property. 


February 26, 2018 

Education-Type Uses 
7. 	
Private Schools -private schools, colleges and universities and uses and activities accessory thereto. 

8. 	
Day Care Center / Nursery School -Day care centers and nursery schools provided that: 

a. 	
adequate provision is made for parking / pick-up / drop-off areas, and 

b. 	
the facility is operated by a resident of the property. 




Office-Type Uses 
9. 	Medical Office -A medical office building in the B Residence Zone when located on a lot containing at least two (2) acres and when having the re­quired frontage on and access from a through street which, in the sole opin­ion of the Commission, has adequate capacity for the anticipated usage. 
Institutional-Type Uses 
10. 	
Municipal Facility -Municipal facility, public school, park, recreation facility, or other public use on land owned or leased by the Town of New Canaan. 

11. 
Governmental Facility -Governmental buildings, facilities and uses. 

12. 	
Nursing Home -Nursing home or convalescent home in the B Residence Zone provided that: 

a. 	
the lot is located on and served by a collector or arterial road as identified in the Plan of Conservation and Development, and 

b. 	
the facility is served by public water and is located within the sewer dis­trict, and 

c. 	
the facility has no more than 20 beds per acre of buildable land, and 

d. 	
building coverage does not exceed 25 percent, and 

e. 	
adequate provision has been made for dining areas, kitchen facilities, medical or clinical care rooms, physical therapy rooms, meeting or activi­ty rooms, recreation rooms, administrative offices, and similar uses in support of the residents of the facility, and 

f. 	
adequate parking will, in the opinion of the Commission, be provided for residents, employees, and visitors. 



13. 	
Group Home -A group home licensed under the applicable provisions of the Connecticut General Statutes. 

14. 	
Religious Institution -Religious institutions when located on and served by a collector or arterial road as identified in the Plan of Conservation and De­velopment. 

15. 	
Religious Residential Facility -A housing facility, such as a convent or monastery, for persons affiliated with a religious institution. 


45 


Section 3.2 
16. 	
Clubs and Organizations -Clubs and other organizations providing social, cultural and recreational uses serving a community need or convenience and not including any activity carried on primarily for profit. 

17. 	
Philanthropic or Eleemosynary Institutions -Institutions of philanthropic or eleemosynary organizations serving a significant community need. 

18. 	
Hospital – [this provision is intended to apply only to the facility currently known as Silver Hill] In the 2 Acre Residence Zone only, a hospital providing treatments of mental illness or chemical dependency with levels of care that may include inpatient treatment, residential treatment, and a range of outpa­tient programs provided that: 


a.  the hospital campus contains a minimum of 30 acres, and such require­ 
ment must be satisfied by contiguous parcels which may be divided by a  
public road; and  
b.  the facility was licensed by the State of Connecticut  as  a  hospital for  
mentally ill persons at the site as of June 16, 2007, and  
c.  the use has continually existed on some portion of the entire parcel since  
1940; and  
d.  adequate provision has been made on the hospital campus for dining ar­ 
eas, kitchen facilities, medical or clinical care rooms, meeting or activity  
rooms, recreation rooms, administrative office and similar uses in support  
of residents or patients of the facility; and  
e.  any new buildings, structures, or additions shall be designed to minimize  
an institutional appearance, promote a residential appearance, and shall  
include adequate buffers, screening, and landscaping pursuant to Sec­ 
tion 6.1 of these Regulations.  

Other Uses 
19. 	
Public Utility Uses -Telephone exchanges, electric substations, water tow­ers or other public utility uses provided that, if there shall be a conflict be­tween a demonstrated public necessity and the Special Permit criteria set forth in these Regulations, the Commission may establish whatever condi­tions it finds necessary to minimize that conflict. 

20. 	
Railways -Railways, but not including switching or storage yards, industrial sidings, repair or service facilities. 

21. 	
Private Recreation -use of the facilities and/or grounds of public or private schools, colleges, or universities for recreational or non-educational activities by other organizations. 

22. 
Farming 


February 26, 2018 


SECTION 3.3. PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES 
A. Permitted Without Permit 
1. 	
Customary Uses -Accessory uses customarily and reasonably incidental to a permitted principal use. 

2. 	
Outside Parking -Outside parking of motor vehicles provided: 

a. 	
required parking spaces shall not be located within the front yard setback, and 

b. 	
unregistered motor vehicles shall be screened from view from the street and adjacent properties, and 

c. 	
such parking shall be in accordance with any other provisions of these Regulations and other applicable laws and ordinances. 



3. 	
Animals -Keeping of animals by the resident(s) for their personal use in ac­cordance with Chapter 6 of the Town Code. 

4. 	
Home Office -A home-based business where such business is located with­in the same dwelling used by such person as his or her primary residence and involves minimal visits to the premises provided that: 

a. 	
the area devoted to such accessory use shall not exceed twenty percent (20%) of the total square footage of the dwelling, exclusive of garage, at­tic and cellar, and 

b. 	
the home office does not have any non-resident employees, and 

c. 	
the accessory use shall: 


i. 	not change the exterior residential appearance or character of the building or be noticeable from the exterior of the building, and 
ii. 	not materially change the traffic characteristics of the neighborhood, and 
iii. 	not have any outside storage or parking of commercial vehicles, and 
iv. 	
not involve the display of signs or products in, on, or about the prem­ises except as permitted by these Regulations, and 

v. 	
not create any electrical, radio, television or similar interferences. 



5. 	
Maintenance Vehicles / Equipment -Vehicles or equipment necessary for, used for, and accessory to farming operations on the premises or upkeep of the premises provided that: 

a. 	
outside backhoe storage is not permitted, and 

b. 	
such vehicles or equipment shall not be used elsewhere for any purpose, except snow plowing. 




August 1, 2013 
47 


Section 3.3 
6. 	Commercial Vehicle Storage -When housed in an enclosed structure, maintenance or storage of not more than one (1) commercial vehicle of over one-thousand (1,000) pound capacity or one (1) self-propelled heavy-construction equipment unit provided that no vehicle for the transportation of refuse, garbage, or septic waste shall be maintained or stored in a residential zone. 
For purposes of this section “maintenance” means causing or allowing a commercial vehicle to be parked or otherwise kept on site or on any adjacent driveway, accessway, or public or private road, for more than four (4) hours, except that when the commercial vehicle is transportation for a contractor ac­tually engaged in permitted work on site (e.g., the commercial vehicle of a builder, plumber, electrician, painter or landscaper that is used for transporta­tion to and from the site and that is parked only while the contactor is present and engaged in construction or repairs in or on the residence or on the grounds of the residence). 
For purposes of this section “storage” means to keep or put aside for use 
when needed, and storage is presumed when a commercial vehicle is pre­sent on site or on any adjacent driveway, accessway or public or private road for more than twenty-four hours.  

B. Permitted by Zoning or Other Permit 
1. 	
Attached Garage -An attached garage accessory to a residence provided that it does not result in garage space for more than five (5) vehicles on the property, one (1) of which may be a commercial vehicle. 

2. 	
Tag Sale -The use of land and buildings for a tag sale provided that: 

a. 	
a tag sale shall not exceed two (2) consecutive days in any calendar year, and 

b. 	
no signs related in any way to a tag sale, other than the permit issued by the Town, shall be placed or displayed in any manner within the right-of­way of any public or private road, street, or other public place. 



3. 	
Day Care -Family day-care home. 

4. 	
Minor Home Occupation -A home-based business where such business is located within the same dwelling used by such person as his or her primary residence and involving no more than five (5) patron, client or associate visits to the premises per week provided that. 

a. 	
a home occupation permit is obtained, and 

b. 	
the area devoted to such accessory use shall not exceed twenty percent (20%) of the total square footage of the dwelling, exclusive of garage, at­tic and cellar, and 

c. 	
not more than one (1) nonresident person shall be employed on the premises, and 

d. 	
The accessory use shall: 

i. 	not change the exterior residential appearance or character of the building or be noticeable from the exterior of the building, and 
ii. 	not materially change the traffic characteristics of the neighborhood, and 
iii. 	not have any outside storage or parking of commercial vehicles, and 
iv. 	
not involve the display of signs or products in, on, or about the prem­ises except for a sign as permitted by these Regulations, and 

v. 	
not create any electrical, radio, television or similar interferences, and 



e. 	
no parking areas for residents, employees or the general public shall be located between any street line and a front yard setback. 




5. 	Recreational Vehicle Parking -Parking for not more than two (2) recrea­tional vehicles, as defined in these Regulations, provided that such vehicles shall, when on the premises: 
a. 	
be parked or stored at all times in a fully enclosed structure or, if parked outdoors shall: 

i. 	not be located in the front yard of the existing dwelling or other princi­pal building on the same lot, 
ii. 	not be located within any required accessory building yard space, and 
iii. 	be effectively screened from view of adjacent premises to the satis­faction of the Zoning Inspector. 

b. 	
not be used for living, recreation or business purposes while parked or stored on a residential lot. 

c. 	
be directly owned or leased by the owner or tenant of the premises on which they are stored. 


6. 	Accessory Dwelling Unit -An accessory dwelling unit within or attached to the main dwelling unit provided that: 
a. 	
only one accessory dwelling unit shall be permitted for each lot and no accessory dwelling unit shall be approved as part of a two-family dwelling or any multi-family use 

b. 	
the lot shall conform to the minimum lot width and area requirement for the zone in which the property is located, and an accessory dwelling unit in the B Residence Zone shall only be located on a lot containing at least 9,000 square feet and shall maintain side yard setbacks of at least twelve 

(12) feet, and 


c. 	
the owner of the property shall occupy either the principal dwelling unit or the accessory dwelling unit, and 

d. 	
the accessory dwelling unit shall: 

i. 	be accessible from the principal dwelling by an operable door along a common wall, and 
ii. 	not exceed 1,000 square feet or 40% of the combined floor areas of the single-family dwelling and the accessory dwelling unit, whichever is less unless in the opinion of the Commission a greater amount of floor area is warranted by the specific circumstances of the particular building, and 

e. 	
both the accessory dwelling unit and the principal dwelling shall meet the requirements of the Building and Public Health Codes, and 

f. 	
upon establishment of the accessory dwelling unit, the building shall: 

i. 	maintain the exterior appearance and style (roof line, roof pitch, build­ing materials, window style and spacing, etc.) of the principal resi­dence, and 
ii. 	have any secondary entrance incorporated into the principal resi­dence to reflect the architectural style of a single-family unit, and 

g. 	
parking and access from the public right-of-way shall serve both the prin­cipal and accessory units, and shall not be distinguishable as separate facilities, and 

h. 	
adequate off-street parking as required by these Regulations shall be provided for both uses and such parking shall not be located in the front yard. 


7. 	Temporary Use -Temporary use of land and buildings for any musical, edu­cational, charitable, religious, recreational, or fraternal purpose or entertain­ment, provided that such use is without financial profit except compensation to individuals for services devoted solely to the promotion of the objects and purposes for which such use is permitted, for a period not exceeding ten (10) days in any calendar year unless approved for a longer period of time by the Commission. 
August 1, 2013 
49 


Section 3.3 
C. Permitted by Special Permit 
1. 	Large Attached Garage -An attached garage accessory to a residence that results in garage space for: 
a. 	
more than five (5) vehicles on the property, or 

b. 	
more than one (1) commercial vehicle on the property. 



2. 	
Day Care -Group day-care home. 

3. 	
Major Home Occupation -A home-based business where such business use does not comply with the requirements of Subsection 3.3.B.4. 

4. 	
Special Living Accommodations -Living accommodations or a dwelling unit, in conjunction with an approved principal use allowed by Special Permit under Subsection 3.2.C., provided: 

a. 	
the application clearly demonstrates a reasonable safety, security or simi­lar need to have an employee reside on the premises, and 

b. 	
such approval shall terminate upon change of ownership or cessation of the need for an employee or caretaker to reside on the premises. 



5. 	
Farming 

6. 	
Accessory Dwelling Unit -An accessory dwelling unit within or attached to the main dwelling unit that does not comply with the provisions of Subsection 

3.3.B.6. 


7. 	
Other Uses -Other accessory uses not customarily or reasonably incidental, as determined by the Commission, to a permitted principal use. 


SECTION 3.4. PERMITTED ACCESSORY 

STRUCTURES 
A. Permitted Without Permit 
1. 	
Minor Attached Accessory Structure -Accessory structures customarily and reasonably incidental to a permitted principal use and attached to the principal structure such as solar panels, and similar structures. 

2. 	
Minor Detached Accessory Structure -One tool shed, play house, gazebo, or similar detached accessory structure that: 

a. 	
does not have a permanent foundation, and 

b. 	
has no plumbing or electrical service or heating equipment, and 

c. 	
does not exceed 200 square feet in area, and 

d. 	
is not located within a front yard unless it is located 150 feet or more from a front property line, and 

e. 	
complies with the yard requirements for an accessory building. 




B. Permitted by Zoning or Other Permit 
1. 	Detached Garage -A detached garage accessory to a residence provided that: 
a. 	
it is not located within a front yard unless it is located 150 feet or more from a front property line, and 

b. 	
it does not exceed building coverage of 1,000 square feet, and 

c. 	
it does not result in garage space for more than five (5) vehicles on the property or, one (1) commercial vehicle on the property. 


2. 	
Signs -Sign(s) pertaining to a permitted principal use on a lot, as permitted by these Regulations. 

3. 	
Minor Detached Accessory Structure -A tool shed, play house, gazebo, or similar detached accessory structure: 

a. 	
in addition to the one permitted in Subsection 3.4.A.2, or 

b. 	
that does not comply with Subsection 3.4.A.2, and 

c. 	
that is not located within a front yard unless it is located 150 feet or more from a front property line, and 

d. 	
that does not exceed building coverage of 1,000 square feet. 



4. 	
Non-Illuminated Outdoor Recreation Facility -Outdoor recreation facility such as a tennis court, paddle tennis court, swimming pool, or similar facility with no above-ground artificial lighting provided that: 

a. 	
a Building Permit is also obtained, and 

b. 	
the facility is not located within a front yard unless it is located 150 feet or more from a front property line, and 

c. 	
the facility complies with all yard and other applicable Regulations, 

d. 	
any swimming pool deck, patio, mechanical equipment, filtration equip­ment, and storage tanks or containers shall be visually screened and shall not be located within the yard setback required for accessory build­ings and shall be located more than 50 feet from any public or private roadway or easement, and 

e. 	
in the absence of a pool deck or patio, the yard setback for a swimming pool shall be measured to the back of the coping. 




51 


Section 3.4 
5. 	Accessory Recreation Structure -A pool house or similar structure not used as a dwelling unit that is customarily and reasonably incidental to a permitted principal use provided that: 
a. 	
a Building Permit is also obtained, and 

b. 	
the facility is not located within a front yard unless it is located 150 feet or more from a front property line, and 

c. 	
it does not exceed building coverage of 1,000 square feet, and 

d. 	
the facility complies with all yard and other applicable Regulations. 



6. 	Windmills -Windmills and similar energy conservation systems provided that: 
a. 	
the lot shall have a minimum area of one acre (43,560 square feet) or as required by the applicable zone, whichever is greater, and 

b. 	
the windmill or similar structure shall be set back from all lot lines and from the principal building a distance at least equal to the total building height of the windmill structure, and 

c. 	
no windmill or similar structure shall: 


i. 	exceed forty (40) feet in total building height, or 
ii. 	be located within a front yard unless it is located 150 feet or more from a front property line, or 
iii. 	be located in any required yard setback. 

7. 	Ground-Mounted Solar Panels -Ground-mounted solar panels, provided that they shall: 
a. 	
not exceed fifteen (15) feet in height including all supporting structures, and 

b. 	
not be located within a front yard unless it is located 150 feet or more from a front property line, and 

c. 	
not be located within any required yard setback, and 

d. 	
be fully screened from any adjacent property line and the street line, and 

e. 	
be permanently anchored in compliance with the State Building Code. 



8. 	Private Emergency Shelter -Private emergency shelter provided that it shall conform to applicable yard requirements and, if not constructed as an integral part of any dwelling or other conforming principal or accessory building or structure, it shall be covered with at least two (2) feet of soil and the finished ground level shall not be above natural ground level. 
August 1, 2013 

C. Permitted by Special Permit 
1. 	Detached Garage -A detached garage accessory to a residence which does not comply with Subsection 3.4.B.1 since it is proposed to: 
a. 	
contain space for more than five (5) vehicles on a property provided that any such garage space shall not be occupied by more than one (1) commercial vehicle, or 

b. 	
be located within a front yard, or 

c. 	
exceed building coverage of 1,000 square feet. Such detached garage shall comply with the yard setback for a principal structure in that zone. 


2. 	Illuminated Outdoor Recreation Facility -Outdoor recreation facility, in­cluding tennis courts and pools, in compliance with the requirements of Sub­section 3.4.B.4. and which are artificially illuminated, provided that such light­ing shall not create a hazard or nuisance upon adjacent properties with refer­ence to the following standards: 
a. 	
the source of such lights shall be concealed from surrounding residential properties. 

b. 	
all lighting shall be located and be of such design that no illumination shall be directed toward surrounding residential properties. 

c. 	
no lighting facilities shall be mounted at a height greater than twenty (20) feet above grade. 


3. 	Detached Accessory Residential Structure -a detached guest house or a detached accessory dwelling unit provided that: 
a. 	
the property is located in a Residence Zone where the minimum area for a single-family dwelling is one (1) acre or more, and 

b. 	
the property shall have one (1) full zone unit, as required by these Regu­lations for the existing house on the premises except that, in the Four Acre Zone, such accessory structure may be permitted on a lot having less than one (1) full zone unit provided that such lot shall have at least two (2) acres of buildable land, and 

c. 	
both the existing house and the proposed accessory dwelling shall demonstrate compliance with the requirements of the Health Code, and 

d. 	
any detached accessory dwelling unit shall comply with the requirements of Subsection 3.3.B.6 except that access from the principal dwelling by an operable door along a common wall shall not be required. 

e. 	
the detached accessory residential structure complies with the yard set­back for a principal structure in that zone. 


4. 	
Agricultural Use -Farm stand. 

5. 	
Other Structures -Other accessory buildings or structures not customarily and reasonably incidental, as determined by the Commission, to a permitted principal use. 

6. 	
Accessory Structures In A Front Yard -Accessory buildings or structures listed in Section 3.4.A or Section 3.4.B located within a front yard and located within 150 feet of the street. 

7. 	
Accessory Buildings That Exceed Building Coverage of 1,000 Square Feet – Accessory Buildings listed in Section 3.4.B.3 or Section 3.4.B.5 that exceed building coverage of 1,000 square feet. Such accessory building shall comply with the yard setback for a principal structure in that zone and if proposed to be located in a front yard, must be at least 150 feet from the street. 

8. 	
Windmills and Ground Mounted Solar Panels -Windmills and ground mounted solar panels that do not comply with the provisions of §3.4.B. 


53 


Section 3.5 
SECTION 3.5. AREA AND DIMENSIONAL 

REQUIREMENTS 

A. Minimum Lot Area 
1. 	Basic Requirement 
Except as may be otherwise provided in these Regulations, every lot shall contain the required minimum lot area for the zone within which the lot is situated. 
1
Minimum Lot Area (Square Feet) 

Four Acre Residence Zone 174,240 
Two Acre Residence Zone 87,120 
One Acre Residence Zone 43,560 
One-Half Acre Residence Zone 21,780 
One-Third Acre Residence Zone 14,520 
A Residence Zone 10,000 
B Residence Zone 7,500 

1. 	Unless otherwise provided in Subsection 1.6.B.6, if two (2) or more adjoining lots or parcels are or have ever been in single ownership at the time of, or subsequent to, the adoption of any change to these Regulations that made one (1) or more of them non-conforming as to minimum lot area and if one (1) or more of the lots or parcels do not or did not conform to these Regulations for minimum lot area, then such lot(s) and/or parcel(s) shall be considered to be an undivided lot or parcel for the purpose of these Regulations, and no portion of said lot or parcel shall be used or sold so as to diminish conformance with these Regulations. 
2. 	Potential Exceptions 
Potential exceptions to minimum lot area requirements in Residential zones may be found in Section 3.6 and/or Section 3.7. 
August 1, 2013 

54 

B. Maximum Density 
1. 	Basic Limitation 
Except as may be otherwise provided in these Regulations, no parcel in existence as of June 18, 2005 shall be: 
a. 	
Divided, subdivided, or re-subdivided in such a way as to exceed the fol­lowing maximum number of lots per acre of buildable land and any calcu­lation resulting in a fractional remainder shall be rounded down to the next whole number. 

b. 	
Used in such a way as to exceed the following maximum number of fami­lies per zone unit. 

c. 	
Used in such a way as to exceed the following maximum number of fami­lies per building. 


Lots / Acre of  Families /  Families /  
Buildable Land  Zone Unit 1  Building 2  
Four Acre Residence Zone  1  1  
Density Limita- 
Two Acre Residence Zone  tion Does Not  1  1  
Apply  
One Acre Residence Zone  1  1  
One-Half Acre Residence Zone  1.00  1  1  
One-Third Acre Residence Zone  1.50  1  1  
A Residence Zone  2.20  1  1  
B Residence Zone  2.90  1  1  

1. 	
Two (2) families per zoning unit are permitted with approval of: . an attached accessory dwelling unit per Section 3.3.B.6, or . a detached accessory dwelling unit or guest house per Section 3.4.C.3, or . a two-family dwelling in the B Residence Zone per Section 3.2.C.1. 

2. 	
Two (2) families per building are permitted with approval by the Commission of: . an attached accessory dwelling unit per Section 3.3.B.6, or . a two-family dwelling in the B Residence Zone per Section 3.2.C.1.a. 


Illustrative Example (A Residence Zone) 1. Gross area of parcel (acres)  1.92 acres  
2. Minus areas classified as wetland, watercourse, 100-year  
floodplain, or containing slopes greater than 25 percent  (0.43 acres)  
3. Equals the buildable land on the parcel (acres)  1.49 acres  
4. Times the maximum number of lots per acre  
of buildable land for the A Residence zone  2.20 lots/acre  
5. Equals maximum number of lots  3.278 lots  
6. Rounded down to three (3) lots.  

2. 	Potential Exceptions 
Potential exceptions to maximum density limitations in Residential zones may be found in Section 3.6 and/or Section 3.7. 
55 

Section 3.5 
C. Minimum Width and Shape 
1. 	Basic Requirement 
a. 	Except as may be otherwise provided in these Regulations, every front lot shall contain the required minimum width upon a public street for the zone within which the lot is situated. 
Minimum Width (Feet) 
Four Acre Residence Zone  350  
Two Acre Residence Zone  225  
One Acre Residence Zone  150  
One-Half Acre Residence Zone  125  
One-Third Acre Residence Zone  100  
A Residence Zone  100  
B Residence Zone  75  


b.  Every lot shall contain, totally within itself and without including any area of the lot that is part of an accessway, a lot circle with a diameter equal to the required minimum width for the zone within which the lot is situated.  
c.  After June 18, 2005, at least fifty percent (50%) of the area of such lot circle shall be classified as contiguous non-wetland soils.  
d.  Where it is proposed to divide, subdivide or re-subdivide land containing an existing house, the new lot that contains the existing house shall meet the minimum width required for the zone at the location of said existing structure, and the lot shall not be reduced below that minimum width at such point.  
e.  No new rear lots shall be established in the A Residence Zone, the B Residence Zone, or the One-Third Acre Residence Zone.  

2. 	Potential Exceptions 
Potential exceptions to minimum width and shape requirements in Residential zones may be found in Section 3.6 and/or Section 3.7. 
D. Maximum Building Coverage 
1. Building Coverage Limitation 
After June 18, 2005, unless otherwise provided in these Regulations, the building coverage in any Residence zone shall not exceed the following: 
Lot Area  Allowed Building Coverage  
Less than 7,500 SF  25% of the lot area  
7,500 to 9,999 SF  1,875 SF plus 17% of the lot area in excess of 7,500 SF  
10,000 to 14,519 SF  2,300 SF plus 3.7% of the lot area in excess of 10,000 SF  
14,520 to 21,779 SF  2,468 SF plus 2.0% of the lot area in excess of 14,520 SF  
21,780 to 43,559 SF  2,614 SF plus 4.0% of the lot area in excess of 21,780 SF  
43,560 to 87,119 SF  3,485 SF plus 4.0% of the lot area in excess of 43,560 SF  
87,120 to 174,239 SF  5,227 SF plus 4.0% of the lot area in excess of 87,120 SF  
174,240 or more SF  8,712 SF plus 4.0% of the lot area in excess of 174,240 SF  


2. Potential Exceptions 
Potential exceptions to maximum building coverage limitations in Residential zones may be found in Section 3.6 and/or Section 3.7. 
57 

Section 3.5 
E. Minimum Yard Setbacks 
1. 	General Requirements 
a. 	
Except as may be otherwise provided in these Regulations, every build­ing and structure shall comply with the required minimum yard setbacks for the zone within which the lot is situated. 

b. 	
A rear yard setback shall be required on every lot in a residential zone except a corner lot, a through lot, or a pie-shape lot. 

c. 	
No building or accessory building shall be constructed within forty (40) feet of an interstate natural gas pipeline. 



2. 	
Minimum Yard Setbacks For Principal Buildings 

3. 	
Minimum Yard Setbacks For Accessory Buildings / Structures 


Front Lots Rear Lots 

Front Yard Setback (feet)  Side Yard Setback (feet)  Rear Yard Setback (feet)  Front, Side, and Rear Yard Set­backs (feet)  
Four Acre Residence Zone  50  50  50  50  
Two Acre Residence Zone  45  35  50  40  
One Acre Residence Zone  35  25  35  30  
One-Half Acre Residence Zone  35  20  25  25  
One-Third Acre Residence Zone  35  15  25  25  
A Residence Zone B Residence Zone  30 25  15 8  25 feet or 25% of lot depth, whichever is less  25 feet or 25% of lot depth, whichever is less  

An accessory structure shall comply with the following yard setbacks and shall not be located in a front yard except as may be permitted by these Regulations. 
Front Lots Rear Lots 4. Potential Exceptions 

Front  Side  Front, Side,  
Yard  Yard  Rear Yard  and Rear  
Setback  Setback  Setback  Yard Set­ 
(feet)  (feet)  (feet)  backs (feet)  
Four Acre Residence Zone  50  50  50  50  
Two Acre Residence Zone  45  35  35  35  
One Acre Residence Zone  35  25  25  25  
One-Half Acre Residence Zone  35  15  15  15  
One-Third Acre Residence Zone  35  15  15  15  
A Residence Zone  30  10  10  10  
B Residence Zone  25  8  8  8  

Potential exceptions to minimum yard requirements in Residential zones may be found in Section 3.6 and/or Section 3.7. 

59 


Section 3.5 
F. Height of Buildings and Walls 
1. Maximum Height in Feet (Finished Grade) 
Except as may otherwise be provided in these Regulations, no principal building or accessory building and no building wing or distinct portion thereof shall exceed the following: 
a. 
building height above finished average grade, or 

b. 
total building height above finished average grade. 


Building Height Total Building (Feet) Height (Feet) 

Principal  Accessory  Principal  Accessory  
Building  Building  Building  Building  
Four Acre Residence Zone  40  20  45  30  
Two Acre Residence Zone  35  15  40  25  
One Acre Residence Zone  35  15  40  25  
One-Half Acre Residence Zone  35  15  40  25  
One-Third Acre Residence Zone  35  15  40  20  
A Residence Zone  30  15  35  20  
B Residence Zone  30  15  35  20  
See Subsection 3.5.F.4 for additional building height limitations.  

2. Maximum Height in Feet (Pre-Existing Grade) 
Except as may otherwise be provided in these Regulations, no principal building or accessory building and no building wing or distinct portion thereof shall exceed the following: 
a. 
building height above pre-existing average grade, or 

b. 
total building height above pre-existing average grade. 


Building Height Total Building (Feet) Height (Feet) 

Principal  Accessory  Principal  Accessory  
Building  Building  Building  Building  
Four Acre Residence Zone  45  25  50  35  
Two Acre Residence Zone  40  20  45  30  
One Acre Residence Zone  40  20  45  30  
One-Half Acre Residence Zone  40  20  45  30  
One-Third Acre Residence Zone  40  20  45  25  
A Residence Zone  35  20  40  25  
B Residence Zone  35  20  40  25  
See Subsection 3.5.F.4 for additional building height limitations.  

3. Maximum Number of Stories 
Except as may be otherwise provided in these Regulations, no part of a principal building or accessory building and no building wing or distinct portion thereof shall exceed the following number of stories. 
Principal Building Accessory Building 

Four Acre Residence Zone  2 ½  1 ½  
Two Acre Residence Zone  2 ½  1 ½  
One Acre Residence Zone  2 ½  1 ½  
One-Half Acre Residence Zone  2 ½  1 ½  
One-Third Acre Residence Zone  2 ½  1 ½  
A Residence Zone  2 ½  1 ½  
B Residence Zone  2 ½  1 ½  

4. Maximum Wall Height In Feet 
After June 18, 2005, except as may be permitted by the Commission by Special Permit, no more than fifty percent (50%) of the horizontal dimension of an exterior wall of a principal building or accessory building shall exceed twenty-five (25) feet in vertical height from the lowest finished ground elevation at the bottom of the wall segment being evaluated to the eave or parapet without being broken by a roof or being offset from another generally parallel wall by at least eight (8) feet.  This requirement shall not apply to the gable end of a gable, gambrel, or salt box roof. 

61 


Section 3.5 
5. 	Maximum Side Yard Height 
a. 	
No part of a principal building or accessory building shall, within the side yard setbacks identified below, exceed the following: 

i. 	maximum building height above finished average grade, or 
ii. 	maximum total building height above finished average grade. 

b. 	
For the purposes of side yard height limitations, building height and total building height shall be determined on the basis of: 


i. 	the portion of the building within the reduced height setback distance specified below, and 
ii. 	the finished average grade for that building wing or distinct portion of the building. 

Setback  Building  Total  
Distance  Height  Building Height  
Zone  (feet)  (feet)  (feet)  

One-Half Acre Residence Zone  20 to 30  20  25  
One-Third Acre Residence Zone  15 to 25  20  25  
A Residence Zone  15 to 25  20  25  
B Residence Zone  8 to 16  20  25  



6. 	Potential Exceptions 
Potential exceptions to building height in Residential zones may be found in Sec­tion 3.6 and/or Section 3.7. 
SECTION 3.6. SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR 

RESIDENCE ZONES 

A. Preservation of Modern Houses 
1. 	In order to encourage the preservation and architectural integrity of Modern houses, the Commission may, by Special Permit, allow a minimum area or dimensional requirement (such as minimum yard setback) to be reduced or a maximum area or dimensional requirement (such as maximum building cov­erage) to be exceeded provided that: 
a. 	
the New Canaan Historical Society or other source acceptable to the Commission shall have recognized the principal structure on the property as a Modern house worthy of continued preservation, and 

b. 	
the Modern house shall be preserved, and 

c. 	
the New Canaan Historical Society or other source acceptable to the Commission shall have determined that any proposed improvement shall retain the architectural integrity of the Modern house, and 

d. 	
the extent of the requirement to be exceeded or reduced shall be clearly identified on the application presented to the Commission, and 

e. 	
any such exception shall only be the minimum amount and geographic extent required to authorize the improvements approved by the Commis­sion. 


2. 	Any Special Permit granted by the Commission shall only remain effective so long as the Modern house is preserved and maintained as the principal struc­ture on the property. 
Modern House 


April 1, 2014 
63 


Section 3.6 
B. Flexibility for Open Space Provision 
In order to encourage the permanent preservation of open space and the estab­lishment of greenways and trails in residential areas, the Commission may, by Special Permit, allow a minimum area or dimensional requirement (such as min­imum lot area or minimum yard setback) to be reduced or a maximum area or dimensional requirement (such as maximum building coverage) to be exceeded on a developed residential lot when a portion of the lot will be dedicated for per­manent preservation of open space and the establishment of greenways and trails in residential areas provided that: 
a.  the proposed open space dedication is referred, at least 30 days prior to the public hearing, to the Environmental Commission, the Park and Rec­reation Commission, and other appropriate Town agencies for an adviso­ry recommendation, and  
b.  the portion of the developed lot to be so dedicated in perpetuity as open space is deeded to the Town of New Canaan, the New Canaan Land Trust, or similar organization acceptable to the Commission, and  
c.  the proposed open space dedication is not encumbered by an accessway or other easement in favor of other parties, and  
d.  any encumbrance placed on the land so dedicated shall not restrict pos­sible future establishment of a greenway trail, and  
e.  the applicant shall submit a copy of the proposed document of dedication with the application.  



C. Design Review 
In residential zones, new construction or remodeling of the exterior of any non­residential building or a multi-family residential use of four (4) or more units shall be reviewed in accordance with the provisions of Section 6.12 of these Regula­tions. 
D. Driveways In Residence Zones 
1. 	
After June 16, 2007, except as may be permitted by the Commission by Spe­cial Permit, no residential driveway shall be located within three (3) feet of a side or rear property line on any lot or within an accessway in any residential zone. 

2. 	
Any driveway constructed for vehicular access to another parcel shall be lo­cated within the required accessway. 

3. 	
In a residence zone, no accessway, driveway, right-of-way or walk shall be maintained or used for access to any other land which is: 

a. 	
being used for a use other than a dwelling or other use allowed by Sec­tion 3.2.A or 3.2.B; or 

b. 	
located in a zone in which, under applicable Regulations, there is permit­ted a residential use of greater density than is permitted in the zone in which the accessway, driveway, right-of-way or walk is located. 



4. 	
Any driveway shall comply with the provisions of Section 6.9 of these Regula­tions. 


65 


Section 3.7 

SECTION 3.7. DIMENSIONAL EXCEPTIONS 
A. Height Exceptions 
In residence zones, the basic building height limitations of these Regulations may be exceeded in the following situations, provided that such features shall only be erected to such heights as are necessary to accomplish the purpose they are in­tended to serve: 
1. 	A spire or belfry on a religious institution, school, public library, or public mu­seum provided that: 
a. 	
the total building height of the spire or belfry shall not exceed fifty (50) feet unless a Special Permit has been approved by the Commission, and 

b. 	
the total area covered by such features shall not exceed ten percent (10%) of the roof area unless a Special Permit has been approved by the Commission. 



2. 	Cupolas or chimneys provided that: 
a. 	
the total building height of the cupola or chimney shall not be more than twenty percent (20%) higher than the total building height allowed unless a Special Permit has been approved by the Commission, and 

b. 	
the total area of such features which exceed the total building height limi­tation shall not exceed five percent (5%) of the roof area unless a Special Permit has been approved by the Commission. 



3. 	
Flagpoles less than fifty (50) feet in height unless a Special Permit has been approved by the Commission. 

4. 	
Water tanks where the Commission has granted a Special Permit for an in­crease in height. 

5. 	
Roof-top equipment for non-residential buildings (such as HVAC equipment, ventilators, skylights, bulkheads, or similar features) provided that: 

a. 	
adequate appropriate screening shall be provided, and 

b. 	
such equipment which exceeds the total building height limitation shall not have a horizontal area greater than five percent (5%) of the roof area of the building on which it is located unless a Special Permit has been approved by the Commission.  



6. 	
The Commission may, by Special Permit, allow a greater building height and/or an additional half-story for a single-family residential dwelling provided: 

a. 	
such dwelling shall exhibit a historically appropriate architectural style (such as Victorian), 

b. 	
the Commission can request and/or consider design guidance from the Historic District Commission, the Historical Society, or Village District consultant, or others, and 

c. 	
the total building height limitation for the zoning district shall not be ex­ceeded, and 

d. 	
no area encumbered by a height restriction as provided in Subsection 




3.7.E.1.a shall b eligible for such greater building height or additional half-story. 

B. Yard Exceptions 
1. 	Typical residential building projections such as eaves, cornices, gutters, and belt courses may extend into any required yard setback not more than the lesser of: 
a. 	
10 percent of the required yard setback, or 

b. 	
24 inches maximum.  


2. 	Typical residential building projections such as chimneys, pilasters, sills, leaders, and bay windows may, for a maximum horizontal extent of ten (10) feet for each occurrence, extend into any required yard setback not more than the lesser of: 
a. 	
10 percent of the required yard setback, or 

b. 	
24 inches maximum.  



3. 	
A basement hatchway may project into a required rear yard setback not more than six (6) feet.  

4. 	
A one-story open porch and any associated stairs may project into the re­quired front yard setback not more than twenty (20) percent of the minimum front yard requirement. 

5. 	
Entry stairs, stoops, and fire escapes may extend into any required yard set­back not more than five (5) feet. 

6. 	
To accomplish the intended purpose, access ramps for the handicapped may, with approval of the Zoning Inspector, extend into any required yard setback. 

7. 	
The front yard, side yard, and rear yard setback requirements for the Two-Acre Zone shall apply to any parcel of land in the Four-Acre Zone which: 

a. 	
was in different ownership than all abutting land on December 1, 1956, and had an area on that date of less than four (4) acres, or 

b. 	
was an approved lot or parcel of land having an area of less than four (4) acres in a subdivision approved by the Commission and the subdivision map was filed for record in the Office of the Town Clerk on or before De­cember 15, 1956. 




67 


Section 3.7 
8. 	The Zoning Inspector may allow an exception to the yard requirement or set­back requirement for minor detached accessory structures such as genera­tors, transformers or mechanical equipment when it is determined that the to­pography or lot configuration makes compliance with the regulations unrea­sonable. In such instances the structure must be thoroughly screened and not visible from adjoining properties.  
C. Lot Width Exceptions 
1. 	
These Regulations shall not prohibit the erection of a single-family dwelling on any parcel which is smaller in width than that required for a single-family house by these Regulations provided that, at all times subsequent to the adoption of the zoning regulation which resulted in such lot being non­conforming as to width, such lot was in a different ownership from that of all abutting land. 

2. 	
In One-Half-Acre, One-Acre, Two-Acre and Four-Acre Zones, where a parcel of land is located on a public street and has sufficient area for no more than two (2) zone units and one (1) of the zone units does not have the required lot width on a public street for the zone involved, Zoning Permits may be issued for both zone units, provided that: 

a. 	
The zone unit not having the required lot width on a public street has ac­cess thereto by means of an accessway serving such zone unit. 

b. 	
Such accessway shall not be less than twenty-five (25) feet in horizontal width. 



3. 	
Where a parcel of land is located on a nonpublic roadway and has sufficient area and lot width for more than one zone unit, Zoning Permits may be is­sued for those zone units provided the private roadway has a width of at least fifty (50) feet, and has a traveled way to town standards of at least twenty (20) feet of asphalt, unless approved by the Commission through the granting of a Special Permit. 

4. 	
Where a parcel of land is located on a nonpublic roadway and has sufficient area for more than one zone units and one or more of the zone units do not have the required lot width for the zone involved, Zoning Permits may be is­sued for these zone units provided that: 

a. 	
The zone unit not having the required lot width on a nonpublic street has access thereto by means of an accessway serving such zone unit(s); and 

b. 	
Such accessway shall not be less than twenty-five (25) feet in horizontal width; and 

c. 	
The private roadway has a width of at least fifty (50) feet, and has a trav­eled way to town standards of at least twenty (20) feet of asphalt, unless approved by the Commission through the granting of a Special Permit. 



5. 	
One (1) Zoning Permit may be issued for any tract of land that does not com­ply with the lot width requirement provided it was in different ownership than all abutting land on December 15, 1956, and has continued to be in different ownership than all abutting land, if such tract of land has access to a public street by means of a private accessway having a width of at least 16.5 feet. 

6. 	
For lots of record as of June 16, 2007, Zoning Permits may be issued for front lots having the required area and having an average width (minimum width plus maximum width divided by two) which is greater than or equal to the required minimum width but where the road frontage is less than the re­quired minimum width, when such frontage is at least two-thirds (2/3) of the required lot width, and, if on a circle, the measurement may be on the arc of the circle. 


D. Lot Area Exceptions 
1. 	
These Regulations shall not prohibit the erection of a single-family dwelling on any parcel which is smaller in lot area than that required for a single-family house by these Regulations provided that, at all times subsequent to the adoption of the zoning regulation which resulted in such lot being non­conforming as to lot area, such lot was in a different ownership from that of all abutting land. 

2. 	
Any parcel or lot of land located in the Four-Acre Zone, which is less than four 


(4) acres in area and which lot or parcel was an approved lot or parcel on a subdivision map approved by the Commission and which subdivision map was filed for record in the Office of the Town Clerk of the Town of New Ca­naan on or before December 15, 1956, shall be considered to conform to the area requirements of the Four-Acre Zone, but no resubdivision of any such lot or parcel having an area of less than four (4) acres located in such subdivi­sion shall be allowed except in accordance with the requirements of the Four-Acre Zone. 
E. Exceptions for Building Coverage 
1. 	The Commission may, by Special Permit, allow the maximum building cover­age on a residential lot to be increased above the building coverage limitation specified in Subsection 3.5.D provided that: 
a. 	
a restriction shall be placed on the land records: 

i. 	limiting the maximum building height on a portion of the lot that is or will be covered by a building to eighteen (18) feet and 1.5 stories, and 
ii. 	encumbering with such limitation an area that is or will be covered by a building pursuant to the Special Permit which encumbered area is at least twice as large as the increased building coverage allowed by the Commission, and 

b. 	
no such building coverage exception shall allow the total building cover­age to exceed one-hundred forty percent (140%) of the area allowed for building coverage by Subsection 3.5.D. 


Examples: 

Area Requested For Minimum Area To Be Restricted Increased Building Coverage to Reduced Height 
575 square feet 1,150 square feet 2,000 square feet 4,000 square feet 
House Built To House Built With Maximum Height and Reduced Height and Maximum Building Coverage Increased Building Coverage 

Section 3.7 
2. The Commission may, by Special Permit, increase the permitted building coverage in a residential zone for the following uses: 
a.  Municipal facility.  
b.  Governmental facility.  
c.  Hospital in the Two Acre Residence Zone if permitted under Subsection  
3.2.C.18 of these Regulations.  
d.  Recreational clubs, in recognition that such clubs can provide unique fa­ 
cilities, programs and services serving a community need or convenience  
not provided by the Town, provided that:  
i. The club is open to the general public through paid memberships and  
financially-assisted memberships; receives widespread financial and  
volunteer support from the New Canaan community; and provides  
charitable services or programs to the New Canaan community;  
ii. The club is located on a parcel of at least 6 acres, and the portion  
added to the buildings and structures under this subsection shall  
meet the setback requirements for the zone;  
iii. The increase in coverage will enable the club to provide or improve a  
facility or use that will serve a community need or convenience not  
provided by the Town; and  
iv. The increase in building coverage that may be permitted by special  
permit shall be in addition to the existing building coverage as of the  
date of this amendment, and the aggregate of all such special permit  
increases from the date of this amendment shall not exceed 6 per­ 
cent (6%) of the total lot size of the subject lot existing as of the date  
of this amendment. Further, such permitted increase in building cov­ 
erage shall be mitigated by attractive building and site design and by  
enhancements in screening and landscaping that will improve the  
overall appearance of the parcel (see Section 6.12-Design Review).  

F. Maximum Density Exceptions 
1. 	The Commission may, by Special Permit, increase the maximum density (lots / acre of buildable land) permitted in a residential zone above the limita­tion established in Subsection 3.5.B by: 
a. 	
allowing a calculation resulting in a fractional remainder of three-quarters 

(0.75) or above to be rounded up to the next whole number, or 

b. 	
considering some other method proposed by the applicant that will, in the sole discretion of the Commission, help preserve open space or the feel­ing of “openness” in New Canaan. 


July 16, 2012 

ARTICLE 4 -BUSINESS ZONES 

SECTION 4.1. GENERAL PURPOSES 

1. 	
The various business districts are intended to provide suitable areas for busi­ness development appropriate to overall community needs, the location and characteristics of the land, and the character of the neighborhood.  

2. 	
The differentiation among the business districts is intended to provide for va­riety in the size and intensity of business development appropriate to com­munity needs.  

3. 	
The business districts may allow for certain non-business uses when it can be demonstrated that they shall be compatible with nearby uses and enhance neighborhood and community character. 


Business Area 	Business Area 

Business Area 	Business Area 

a.  Intent and Purpose This Section regulates the permitting of Medical Marijuana Dispensaries and Medical Marijuana Production Facilities, as defined in Section 2.2 (Definitions) of these regulations.  
b.  Standards i. Medical Marijuana Dispensaries and Medical Marijuana Production Facilities are prohibited in all zones within the Town of New Canaan.  
May 14, 2018  71  

Section 4.2 
ii. 	The dispensing and growing of recreational marijuana are prohibited in all zones within the Town of New Canaan and shall not be permit­ted unless expressly authorized in these regulations. 

SECTION 4.2. RETAIL A ZONE 
(VILLAGE DISTRICT) 

A. Purpose 
The Retail A Zone is intended to provide a compact and cohesive, pedestrian-oriented shopping district which is scaled to serve the needs of the community, designed to retain the attractive village character valued by so many residents and restricted in area to limit the major public investment required to provide mu­nicipal parking to serve such a district. It is also the purpose of this district to al­low for residential use of upper floors, particularly in existing structures, so that such buildings, which may be historic or architecturally significant, can contribute to the smaller-unit housing resources, thereby providing for diversity in housing choices and opportunity. 
B. Design Review Authorized 
The Retail A Zone is hereby designated as a Village District as authorized by CGS 8-2 and any new construction or remodeling of the exterior of a building shall be reviewed in accordance with the provisions of Section 6.12 of these Reg­ulations. 
C. Uses Permitted with Site Plan Approval 
1. 	
Retail businesses containing a gross first-floor area of not more than 5,000 square feet per store, but not to include automotive sales or services. 

2. 	
Restaurants, excluding any designed or intended in whole or in part for food service to, or consumption by, patrons in motor vehicles on the premises. 

3. 	
Outside dining on a deck, porch, terrace or patio as an accessory use to a restaurant or food-serving establishment when located on the same property. 

4. 	
Food Shops, Retail 

5. 	
Theaters or groups of adjacent theaters containing a total gross floor area of not more than 7,500 square feet. 


May 14, 2018 

6. 	General and Medical Offices provided that: 
a. 	
offices shall not be permitted on the first floor of any building, and 

b. 	
not more than 10,000 square feet of total gross floor area of office use shall be in any one building, and 

c. 	
any floor used for office shall be located more than seven feet in vertical height above or below the curb level of the adjacent street. 


7. 	Personal Service Establishments and/or Service Establishments shall be permitted on the first floor in accordance with the following guidelines: 
a. 	
The retail component must be located along the entire tenancy facing the street except for an access or common hallway to the street line. 

b. 	
The Personal Service Establishment cannot be located along any portion of the building’s frontage except for an access or common hallway lead­ing to the establishment. 

c. 	
The retail area must be a minimum of 15 feet in depth, measured from exterior building line or 20% of total floor area, whichever is greater. Any­thing less than 15 feet in depth is subject to administrative approval. 

d. 	
The space may be occupied by one tenant with multiple permitted uses, provided that the requirements in Section 4.2.C.7.a, 4.2.C.7.b and 4.2.7.c are met. (See also Section 4.2.D.3) 


8. 	
Personal service establishments provided that storage or work areas shall not occupy more than 80 percent of the total gross floor area of such use. 

9. 	
Service establishments that are not personal service establishments, provid­ed that such uses shall not be permitted on the first floor of any building and storage and work areas shall not occupy more than 80 percent of the total gross floor area for such use. 

10. 
Residential dwelling units provided that: 

a. 	
no such unit shall be permitted on the first floor of any building, and 

b. 	
no such unit shall contain more than 750 square feet of gross floor area, and 

c. 	
any floor used for such a unit shall be located more than seven feet in vertical height above the curb level of the adjacent street, and 

d. 	
no such unit shall contain more than one bedroom. 



11. 
Municipal facilities; public facilities; quasi-public charitable institutions; cultural facilities such as art galleries and museums; and public utilities; provided that each such use shall not contain more than 7,500 square feet of gross floor area. 


D. Uses Requiring Special Permit 
1. 	
Outside dining, including entertainment, on private property as an accessory use to a restaurant or food-serving establishment when located on the same property. 

2. 	
Retail businesses containing a gross first-floor area of more than 5,000 (not to exceed 10,000) square feet per store and may not include automotive sales or services. 

3. 	
Personal Service Establishments and/or Service Establishments shall be permitted on the first floor in accordance with the following, where the space is occupied by no more than two (2) tenants with multiple permitted uses, provided that the requirements in Section 4.2.C.7.a, 4.2.C.7.b and 4.2.7.c are met. 


May 14, 2018 
73 


Section 4.2 
4. 	Personal Service Establishments without a retail component may be permitted by Commission approval. 
E. Sidewalk Cafés 
Outside dining on municipal sidewalks or walkways, as an accessory use to an adjacent restaurant or food-serving establishment, subject to the Sidewalk Café Permit Procedures approved by the Board of Selectman and the Commission. 
August 1, 2013 

SECTION 4.3. RETAIL B ZONE 
(VILLAGE DISTRICT) 

A. Purpose 
The Retail B Zone is intended to provide areas adjacent to the pedestrian-oriented Retail A Zone where parking shall be provided on-site yet where build­ings are located close to the sidewalk for pedestrian access. It is also the pur­pose of this district to allow for residential use of upper floors, particularly in exist­ing structures, so that such buildings, which may be historic or architecturally sig­nificant, can contribute to the smaller-unit housing resources, thereby providing for diversity in housing choices and opportunity. 
B. Design Review Authorized 
The Retail B Zone is hereby designated as a Village District as authorized by CGS 8-2 and any new construction or remodeling of the exterior of a building shall be reviewed in accordance with the provisions of Section 6.12 of these Reg­ulations. 
C. Uses Permitted with Site Plan Approval 
1. 	
Retail businesses. 

2. 	
Banks. 

3. 	
Restaurants as permitted in Retail A Zone. 

4. 	
Outside dining as permitted in Retail A Zone. 

5. 	
Food Shops, Retail 

6. 	
Theaters as permitted in Retail A Zone. 

7. 	
General and Medical Offices as permitted in Retail A Zone. 

8. 	
Residential dwelling units as permitted in Retail A Zone. 

9. 	
Service establishments, including personal service establishments, provided that such operations which involve outdoor storage of equipment, supplies or products shall be located on a lot containing at least 80,000 square feet. 

10. 
New 	car dealerships, including a motor vehicle repair garage and sale of used cars, provided that: 

a. 	
such repair garage and/or sale of used cars is clearly accessory and inci­dental to the principal use, and 

b. 	
such accessory operations are located on the same parcel as the princi­pal use or, with approval of the Zoning Board of Appeals, on a parcel within 300 feet of the principal parcel. 



11. 
Municipal facilities; public facilities; quasi-public charitable institutions; cultural facilities such as art galleries and museums; and public utilities. 

12. 
A public or commercial surface parking lot but not a parking structure, wheth­er attached or detached. 

13. 
Green Grocers, not to exceed a gross floor area of 10,000 square feet.  


August 1, 2013 
75 


Section 4.3 
D. Uses Requiring Special Permit 
1. 	Dwellings units contained within a mixed-use development of multi-family dwellings and other permitted uses, provided that: 
a. 	
no dwelling unit shall contain more than 1,500 gross square feet;  howev­er, the Commission may increase the size of a dwelling unit beyond 1,500 square feet where the Commission finds that the larger units are appropriate for the site, promote excellence in design and contribute to the variety of housing choices, and 

b. 	
no dwelling unit shall contain more than two bedrooms;  however, the Commission may increase the number of bedrooms beyond two, where the Commission finds that the number of bedrooms are appropriate for the site, promote excellence in design and contribute to the variety of housing choices, and 

c. 	
the total number of dwelling units on the lot shall not exceed one unit per 1,500 square feet of lot area, and 

d. 	
in addition to alterations to address compliance with the Special Permit criteria, the Commission may increase or decrease density and alter lay­out requirements based upon: 


i. 	special or unusual lot area, 
ii. 	shape or topography; 
iii. 	the density and layout of existing neighboring uses; 
iv. 	the official designation of infrastructure improvements or re­configurations which may negatively impact residential use. 

2. 	
Outside dining as permitted in Retail A Zone. 

3. 	
Outside dining on a deck, porch, terrace or patio as an accessory use to a restaurant when located on the same property. 

4. 	
Underground parking provided: 

a. 	
the underground parking shall be hidden from view from abutting proper­ties, 

b. 	
the street level views of such underground parking access shall be mini­mized, and 

c. 	
any first floor level above such parking shall not exceed the curb level of the street by more than two (2) feet. 



5. 	
Decked or tiered parking structure. 

6. 	
Inns. 


E. Sidewalk Cafés 
Outside dining on municipal sidewalks or walkways, as an accessory use to an adjacent restaurant or food-serving establishment, subject to the Sidewalk Café Permit Procedures approved by the Board of Selectman and the Commission. 
August 1, 2013 

SECTION 4.4. BUSINESS A ZONE 
(VILLAGE DISTRICT) 

A. Purpose 
The Business A Zone is intended to provide areas for single-purpose shopping and services which require on-site parking facilities. Retail sales of large or bulky items which would be difficult to carry any distance, automotive services, drive-in banking and certain professional and personal services which often represent a special-purpose trip are appropriate uses in this area. Residential uses may also be permitted under certain conditions to provide a greater variety of use alterna­tives for large lots, to include uses which generate less traffic and contribute to the housing resources for smaller households, thereby providing for diversity in housing choices and opportunity. 
B. Design Review Authorized 
The Business A Zone is hereby designated as a Village District as authorized by CGS 8-2 and any new construction or remodeling of the exterior of a building shall be reviewed in accordance with the provisions of Section 6.12 of these Reg­ulations. 
C. Uses Permitted with Site Plan Approval 
1. 	
Any non-office use permitted with Site Plan Approval in the Retail B Zone subject to the same conditions. 

2. 	
Green Grocers, provided they do not exceed a total gross floor area of 10,000 square feet. 

3. 	
Supermarkets, provided they do not exceed a total gross floor area of 30,000 square feet. 

4. 	
Banks 

5. 	
General and Medical Offices provided that: 


Not more than 10,000 square feet of total gross floor area of general and/or medical office use shall be in any one building unless permitted by Special Permit. 
D. Uses Requiring Special Permit 
1. 	
Any non-office use permitted by Special Permit in the Retail B Zone subject to the same conditions. 

2. 	
Underground parking subject to the same requirements as for the Retail B zone except that public parking shall not be required to be hidden from public view or be a substitute for surface parking. 

3. 	
Quasi-Public Libraries 

4. 	
Wellness Centers 

5. 	
Office and/or medical use whose total gross floor area exceeds 10,000 square feet 


December 13, 2018 
77 


Section 4.5 
E. Sidewalk Cafés 
Outside dining on municipal sidewalks or walkways, as an accessory use to an adjacent restaurant or food-serving establishment, subject to the Sidewalk Café Permit Procedures approved by the Board of Selectman and the Commission. 
SECTION 4.5. BUSINESS B ZONE 
(VILLAGE DISTRICT) 


A. Purpose 
The Business B Zone is intended to provide areas where service businesses, specialty retail and residential dwelling units, within a mixed-use development, can co-exist and complement each other. Medical office is also contemplated for this zone, but the overall amount dedicated to this use shall be determined by the Commission as outlined below. The long-term vision for this area is to improve the streetscape by becoming more pedestrian-friendly, active and attractive while ensuring that future redevelopment is consistent with the POCD.  A detailed study of this area was conducted in 2015 and the Cross and Vitti Streets Neighborhood Master Plan was prepared. The Commission will refer to the Plan in its evalua­tion of applications in this zone and areas included in this zone in the future. Fur­ther, the Commission will ask applicants to consider the elements of the Plan when submitting applications.  
B. Design Review Authorized 
The Business B Zone is hereby designated as a Village District as authorized by CGS 8-2 and any new construction or remodeling of the exterior of a building shall be reviewed in accordance with the provisions of Section 6.12 of these Reg­ulations. In addition, any new construction or remodeling of the exterior of a building shall also be reviewed in accordance with the Village District Guidelines and the design recommendations within the Cross and Vitti Streets Neighborhood Master Plan. 
C. Uses Permitted with Site Plan Approval 
1. 	
Retail sales of garden supplies, hardware, lumber or other products which may require extensive storage areas, but shall not include outdoor storage of used or scrap materials, unless properly screened from view of adjacent property owners and adjacent streets. 

2. 	
Specialty retail sales such as antiques, art galleries, or artisan/craftsperson goods. 

3. 	
Restaurants as permitted in Retail A Zone. 

4. 	
Outside dining as permitted in Retail A Zone. 

5. 	
Craftsperson Shops 

6. 	
Food Shops, Retail 

7. 	
Green Grocers, as permitted in the Business A Zone. 


August 8, 2016 

8. 	General Offices, provided that: 
a. 	
no more than 4,000 gross square feet in any one building shall be utilized for such purpose, and 

b. 	
any office located on the first floor of the building is not located adjacent to the street and does not occupy more than 50% of the first floor area. 


9. 	
Service establishments and personal service establishments. 

10. 
Laundries or dry cleaners, provided chemical dry cleaning is done off premis­es. 

11. 
Other specialty sales and services which would be in keeping with the service business nature and stated purpose of the zone. 

12. 
Publishers or printing services. 

13. 
Automotive services which do not involve outdoor storage of used auto parts or inoperable motor vehicles. 

14. 
Car Sales, New & Used: 

a. 	
New Car Sales, provided that there are no on-site repairs, outdoor stor­age of auto parts or inoperable motor vehicles. 

b. 	
Used Car Sales, provided that the dealership exclusively offers refur­bished, investment grade, high-end collectible inventory; there are no on-site repairs, outdoor storage of auto parts or inoperable motor vehicles.  Used car dealerships are prohibited from parking inventory outdoors for sale purposes; but inventory may be displayed for limited special events during business hours with advance notice and approval from the Town Planner/Zoning Enforcement Officer. 



15. 
New car sales provided there are no Health clubs, spas and other indoor ath­letic facilities. 

16. 	
Wellness Centers 

17. 
Upholsterers or furniture repair services 

18. 
Municipal facilities; public facilities; quasi-public charitable institutions; cultural facilities, such as art galleries, museums; and public utilities. 


D. Uses Requiring Special Permit 
1. 	
Dwelling units as permitted by Special Permit in the Retail B Zone. 

2. 	
Outside dining as permitted in Retail A Zone. 

3. 	
Outside dining on a deck, porch, terrace or patio as an accessory use to a restaurant when located on the same property. 

4. 	
High-Technology Incubator Business, provided: 

a. 	
Such businesses are, in the view of the Commission, consistent with the aim of developing and nurturing start-up, high-technology businesses.  The Commission shall use NAICS descriptions, or its equivalent, in as­sisting them in determining if a particular Use is in keeping with the intent of the regulation. Some examples include, but are not limited to the re­search and development of: computer software, fuel cells, “green” prod­ucts, solar cells, semiconductors, optical scanning devices, information technology, digital animation, 3D printing, robotics, computer hardware, computer facilities management and information retrieval services.   

b. 	
Such uses shall occupy a gross floor area of no more than 15,000 square feet. 




June 1, 2017 
79 


Section 4.5 
c. 	Office use within such space shall not occupy more than 50% of the gross floor area. 

5. 	
Inns 

6. 	
Supermarkets 

7. 	
Theaters 

8. 	
Medical Offices provided: 

a. 	
medical office use does not occupy more than 10,000 square feet on a single site. 

b. 	
any medical office use located on the first floor of any building does not contain patient exam rooms but consists of such uses as pharmacies, physical therapy or group exercise rehabilitation, blood-draw or imaging services. 

c. 	
any medical office use proposed to be located on the first floor of any building does not result in more than 25% of total first floor gross floor ar­ea of all the buildings, on either Cross Street or Vitti Street, including any properties on Cherry Street rezoned to Business B, within the zone, being medical office. 

d. 	
any medical office use proposed on any site does not result in more than 25% of total gross floor area of all the buildings, on either Cross Street or Vitti Street, including any properties on Cherry Street rezoned to Busi­ness B, within the zone, being medical office. 



9. 	
Underground parking provided: 

a. 	
the underground parking shall be hidden from view from abutting proper­ties, 

b. 	
the street level views of such underground parking access shall be mini­mized, and 

c. 	
any first floor level above such parking shall not exceed the curb level of the street by more than two (2) feet. 



10. 
Structured parking provided the parking structure shall be hidden from view from abutting properties. 


E. Sidewalk Cafés 
Outside dining on municipal sidewalks or walkways, as an accessory use to an adjacent restaurant or food-serving establishment, subject to the Sidewalk Café Permit Procedures approved by the Board of Selectman and the Commission. 
August 8, 2016 

SECTION 4.6. BUSINESS C ZONE 
(VILLAGE DISTRICT) 

A. Purpose 
The Business C Zone is intended to allow for large office buildings in locations which would not be inconsistent with the village character and where proper traffic management can be provided. This district also allows for residential uses, thereby providing for diversity in housing choices and opportunity. 
B. Design Review Authorized 
The Business C Zone is hereby designated as a Village District as authorized by CGS 8-2 and any new construction or remodeling of the exterior of a building shall be reviewed in accordance with the provisions of Section 6.12 of these Reg­ulations. 
C. Uses Permitted with Site Plan Approval 
1. 	
Any use permitted with Site Plan Approval in the Retail B Zone, excluding banks and outdoor dining, subject to the same conditions. 

2. 	
General and Medical office buildings containing a gross floor area of not more than thirty-five thousand (35,000) square feet. 

3. 	
Parking in accordance with the provisions for the Business A zone. 


D. Uses Requiring Special Permit 
1. 	
Any use permitted by Special Permit in the Retail B Zone, excluding outdoor dining, subject to the same conditions. 

2. 	
Commercial garage. 

3. 	
Parking provided underground or in a separate structure on the same site. 


SECTION 4.7. BUSINESS D ZONE 
(VILLAGE DISTRICT) 
A. Purpose 
The Business D Zone is intended to provide areas where retail and service busi­nesses of a heavier or more extensive nature may be located, provided that such uses are designed and operated so as to avoid undue nuisance, hazard or a deleterious effect on adjacent property values. Residential uses may also be permitted under certain conditions to provide for alternative uses on large parcels thereby providing for diversity in housing choices and opportunity. 
B. Design Review Authorized 
The Business D Zone is hereby designated as a Village District as authorized by CGS 8-2 and any new construction or remodeling of the exterior of a building shall be reviewed in accordance with the provisions of Section 6.12 of these Reg­ulations. 
June 1, 2017 
81 


Section 4.7 
C. Uses Permitted with Site Plan Approval 
1. 
Retail sales of garden supplies, hardware, lumber or other products which may require extensive storage areas, but shall not include outdoor storage of used or scrap materials, unless properly screened from view of adjacent property owners and adjacent streets. 

2. 
Specialty retail sales such as antiques, art galleries, or artisan/craftsperson goods. 

3. 
Restaurants as permitted in Retail A Zone. 

4. 
Outside dining as permitted in Retail A Zone. 

5. 
Craftsperson Shops 

6. 
Food Shops, Retail 

7. 
Green Grocers, as permitted in the Business A Zone. 

8. 
General Offices, provided that: 

a. 
no more than 4,000 gross square feet in any one building shall be utilized for such purpose, and 

b. 
not more than 25 percent of the total floor area of any building shall be first-floor offices. 



9. 
Service establishments and personal service establishments. 

10.
 Laundries or dry cleaners. 

11. 
Other specialty sales and services which would be in keeping with the service business nature and stated purpose of the zone, including restaurants, as permit­ted in Retail A Zone. 

12.
 Publishers or printing services. 

13. 
Automotive services which do not involve outdoor storage of used auto parts or inoperable motor vehicles. 

14. 
New car sales provided there are no on-site repairs, outdoor storage of auto parts or inoperable motor vehicles. 

15.
 Health clubs, spas and other indoor athletic facilities. 

16.
 Appliance repair services. 

17.
 Upholsterers or furniture repair services 

18. 
Municipal facilities; public facilities; quasi-public charitable institutions; cultural facilities, such as art galleries, museums; and public utilities. 


D. Uses Requiring Special Permit 
1. 
Dwelling units as permitted by Special Permit in the Retail B Zone. 

2. 
Outside dining as permitted in Retail A Zone. 

3. 
Outside dining on a deck, porch, terrace or patio as an accessory use to a res­taurant when located on the same property. 


April 15, 2015 

4. High-Technology Incubator Business, provided: 
a. Such businesses are, in the view of the Commission, consistent with the 
aim of developing and nurturing start-up, high-technology businesses. The Commission shall use NAICS descriptions, or its equivalent, in assisting them in determining if a particular Use is in keeping with the intent of the regulation. Some examples include, but are not limited to the research and development of: computer software, fuel cells, “green” products, solar cells, semiconduc­tors, optical scanning devices, information technology, digital animation, com­puter hardware, computer facilities management and information retrieval ser­vices. 
b. 
Such uses shall occupy a gross floor area of no more than 15,000 square feet. 

c. 
Office use within such space shall not occupy more than 50% of the gross floor area. 


5. Underground parking provided: 
a.
 the underground parking shall be hidden from view from abutting properties, 

b. 
the street level views of such underground parking access shall be mini­mized, and 

c. 
any first floor level above such parking shall not exceed the curb level of the street by more than two (2) feet. 


6. Inns 
11. Medical Offices, provide that they do not exceed 10,000 square feet of gross floor area in any one building or parcel.  
E. Sidewalk Cafés 
Outside dining on municipal sidewalks or walkways, as an accessory use to an adjacent restaurant or food-serving establishment, subject to the Sidewalk Café Permit Procedures approved by the Board of Selectman and the Commission. 
April 15, 2015 
83 


Section 4.8 
SECTION 4.8. AREA AND DIMENSIONAL 
REQUIREMENTS 

A. 	Minimum Lot area Zone(s) Requirement 
Retail A Zone No minimum lot area requirement. 
Retail B Zone Business A Zone Business B Zone Five thousand (5,000) square feet Business C Zone Business D Zone 
B. Minimum Frontage Zone(s) Requirement 
Retail A Zone Retail B Zone Business A Zone 
Fifty (50) feet of frontage on a public street 

Business B Zone Business C Zone Business D Zone 
C. Minimum Front Yard Setback Zone(s) Requirement 
Retail A Zone . Building line only. 
Retail B Zone . 	The minimum front yard shall be five (5) feet or equal to one hundred fifty percent (150%) of the minimum side yard, whichever is greater, but need not exceed ten (10) feet. 
. 	Front yards may be reduced to the average dis­tance from the street line for existing buildings on adjacent lots, except that any new construction shall comply with any established building line. 
. 	Where appropriate due to the location and/or de­sign of the proposed use and the building line of existing neighboring structures, the Commission may, by Special Permit, reduce the front yard set­back to the building line. 

Business A Zone  .  The minimum front yard shall be five (5) feet or equal to one hundred fifty percent (150%) of the minimum side yard, whichever is greater.  
Business B Zone  .  Same as for Retail A Zone.  
Business C Zone  .  A minimum of six (6) feet.  
Business D Zone  .  Same as for Business A Zone.  

August 8, 2016 

Section 4.8 

D. 	Maximum Front Yard Setback Zone(s) Requirement 
Five (5) feet. Unless modified by the Commission  
Retail A Zone  through the granting of a Special Permit. An in- 
Retail B Zone  creased setback can only be approved, provided the  
Business A Zone  proposed development contains an amenity, which in  
Business B Zone  the view of the Commission, will enhance the pedes­ 
trian experience and improve the streetscape.  

E. Building Lines 
Unless modified by the Commission through the granting of a Special Permit, in any Retail A Zone, Retail B Zone, Business A Zone, Business B Zone, Business C Zone, or Business D Zone, no building or other structure shall be erected on land between the building line, as previously or hereafter established, and the street line. 
F. Minimum Side/Rear Yard Setbacks 
A rear yard extending along the rear lot line shall be required on every lot or por­tion thereof, except as may be modified in the Retail A and Retail B Zones. 
Zone(s) Requirement 
Business Zones 


Retail A Zone . 	Six feet minimum each, except that the Commis­sion may: 
. reduce the yard setback to zero (0) feet where a common wall will be established or main­tained by both property owners, or 
. increase the yard setback to twelve (12) feet where a common wall will not be established or maintained and a structure on the adjacent lot was established with a zero (0) foot set­back. 

. 	In any event, a clear minimum of twelve (12) feet shall be provided or be available on at least two sides of any building. 
. 	For nonrectangular buildings, a clear minimum of twelve (12) feet shall be provided or be available on at least forty (40) percent of the perimeter of any building. 
. 	Said twelve (12) feet of clear area shall have ade­quate vehicular access and may be a grass area, provided that it has a base suitable to support fire vehicles. 
February 26, 2016 
85 

Section 4.8 
Retail B Zone . 	The minimum side yard and rear yards for any lot shall be three (3) feet each, plus an additional one 
(1) foot for every 5,000 square feet of lot area in excess of 5,000 square feet, up to a maximum 32 feet each for side and rear yards, for parcels of 150,000 square feet and over. 
. 	Where appropriate due to the location and/or de­sign of the proposed use and the building set­backs of existing neighboring structures, the Commission may, by Special Permit, reduce the side and rear yards to those of the Retail A Zone. 

Business A Zone . 	The minimum side yard and rear yards for any lot shall be six feet each and at least one side yard shall be three feet wide plus an additional one foot for every 5,000 square feet of lot area in excess of 5,000 square feet, up to a maximum 32 feet. 
. 	Where appropriate due to the location and/or de­sign of the proposed use and building setbacks of existing neighboring structures, the Commission may, by Special Permit, reduce the side and rear yards to those of the Retail A Zone. 

Business B Zone . Same as for Retail A Zone. 
Business C Zone . 	A minimum of six (6) feet each. 
. 	On at least two sides of each principal building, there shall be a minimum twelve (12) foot clear area, both of which shall have vehicular access adequate for fire vehicles. 
. 	For nonrectangular buildings, a clear minimum of twelve (12) feet shall be provided or be available on at least forty (40) percent of the perimeter of any building. 

Business D Zone . Same as for Business A Zone. 
G. Minimum Distance between Buildings on the Same Lot Zone(s) Requirement 
Retail A Zone 
. 	Each principal building or accessory building shall 

Retail B Zone 
be at least twelve (12) feet distant from any other 

Business A Zone 
building on the same lot, as measured in a straight 

Business B Zone 
line between the nearest points of any two build-

Business C Zone 
ings. 

Business D Zone 
H. Maximum Building Height 
Zone(s) Requirement 

Retail A Zone Retail B Zone (1) . The maximum building height shall be thirty (30)
Business A Zone feet or two-and-one-half stories, whichever is less. 
Business B Zone (2) Business C Zone Business D Zone (1) By Special Permit in the Retail B Zone, the maximum building height may be increased above thirty (30) feet and up to three (3) stories, provided the Com­mission shall make affirmative findings that: 
a. 	The proposed development will provide for a significant community ben­efit such as: . consolidation of two or more parcels into a meaningful master plan, . excellence in design which enhances the pedestrian experience and 
overall streetscape (such as avoiding driveways interrupting the sidewalk), August 8, 2016 
. 	provides meaningful design solutions to properties with unique site constraints or features (such as topography, size, shape, location presence of a water table, etc.); and/or 
. 	other meaningful public amenities. 
b. 	
the increased building height promotes the goal of providing mixed use with residential use of upper floors and contributes to the variety of housing choices; 

c. 	
due to the location and/or design of the proposed use and the building height of existing neighboring structures, no neighboring property will be adversely impacted by such structure; and 

d. 	
the increased building height will be in harmony with the existing building heights within the zone. 


(2) 
The Commission may determine that any mixed-use building(s) with a basement level dedicated in its entirety to storage and/or non-living space (ex. Vehicular garage access and/or parking, utility, circulation, or other common storage, etc.) shall not be counted as a story in the calculation of height in the Retail B Zone provided that: 

a. 	
A minimum of 30% of the subject basement level area is located a min­imum of three (3) feet below grade; 

b. 	
Required residential parking is concealed; 

c. 	
Non-residential parking requirements are provided on-site or off-site, provided that if off-site, appropriate Special Permits are obtained and said off-site parking is located adjacent to the subject property in a manner otherwise conforming to these Regulations; and 

d. 	
The affirmative findings of Paragraph (1) are satisfied. 



(3) 
The Commission may require that any building height above thirty (30) feet or two-and-one-half stories be set back from the façade of the building so as to maintain a cornice line along the street and/or not overwhelm the street. 


February 26, 2018 
87 


Section 4.8 
I. 	Minimum Building Height Zone(s) Requirement 
Business B Zone Twenty (20) feet and two (2) stories. 
J. Maximum Building Wall Length Zone(s) Requirement 
Retail A Zone  
Retail B Zone  .  No limitation.   
Business B Zone  
Business A Zone Business C Zone Business D Zone  .  Unless modified by the Commission, no length of continuous building wall shall exceed eighty (80) feet unless there shall be a wall offset of at least ten (10) feet for a distance of at least twenty (20)  
feet.  

K. Size of Second Floor Zone(s) Requirement 
Retail A Zone  
Retail B Zone (1) Business A Zone Business B Zone Business C Zone Business D Zone  .  The gross floor area of the second floor of any building shall not exceed by more than fifteen (15) percent the gross floor area of the first floor of said building.  

(1) By Special Permit in the Retail B Zone and the Business B Zone, the gross floor area of any upper floor of any building may be increased to exceed the gross floor area of the first floor by more than 15% of said building, provided that the Commission shall make affirmative findings that: 
a.  The proposed development will provide for a significant community benefit  
such as:  
i.  consolidation of two or more parcels into a meaningful master plan,  
ii.  excellence in design which enhances the pedestrian experience and  
overall streetscape (such as avoiding driveways interrupting the side­ 
walk), and/or  
iii.  other meaningful public amenities.  
b.  the increase in the gross floor area of the upper floor of any building pro­ 
motes the goal of providing mixed use with residential use of upper floors  
and contributes to the variety of housing choices;  
c.  due to the location and/or design of the proposed use and the size of exist­ 
ing neighboring structures, no neighboring property will be adversely im­ 
pacted by such structure; and  
d.  the size of the proposed structure will be in harmony with the existing devel­ 
opment of the zone.  

August 8, 2016 

L. Maximum Floor Area Ratio 
Limitation With Zone(s) Limitation Underground Parking (may require Special Permit) 
Retail A Zone No maximum No maximum 
Retail B Zone 0.40 0.46 
Business A Zone 0.40 0.46 
Business A Zone -for medical, dental or similar health­0.25 0.2875 
oriented facilities oc­cupying more than 50% of a building 
Business A Zone -for building floor areas relating to residential 
No maximum No maximum 

uses as part of an Affordable Housing Development 
Business B Zone 0.60 0.69 
Business C Zone 0.90 1.035 
Business D Zone 0.60 0.69 
April 15, 2016 
89 

Section 4.9 
SECTION 4.9. SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR 
BUSINESS ZONES 


A. Height Exceptions for Structures 
The height limitations of these Regulations shall not apply in business zones to: 
1. 	a parapet wall or cornice extending above the height limit not more than three 
(3) feet, 

2. 	
flagpoles less than fifty (50) feet in height above finished grade, 

3. 	
schools, public libraries, municipal buildings, and museums which may be built to a height not to exceed three (3)stories, or 

4. 	
public utility facilities which may be built to a height not to exceed fifty (50) feet. 


B. Height Exceptions for Roof-Top Appurtenances 
In retail zones and business zones, the building height limitations of these Regu­lations may be exceeded in the following situations provided that such features shall only be erected only to such heights as are necessary to accomplish the purpose they are intended to serve: 
1. 	Roof-top solar panels provided that: 
a. 	
horizontal solar panels shall be mounted no more than nine (9) inches above roof level, and 

b. 	
sloping solar panels shall not project more than ten (10) feet in vertical height above the actual roof level of the building and shall be located so that no part of any such panel shall project above a forty-five-degree slope up from the edge of the roof, and 

c. 	
such panels shall be screened on all sides by a solid appearing wall con­structed of materials that shall be harmonious in color and texture with the adjacent facade of the building, except that the Commission may modify these requirements upon proper showing that such screening would materially interfere with the reception of sunlight on solar panels and adversely affect the efficiency of the system.  



2. 	Roof-top appurtenances, including but not limited to HVAC equipment, stair­well housings, elevator shafts, air-conditioning units, cooling towers, heat pumps, or similar mechanical equipment provided that: 
a. 	
no such appurtenance shall be located within ten (10) feet of the edge of the roof of the building, and 

b. 	
such appurtenances shall not project more than ten (10) feet in vertical height above the actual roof level of the building, and 

c. 	
all such appurtenances shall be screened on all sides by a solid appear­ing wall constructed of materials that shall be harmonious in color and texture with the adjacent facade of the building, and 

d. 	
such equipment shall not have a horizontal area greater than twenty per­cent (20%) of the roof area of the building on which it is located without approval of a Special Permit by the Commission.  



C. Driveways and Accessways 
Any driveway constructed for vehicular access to another parcel shall be located within the required accessway. 
February 26, 2018 

D. Yard Exceptions 
1. 	Provided that such projections do not extend over a building line, typical build­ing projections such as eaves, cornices, gutters, and belt courses may ex­tend into any required yard setback not more than the lesser of: 
a. 	
10 percent of the required yard setback, or 

b. 	
24 inches maximum.  


2. 	Provided that such projections do not extend over a building line, typical build­ing projections such as chimneys, pilasters, sills, leaders, and bay windows may, for a maximum horizontal extent of ten (10) feet for each occurrence, extend into any required yard setback not more than the lesser of: 
a. 	10 percent of the required yard setback, or 
b. 	24 inches maximum. 

3. 	By Special Permit in the Retail B Zone, entry stairs, stoops, porches, plat­forms or other associated projecting appurtenance required to provide safe access into the subject building may project into the front yard setback pro­vided that: 
a. 	
Neither the walls of the subject building, nor the projecting appurtenance, extends over a building line or pedestrian sidewalk; 

b. 	
The first floor of the subject building is elevated above grade as a result of unique property features(ex. Topography, shape, presence of a water table, etc.) and said appurtenance is required for access; and 

c. 	
The Commission shall make further affirmative findings that the proposed projection; 


i. 	Will result in excellence in design which will enhance the pedestrian experience and overall streetscape; 
ii. 	Provide a meaningful design solution for building access; 
iii. 	Promotes the goal of providing a mixed-use development in the zone; and 
iv. 	Is otherwise in harmony with the existing neighboring properties in the zone. 
April 15, 2017 
91 


Section 4.9 
E. Floor Area Ratio Exceptions 
In order to promote additional housing within the Retail B Zone, Business A Zone and Business B Zone, the Commission may, by Special Permit, allow the gross floor area of residential units to be excluded from the cal­culation of FAR. Any proposed change in use from residential to a non­residential use must include that square footage in the calculation of FAR and therefore comply with the FAR limitations listed in §4.7.J, in addition to other requirements set forth in these regulations. 
February 26, 2018 

ARTICLE 5 -SPECIAL ZONES 
SECTION 5.1. WAVENY ZONE 
A. Purposes 
The Waveny Zone is intended to provide for the diverse range of activities and functions that occur on the Town-owned Waveny property while providing for the establishment of flexible guidelines that will protect neighborhood and community interests. 
B. Uses Permitted by Right 
A single-family dwelling existing as of the effective date of this Section. 
C. Uses Permitted in Accordance with Guidelines 
1. 	
Recreational uses in and on land and facilities under the jurisdiction of the Town of New Canaan, including buildings, structures and playing fields with or without customary spectator amenities. 

2. 	
Educational uses in and on land and facilities under the jurisdiction of the Town of New Canaan, whether for profit or otherwise, subject to the approval of the owner of the land and or/facilities. 

3. 	
Temporary uses as specified in Subsection 3.3.B.7, where it is reasonably expected and affirmed by the sponsor that the net profits are to be devoted to the charitable purposes of the sponsoring organization. 

4. 	
Community activities, whether for profit or otherwise, including shows, enter­tainments, concerts, displays, and rehearsals (but not to include flea mar­kets), where such events are approved by the owner or lessee of the land or facilities, or the agency charged with its management. 

5. 	
Not-for-profit community health facilities. 


D. Use Guidelines 
1. 	
The Park & Recreation Commission shall be the sole authority to prepare written guidelines for the uses permitted for buildings and land under its juris­diction under Subsection 5.1.C.1 through 5.1.C.4. 

2. 	
The Board of Education shall be the sole authority to prepare written guide­lines for the uses permitted for buildings and land under its jurisdictions under Subsection 5.1.C.1 through 5.1.C.4.  

3. 	
The Waveny Care Center shall be the sole authority to prepare written guide­lines for the uses permitted for buildings and land under its jurisdiction under Subsection 5.1.C.5. 

4. 	
These written guidelines shall be subject to the review and approval of the Commission.  

5. 	
Each cited agency shall provide to the Commission on an annual basis, a list of activities approved thereunder 

6. 	
Any driveway constructed for vehicular access to another parcel shall be lo­cated within the required accessway. 


93 


Section 5.1 
E. Uses Permitted by Special Permit 
1. 	
New permanent buildings and facilities for recreational, educational, munici­pal, or other uses. 

2. 	
Water towers or other public utility uses provided that, if there shall be a con­flict between a demonstrated public necessity and the Special Permit criteria set forth in these Regulations, the Commission may establish whatever con­ditions it finds necessary to minimize that conflict. 

3. 	
The Commission may, by Special Permit, modify the height limitations in the Waveny Zone for a municipal facility or a public utility use as follows: 

a. 	
a parapet wall or cornice may extend above the height limit not more than three (3) feet 

b. 	
flagpoles may project up to fifty (50) feet in height above finished grade. 

c. 	
schools, public libraries, municipal buildings, and museums may be built to a height not to exceed three (3) stories. 

d. 	
public utility facilities may be built to a height not to exceed fifty (50) feet. 




F. Dimensional Standards 
Requirement 

Maximum Building Height 1 Thirty (30) Feet Two and One Half (2 1/2) Stories Maximum Building Coverage Five (5%) Percent Minimum Front Yard Fifty (50) Feet Minimum Side Yard Fifty (50) Feet Minimum Rear Yard Fifty (50) Feet 
1. Exceptions to the building height limitations in the Waveny Zone may be applied in accordance with the criteria established in Subsection 3.7.A. 
G. Special Setback Standards 
Within fifty (50) feet of the boundary line of a parcel of land or a lease line for land which is used and occupied by a community health care facility: 
1. 	
No stadiums, bleachers or other structures shall be erected. 

2. 	
No public address system or exterior lighting shall be installed.  

3. 	
The following may be permitted subject to the issuance of a Zoning Permit: 

a. 	
fences constructed of material which does not substantially obstruct light, air or ventilation. 

b. 	
low-level, low-intensity lighting. 

c. 	
bleachers which are neither affixed to the ground nor exceed three levels of seats. 

d. 	
baseball backstops and similar appurtenances oriented to direct principal sports activities away from said boundary line. 

e. 	
sports scoreboards designed to be visible principally to spectators not in said setback area. 




H. Temporary Signage Limitations 
1. 	
Temporary signs shall be permitted only on the sign wall at the corner of South Avenue and Farm Road, subject to the guidelines established for signs at that location.  

2. 	
On the day or days of the use or activity, a temporary sign may be erected at the South Avenue entrance, the Lapham Road entrance or the Farm Road entrance to the Waveny property, most appropriate to the actual location of the activity or use and such signs shall be removed within 24 hours of com­pletion of the use or activity. 


I. Lighting Limitations 
1. 	
Lighting facilities within the Waveny Zone shall be mounted at a height of 20 feet above grade or less except that, on land under the jurisdiction of the Board of Education, the Commission may, by Special Permit, allow lighting facilities to be mounted up to a height of 70 feet above grade after the Com­mission has determined that said lighting shall not have a substantially ad­verse impact on adjoining uses or properties.  

2. 	
Any application to erect lighting facilities in excess of 20 feet above grade, as provided above, shall be prepared by a professional engineer licensed in the State of Connecticut and specializing in lighting design and shall include complete technical details including the height and location of proposed light­ing, a plan showing proposed foot-candle levels, methods of shielding adjoin­ing properties from the source of illumination, together with all steps that have been or shall be taken to minimize the impact on adjoining properties and the neighborhood. 


95 


Section 5.2 
SECTION 5.2. 	PARK, RECREATION & OPEN SPACE ZONE 
A. Purposes 
The Park, Recreation and Open Space zone is intended to provide for the diverse range of activities and functions that occur on Town-owned properties while providing for the establishment of flexible guidelines that shall protect neighbor­hood and community interests. 
B. Uses Permitted by Right 
1. 	
A single-family dwelling existing as of June 18, 2005 and accessory buildings or structures incidental and subordinate to the principal use. 

2. 	
Parks, playgrounds, recreation areas, greenways, and open space. 

3. 	
Temporary uses as specified in Subsection 3.3.B.7, where it is reasonably expected and affirmed by the sponsor that the net profits are to be devoted to the charitable purposes of the sponsoring organization. 


C. Uses Permitted by Special Permit 
1. 	
Golf courses and uses and activities accessory thereto. 

2. 	
Buildings or structures accessory to a park, playground, recreation area, or open space provided that 

a. 	
such building or structure shall have residential design, scale, architec­ture, and exterior materials compatible with the residential or recreational character of the area, and 

b. 	
such accessory building or structure is set back and buffered from adja­cent residentially used properties. 



3. 	
Community activities, whether for profit or otherwise, including shows, enter­tainments, concerts, displays, and rehearsals (but not to include flea mar­kets). 


D. Dimensional Standards 
Requirement 

Maximum Building Height 1 Thirty (30) Feet Two and One Half (2 1/2) Stories Maximum Building Coverage Five (5%) Percent Minimum Front Yard Fifty (50) Feet Minimum Side And Rear Yard Fifty (50) Feet 
1. Exceptions to the building height limitations in the 	Park, Recreation & Open Space Zone may be applied for in accordance with the criteria established in Subsection 
3.7.A. 

SECTION 5.3. MULTI-FAMILY ZONE 
A. Purposes 
The Multi-family Zone is intended to allow for a diversity of housing types in New Canaan while retaining community character. 
B. Permitted by Zoning or Other Permit 
1. 	
Single-family dwelling. 

2. 	
For a single-family dwelling: 

a. 	
accessory uses subject to the same conditions and limitations provided in Section 3.3, and 

b. 	
accessory structures subject to the same conditions and limitations pro­vided in Section 3.4. 



3. 	
For a multi-family dwelling, a home office, keeping of animals and other cus­tomary uses subject to the same conditions and limitations provided in Sub­section 3.3.A. 


C. Permitted by Special Permit 
The following uses may be permitted by the Commission by Special Permit pro­vided that the construction, alteration or use shall comply with the requirements of this Section: 
1. 	
Individual dwelling units in detached buildings or multiple dwelling units in one or more buildings at a density of up to 4.0 units per acre of buildable land. 

2. 	
Individual dwelling units in detached buildings or multiple dwelling units in one building by a not-for-profit organization at a density of up to 6.0 units per acre of buildable land. 

3. 	
Common recreational facilities such as swimming pools or tennis courts and other uses accessory to a permitted use. 


97 


Section 5.3 
D. Dimensional Standards 
1. Lot-Related Standards 
Minimum zone unit area Minimum zone unit width Minimum front yard setbacks Minimum side and rear yard setbacks for a principal building Minimum side and rear yard setbacks for an accessory building Maximum building coverage Minimum landscaped area  30,000 square feet 100 feet 25 feet 25 feet 15 feet 30% 50%  
2.  Building-Related Standards  
Maximum principal building height Maximum total principal building height Maximum accessory building height Minimum gross floor area per unit  2 ½ stories 30 feet 40 feet 20 feet 1 ½ story 750 square feet ex­cluding basements, attic space and gar­age space  

E. Specific Lot-Related Standards 
1. 	
Landscaped front, side and rear yard buffer areas shall be provided adjacent to each property line of the subject parcel except that if adjacent properties have been developed with a similar use, the Commission may, by Special Permit, modify the buffer area requirement. 

2. 	
Side and rear yard buffer areas shall be planted or preserved in a natural state in a mixture of evergreen and deciduous trees and shrubs and shall be maintained in proper order and present a reasonably opaque, natural barrier to a height of at least ten (10) feet. 

3. 	
Parking areas, including garages, shall: 

a. 	
comply with Section 6.2 hereof, 

b. 	
not be located in any required yard setback, 

c. 	
be suitably screened from adjoining residential uses, and 

d. 	
to the extent feasible, be designed so that vehicle headlights do not shine directly into the window of any dwelling unit on or off the premises. 



4. 	
Driveways and entrance and exit drives shall: 

a. 	
have a minimum width of twenty (20) feet for two-way travel and fifteen 

(15) feet for one-way travel, 

b. 	
not be permitted within any side or rear yard setback, 

c. 	
be surfaced with asphalt or another suitable non-erodible surface, and 

d. 	
be laid out so as to prevent traffic hazards and nuisances. 



5. 	
Exterior lighting shall: 

a. 	
be provided and maintained by the owner at all access points to streets, parking areas, building entrances and elsewhere where required for the safety of vehicular or pedestrian traffic, and 

b. 	
not be directed into any abutting properties. 



6. 	
Sidewalks shall: 

a. 	
have a minimum width of five (5) feet, 

b. 	
be concrete, brick, or other surface acceptable to the Commission, and 

c. 	
be provided between dwelling units and parking areas, streets and drive­ways. 



7. 	
Any outdoor recreation facilities shall comply with the criteria specified in Subsection 3.4.B.4 or Subsection 3.4.C.2. 


F. Specific Building-Related Standards 
1. 	
No residential building shall contain more than four (4) dwelling units. 

2. 	
Every principal and accessory building shall be at least twenty (20) feet dis­tant from any other building on the lot. 

3. 	
No length of continuous building wall or continuous building roof shall exceed (sixty) 60 feet unless there is an offset of at least ten (10) feet for a distance of at least twenty (20) feet. 

4. 	
In accordance with Subsection 3.6.C, new construction or remodeling of the exterior of any building in a Multi-family Zone shall be reviewed in accordance with the provisions of Section 6.12 of these Regulations. 

5. 	
All dwelling units and other uses shall be connected to and served by public water and shall be located within the sewer district. 


99 


Section 5.4 
SECTION 5.4. APARTMENT ZONE 
A. Purposes 
The Apartment Zone is intended to allow for a diversity of housing types in New Canaan while retaining community character. 
B. Permitted By Zoning or Other Permit 
1. 	
Single-family dwelling in accordance with the use, area, and dimensional re­quirements of the B-Residence zone. 

2. 	
For a single-family dwelling on lots of less than 10,000 square feet in area: 

a. 	
accessory uses subject to the same conditions and limitations provided in Section 3.3, and 

b. 	
accessory structures subject to the same conditions and limitations pro­vided in Section 3.4. 



3. 	
For a multi-family dwelling, a home office, keeping of animals and other cus­tomary uses subject to the same conditions and limitations provided in Sub­section 3.3.A. 


C. Permitted By Special Permit 
The following uses may be permitted by the Commission by Special Permit pro­vided that the construction, alteration or use shall comply with the requirements of this Section: 
1. 	
Attached or detached two family dwellings on lots of less than 15,000 square feet in area, in accordance with the use, area and dimensional requirements of the B Residence Zone except for maximum building coverage which shall comply with § 5.4.D.1. 

2. 	
Multi-family dwelling(s). 

3. 	
Common recreational facilities such as swimming pools or tennis courts and other uses accessory to a permitted use. 

4. 	
Quasi-Public Libraries 


Section 5.4  
D. 1.  Dimensional Standards Lot-Related Standards  
Minimum zone unit area Minimum zone unit width Minimum front yard setbacks Minimum side and rear yard setbacks for a principal building Minimum side and rear yard setbacks for an accessory building Maximum density Maximum building coverage Minimum landscaped area  15,000 square feet 100 feet 25 feet 25 feet 15 feet One (1) unit per 5,000 square feet of lot area 25% 50%  
2.  Building-Related Standards  

Maximum principal building height  2 ½  stories  
30 feet  
Maximum total principal building height  40 feet  
Maximum accessory building height  20 feet  
1 ½ story  
Minimum gross floor area per unit  750 square feet ex­ 
cluding basements,  
attic space and gar­ 
age space  

E. Specific Lot-Related Standards 
1. 	
Landscaped front, side and rear yard buffer areas of at least fifteen (15) feet in width shall be provided adjacent to each property line of the subject parcel. 

2. 	
Side and rear yard buffer areas shall be planted or preserved in a natural state in a mixture of evergreen and deciduous trees and shrubs and shall be maintained in proper order and present a reasonably opaque, natural barrier to a height of at least ten (10) feet. 

3. 	
Recreational areas shall be provided with: 

a. 	
A minimum of 200 square feet per dwelling unit. 

b. 	
No dimension less than twenty (20) feet. 

c. 	
Not more than one-quarter of any such area to have a grade greater than five percent. 

d. 	
No boundary line to be less than ten (10) feet from any building or less than five (5) feet from any interior lot line. 




August 1, 2013 
101 


Section 5.4 
F. Specific Building-Related Standards 
1. 	
Each dwelling unit shall have access to a service entrance opening into a rear or side yard. 

2. 	
No length of continuous building wall or continuous building roof shall exceed sixty (60) feet unless there shall be an offset of at least ten (10) feet for a dis­tance of at least twenty (20) feet. 

3. 	
Any open courtyard surrounded by a building or buildings shall be at least twice as wide as the highest wall of the courtyard and shall, in area, be at least twice the square of the smallest dimension. 

4. 	
For an open courtyard between buildings, buildings separated at nearest points by at least the average of their combined heights may overlap for a dis­tance not to exceed ten (10) feet. 


G. Specific Parking-Related Standards 
1. 	Parking areas shall: 
a. 	
comply with Section 6.2 hereof, 

b. 	
be located at least 10 feet from any dwelling unit within the development unless it is an attached garage or underground parking, and 

c. 	
be suitably screened from adjoining residential uses. 



2. 	
Enclosed garage spaces, if provided, shall be considered as satisfying the minimum off-street parking requirement for the development provided there shall be at least 0.25 visitor spaces per dwelling unit. 

3. 	
No portion of any parking area shall be more than 300 feet from the entrance of any building served thereby. 

4. 	
To the extent feasible, parking areas and access drives shall be designed so that vehicle headlights do not shine directly into the window of any unit. 


H. Other Standards 
1. 	
In accordance with Subsection 3.6.E, new construction or remodeling of the exterior of any multi-family residential building containing four (4) or more units shall be reviewed in accordance with the provisions of Section 6.12 of these Regulations. 

2. 	
All dwelling units and other uses shall be connected to and served by public water and shall be located within the sewer district. 

3. 	
Driveways and entrance and exit drives shall: 

a. 	
have a minimum width of twenty (20) feet for two-way travel and fifteen 

(15) feet for one-way travel, 

b. 	
not extend within ten (10) feet of any building used wholly or in part for dwelling purposes unless it is an attached garage or underground park­ing, 

c. 	
be surfaced with asphalt or another suitable non-erodible surface, and 

d. 	
be laid out so as to prevent traffic hazards and nuisances. 



4. 	
Exterior lighting shall: 

a. 	
be provided and maintained by the owner at all access points to streets, parking areas, building entrances and elsewhere where required for the safety of vehicular or pedestrian traffic, and 

b. 	
not be directed into any abutting properties 



5. 	
Sidewalks shall: 

a. 	
have a minimum width of five feet (5’), 

b. 	
be concrete, brick, or other surface acceptable to the Commission, and 

c. 	
be provided between dwelling units and parking areas, streets and drive­ways. 



6. 	
Any outdoor recreation facilities shall comply with the criteria specified in Subsection 3.4.B.4 or Subsection 3.4.C.2. 


103 


Section 5.5 
SECTION 5.5. 	FLOODPLAIN OVERLAY ZONE 
A. 	Purpose 
The Floodplain Overlay Zone is intended to provide reasonable notice regarding property that may be subject to the effects of flooding. 
B. 	Standards 
Principal and accessory buildings, structures, uses, and activities allowed in the underlying zone are permitted in the Floodplain Overlay Zone provided that they comply with the requirements of the Town Code relating to floodplains and any requirements of the Environmental Commission, acting as the administrator of the floodplain standards. 
SECTION 5.6. 	AQUIFER PROTECTION OVERLAY ZONE 
A. 	Purpose 
The purpose of the Aquifer Protection Zone is to preserve the quality and quantity of the groundwater supply by regulating land uses which may cause contamina­tion of designated aquifers and aquifer recharge areas. 
B. 	Standards 
Principal and accessory buildings, structures, uses, and activities allowed in the underlying zone are permitted in the Aquifer Protection Overlay Zone provided that they comply with the requirements of the Town Code relating to aquifer pro­tection and any requirements of the Environmental Commission, acting as the administrator of the aquifer protection standards. 
SECTION 5.7. 	MILLPORT HOUSING ZONE 
A. 	Purpose 
The Millport Housing Zone is intended to increase economic diversity of housing types in New Canaan by allowing a small, well-designed and landscaped multi­family development. 
B. 	Properties Eligible for Rezoning to Millport Housing Zone 
To be eligible for rezoning to Millport Housing Zone, a parcel or parcels to be merged must total at least four (4.0) acres and have no less than 300 feet of frontage on Millport Avenue. 
C. 	Uses Permitted by Site Plan Approval 
Multi-family residential dwellings with a maximum of forty (40) units per building, with a total density of not more than thirty (30) units per gross acre. 
February 15, 2015 

D. Accessory Uses Permitted by Site Plan Approval 
1. 	
Free-standing garage structures of not more than six spaces, with a min­imum side yard of ten (10) feet. 

2. 	
Home offices and minor home occupations allowed by Sections 3.3.A.4 and 3.3.B.4. 


E. Dimensional Standards 
1. 
Lot-Related Standards 

Maximum building coverage 30 percent 
Maximum combined impervious coverage 65 percent 


2. 
Principal Building Standards 


Maximum height (vertical distance from average grade of building to 40 feet highest mean elevation between highest ridge and lowest correspond­ing eave) Maximum total height 50 feet Maximum stories 4.0 stories Minimum front yard 10 feet Minimum side yard 12 feet Minimum rear yard 15 feet Minimum separation distance between buildings 5 feet Parking 1.0 space per 
apartment home 

F. Site Plan Standards 
1. 	
In accordance with Subsection 3.6.C, new construction or renovation of the exterior of any multi-family residential building or any detached gar­age shall be reviewed using the criteria set forth in subsection 6.12.D of these Regulations. 

2. 	
All dwelling units and other uses shall be located within the sewer district, and shall be connected to public water. 

3. 	
Driveways and entrance and exit drives shall: 

a. 	
have a minimum width of eighteen (18) feet for two-way travel and twelve (12) feet for one-way travel; 

b. 	
be surfaced with asphalt or another suitable non-erodible surface; and 

c. 	
be laid out so as to prevent traffic hazards and nuisances. 



4. 	
Parking stalls shall be eight (8) feet, six (6) inches wide and twenty (20) feet long, and the site plan shall provide for driving aisles at least twenty-four (24) feet wide. 


February 15, 2015 
105 

Section 5.7 
5. 	Exterior lighting shall: 
a. 	
be provided and maintained at all access points to streets, parking areas, building entrances, and elsewhere where required for the safety of vehic­ular or pedestrian traffic; 

b. 	
not be directed into any abutting properties; and 

c. 	
comply with Section 6.11. 



6. 	Sidewalks shall: 
a. 	
have a minimum width of four (4) feet; 

b. 	
be concrete, brick, or other surface acceptable to the Commission; and 

c. 	
be provided between dwelling units and parking areas, streets, and driveways. 



7. 	Retaining walls shall: 
a. 	
have a maximum height of fifteen (15) feet; 

b. 	
when tiered, be separated by at least four (4) feet; 

c. 	
be no closer to a side property line than five (5) feet; 

d. 	
have a surface treatment / appearance that is suitable to a residential de­velopment; and shall be screened from abutting property by planting or landscaping. 



8. 	
Stormwater Management: In addition to compliance with Section 6.4.J of these Regulations, applicant shall use Low Impact Design practices and techniques to the maximum extent possible, including the use of a "green roof" to collect and renovate stormwater. 

9. 	
Grading, Excavation, Soil Disturbance. 

a. 	
Excavating, grading, or soil disturbance, including removal of trees and vegetative ground cover, shall occur only as specifically approved by the Commission as part of site plan approval, and shall be granted only as essential to the construction or alteration of residential and accessory buildings, and installation of driveways, utilities, or amenities. 

b. 	
The applicant shall provide the Commission, in connection with its site plan application, a calculation and specification of the amount, lateral ex­tent, and depth of earth materials to be excavated; materials to be reused on-site; materials to be imported; and a net cut / fill calculation. 

c. 	
The application erosion control plan shall specifically address controls tai­lored to the amount, location, and timetable for cut, fill, excavation, and import / export. 

d. 
The applicant shall comply with the provision of Section 6.4.H and 6.4.I of these Regulations. 




February 15, 2015 

G. 	Standards and Regulations for Household Income and Sale / Resale Price Limitations 
A development in a Millport Housing Zone shall be either a "set aside develop­ment" or "assisted housing" in compliance with General Statutes § 8-30g. 
H. 	Affordable Apartment Home Requirements 
The purpose of the Millport Housing Zone is to facilitate a residential community containing household income / price-restricted dwellings that comply with § 8-30g of the General Statutes.  The following requirements shall apply: 
1. 	
Affordable apartment homes shall be of a construction quality that is comparable to a baseline specification for market-rate homes (if any) within the community. The Affordability Plan shall identify the locations within the community of the affordable apartment homes. 

2. 	
Calculation of the maximum monthly payment for affordable apartment homes, so as to satisfy General Statutes § 8-30g, shall utilize the median income data as published by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development in effect on the day a lease is executed. 

3. 	
The maximum monthly payment that the owner of an affordable apart­ment home shall pay shall not be greater than the amount that will pre­serve such unit as defined in General Statutes § 8-30g. 

4. 	
An affordable apartment home shall be occupied only as a principal resi­dence.  Sub-leasing of affordable apartment homes shall be prohibited. 

5. 	
Notice of availability of the apartment homes shall be provided by adver­tising such availability in the real estate section of a newspaper of general circulation in the Town of New Canaan, by providing notice to the New Canaan Town Council, the New Canaan Town Clerk, and the New Ca­naan Planning and Zoning Commission, and through the procedures out­lined in the affirmative fair housing marketing plan in the Affordability Plan. 

6. 	
Each lease for an affordable apartment home will contain substantially the following provision: 

"This apartment home is an affordable housing unit and is therefore sub­ject to a limitation at the date of leasing and occupancy on the maximum annual income of the household that may occupy the apartment home, and is subject to a limitation on the maximum monthly rent. These limita­tions shall be strictly enforced, and may be enforced by the zoning en­forcement authority of New Canaan." 

7. 	
The forty (40) year affordability period shall be calculated separately for each affordable apartment home in a Millport Housing Zone, and the pe­riod shall begin on the date, as stated in the lease, of occupancy of the affordable apartment home. 


February 15, 2015 
107 

Section 5.7 
8. 	A violation of the Regulations contained in this Section shall not result in a forfeiture or reversion of title, but the New Canaan Planning and Zoning Commission or its designated agent shall otherwise retain all enforce­ment powers granted by the Connecticut General Statutes, including the authority under § 8-12 to issue notices of violation, to impose fines, and to seek injunctive relief. 

I. Conflicts 
Where any provision of this Section conflicts with any other provisions of the New Canaan Zoning Regulations, the provisions of this Section shall govern. 
J. Submission Requirements 
1. 	
As applicant seeking approval of a site plan for a Millport Housing Zone development shall submit all information required by Section 8.2 of these Regulations. 

2. 	
The applicant shall also submit an Affordability Plan explaining how household income and rental price limits will be calculated and adminis­tered, and how the development will comply with General Statutes § 8­30g. 


February 15, 2015 

Adopted – November 29, 2016 Effective – December 29, 2016 Corrected Version – April 7, 2017 Corrected Language Underlined 
SECTION 5.8. 	PEDESTRIAN ORIENTED MULTI­FAMILY ZONE (POMZ) 
A. Purpose 
The Pedestrian Oriented Multi-Family Zone (POMZ) is intended to add to the di­versity of housing types in New Canaan located within walking distance (less than 1,000 feet) of the Metro North train station and downtown, and in an area that has the potential for development of higher density multi-family buildings within the Apartment Zone that supports transit and local demand for shops and services. The POMZ is an overlay zone, which enables an applicant to request Special Permit approval of a development using the provisions of this Section instead of those for the Apartment Zone, the underlying zone. The POMZ modifications to the Apartment Zone regulations are in conformance with the Plan of Conservation and Development and are designed to preserve health, safety, property values, and the residential character of New Canaan, broaden the housing opportunities in and near downtown, provide additional residential development within walking distance of the train station and the downtown shopping area, provide open spaces and opportunities for public access and connectivity, establish mid-block links in the pedestrian circulation system, minimize land area for surface parking, provide workforce housing, and establish parking requirements that support transit use and reduce land invested in parking. 
B. Properties Eligible for rezoning to POMZ Zone 
To be eligible for rezoning to POMZ: 
1. 	
The lot size must be at least three and one-quarter (3.25) acres; 

2. 	
The three and one-quarter (3.25) acre minimum shall have been held as a single parcel of land, whether by one owner or successive owners, for at least ten (10) consecutive years prior to an application for a zone change to POMZ zone; 

3. 	
The lot must have been located within the Apartment Zone for at least ten 

(10) years and in walking distance (less than 1,000 feet) to downtown and Metro North Train station; 

4. 	
At the time of the application the property must be connected to public water supply; 

5. 	
At the time of the application the property must be served by the Town sewage system; and 

6. 	
The planned multifamily buildings and units must comply with this Section of the Regulations as well as all other applicable provisions of the Regu­lations. In the event of any conflict between the provisions of this Section and any other Section of the Regulations, the provisions of this Section shall control. 


February 15, 2015 
109 

Section 5.8 
C. Uses Permitted by Special Permit Approval 
Multi-family residential dwellings units in one or more buildings located on at least a three and one-quarter (3.25) acre lot as set forth in Subsections 5.8.B.1 and 2. 
Uses customarily associated with services for multi-family residential dwellings 
(i.e. indoor fitness facilities, storage facilities, dry cleaning drop off and pick up, storage of lawn and maintenance equipment, etc.) 
D. Accessory Uses Permitted by Special Permit 
A home office, keeping of animals and other customary uses subject to the same conditions and limitations provided in Subsection 3.3.A.  
E. Dimensional Standards 
1. Lot-Related Standards 
Minimum zone unit area Minimum zone unit width Minimum front yard setbacks Minimum side and rear yard setbacks for all buildings  140,000 square feet 200 feet 25 feet 25 feet¹  
Maximum density Maximum building coverage Minimum open space area²  One (1) unit per 1,200 square feet of lot area 35% 50%  
2.  Building-Related Standards  

Maximum building height³ 45 feet 
Maximum total building height 55 feet 
Maximum stories 4 stories 
Maximum accessory building height 20 feet 1 ½ story 
Minimum gross floor area per unit 650 square feet 
Maximum number of units One hundred and twenty-five (125) units 

1 
The Commission may reduce the minimum side yard to no less than 12 feet in areas where the building on the adjacent property is more than 40 feet away. 
2 
Includes walks and open space over underground garages and excludes buildings and vehicular drives and parking. 
3 
In order to accommodate the underground parking, peaked roofs, and open space requirements, building height is determined by measuring from the entry level to the eave line and total building height is measured from the entry level. 
February 15, 2015 

3. Minimum Parking 
Parking Spaces 	1.5 spaces per unit 
F. Specific Lot-Related Standards 
1. 	
Landscaped front, side and rear yard buffer areas of at least twelve (12) feet in width shall be provided adjacent to each property line of the subject parcel. 

2. 	
Side and rear yard buffer areas shall be planted or preserved in a natural state in a mixture of evergreen and deciduous trees and shrubs and shall be maintained in proper order and present a reasonably opaque, natural barrier to a height of at least ten (10) feet. 

3. 	
Open space areas shall be provided with improvements that encourage pedestrian circulation for mid-block connections and a sense of community and place. 


G. Specific Parking-Related Standards 
1. 	
Eighty percent (80%) of the parking spaces on the site must be located underground. 

2. 	
Parking areas shall: 

a. 	
comply with Section 6.2 of these Regulations, except as otherwise provided within this section; and 

b. 	
be suitably screened from adjoining residential uses. 



3. 	
Parking stalls shall be at least nine (9) feet wide and eighteen (18) feet long, and the site plan shall provide for driving aisles for perpendicular parking of at least twenty-four (24) feet wide. 

4. 	
No portion of any parking area shall be more than 300 feet from the entrance of any building served thereby.  

5. 	
To the extent feasible, parking areas and access drives shall be designed so that vehicle headlights do not shine directly into the window of any unit. 

6. 	
Tandem Parking shall be allowed by the Site Plan Approval if the spaces in tandem configuration are allocated to one dwelling unit. No parking attendant shall be required. 


H. Site Plan and Other Standards 
1. 	
The POMZ development shall be reviewed using the criteria set forth in Subsection J of this Section. 

2. 	
All dwelling units and other uses shall be connected to and served by public water and shall be located within the sewer district. 

3. 	
Driveways and entrance and exit drives shall: 


February 15, 2015 
111 

Section 5.8 
a. 	
have a minimum width of twenty (20) feet for two-way travel and 
twelve (12) feet for one-way travel; 


b. 	
not extend within ten (10) feet of any building used wholly or in part for dwelling purposes unless it is an attached garage or underground parking; 

c. 	
be surfaced with asphalt or another suitable non-erodible surface; and 

d. 	
be laid out so as to prevent traffic hazards and nuisances. 



4. 	Exterior lighting shall: 
a. 	
be provided and maintained by the owner at all access points to streets, parking areas, building entrances and elsewhere where required for the safety of vehicular or pedestrian traffic; and 

b. 	
not be directed into any abutting properties. 



5. 	Sidewalks shall: 
a. 	
have a minimum width of five feet (5’); 

c. 	
be concrete, brick, or other surface acceptable to the Commission; and 

d. 	
be provided between dwelling units and parking areas, streets and driveways. 



I. Submission and other Approval Requirements 
1. 	
An applicant seeking approval for the rezoning of land to POMZ and of an accompanying Special Permit for development of multi-family residential dwellings in accordance herewith shall submit all information required in this Section and by applicable Sections of Article 8 of these Regulations. 

2. 	
Before the commission approves such special permit and rezoning appli­cation, it shall review the applications in accordance with applicable Sec­tions of Article 8 if these Regulations and shall determine that the applica­tion is in conformance with this section of the Regulations as well as all other applicable provisions of the Regulations. In the event of any con­flict between the provisions of this Section and any other Section of the Regulations, the provisions of this Section shall control. 



J. Design Review 
1. 	Purpose 
This Subsection is intended to govern the design aspects for POMZ and aid applicants in ensuring that their designs for a POMZ development encourage high quality building and site design, comply with the Plan of Conservation and Development, are designed to preserve health, safety, property values, and the residential character of New Canaan, broaden the housing opportunities near downtown, provide additional residential development in walking distance to the train station and downtown, reduce land utilized for 
February 15, 2015 

parking, and encourage public transit use and pedestrian access to downtown. 
2. Procedure 
The Commission shall review an application submitted pursuant to this Sec­tion in relation to the design guidelines of this Subsection. 
3. Guidelines 
a. 
Relationship of Buildings to Site and Adjoining Areas 

1. 
Buildings shall be organized in a coordinated and functional manner that is compatible with site features and residential characteristics. 

2. 
A unified design theme for building massing, exterior treatments and signage shall be established where harmony in textures, lines, and masses is provided and monotony is avoided. 

3. 
Parking areas shall be treated appropriately in relation to the build-ing(s), and preserve the residential quality of the neighborhood and the community while supporting transit use, encouraging pedestrian ac­cess to downtown, and reducing the amount land utilized for parking. 

4. 
Each building shall:  	provide suitable multi-family housing opportunities for seniors and young adults be compatible with its site; be designed to preserve health, safety, property values, and the overall residential character of New Canaan; provide suitable multi-family housing oppor­tunities within walking distance to the train station and downtown; and designed to encourage public transit use and pedestrian access to downtown. 

5. 
Newly installed utility services, and service revisions necessitated by exterior alterations, shall be underground. 

6. 
A desirable streetscape and attractive landscape transitions to adjoin­ing properties shall be provided. 



b.
 Landscape and Site Treatment 

1.
 Landscape treatment shall be provided to enhance architectural fea­tures, shield unsightly areas, provide shade, and relate to the natural environment and topography. 

2. 
Plant material that is non-invasive and native or adapted species, indigenous to the area shall be selected for its ultimate growth and for interest in its shape, texture, and color. 

3. 
Pedestrian walkways shall provide safe and convenient connections within the site and between adjacent sites and shall be constructed of all-weather materials appropriate for the location (such as brick, concrete, or paving blocks but not earth, gravel, or loose stone). 

4. 
Existing trees at four (4) inches or greater caliper shall be incorporated into the site plan to the extent feasible. 




February 15, 2015 
113 


Section 5.8 
c. 
Building Design 

1. 
Architectural features shall be of high quality and maintain a residential quality, while at the same time providing multifamily housing opportun­ities suitable for a transit oriented zone in walking distance of the train station and downtown. 

2. 
Facades and rooflines shall be articulated and/or varied to reduce the appearance of bulk and provide architectural interest. 

3. 
Building materials shall have good architectural character and durable quality and maintain a residential quality, while at the same time providing multifamily housing opportunities suitable for a transit orient­ed zone in walking distance of the train station and downtown. 

4. 
Building textures, colors, and components shall be in harmony with a residential neighborhood. 

5. 
Utility and service equipment areas shall be screened from public view with materials harmonious with the building(s). 



d.
 Signs and Lighting 

a. 
Every sign shall be designed as an integral architectural element of the building and site to which it principally relates and shall be coordinated with the building architecture. 

b. 
Exterior lighting, where used, shall enhance the building design and the adjoining landscape. 

c.
 Lighting shall be restrained in design and excessive brightness avoid­ed. 




February 15, 2015 

SECTION 5.9. CANAAN PARISH HOUSING ZONE 
A. 	Purpose 
The Canaan Parish Housing Zone is intended to increase economic diversity of housing types in New Canaan by allowing a small, well-designed and landscaped multi­family development. 
B. 	Properties Eligible for Rezoning to Canaan Parish Housing Zone 
To be eligible for rezoning to Canaan Parish Housing Zone, a parcel or parcels to be merged must total at least four (4.0) acres and have no less than 200 feet of frontage on Lakeview Avenue. 
C. 	Uses Permitted by Site Plan Approval 
Multi-family residential dwellings with a maximum of sixty-five (65) units per build­ing, with a total density of not more than thirty (30) units per gross acre. 
D. 	Accessory Uses Permitted by Site Plan Approval 
1. 	
Free-standing garage structures of not more than six spaces, with a minimum side yard of ten (10) feet. 

2. 	
Home offices and minor home occupations allowed by Sections 3.3.A.4 and 

3.3.B.4. 


3. 	
Free-standing bus shelter structure with no front yard minimum. 

4. 	
Clubhouse/community space for use by tenants. 


E. 	Dimensional Standards 
1. 	Lot-Related Standards 
Maximum building coverage Maximum combined impervious coverage  30 percent 65 percent  
2.  Principal Building Standards  
Maximum height (vertical distance from average grade of building to highest mean elevation between highest ridge and lowest corresponding eave) Maximum total height Maximum stories (a ground-level parking area shall not constitute a story) Minimum front yard Minimum side yard Minimum rear yard Minimum separation distance between buildings Parking  56 feet 67 feet 4.0 stories 10 feet 12 feet 15 feet 5 feet 1.5 spaces per apartment home  

September 20, 2018 
115 


Section 5.9 
F. Site Plan Standards 
1. 	
In accordance with Subsection 3.6.C, new construction or renovation of the exterior of any multi-family residential building or any detached gar­age shall be reviewed using the criteria set forth in subsection 6.12.D of these Regulations. 

2. 	
All dwelling units and other uses shall be located within the sewer district, and shall be connected to public water. 

3. 	
Driveways and entrance and exit drives shall: 

a. 	
have a minimum width of eighteen (18) feet for two-way travel and twelve (12) feet for one-way travel; 

b. 	
be surfaced with asphalt or another suitable non-erodible surface; and 

c. 	
be laid out so as to prevent traffic hazards and nuisances. 



4. 	
Parking stalls shall be nine (9) feet wide and twenty (20) feet long, and the site plan shall provide for driving aisles at least twenty­four (24) feet wide. 

5. 	
Exterior lighting shall: 

a. 	
be provided and maintained at all access points to streets, parking areas, building entrances, and elsewhere where required for the safety of vehicular or pedestrian traffic; 

b. 	
not be directed into any abutting properties; and 

c. 	
comply with Section 6.11. 



6. 	
Sidewalks shall: 

a. 	
have a minimum width of four (4) feet; 

b. 	
be concrete, brick, or other surface acceptable to the Commission; and 

c. 	
be provided between dwelling units and parking areas, streets, and driveways. 



7. 	
Retaining walls shall: 

a. 	
have a maximum height of fifteen (15) feet; 

b. 	
when tiered, be separated by at least four (4) feet; 

c. 	
be no closer to a side property line than one (1) foot; 

d. 	
have a surface treatment/appearance that is suitable to a residential development; and shall be screened from abutting property by plant­ing or landscaping. 




September 20, 2018 

8. 	
Stormwater Management: In addition to compliance with Section 6.4.J of these Regulations, applicant shall use Low Impact Design practices and techniques to the maximum extent possible. 

9. 	
Grading, Excavation, Soil Disturbance. 

a. 	
Excavating, grading, or soil disturbance, including removal of trees and vegetative ground cover, shall occur only as specifically ap­proved by the Commission as part of site plan approval, and shall be granted only as essential to the construction or alteration of residen­tial and accessory buildings, and installation of driveways, utilities, or amenities. 

b. 	
The applicant shall provide the Commission, in connection with its site plan application, a calculation and specification of the amount, lateral extent, and depth of earth materials to be excavated; materials to be reused on-site; materials to be imported; and a net cut/fill calcu­lation. 

c. 	
The application erosion control plan shall specifically address con­trols tailored to the amount, location, and timetable for cut, fill, exca­vation, and import/ export. 

d. 	
The applicant shall comply with the provision of Section 6.4.H and 




6.4.1 of these Regulations. 
G. 	Standards and Regulations for Household Income and Sale/Resale Price Limitations 
A development in a Canaan Parish Housing Zone shall be either a "set aside de­velopment" or "assisted housing" in compliance with General Statutes § 8-30g. 
H. 	Affordable Apartment Home Requirements 
The purpose of the Canaan Parish Housing Zone is to facilitate a residential community containing household income/price-restricted dwellings that comply with § 8-30g of the General Statutes. The following requirements shall apply: 
1. 	
Affordable apartment homes shall be of a construction quality that is comparable to a baseline specification for market-rate homes (if any) within the community. The Affordability Plan shall identify the locations within the community of the affordable apartment homes. 

2. 	
Calculation of the maximum monthly payment for affordable apartment homes, so as to satisfy General Statutes § 8-30g, shall utilize the median income data as published by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development in effect on the day a lease is executed. 

3. 	
The maximum monthly payment that the owner of an affordable apart­ment home shall pay shall not be greater than the amount that will pre­serve such unit as defined in General Statutes § 8-30g. 

4. 	
An affordable apartment home shall be occupied only as a principal resi­dence. Sub-leasing of affordable apartment homes shall be prohibited. 


September 20, 2018 
117 

Section 5.9 
5. 	
Notice of availability of the apartment homes shall be provided by adver­tising such availability in the real estate section of a newspaper of general circulation in the Town of New Canaan, by providing notice to the New Canaan Town Council, the New Canaan Town Clerk, and the New Ca­naan Planning and Zoning Commission, and through the procedures out­lined in the affirmative fair housing marketing plan in the Affordability Plan. 

6. 	
Each lease for an affordable apartment home will contain substantially the following provision: 

"This apartment home is an affordable housing unit and is therefore sub­ject to a limitation at the date of leasing and occupancy on the maximum annual income of the household that may occupy the apartment home, and is subject to a limitation on the maximum monthly rent. These limita­tions shall be strictly enforced, and may be enforced by the zoning en­forcement authority of New Canaan." 

7. 	
The forty (40) year affordability period shall be calculated separately for each affordable apartment home in a Canaan Parish Housing Zone, and the period shall begin on the date, as stated in the lease, of occupancy of the affordable apartment home. 

8. 	
A violation of the Regulations contained in this Section shall not result in a forfeiture or reversion of title, but the New Canaan Planning and Zoning Commission or its designated agent shall otherwise retain all enforce­ment powers granted by the Connecticut General Statutes, including the authority under § 8-12 to issue notices of violation, to impose fines, and to seek injunctive relief. 



I. Conflicts 
Where any provision of this Section conflicts with any other provisions of the New Canaan Zoning Regulations, the provisions of this Section shall govern. 
J. Submission Requirements 
1. 	
As applicant seeking approval of a site plan for a Canaan Parish Housing Zone development shall submit all information required by Section 8.2 of these Regulations. 

2. 	
The applicant shall also submit an Affordability Plan explaining how household income and rental price limits will be calculated and adminis­tered, and how the development will comply with General Statutes § 8­30g. 



September 20, 2018 

ARTICLE 6 -BASIC STANDARDS 

SECTION 6.1. LANDSCAPING 
A. Applicability 
This Section of the Regulations shall apply whenever any proposed building, structure, or development activity requires the submission of a Site Plan applica­tion or a Special Permit application. These provisions shall not apply to the con­struction or development of a single-family dwelling or a two-family dwelling un­less part of a multi-family development except that tree removal, grading, and excavation activities incidental to or in preparation for landscaping, demolition, construction, or site development (including single-family dwellings and two-family dwellings) may be regulated under Section 6.4, Section 6.6, and/or Section 6.7 of these Regulations. 
B. Overall Landscaping Standards 
1. 	
All portions of a property not required for buildings, structures, parking, drive­ways, or sidewalks shall be landscaped with ground cover, trees, and ever­green shrubs. 

2. 	
To the extent possible, existing trees, vegetation, and unique site features, such as stone walls, shall be retained and protected. 

3. 	
Existing healthy, mature trees expected to survive shall be fully credited against the requirements of these Regulations. 

4. 	
The required landscaped areas may include sidewalks, but there shall be a minimum of sixty (60) percent of the required landscaped area used for plant­ing in any Retail Zone or any Business Zone. 

5. 	
In any Retail Zone or any Business Zone, planted areas adjacent to a building shall be a minimum of three (3) feet in width and all others a minimum of five 

(5) feet in width. 


6. 	
In accordance with Town Code Section 54-19, the property owner shall land­scape and maintain any area between the front lot line and the edge of the street pavement. 

7. 	
In any Retail Zone or any Business Zone, at least one (1) shade tree having a caliper of not less than two (2) inches, measured at four (4) feet above the ground, shall be provided within the front landscaped area for each fifty (50) feet or fraction thereof of lot frontage and along the roads bordering the prop­erty lines. 

8. 	
Where physical characteristics of the lot or existing structures make it unfea­sible to comply with the requirements for a front landscaped area or land­scaped parking area in any Retail Zone or any Business Zone, the Commis­sion may approve the substitution of planters, plant boxes or pots containing trees, shrubs and/or flowers to comply with the intent of these Regulations. 


119 


C. Perimeter Landscaping Standards 
1. 	
In any Retail Zone or any Business Zone, property lines which are adjacent to residential properties shall be screened by a decorative fence or wall and/or closely-planted evergreen trees and shrubs to provide visual screening. 

2. 	
In any Retail Zone or any Business Zone, perimeter landscaping, fencing or wall treatment shall be of such type, height, spacing and arrangement which, in the judgment of the Commission, shall effectively screen the activity on the subject lot from the neighboring residential area and provide protection from noise, headlight glare and visual intrusion to dwellings and residential yards. 


D. Parking Area Landscaping Standards 
1. 	
In addition to the other provisions of this Section, parking areas which contain twenty (20) or more parking spaces shall have landscaped islands providing shade trees and shrubs. 

2. 	
At least ten (10) square feet of interior landscaping within the paved portion of the parking area shall be provided for each parking space. 

3. 	
There shall not be more than ten (10) parking spaces in a row without being broken with curbing and a landscaped area to provide relief from the expanse of pavement and to provide plant materials, which have a moderating effect on noise, air pollution and temperature. 

4. 	
A landscaped area shall also be provided at the ends of parking rows to sep­arate parking spaces from the circulation aisles. 

5. 	
Spaces which cannot be used for parking, such as perimeter corners be­tween parking stalls, shall be incorporated into the landscaped area rather than being paved. 

6. 	
At least one (1) shade tree of not less than a two-inch caliper, measured at four (4) feet above the ground, shall be provided within the parking islands and adjacent to the parking area for every ten (10) parking spaces. 

7. 	
Each landscaped area shall contain a minimum of 100 square feet, shall have a minimum dimension of at least eight feet and shall be planted with ground cover, grass or shrubs, in addition to any shade tree requirements. 

8. 	
All landscaping, trees, and planting material adjacent to parking areas, load­ing areas or driveways shall be properly protected by barriers, curbs or other means from damage by vehicles. 

9. 	
The location and selection of plant materials shall provide for easy identifica­tion of traffic barriers and islands without obstructing vision of other vehicles, pedestrians or traffic signage. 

10. 
Landscaping plans shall be designed to accommodate storage areas for pil­ing snow. 


120 

E. Maintenance 
1. 	
Landscaping, trees and plants required by these Regulations shall be planted and maintained in a healthy, growing condition according to accepted horti­cultural practices. 

2. 	
Any landscaping, trees, and plants which are in a condition that does not fulfill the intent of these Regulations shall be replaced by the property owner during the next planting season for the particular plant material. 

3. 	
Any screening fence, wall, or curbing required by these Regulations shall be maintained by the property owner in good condition throughout the period of the use of the lot. 


F. Landscaping Materials 
Landscaping materials selected for use shall be acceptable to the Commission and native, non-invasive species are preferred. 
G. Bonding 
1. 	
The Commission or the Zoning Inspector may require that a performance bond, in an acceptable form and an amount to be set by the Zoning Inspec­tor, be provided to insure the faithful performance of the landscaping work to be undertaken. 

2. 	
Following the completion of landscaping for a project where a bond was re­quired, the Zoning Inspector may require an as-built plan to be filed with the Commission, showing the relationship between the approved plan and the actual landscaping. 


H. Modification of Requirements 
1. 	
The Commission may, by Special Permit, allow these standards to be re­duced in special circumstances where other adequate landscape treatment is provided. 

2. 	
During construction, the Zoning Inspector may allow field substitutions of plant material provided the original intent of the landscape is maintained. 


121 




SECTION 6.2. PARKING AND LOADING 

A. Purpose 
This Section is intended to provide adequate parking and loading facilities to serve all existing and proposed uses. 
B. Applicability 
1. 	
Off-street motor vehicle parking facilities and off-street loading spaces, to­gether with adequate exits and entrances thereto and interior aisles, shall be installed and permanently maintained as provided in this Section for each building erected, enlarged or altered and for any land or premises hereafter used, except that no off-street motor vehicle parking facilities or off-street loading spaces shall be required within the Retail A Zone. 

2. 	
On land owned or leased by the Town and located in any zone, the parking of motor vehicles is a permitted use, and any charge made for parking of motor vehicles thereon shall not constitute a business use in the interpretation of these Regulations. 


C. Minimum Amount of Parking and Loading Facilities 
1. 	
The minimum amount of parking and loading facilities required for any prop­erty shall be determined by applying the standards of this Section to the actu­al and proposed uses and when the requirements result in a fractional num­ber, the minimum requirement shall be rounded up to the next whole number. 

2. 	
Where different uses occur on a single parcel of land, the parking and loading spaces to be provided with respect to such parcel shall be the aggregate of the requirements for each such use, unless otherwise indicated in the regula­tions. 

3. 	
Except as may be provided in Subsection 6.2.E, all required parking spaces shall be maintained for the exclusive use of residents, patrons, employees or tenants of the building(s) on the site and shall not be used to meet the park­ing requirements of any other use. 

4. 	
Any parking rights acquired from another parcel shall be recorded in the land records in the deed of each parcel involved in such agreement. 

5. 	
In the Business B Zone, any use (other than warehousing) which has more than twenty-five percent (25%) of its gross floor area in the form of storage facilities may have up to fifty percent (50%) of such storage area deducted from the total building gross floor area for the purpose of computing parking requirements provided: 

a. 	
such storage area shall be clearly identified on any application for a Zon­ing Permit, 

b. 	
such storage area shall be certified by the applicant as not housing any employee rest area, office area, work area or sales area, 

c. 	
use of such area for purposes other than storage shall constitute a viola­tion of these Regulations, and 

d. 	
required loading space shall still be based upon the total building gross floor area. 




122 

Residential Uses  
Use  Minimum  Minimum  
Parking Facilities  Loading Facilities  

Single-family dwelling 
Single-family dwelling with accessory dwelling unit 
Single-family dwelling with home-based business 
Two-family dwelling 
Multi-family dwellings (20 units or less) 
Multi-family dwellings (> 20 units) 
Multi-family dwellings in mixed-use developments (10 units or less) 
Multi-family dwellings in mixed-use developments (> 10 units) 
Two (2) spaces 
Two (2) spaces for the dwelling unit plus one space for the accessory dwelling unit 
Two (2) spaces for the dwelling unit plus ade­quate parking for em­ployees, clients, and visitors screened by landscaping from abut­ting residentially zoned parcels 
Two (2) spaces / unit 
Four (4) spaces total 
Two (2) spaces per 
1
unit
One and one half 
1
(1.5) spaces per unit
Two (2) spaces per unit 
One and one half (1.5) spaces for studios and 1 bedroom units and two (2) spaces for 2 or more bedroom units 
None 
None 

None 

None 
None 

None 
At least one (1) loading 

2
space per building At least one (1) loading 
2
space per building 
Basic Standards 


Retail, Business, Bank, or Office Uses 
Use Minimum Minimum Parking Spaces Loading Spaces 
Located on any floor nearest in One space per 200 vertical height to the curb level of square feet of gross any adjacent street. floor area on that floor At least one (1) loading 
2 
space per buildingOne space per 270 Located on any other floor, (in-square feet of gross cluding basement or cellar). 

floor area 

Medically-Related Uses 
Use Minimum Minimum Parking Spaces Loading Spaces 
One space per 150 

Medical offices or clinics located 
square feet of gross None 

within a Business or Retail Zone 
floor area. 
December 15, 2014 
123 


Medical offices or clinics outside a Business or Retail Zone 
Hospitals, sanatoriums or nurs­ing homes 
Five (5) spaces per  
practitioner and  
screened from abutting  None  
residentially zoned par­ 
cels  
One (1) space per five  
(5) beds and at least  
one (1) space per two  At least one loading  
(2) employees and as- space per building 2  
sociated professional  
personnel  


Other Business Uses  
Use  Minimum  Minimum  
Parking Spaces  Loading Spaces  

Restaurants, nightclubs, or eat­ing places 
Hotels 
Industrial, wholesale, or manu­facturing establishments. 
Car washes 
One space per 100 square feet of gross floor area. 
One space per guest room 
One space per 300 square feet of gross floor area 
Usable off-street stack­ing space equal to one-third of the maximum hourly capacity of the facility plus off-street parking facilities as determined by the Commission At least one (1) loading 
2 
space per building 
None 

Other Uses  
Use  Minimum  Minimum  
Parking Spaces  Loading Spaces  

Clubs 
Auditoriums, stadiums, theaters or other places of assemblage, together with churches 
Railroad stations 
Unlisted Uses 
One space per three (3) members. 
One space per five (5) 
seats based on maxi­
mum seating capacity. 
One space per 100 square feet of total plat­form and station area 
As determined by the Commission based on the requirements appli­cable to comparable uses. As determined by the Commission based on the requirements appli­cable to comparable 
2 
uses 

¹ The Commission may require additional guest or service provider parking as they deem appropriate. 
² Additional off-street loading spaces may be required by the Commission if, in its opinion, such additional off-street loading spaces are necessary to adequately meet the needs of the location where they are to be provided. 
124 

D. Handicapped Parking Facilities 
1. 	
Where the installation of parking spaces is required by these Regulations, parking spaces for the physically handicapped shall be provided as follows: 

2. 	
Such parking spaces shall be located: 

a. 	
as close as possible to the nearest accessible ramp, walkway, and build­ing entrance on an accessible route; 

b. 	
so that physically handicapped persons shall not be compelled to wheel or walk behind parked cars to reach the nearest accessible ramp, walk­way, and building entrance. 



3. 	
A handicapped parking space shall be: 

a. 	
no less than eight (8) feet wide with a crosshatched, painted access aisle no less than eight (8) feet wide if it is a van-accessible handicapped park­ing space, or 

b. 	
no less than ten (10) feet wide with an adjacent crosshatched, painted access aisle no less than five (5) feet wide if a handicapped parking space.  



4. 	
Two (2) adjacent handicapped parking spaces may share a common access aisle. 

5. 	
All handicapped accessible parking spaces shall be clearly designated with signs situated approximately 5 feet above grade and, wherever possible, with pavement markings. Signs shall display the international symbol of access and shall bear the words "Handicapped Parking Permit Required" and "Viola­tors Will Be Fined." Accessible spaces for vans shall also bear the words "Van-Accessible." 

6. 	
Where these standards conflict with any applicable provisions of CGS 14­253a(h), the State Building Code, or the Americans with Disabilities Act (28 CFR Part 36) as they may be amended, the more stringent standard shall prevail. 


Total Number  Minimum Number of Van- 
of Parking  Minimum Number  Accessible Spaces (included  
Spaces in Lot  of HC Spaces  in total HC spaces)  

Up to 25  1  1  
26 to 50  2  1  
51 to 75  3  1  
76 to 100  4  1  
101 to 150  5  1  
151 to 200  6  1  
201 to 300  7  1  
301 to 400  8  1  
401 to 500  9  2  
501 to 1,000  2 percent  of total  
number of spaces  
1,001 plus  20 spaces plus 1  12.5 percent of total number of  
space for every 100  HC spaces  
spaces over 1,000  
spaces  

December 15, 2014 
125 


E. Reduction of Parking Facilities 
1. 	Permanent Shared Use Reduction -The Commission may, by Special Per­mit, allow a reduction of up to 25% of the required parking spaces, up to a maximum of five (5) spaces, within the Retail B, Business A, Business B, Business C and Business D Zones and up to 40% of the required parking spaces, within the Business B Zone, for the uses on one or more sites due to shared use of parking facilities when: 
a. 	
the parking facilities provided on the site(s) are interconnected with adja­cent parking facilities to create a functional parking arrangement, and 

b. 	
appropriate access and parking easements are executed between the adjacent properties, and 

c. 	
the Commission is satisfied that the parking needs of the joint users on the sites occur at different hours of the day or that adequate parking will be available for the current and potential future uses, and 

d. 	
a traffic and parking study be submitted and a subsequent peer review of such study is conducted on any application requesting a reduction of five 


(5) or more parking spaces. The thorough peer review must definitively confirm that there is adequate parking on site and there will be no nega­tive impacts on the street or surrounding properties. 

2. 	Permanent Site Use Reduction -The Commission may, by Special Permit, allow a reduction of up to 25% of the required parking spaces, up to a maxi­mum of five (5) spaces, within the Retail B, Business A, Business B, Busi­ness C and Business D Zones and up to 40% of the required parking spaces, within the Business B Zone, on an individual site that is not interconnected with one or more adjacent parking facilities when the Commission is satisfied that: 
a. 	
the parking needs of the uses on the site occur at different hours of the day, and 

b. 	
adequate parking will be available for the current and potential future us­es, and 

c. 	
a traffic and parking study be submitted and a subsequent peer review of such study is conducted on any application requesting a reduction of five 

(5) or more parking spaces. The thorough peer review must definitively confirm that there is adequate parking on site and there will be no nega­tive impacts on the street or surrounding properties, and 

d. 	
if proposed within a mixed-use development there is adequate parking for both the commercial and residential tenants. 



3. 	Temporary Installation Deferral -The Commission may, by Special Permit, defer the immediate installation of up to 25% of the required parking spaces where: 
a. 	
sufficient evidence has been presented, in the judgment of the Commis­sion, to show that the reduced parking facilities will adequately serve the proposed use, 

b. 	
the applicant shall show upon the Site Development Plan the complete layout for the full parking requirements, 

c. 	
the applicant accepts, in writing, a requirement that the owner will file the Site Development Plan in the -Office of the Town Clerk, stipulating that the owner, or the successor and assigns of the owner, will install as many of the deferred parking spaces as the Commission deems necessary within 6 months of the Commission's request, when, in the opinion of the Commission, such Installation is needed. 


August 8, 2016 

4. 	Curb-Cut Reduction Credit -The Commission may, by Special Permit, per­manently grant a property a reduction of one (1) on-site parking space for each on-street public parking space added through the removal and or reduc­tion of curb-cuts, provided the Commission makes affirmative findings that the proposed development will result in a significant community benefit such as: 
. 	consolidation of two or more parcels into a meaningful master plan, 
. 	excellence in design which enhances the pedestrian experience and overall streetscape (such as avoiding driveways interrupting the sidewalk), and/or 
. 	other meaningful public amenities. 
5. 	Fee-in-lieu-of Parking 
a. 	
Bya 2/3’s vote, the Commission may, by Special Permit, allow for a perma­nent reduction of all or a portion of the parking spaces required, provided the applicant pays a fee-in-lieu-of the required parking spaces, pursuant to Sec­tion 8-2c of the Connecticut General Statutes. The Special Permit is applica­ble to any new construction or addition, or change in Use in the Retail B, Business A, Business B, Business C or Business D zones, which requires additional parking spaces pursuant to Section 6.2.C of these regulations. 

b. 	
Fees collected from such payments shall be placed into a fund to be used solely for the acquisition, development, expansion or capital repair of public parking facilities. 

c. 	
The fee shall be determined as follows: 


1. 	For any proposed new construction and/or addition, the fee for one (1) parking space shall be no less than $17,500. Final price per space will be determined as follows: 
Number of Spaces x $17,500 

2. 	The price per space can be reduced to $15,000 if the applicant attains LEED Silver Certification for the proposed construction. The price per space can be reduced to $12,500 if the applicant attains LEED Gold Cer­tification.  
The price reduction would be returned to the applicant upon written notifi­cation from the US Green Building Council or its equivalent that Certifica­tion had been granted.   
The Commission may also approve the same price reductions per space should the applicant seek accreditation from an alternative rating agency based on their equivalent rating to LEED standards. 
3. 	For any proposed change in Use that requires additional parking spaces per Section 6.2.C of these regulations, the final price per space will be determined as follows: 
Number of Spaces x $10,000 

4. 	The fees listed above will be reviewed by the Commission on an annual basis to determine whether they need to be adjusted based on such fac­tors as materials costs, construction costs and/or inflation. 
d. 	
The fee shall be paid prior to the issuance of a Zoning Permit. 

e. 	
As part of this Special Permit Application, the applicant shall submit a Traffic Report, prepared by a qualified Traffic Engineer, to study the impacts that 


August 8, 2016 
127 

added development will have, if none or less than the required off-street park­ing is provided. 

f. 	No Special Permit under this section shall be approved unless the Commis­sion finds and declares that the number of parking spaces which would be required in connection with such use of land pursuant to any applicable plan­ning or zoning regulation: 
1. 	
Could not be physically located on such parcel of land for which such use is proposed; 

2. 	
Will not detract from the village feel and quality of life in the downtown; and 

3. 	
The proposed development will be beneficial to the community and is consistent with the Plan of Conservation and Development and is in keeping with the Village District Design Guidelines. 



F. Location of Parking and Loading Facilities 
1. 	The off-street motor vehicle parking facilities and off-street loading spaces required by this Section in any Retail Zone and any Business Zone shall be located on the same land as the use or building served thereby except that: 
a. 	
The Commission may permit two (2) or more abutting properties to be served by a common facility situated on one (1) or more of said proper­ties. 

b. 	
The Commission may permit parking facilities to be on land within five hundred (500) feet of a building or use if it determines that it is impractical to provide parking facilities on the same land where the building or use is located, provided that any parking rights acquired from another parcel shall be recorded in the land records in the deed of each parcel involved in such agreement.  



2. 	
Within any of the Retail or Business zones, off-street parking facilities shall be located to the rear of any proposed building. Any parking proposed to be located to the side of the building must demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the Commission, that some or all of the parking cannot be located at the rear of the building and that the parking will be screened to the extent possible. 

3. 	
The Commission may, through the granting of a Special Permit, allow parking in the front of the building, provided that the Commission finds that: 

a. 	
The proposed parking improves pedestrian safety, or 

b. 	
There are unique circumstances to this site that make parking in front of the building a necessity, or 

c. 	
The proposed use, which the Commission finds will benefit the communi­ty, requires parking in front of the building. 



4. 	
Within any of the Retail or Business zones, no parking shall be located within the required side or rear yard setbacks, unless the Commission finds that there is suitable screening to prevent any adverse impacts on neighboring properties.  

5. 	
Parking lots in any Retail Zone or any Business Zone shall be located at least five (5) feet from a building, except as may be required for loading facilities. 

6. 	
Parking structures, whether detached or attached, shall not be permitted, ex­cept in a Business or Retail Zone, where these Regulations allow parking to be provided underground, within the envelope of the building, or in a separate structure on the same site. The design of such structure shall be consistent with §6.12, Design Review and the Village District Design Guidelines.  


7. 
Where the required parking spaces in any Retail Zone or any Business Zone are provided by garage or other covered space, the location of such garage 

or other covered space shall be in conformity with the Zoning Regulations re­lating to the zone and class of August 8, 2016 . 

8. 	
Underground parking: 

a. 	
may be provided in lieu of required surface facilities, 

b. 	
may be permitted as a substitute for, or in addition to, surface parking to allow the area normally occupied by surface parking to remain undis­turbed or to provide open space, landscaping and similar amenities, 

c. 	
may permit a larger above-ground structure or intensification in use of the site to an above-ground floor area exceeding the applicable floor ratio by up to fifteen percent (15%), 

d. 	
shall be hidden from view from abutting properties, and street-level views of underground parking access shall be minimized, and 

e. 	
shall be designed such that any first-floor level above such parking shall not exceed the curb level of any adjacent street by more than two (2) feet. 



9. 	
No parking facility shall be established without adequate driveway and aisle access except that the Commission may, by Special Permit, allow tandem parking and may require a full-time parking attendant, provided such ar­rangement is approved by the Fire Marshal. 


G. Size of Parking and Loading Facilities 
1. 	
Except as provided below, off-street parking spaces and aisles shall be in­stalled and maintained as follows: 

2. 	
Each off-street loading space shall be at least ten (10) by twenty-five (25) feet, with a height clearance of at least fourteen (14) feet. 

3. 	
All residential parking spaces shall have a minimum twenty (20) foot backup area. 



A  Parking angle  30°  45°  60°  90°  
B  Curb length  18'-0"  12'-9"  10'-5"  9'-0"  
C  Stall depth  16'-6"  19'-10"  21'-0"  20'-0"  
D  Vehicular aisle width – Two-way circulation  24'-0"  24'-0"  24'-0"  24'-0"  
D  Vehicular aisle width – one-way circulation  11'-0"  13'-0"  18'-0"  24'-0"  

August 8, 2016 
129 


4. 	In order to promote additional parking for mixed-use projects within Business Zones (Village Districts) the Commission may, allow the minimum stall depth to be reduced to not less than eighteen (18) feet from the standard indicated above, provided the Commission makes an affirmative finding that the di­mensions provided for vehicular access, site circulation, and parking, are ap­propriate for the site and that the reduction in dimension may result in either additional landscape buffering features, aide in the use of LID features or al­lows additional pedestrian enhancements such as sidewalks, walkways or gathering spaces. 
H. Specifications for Parking and Loading Facilities 
1. 	
Except for private residences, every parking facility shall be graded, hard-surfaced, drained, and permanently marked to delineate both the individual parking spaces and the uses served thereby. 

2. 	
Every parking facility shall be maintained by the owner of the premises. 

3. 	
Where required parking areas abut upon public streets or sidewalks, perma­nent barriers or bumpers shall be provided. 

4. 	
Completion of the off-street motor vehicle parking facilities and off-street loading spaces required by this Section shall be a condition precedent to the issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy. 


I. Access Drives 
1. 	
No exit from or entrance to an off-street motor vehicle parking facility or off-street loading space shall be so laid out as to constitute or create a traffic hazard or nuisance. 

2. 	
Driveways to the street in any Retail Zone or any Business Zone shall be a minimum of twelve (12) feet wide for one-way traffic, shall not exceed twenty-four (24) feet in width, and shall not exceed two (2) in number. 

3. 	
Lots containing less than one hundred fifty (150) feet of street frontage in any Retail Zone or any Business Zone shall be limited to one (1) driveway to the street, except where the nature of the business requires drive-through ser­vice, i.e., drive-in banks and gas stations. 

4. 	
Driveway access in any Retail Zone or any Business Zone shall be permitted to a street or parking facility on an adjacent lot and connections to adjacent parking lots shall, at the Commission's discretion, be made wherever practi­cal. 

5. 	
Driveways to adjacent lots in any Retail Zone or any Business Zone shall be a minimum of twelve (12) feet wide for one-way traffic, shall not exceed twenty-four (24) feet in width, and shall not exceed two (2) in number. 

6. 	
Lots in any Retail Zone or any Business Zone with a side property line of less than two hundred (200) feet in length shall be limited to one (1) driveway connecting with an adjoining lot for each side. 


J. Existing Off-Street Parking and Loading Facilities 
1. 	Where, as of the effective date of this Section, off-street motor vehicle park­ing facilities and off-street loading spaces are provided conforming in whole or in part to the provisions of this Section, such off-street parking facilities and off-street loading spaces shall not be altered or reduced in area below the re­quirements set forth herein. 
August 8, 2016 

2. 	In the event, however, that there shall be an enlargement or alteration of any building served by such off-street motor vehicle parking facilities or off-street loading spaces or a new or changed use of the property requiring additional off-street parking facilities or off-street loading spaces under the provisions of this Section, such additional off-street parking facilities or off-street loading spaces shall be provided as required herein. 
K. Policing of Parking Spaces 
Nothing contained in this Section shall be construed to prohibit the owner or own­ers of the land on which such off-street parking facilities are located from policing the same and from forbidding the parking of motor vehicles thereon when the owner or user of such motor vehicle is not making use of the facilities, uses or buildings for which such parking area is provided. 
August 8, 2016 
131 


SECTION 6.3. SIGNS 
A. Purpose 
This Section is intended to control the number, size, location, lighting, and type of signs in order to protect the public safety and general welfare. 
B. Applicability 
No sign, billboard, signpost or structure displaying advertising or other matter shall which is visible and legible from a public street be erected, attached to, or maintained on property subject to these Regulations, except as permitted by the provisions of this Section. 
C. Signs Permitted In Residential Zones 
1. Permitted By Right 
Maximum Maximum 
Type of Sign Number Size / Area 

Lawn sign bearing the name of the prop­erty and/or the name of the occupant  One sign per lot  Twenty-four by six (24 x 6) inches  
Real estate sign as defined in these Reg­ulations  One sign per lot  Three (3) square feet  
Sign identifying a minor home-occupation as defined in these Regulations  One sign per lot  One square foot  
Detached security these Regulations  sign  as  defined  in  Two signs per lot  One square foot per sign  
Political signs associated with an official election or referendum provided that such signs are removed within seven (7) days after the election or referendum  Not Applicable  Not Applicable  
2. Permitted By Zoning Permit  
Type of Sign  Maximum Number  Maximum Size / Area  
Sign identifying a major home occupation as defined in these Regulations  One sign per lot  One square foot  
Approved multi-family developments, churches, schools, public libraries, and commercial farming operations  One sign per street frontage  Four (4) square feet  
3. Permitted By Site Plan Approval  
Type of Sign  Maximum Number  Maximum Size / Area  
Other approved Special Permit uses Any sign not meeting the specifications of Section 6.3.C.  One sign per street frontage Four (4) square feet As approved by the Commission after considering the size, location, use, or other unique conditions.  

132 

D. Signs Permitted In Business Zones 
1. 	Permitted By Zoning Permit 
Signs complying with the following may be authorized by the Zoning Inspector upon submission of a complete application with all required supporting materials: 
Sign Number One sign per business, except that: . a second sign may be allowed on a corner lot 
. 	a secondary identification sign (< 1 SF) may be allowed for the back entrance of a first-floor use 

.  a secondary street level identification sign  
(<1 SF) may be allowed for the front en­ 
trance of a second floor use  
Sign Type  Wall-mounted signs only.  No additional signage  
is permitted on window glass.  
Sign Mounting  On or against the wall of the structure  
Sign Location  No portion shall be located more than four (4)  
feet above the top of the doors or windows on  
the ground floor on such side of the building  
No sign shall extend above the eaves line on  
any building  
Maximum Dimensions  20 inches vertical  
If Rectangular  15 feet horizontal  
Maximum Dimension  Four (4) feet  
If Circle Or Oval  

Maximum Letter Height 
. 	Single line of lettering 12” letters 
. Double line of lettering 	8” letters, one (1) line; 4” letters, other line 
Max. Area of All Signage 1 25 square feet per lot 2 
1. 	
The maximum area limitation per lot is irrespective of the number of separate businesses conducted thereon. 

2. 	
For signs with two (2) sides, only one (1) side shall count for measurement pur­poses. 


2. 	Permitted By Site Plan Approval. 
Any proposed sign(s) not meeting the above specifications may be approved by the Commission by Site Plan Approval. The Commission shall review the pro­posal, giving due regard to its relationship to the size, location, topography, occu­pancy or other unique conditions pertaining to the lot or building(s) thereon, and may authorize the Zoning Inspector to issue such permit where it is found to be warranted. 
August 8, 2016 
133 


E. Sign Illumination 
Signs which are visible from a public street or other public space may be illumi­nated, directly or indirectly, by white lights only. Light emitting diodes (LED’s), CFL’s and fluorescent bulbs must be in the color range of 2,700K-3,000K. 
F. Prohibited Signs 
1. 	
No sign illumination shall involve the use of neon or any other method result­ing in a similar appearance to neon, including, but not limited to, illumination through fiber optics or similar media. Light boxes are not permitted. 

2. 	
No signs or parts thereof, streamers, balloons, or other devices which flash, move or give the impression of movement in any fashion shall be permitted. 

3. 	
Construction signs, painter signs, landscape company signs and the like shall not be allowed in any Residence Zone. 

4. 	
In any Retail Zone or any Business Zone, no sign shall be located forward of the building or setback line. 

5. 	
Except for retractable canvas or cloth awnings, no sign or other device identi­fying a business or other use shall hereafter be erected or maintained extend­ing over and beyond the street line or beyond the building line as now or hereafter established, and: 

a. 	
no permit for any such sign or structure shall be issued, 

b. 	
any such legally existing sign may be maintained but shall not be in­creased in size of sign, size of lettering, or the extent it projects or is illu­minated as the same exists at the effective date of these Regulations, except as ordered by the Zoning Inspector for reasons of public safety, and 

c. 	
each such sign shall be completely and totally removed at such time as the place of business which such sign advertises shall change in owner­ship or occupancy, subsequent to the effective date of these Regulations. 



6. 	
No sign shall contain a logo which is recognized as a company or entities trademark.  

7. 	
Sandwich Board and easel type signs. 


G. Fees 
The Commission may determine and fix fees to be charged and paid to the Town upon issuance of a permit for a business sign, the schedule of which fees shall be filed for public record in the office of the Town Clerk of the Town within a reason­able time after their adoption by the Commission. 
H. Applications 
1. 	
No sign shall be erected, lettered or otherwise displayed in any Retail Zone or any Business Zone or on any parcel in a Residence Zone that contains a le­gally nonconforming business or commercial use unless a written application for a Sign Permit has been made and a permit issued by the Zoning Inspec­tor. 

2. 	
Each sign application shall show the method of attaching the sign to the build­ing or other support in detail, and the Zoning Inspector shall determine the adequacy and safety of said method before issuing the permit. 


August 1, 2013 


SECTION 6.4. GRADING, DRAINAGE, AND TREE REMOVAL 
A. Purposes 
This Section is intended to control soil disturbance (including removal of trees and vegetative ground cover), excavation, site grading, and drainage changes associated with building demolition, building construction, and site development in order to: 
. 	protect the public safety and general welfare; 
. 	prevent adverse impacts to other property due to erosion, sedimenta­
tion, and increases in storm water runoff; 
. 	prevent sedimentation of public and private streets; 
. 	prevent sedimentation of public storm sewer and drainage systems; 
. 	reduce the risk of flooding caused by increased runoff and sedimen­
tation of drainage channels, wetlands, and watercourses; and 
. 	protect water quality by reducing the risk of sediment pollution of res­
ervoirs.   

B. Removal of Trees or Vegetative Ground Cover 
The Commission finds that trees and other vegetative ground cover play an im­portant role in controlling erosion by: protecting the soil surface from the impact of 
falling rain; holding soil particles in place; enhancing the soil’s capacity to absorb 
water; slowing the velocity of runoff; removing subsurface water between rain falls through the process of evapo-transpiration; and improving infiltration rates.  
Therefore, for purposes of this Section, clear-cutting or removal of trees and oth­er vegetative ground cover, regardless of whether stumps and root systems are removed, shall be considered an erosion factor equivalent to grading and other forms of soil disturbance, and references in this Section to soil disturbance and/or grading shall include clear-cutting or removal of trees and vegetative ground cov­er. 
C. Applicability 
Within the Town of New Canaan, there shall be no excavation, grading, or other soil disturbance (including removal of trees or vegetative ground cover) except as herein provided. The occurrence of any off-site sedimentation, flooding, or ero­sion caused by excavation, grading and/or soil disturbance is prohibited and shall be grounds for enforcement action. 
D. Other Approvals May Be Required 
Any approval or exemption under this Section does not relieve any person from having to obtain any other approvals that may be required, such as for: 
1. 	
Regulated activities under the New Canaan Inland Wetlands & Watercourses Regulations; 

2. 	
Activities within a floodplain area; 

3. 	
Activities regulated by other local, state, or federal agencies. 


August 8, 2016 
135 


E. Allowed Without Permit 
The following activities are allowed without a separate zoning permit, provided the proposed use of the property otherwise complies with these Regulations, and no off-site sedimentation, flooding, or erosion occurs. The Zoning Inspector may require a permit and compliance with Subsections H., I., and J. of this Section in the event that any off-site sedimentation, flooding, or erosion occurs as a result of these activities: 
1. 	
Farming. 

2. 	
Excavation or grading of less than 100 cubic yards of earth material;   

3. 	
Soil disturbance (including removal of trees and vegetative ground cover) of 5,000 square feet in area or less; 

4. 	
Excavation, grading and/or soil disturbance associated with specific plans for a subdivision, site plan, or special permit approved by the Commission, where the proposed excavation, grading and/or soil disturbance is specified in such other approval. 


F. Permitted by Zoning or Other Permit 
The following activities may be permitted by the Zoning Inspector provided: the proposed use of the property otherwise complies with these Regulations; the pro­visions of Subsections H., I., and J. of this Section are satisfied; and a zoning permit, a demolition permit, a building permit, or a septic permit has been issued for such activity and the proposed excavation, grading, and/or soil disturbance is specified in such permit: 
1. 	
Excavation or grading of 100 to 1,000 cubic yards of earth material; 

2. 	
Soil disturbance (including removal of trees and vegetative ground cover) of more than 5,000 square feet but less than 10,000 square feet in area; 

3. 	
Any excavation, grading or soil disturbance (including removal of trees and vegetative ground cover) in connection with and clearly essential to: 

a. 	
construction or alteration of a building or structure (including the area of the building or structure plus the surrounding twenty-five feet); 

b. 	
installation of driveways, utilities or amenities (e.g., septic systems, utility service lines, swimming pools, walls or fencing). 




G. Permitted by Special Permit 
The following activities may be permitted provided the proposed use of the prop­erty otherwise complies with these Regulations, and the Commission issues a Special Permit for the activity: 
1. 	
Excavation or grading of more than 1,000 cubic yards of earth material; 

2. 	
Soil disturbance (including removal of trees and vegetative ground cover) of 10,000 square feet in area or more. 


February 28, 2017 

H. Bonding and As-Built Plan 
1. 	
Prior to the commencing of any excavation or grading of more than 200 cubic yards of material per acre of lot area, and/or more than 5,000 square feet of soil disturbance (including removal of trees and vegetative ground cover), the Commission or the Zoning Inspector may require that a bond be provided in an acceptable form and in an amount to be set by the Commission or Zoning Inspector to insure the faithful performance of the work to be undertaken pur­suant to the conditions of the permit. 

2. 	
Following the completion of excavation or grading for a project where a bond was required, the Zoning Inspector may require that the permit holder file a certified as-built plan with the Commission, showing the relationship between the approved plan and the actual grading. 


I. Permit Standards and Conditions 
1. 	
The occurrence of any off-site sedimentation, flooding, or erosion caused by excavation, grading and/or soil disturbance is prohibited. 

2. 	
All allowed or permitted excavation, grading, and soil disturbance activities shall be conducted with appropriate soil erosion and sediment control measures installed and maintained at all times until the site is fully stabilized.  The Commission or the Zoning Inspector may require soil erosion and sedi­ment control measures and project phasing as a condition to the issuance of any permit. Control measures may include (without limitation) silt fencing, hay bales, sediment barriers, mulch, temporary erosion control blankets, turf reinforcement mats, stone slope protection, or other soil stabilization measures set forth in the Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sedi­ment Control (2002) necessary to prevent off-site sedimentation, flooding, and erosion.  

3. 	
All earth materials to be stockpiled on site shall be contained within a sedi­ment control barrier. 

4. 	
All earth materials to be transported onto or off the site shall be covered to minimize flying dust or rock. 

5. 	
Truck access/egress to and from the site shall be conducted as to minimize danger to off-site traffic, and nuisance to surrounding properties. The Com­mission or the Zoning Inspector may require that tracking pads or dust-less driveway aprons be utilized until the site is stabilized. 

6. 	
Grading shall not result in the creation of any stagnant water, sharp pits, de­pressions, soil erosion, drainage or sewerage problems or other conditions which would impair the use of the property or other property in accordance with the Regulations. 

7. 	
Except as provided in Section 6.4.I.9, unless modified by the Commission through granting of a Special Permit, finished grades shall blend with existing grades at the property line and no grade change of one (1.0) foot or more shall occur: 

a. 	
in the One-Half Acre and smaller lot area zones, within five (5) feet of a side or rear property line, or 

b. 	
in the One-Acre and larger lot area zones, within six (6) feet of a side or rear property line where a retaining wall is installed and ten (10) feet oth­erwise. 




August 8, 2016 
137 


8. 	Except as provided in Subsection 6.4.I.9, unless modified by the Commission through granting of a Special Permit, no grading activity that increases the fin­ished slope shall result in a finished slope in any filled or excavated area that exceeds: 
a. 	
a slope of four horizontal to one vertical (4:1) within the yard setback. 

b. 	
a slope of three horizontal to one vertical (3:1) elsewhere. 


Schematic Fill Limitations 


Schematic Cut Limitations 


February 28, 2017 August 8, 2016 

9.  The Commission or the Zoning Inspector may allow grading activity in excess of the foregoing standards within the yard setback for one or more of the fol­lowing reasons: a. For the installation or construction of a berm, swale, level spreader, re­verse slope bench or similar measures to better protect down-gradient parcels from storm water runoff;, or b. For grading of a slope of up to three horizontal to one vertical (3:1) pro­vided that the total grade change within the yard setback is no greater than would otherwise be permitted.  
J.  Drainage Standards  
a.  Any construction or site development activity shall comply with the Drainage Certification Policy of the Town of New Canaan dated July 22, 1999, as amended.  
b.  Peak flow rates and runoff volumes shall be determined by using the Rational Method, the Time of Concentration Method, the Tabular Method or the Unit Hydrograph Method and a 25-year design storm.  

139 


SECTION 6.5. FENCES AND WALLS 

A. Purposes 
This Section is intended to control the size, location, and type of perimeter fenc­es, freestanding walls, and retaining walls in all zoning districts in order to provide for protection of private property while not infringing on the public safety and gen­eral welfare, or on adjoining properties. In addition, this Section is specifically intended to allow such structures to be located within yard setbacks to the extent authorized by this Section. 
B. Retaining Walls 
1. 	
No retaining wall of any kind shall be constructed in a way so as to obstruct corner visibility, as required by Section 6.9 of these Regulations, at intersec­tions of roads, driveways, accessways, or other travel ways. 

2. 	
In Residence Zones and Special Zones, no retaining wall shall: 

a. 	
be located closer than eight (8) feet from any property line in the B Resi­dence Zone, 

b. 	
ten (10) feet from any property line in any other Residential Zone or a Special Zone, or 

c. 	
exceed four (4) feet in height. 



3. 	
A series of retaining walls shall be separated by a distance at least twice the height of any other generally parallel retaining wall and the area between the retaining walls shall be planted or landscaped to mitigate the appearance of the retaining wall(s). 

4. 	
Unless modified by the Commission through granting of a Special Permit, no proposed retaining wall in any Business Zone shall exceed four (4) feet in height. 

5. 	
The construction of any proposed retaining wall shall comply with the Drain­age Certification Policy of the Town of New Canaan dated July 2, 1999, as amended. 

6. 	
A retaining wall four (4) feet or higher above ground level requires the issu­ance of a Zoning Permit and the plans shall address construction design and drainage within ten (10) feet of the wall. 

7. 	
After June 16, 2007, unless modified by the Commission through the granting of a Special Permit, a retaining wall may be combined with an open fence (such as a wrought iron fence or a fence where no more than fifty percent (50%) of the fence is opaque) provided that such fence is not more than forty-


two inches (42”) high. 
February 28, 2017 

C. Fences and Freestanding Walls 
1. 	
No fence, post, column, freestanding wall, or portion thereof shall be con­structed in a way so as to obstruct corner visibility, as required by Section 6.9 of these Regulations, at intersections of roads, driveways, accessways, or other travel ways. 

2. 	
No fence and no fence and freestanding wall combination shall exceed the following height limitations: 

a. 	
Four (4) feet in height above finished grade when in the front yard and lo­cated between a front property line and a front yard setback line. 

b. 	
Six (6) feet in height above finished grade when in a front yard and locat­ed behind the front yard setback line. 

c. 	
Six (6) feet in height above finished grade between a side or rear proper­ty line and a side or rear yard setback line (when not in the front yard set­back). 

d. 	
Eight (8) feet in height above finished grade when located behind the yard setback lines and not in the front yard. 





August 8, 2016 
141 


3. 	
In a front yard, no gate or associated columns/pillars shall exceed four (4) feet in height above finished grade; except that in the Two Acre and Four Acre Residential Zones, they may be erected to a maximum height of six (6) feet in height above finished grade, provided the gate is an open gate, such as wrought iron, where no more than fifty percent (50%) of the gate is opaque. If lighting is proposed on top of the columns, the top of the light fix­ture shall be no more than twenty-four (24) inches above the top of the col­umn. Columns and pillars shall not exceed twenty-four (24) inches in diame­ter. 

4. 	
Notwithstanding the limitations of Subsection 6.5.C.2, unless permitted by the Commission through the granting of a Special Permit, deer fences may be in­stalled to a height not to exceed eight (8) feet provided that: 

a. 	
a deer fence installed in a front yard shall be installed in a wooded area and/or shall be screened from the street by landscaping, 

b. 	
the deer fence and associated appurtenances shall be of a dark or other color to blend with the natural landscape, and 

c. 	
such fence shall be of open design such that it is not especially visible at a distance of fifty (50) feet. 



5. 	
Within the required minimum yard setbacks, the finished or more attractive side of any fence shall face the neighboring property or street. 

6. 	
A fence higher than six (6) feet above ground level, except for a deer fence in accordance with Section 6.5.C.3, requires the issuance of a Zoning Permit. 

7. 	
Unless modified by the Commission through the granting of a Special Permit, barbed wire shall not be allowed in a Residential zone or within eight (8) feet of ground level in any Retail Zone or any Business Zone, measured above the highest finished grade. 

8. 	
Razor wire or its equivalent shall not be permitted in any zone. 


February 28, 2017 

SECTION 6.6. IMPORT / EXPORT OF EARTH MATERIALS 
A. Purposes 
This Section is intended to control the importation and exportation of earth mate­rials (such as loam, topsoil, humus, sand, gravel, clay, stone or quarry stone) in order to protect the public safety and general welfare while allowing for normal and customary construction practices. 
B. Permitted by Right 
1. 	Importation and exportation of earth material for the purpose of site develop­ment in conjunction with construction or alteration of a building or structure is permitted provided such activity is conducted in accordance with: 
a. 	
the standards of this Section, and 

b. 	
plans submitted as part of the Zoning Permit and Building Permit issued for the construction or alteration of the building or struc­ture. 


2. 	Importation and exportation of earth material for the purposes of landscaping is permitted provided such activity involves less than 200 cubic yards of mate­rial per acre of lot area and the standards of this Section are complied with. 
C. Permitted by the Zoning Inspector 
Importation and exportation of less than 1,000 cubic yards of earth material per acre of lot area is permitted for other purposes with approval of a Zoning Permit by the Zoning Inspector provided the standards of this Section are complied with. 
D. Permitted by the Commission 
Unless permitted by Subsection 6.6.B or Subsection 6.6.C, the importation or ex­portation of earth material shall only occur with the approval of a Special Permit by the Commission. 
August 8, 2016 
143 


SECTION 6.7. EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION 


CONTROL 


A. Purpose 
This Section is intended to prevent accelerated erosion and sedimentation of land during and after development; reduce the danger from storm water runoff; mini­mize sediment pollution from land being developed; and prevent detrimental im­pacts to soil and water resources. 
B. Applicability 
1. 	
Grading, tree removal, excavation, and similar activities resulting in disturb­ance of soil or removal of ground cover that is cumulatively more than one-half (1/2) acre in area shall require a soil erosion and sediment control plan certified by the Commission in accordance with the provisions of this Section.  

2. 	
Activities resulting in cumulative disturbance of less than one-half (1/2) acre shall not require a certified soil erosion and sediment control plan under this Section, but may be regulated under Section 6.1, Section 6.4, and/or Section 


6.6 of these Regulations. 

C. Exemptions 
1. 	
Farming shall be exempt from the requirement to have a soil erosion and sediment control plan certified by the Commission. 

2. 	
The construction of a single family dwelling that is not a part of a subdivision of land shall be exempt from the requirement to have a soil erosion and sed­iment control plan certified by the Commission. However, development ac­tivities accessory to the construction of a single family dwelling, such as but not limited to tennis courts, swimming pools, driveways, septic systems, and cutting of trees, shall not be exempt and may be regulated pursuant to Sec­tion 6.1, Section 6.4 and/or Section 6.6 of these Regulations.  


D. Minimum Acceptable Standards 
1. 	
Soil erosion and sediment control plans shall result in a development that minimizes erosion and sedimentation during construction; is stabilized and protected from erosion when completed; and does not cause off-site erosion and/or sedimentation. 

2. 	
Plans for soil erosion and sediment control shall be developed in accordance with this Section, and shall include the information set forth in the plan check­list in the Appendix, using the principles as outlined in Chapters 3 and 4 of the Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control (2002), as amended. 

3. 	
The minimum standards for individual measures are those in the Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control (2002), as amended. The Commission may grant exceptions when requested by the applicant if techni­cally sound reasons are presented. 


February 28, 2017 

E. 	Issuance or Denial of Certification 
1. 	
The Commission shall either certify that the soil erosion and sediment control plan, as filed, complies with the requirements and objectives of this Section or shall deny certification when the development proposal does not comply with the requirements and objectives of this Section. 

2. 	
Nothing in this Section shall be construed as extending the time limits for the approval of any application under Chapters 124, 124A or 126 of the General Statutes. 

3. 	
Prior to certification, any plan submitted to the Commission may be reviewed by the County Soil and Water Conservation District (established under sec­tion 22a-315 of the Connecticut General Statutes and section 22a-315-11 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies) which may make recommen­dations concerning such plan, provided such review shall be completed within thirty (30) days of the receipt of such plan. 

4. 	
The Commission may forward a copy of the development proposal to the En­vironmental Commission or other review agency or consultant for review and comment. 


F. 	Conditions Relating to Soil Erosion and Sediment Con­trol 
1. 	
The estimated costs of measures required to control soil erosion and sedi­mentation, as specified in the certified plan, may be required to be covered in a bond or other assurance acceptable to the Commission in accordance with the provisions specified under Section 8.1.K of these Regulations. 

2. 	
Site development shall not begin unless the soil erosion and sediment control plan is certified and those control measures and facilities in the plan sched­uled for installation prior to site development are installed and functional. 

3. 	
Planned soil erosion and sediment control measures and facilities shall be installed as scheduled according to the certified plan. 

4. 	
All control measures and facilities shall be maintained in effective condition to ensure the compliance of the certified plan. 

5. 	
Failure to install or maintain control measures in an appropriate manner shall be grounds for enforcement action. 


G. 	Inspection 
1. 	
Inspections shall be made by the Commission or its designated agent during development to ensure compliance with the certified plan and that control measures and facilities are properly performed or installed and maintained. 

2. 	
The Commission may require the permittee to verify through progress reports that soil erosion and sediment control measures and facilities have been per­formed or installed according to the certified plan and are being operated and maintained. 


August 8, 2016 
145 


SECTION 6.8. TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT 

A. Purpose 
This Section is intended to provide for the maintenance of public safety and avoidance of congestion on public streets by requiring an analysis of the traffic impacts of development activities and requiring mitigation measures, where ap­propriate. 
B. Applicability 
A quantitative analysis of traffic to be generated by the proposed development and its probable impact on existing roads and intersections in the area shall be provided by the developer for: 
1. 	
any proposed non-residential development containing a gross floor area of ten thousand (10,000) square feet or more, or 

2. 	
any development which, in the Commission's judgment, could generate high levels of traffic. 


C. Traffic Impact Analysis 
The traffic analysis shall be prepared by a qualified traffic engineer and shall in­clude information on: 
1. 	
past and present roadway conditions including accidents, 

2. 	
existing roadway capacity, 

3. 	
existing and proposed sight lines, 

4. 	
existing and projected traffic volumes (average daily traffic, peak A.M. and P.M.), and 

5. 	
existing and projected volume/capacity ratios based on facts and reasonable generation factors of the site, affected road networks, and intersections. 


D. Review Considerations 
1. 	In analyzing the traffic impacts of development proposals, the Commission shall consider: 
a. 	
the effect of the proposed development on traffic conditions on abutting streets, 

b. 	
the patterns of vehicular circulation in relation to the adjoining street sys­tem, 

c. 	
the adequacy of traffic signalization, traffic channelization, left-turn lanes and roadway widths of adjoining streets, 

d. 	
the adequacy of vehicular stacking lanes and/or distances, 

e. 	
the adequacy of pedestrian drop-off areas and, 

f. 	
the adequacy of other traffic or transportation facilities to accommodate the proposed development. 



2. 	A significant traffic impact shall be presumed where it is projected that the additional traffic resulting from a proposed development shall: 
a. 	
exceed a volume/capacity ratio of eight-tenths (0.8) on adjacent streets, 

b. 	
increase the peak hour volume by ten (10) percent or more, or 

c. 	
reduce the level of service to “D” or lower or further reduce the level of service when it is already at “D or below. 



3. 	The Commission shall not approve a proposed development with a significant traffic impact unless the proposal is revised to mitigate the adverse impacts. 
February 28, 2017 

SECTION 6.9. OBSTRUCTIONS AT INTERSECTIONS 

A. Visibility at Intersections 
On a corner lot or one not on a corner but abutting an accessway at its intersec­tion with a street in any residential zone, no building, structure, fence, wall or ob­struction to vision more than three (3) feet in height above the gutter elevation shall be placed or maintained within the triangular area formed by the intersecting street lines and a straight line connecting points on said street lines, each of which points is twenty-five (25) feet distant from the point of intersection. 
Visibility at Intersections 


In order to provide adequate room for emergency vehicles to turn into driveways and access all buildings and parcels within the Town of New Canaan, all drive­ways (including alleys, private roads, and other accessways) shall provide the following minimum clearances for emergency vehicles, regardless of the paved width of the driveways: 
1. 	
No building, fence, wall, lamp post, telephone pole, mailbox, or other struc­ture, nor any trees, boulders, or other obstructions shall be erected, placed or installed alongside any driveway so as to reduce the access to less than four­teen (14) feet wide. 

2. 	
No building, fence, wall, lamp post, telephone pole, mailbox or other struc­ture, nor any trees, boulders, or other obstructions shall be erected, placed or installed within the triangular areas on either side of the driveway at its inter­section with the travel portion of the road, formed by connecting the outer points of a line measured twenty-five (25) feet on the road (centered on the driveway), and a parallel line fourteen (14) feet wide (centered on the drive­way) at a distance of twenty-five (25) feet from the travel portion of the road. 


August 8, 2016 
147 


3. 	Where there are automatic gates at driveways, an emergency means of opening the gates shall be provided to the Fire Department. 
If all buildings on the parcel are within fifty (50) feet from the traveled portion of the road and can be easily accessed from the road, the Commission or the Zon­ing Inspector may exempt the parcel from the requirements of this subsection. 
Driveway Obstructions 



SECTION 6.10. SIDEWALKS 
Any subdivision or any site plan for commercial or multi-family development lo­cated in any zone other than the Four-Acre Residence Zone or the Two-Acre Residence Zone shall include new or reconstructed sidewalks at least four (4) feet in width along the street frontage or frontages of the parcel or parcels, unless the Commission determines that sidewalks are either impractical or unnecessary at that location, considering prospective pedestrian traffic. 
February 28, 2017 


SECTION 6.11. OUTDOOR LIGHTING 

A. Purpose 
These Regulations are intended to provide specific standards in regard to lighting, in order to maximize the effectiveness of site lighting to enhance public safety and welfare, to raise public awareness of energy conservation, to avoid unnecessary upward illumination and illumination of adjacent properties, and to reduce glare. 
B. Standards 
1. 	All exterior lights and sign illumination shall be designed, located, installed and directed in such a manner as to: 
a. 	
prevent direct light trespass, 

b. 	
be shielded to the extent possible, 

c. 	
employ soft, transitional light levels which are consistent from area to ar­ea, 

d. 	
minimize contrast between light sources, lit areas and dark surroundings, and 

e. 	
be confined within the target area. 


2. 	
In all Residential zones and in all areas adjacent to residential property, no externally-mounted, direct light source directed towards the property line shall be visible at the property line at ground level or above. 

3. 	
To reduce off-site glare, lighting fixtures for all parking and pedestrian areas shall be: 

a. 	
full cut-off type fixtures, or 

b. 	
fully shielded/recessed fixtures where the lens is recessed or flush with the bottom surface. 



4. 	
Lighting fixtures for building security or aesthetics and any display purposes shall, except as may otherwise be approved, be: 

a. 	
top downward (not upward or sideways), and 

b. 	
full cut off or fully shielded/recessed. 



5. 	
Where outdoor playing fields or other special outdoor activity areas are to be illuminated, lighting fixtures shall be specified, mounted and aimed so that: 

a. 	
their beams fall within the primary playing area and immediate surround­ings, and 

b. 	
no direct illumination is directed off the site. 



6. 	
Lighting designed to highlight flagpoles shall be low level and shall be target­ed directly at the flag. 

7. 	
All non-essential lighting (such as display, aesthetic, parking and sign light­ing) shall be configured for “photocell on -time clock off” operation. 

8. 	
Where necessary, lighting for site security may be configured for motion or infrared sensor operation. 

9. 	
The height of luminaires, except streetlights in public right-of-ways, shall be the minimum height necessary to provide adequate illumination, but shall not exceed a height of thirty (30) feet. 


August 1, 2013 
149 


Fixtures Which Might  Fixtures Which Might Not  
Produce Glare or  Produce Glare or  
Light Trespass  Light Trespass  



February 28, 2017 

C. Exemptions and Modifications 
1. 	
Traditional seasonal lighting is exempt from these Regulations. 

2. 	
Temporary lighting used by the Police Department, Fire Department or Emergency Services is exempt from these Regulations. 

3. 	
The Commission may, by Special Permit, allow lighting that does not comply with the requirements of this Section provided the Commission determines, in its sole discretion, that such proposed lighting is consistent with the purpose of these Regulations, in the following cases: 

a. 	
where an applicant can demonstrate, by means of a history of vandalism or other objective means, that an extraordinary need for security exists, 

b. 	
where an applicant can show that conditions hazardous to the public, such as steep embankments or stairs, may exist in traveled ways or are­as, 

c. 	
where a minor change is proposed to an existing non-conforming lighting installation, such that it would be unreasonable to require replacement of the entire installation, 

d. 	
where special lighting is indicated for historic buildings, 

e. 	
where special consideration is given to maintain a uniformity with similar uses in the immediate vicinity, or 

f. 	
where ornamental up-lighting of sculpture, buildings or landscape fea­tures shall enhance the character of the area. 



4. 	
The Commission may modify the requirements of this Section for a temporary use approved under these Regulations. 


151 



SECTION 6.12. DESIGN REVIEW 

A. Purpose 
This Section is intended to aid applicants in ensuring that their designs are in harmony with the character of the community, encourage high quality building and site design, and result in development which is compatible with the character of the community. 
B. Applicability 
The following types of applications shall be reviewed as indicated below: 
1. 	
Any proposed development, construction, or use in any Retail Zone or any Business Zone shall be reviewed in relation to the design guidelines in Sub­section 6.12.D and the design guidelines in Subsection 6.12.E. 

2. 	
A principal use or activity permitted by Special Permit in any Residence Zone, except for a two-family house, a rooming house, a bed and breakfast, a group home, or an agricultural use, shall be reviewed in relation to the design guidelines in Subsection 6.12.D. 

3. 	
A Special Permit use or activity in a Multi-family Zone, an Apartment Zone, a Waveny Zone, or a Park, Recreation and Open Space Zone shall be re­viewed in relation to the design guidelines in Subsection 6.12.D. 


C. Procedure 
1. 	
The Commission shall review an application in relation to the design guide­lines of this Section or may request the assistance of a Design Review Committee or similar organization, if available, in evaluating such plans. 

2. 	
Any recommendations or suggestions so received from any Design Review Committee shall not be binding upon the Commission. 


D. Design Guidelines 
1. 	Relationship of Buildings to Site and Adjoining Areas 
a. 	
Buildings shall be organized in a coordinated and functional manner that is compatible with site features and the desirable characteristics of ad­joining areas.  

b. 	
A unified design theme for building massing, exterior treatments and signage shall be established where harmony in textures, lines, and masses is provided and monotony is avoided. 

c. 	
Parking areas shall be treated appropriately in relation to the building, the neighborhood, and the community. 

d. 	
The height and scale of each building shall be compatible with its site and existing (or anticipated) adjoining buildings. 

e. 	
Newly installed utility services, and service revisions necessitated by ex­terior alterations, shall be underground. 

f. 	
A desirable streetscape and attractive landscape transitions to adjoining properties shall be provided. 


February 28, 2017 

2. 	Landscape and Site Treatment 
a. 	
Landscape treatment shall be provided to enhance architectural features, shield unsightly areas, provide shade, and relate to the natural environ­ment and topography. 

b. 	
Plant material that is indigenous to the area shall be selected for its ulti­mate growth and for interest in its shape, texture, and color. 

c. 	
Pedestrian walkways shall provide safe and convenient connections with­in the site and between adjacent sites and shall be constructed of all-weather materials appropriate for the location (such as brick, concrete, or paving blocks but not earth, gravel, or loose stone). 

d. 	
Existing trees at four (4) inches or greater caliper shall be incorporated into the site plan. 


3. 	Building Design 
a. 	
Architectural features shall be evaluated based on the scale of the build-ing(s), the quality of the design, and the relationship to surroundings. 

b. 	
Facades and rooflines shall be articulated and/or varied to reduce the appearance of bulk and provide architectural interest.  

c. 	
Building materials shall have good architectural character and durable quality and shall be selected for harmony of the building with adjoining buildings. 

d. 	
Building textures, colors, and components shall be selected for harmony of the building with adjoining buildings. 

e. 	
Utility and service equipment areas shall be screened from public view with materials harmonious with the building. 


4. 	Signs and Lighting 
a. 	
Every sign shall be designed as an integral architectural element of the building and site to which it principally relates and shall be coordinated with the building architecture. 

b. 	
Exterior lighting, where used, shall enhance the building design and the adjoining landscape. 

c. 	
Lighting shall be restrained in design and excessive brightness avoided. 


153 


E. Additional Village District Considerations 
1. 	Design Guidelines 
a. 	
Special attention shall be paid to protecting the distinctive character, landscape, and historic structures within the Village District. 

b. 	
The removal or disruption of historic, traditional, or significant structures or architectural elements shall be avoided or minimized. 

c. 	
The conversion, conservation, and preservation of existing buildings and sites in a manner that maintains the historic or distinctive character of the Village District is encouraged. 

d. 	
The exterior of structures or sites shall be consistent with: 

i. 	the "Connecticut Historical Commission -The Secretary of the Interi­or's Standards for Rehabilitation and Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings", revised through 1990, as amended; or 
ii. 	the distinctive characteristics of the district identified in the New Ca­naan Plan of Conservation and Development. 

e. 	
Proposed buildings or modifications to existing buildings shall be harmo­niously related to their surroundings, the terrain in the district, and to the use, scale and architecture of existing buildings in the district that have a functional or visual relationship to a proposed building or modification. 

f. 	
All spaces, structures, and related site improvements visible from public roadways shall be designed to be compatible with the elements of the ar­ea of the Village District in and around the proposed building or modifica­tion. 

g. 	
The color, size, height, location, proportion of openings, roof treatments, building materials, and landscaping of commercial or residential property, and any proposed signs and lighting, shall be evaluated for compatibility with the local architectural motif. 

h. 
Maintenance of views, historic buildings, monuments, and landscaping shall be encouraged. 


February 28, 2017 

2. 	Procedures 
a. 	
The Commission shall select and contract with one or more Village Dis­trict consultants. 

b. 	
Such Village District consultant shall be: 

i. 	a registered architect or an architectural firm, 
ii. 	a licensed landscape architect, or 
iii. 	a planner who is a member of the American Institute of Certified Planners. 

c. 	
Alternatively, an architectural design review board may be designated as the Village District consultant provided the members shall include at least one (1) architect, landscape architect or planner who is a member of the American Institute of Certified Planners. 

d. 	
All applications shall be subject to review and recommendation by the Vil­lage District consultant designated by the Commission as the Village Dis­trict consultant for such application. 

e. 	
The Village District consultant shall review an application and report to the Commission within thirty-five (35) days of receipt of the application. 

f. 	
Such report and recommendation shall be entered into the public hearing record and considered by the Commission in making its decision. 

g. 	
Failure of the Village District consultant to report within the specified time shall not alter or delay any other time limit imposed by these Regulations. 

h. 	
The Commission may seek the recommendations of any Town or region­al agency or outside specialist including, but not limited to, the regional planning agency, the New Canaan Historical Society, the Connecticut Trust for Historic Preservation and The University of Connecticut College of Agriculture and Natural Resources. 

i. 	
Any reports or recommendations from such agencies or organizations shall be entered into the public hearing record. 


155 


Section 7.1  
ARTICLE 7 ­ SPECIAL PROVISIONS  
SECTION 7.1.  NONCONFORMING CONDITIONS  

A. Nonconforming Uses 
1. 	
Any nonconforming use of buildings or land lawfully existing at the time of adoption of these Regulations, or any amendments hereto, may be continued as a nonconforming use. 

2. 	
No nonconforming use may be changed except to a conforming use or, with the approval of a Special Permit by the Commission, to another nonconform­ing use of a less objectionable character.  

3. 	
No nonconforming use shall, once changed to a more conforming use, be changed to a less conforming use. 

4. 	
No nonconforming use which has been discontinued for a period of one (1) year shall thereafter be resumed or replaced by the same or any other non­conforming use unless: 

a. 	
the owner or owners of the property containing said nonconforming use, prior to the expiration of said one-year period, shall have filed with the Commission a notarized statement of intent not to discontinue such non­conforming use and a copy thereof is filed on the Town Land Records, or 

b. 	
the building containing the nonconforming use is being restored, in ac­cordance with Subsection 7.1.B.4, following damage by fire, explosion accident, force majeure, act of nature, or act of a public enemy. 



5. 	
No nonconforming use, and no portion of a building containing a nonconform­ing use, shall be extended or expanded unless such extension or expansion receives approval of a Special Permit by the Commission. 

6. 	
Alterations to a structure containing a nonconforming use may be made pro­vided: 

a. 	
the alterations are structural in nature and do not materially alter the characteristics or exterior appearance of the structure, or 

b. 	
the alterations are solely cosmetic in nature and, in the opinion of the Commission, shall reduce any potential negative impacts of the noncon­forming use, or 

c. 	
the structure has been damaged by fire, explosion, accident, force majeure, act of nature, or act of a public enemy and shall be replaced in accordance with Subsection 7.1.B.4. 




February 28, 2017 

B. Nonconforming Structures 
1. 	
Any nonconforming structure lawfully existing at the time of adoption of these Regulations, or any amendments hereto, may be continued as a nonconform­ing structure. 

2. 	
A nonconforming structure in a single-family residential zone (A-zone and larger lot size zones) may only be enlarged provided such enlargement: 

a. 	
complies with applicable parts of these Regulations for the specific use and zone, or 

b. 	
receives a variance from the Zoning Board of Appeals. 



3. 	
A nonconforming structure in any business or commercial district, B Resi­dence Zone, Apartment Zone or Multi-Family Zone may only be enlarged provided such enlargement: 

a. 	
complies with applicable parts of these Regulations for the specific use and zone, or 

b. 	
receives approval of a Special Permit by the Commission in accordance with the standards of Subsection 8.2.B.4. 



4. 	
Any nonconforming structure which has been damaged by fire, explosion, accident, force majeure, act of nature, or act of a public enemy may be re­paired, restored, rebuilt, or replaced to the same extent as it was immediately prior to said destruction provided: 

a. 	
such repair, restoration, rebuilding, or replacement: 

i. 	does not extend nor expand the previously existing nonconforming structure unless approved by the Commission by granting of a Spe­cial Permit in accordance with the standards of Subsection 8.2.B.4, 
ii. 	shall be initiated within six (6) months of the date of such destruction, and 
iii. 	shall be completed within eighteen (18) months of the date of such destruction. 

b. 	
the Commission may, upon written application made to it, extend the time period for initiation and/or completion for an additional period, not to ex­ceed six (6) months. 

c. 	
in the event of a failure to begin such repair, restoration, rebuilding, or re­placement in accordance with the above time period, said right shall be lost, and such nonconforming structure shall not thereafter be restored or continued. 



5. 	
A nonconforming structure may only be otherwise repaired, restored, rebuilt, replaced, or altered if such alterations: 

a. 	
do not increase the non-conforming aspect of the structure, and 

b. 	
comply with other applicable parts of these Regulations for the specific use and zone, and do not result in the repair or replacement of more than fifty percent (50%) of the existing structure. 




C. Nonconforming Parcels 
Any nonconforming parcel lawfully existing at the time of adoption of these Regu­lations, or any amendments hereto, may be continued as a nonconforming parcel provided that such parcel has not, once becoming non-conforming, been in the same ownership as an abutting parcel. If such parcel has been in the same own­ership as an abutting parcel, such parcels shall, for zoning purposes, be consid­ered to be merged to create a conforming lot or a more conforming parcel. 
157 


SECTION 7.2. TEMPORARY AND CONDITIONAL 
PERMITS 

1. 	
The Commission may authorize the Zoning Inspector to issue a Zoning Per­mit on a temporary and conditional basis for principal or accessory uses or activities not conforming to these Regulations. 

2. 	
Any such temporary and conditional permit shall not be extended beyond what may be authorized by the Commission nor shall any such use or activity be converted or altered to a nonconforming use. 


SECTION 7.3. LAND IN TWO MUNICIPALITIES 
Where a parcel of land is located partially in New Canaan and partially in an ad­joining town, no Zoning Permit shall be issued for the construction of a building on such parcel unless: 
1. 	
all of that part of the building used for human habitation is located entirely within one Town, and 

2. 	
all accessory buildings used for human habitation in connection therewith are located in the same Town. 


SECTION 7.4. TRAILERS 
1. 	
Temporary construction trailers shall obtain a Zoning Permit. 

2. 	
Trailers shall not be used for human habitation except for an emergency as determined by the Zoning Inspector and then only on a temporary basis. 

3. 	
Except as provided above, trailers shall not be used or employed for any use of any kind without approval of a Special Permit by the Commission. 


SECTION 7.5. SALE OF ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR 
No building, premises or land or any part thereof shall hereafter be used for the sale of alcoholic liquors as defined in the Liquor Control Act, except: 
1. 	
In a Waveny Zone, 

2. 	
In any Retail Zone or any Business Zone, or 

3. 	
By a club or hotel legally conducted in a Residence Zone. 


February 28, 2017 

SECTION 7.6. AFFORDABLE HOUSING 
A. Inclusionary Zoning Fee 
1. 	Authority 
This Subsection is adopted under the authority of Section 8-2i of the Connecticut General Statutes.  
2. 	Applicability 
All applications for a zoning permit for any new building construction or addition (excluding interior renovation) in any zone shall be accompanied by an inclusion­ary zoning fee of $10.00 per $1,000 of construction value, to be paid into a hous­ing trust fund to be used for constructing, rehabilitating or repairing housing af­fordable to persons and families of low and moderate income. 
3. 	Exemptions 
The following applications shall be exempt from this fee: 
1. 	
Any application submitted on behalf of the United States of America, the State of Connecticut, the Town of New Canaan, the New Canaan Board of Education, the New Canaan Housing Authority, or any of their agencies; 

2. 	
Any application for any construction in an affordable housing development approved in accordance with the requirements of CGS 8-30g; 

3. 	
Any application for a dwelling unit designated as affordable housing that complies with the affordability criteria and other requirements of CGS 8-30g in effect on the date of approval. 


B. Affordable Housing Developments 
For any affordable housing development, the following requirements shall apply: 
1. 	
After June 18, 2005, any proposed affordable housing development shall submit a Housing Affordability Plan to the Commission and the development shall thereafter conform to the Housing Affordability Plan approved by the Commission. 

2. 	
Any affordable housing development approved prior to June 18, 2005 shall comply with the affordability criteria and other requirements of CGS 8-30g which were in effect on the date the application was applied for and subse­quently approved. 

3. 	
Unless otherwise provided in the Housing Affordability Plan approved by the Commission, 

a. 	
construction quality of affordable housing units shall be comparable to market-rate units within the development, 

b. 	
affordable housing units shall be dispersed throughout the development, 

c. 	
affordable housing units shall be built on a pro rata basis as construction proceeds, 

d. 	
occupancy of affordable housing units shall be restricted to persons and families eligible under State law, and 

e. 	
the New Canaan Housing Authority shall be designated as the municipal agent monitoring the enforcement of the standards contained in the defi­nition of an affordable housing development. 




159 


SECTION 7.7. PRESERVATION OF HISTORIC 

STRUCTURES 


A. Purpose 
In order to encourage the preservation of structures contributing to positive as­pects of community character, the Commission may, by Special Permit, allow a minimum area or dimensional requirement (such as minimum yard setback) to be reduced or a maximum area, density or dimensional requirement (such as maxi­mum building coverage or density calculation) to be exceeded in accordance with 
1

the following standards.
B. Historic Structure Designation Criteria 
1. 	For purposes of this Section, structures may, upon application by the owner, be designated as historic structures by the Commission where said structures are seventy five (75) years old or older, and are found by the Commission to be directly associated with the history of the subject property and: 
a. 	
exemplify or reflect the broad cultural, political economic or social history of the nation, state or Town; or 

b. 	
are identified with historic personages or with important events in the na­tional, state or local history; or 

c. 	
embody the distinguishing characteristics of an architectural type inher­ently valuable for study of a period, style, method of construction or of in­digenous materials or craftsmanship; or 

d. 	
are representative of a notable work of a master builder, designer or ar­chitect who influenced his or her age; or 

e. 	
have yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important to history. 



2. 	The Commission encourages property owners to seek designation of historic significance from local, state or federal organizations and to display appropri­ate historic plaques. 
C. Application Requirements 
1. 	Application for the Special Permit shall be made in the form prescribed by the Commission, consistent with all applicable provisions of these regulations particularly Subsection 8.2.B.4 and shall contain, at a minimum: 
a. 	
accurate exterior elevations or photographs of each side, of each historic structure proposed to be preserved, 

b. 	
a survey map and other documentation sufficient to establish the historic, cultural, or architectural significance of the historic structure and compli­ance with the standards set forth in Subsection 7.7.B and any other standards contained in these regulations as determined applicable by the Commission. 



1 
When two conforming lots, each with an existing single family dwelling are merged and at least one of the original lots contains a single family dwelling and/or accessory dwelling unit which meet the criteria of historic structure(s) as set forth in this Section, continuation of the pre-existing uses as single family dwelling units shall be permitted without requiring a Special Permit. However, should the historic structure(s) be removed a new single family dwelling cannot be erected unless the parcel is resubdivided or permission to erect a new single-family dwelling is allowed in accordance with these regulations. Once the properties have been merged under this Section, the historic dwelling unit(s) shall not be relocated or modified in any way unless such modification or relocation is ap­proved by the Commission or its agent. 
January 8, 2016 

2. 	The Commission shall determine, in its sole discretion, from factual evidence or expert opinion that: 
a. 	
the structure in question contributes to community character or possess­es a degree of historic significance (which may be evidenced by its age, architectural uniqueness, or cultural value) which would represent a cul­tural benefit to the community if preserved, and, 

b. 	
the structure in question requires some measure of regulatory relief to al­low for its preservation. 


D. Considerations 
1. 	When considering an application or any action regarding a use or a structure under this Section the following shall apply: 
a. 	
the maximum variation allowable by the Commission, of any applicable regulation, shall be 75% of the regulation requirement, and 

b. 	
the Commission may solicit pertinent information from outside experts such as the Historical Society, architectural consultants, historians or any other person(s) it may find as qualified to comment and provide infor­mation on the subject application. 


2. 	When reviewing Special Permits under this Section, the Commission shall, in addition to the Special Permit Criteria of Section 8.2.B.4, consider and deter­mine in each case whether the proposal will: 
a. 	
have a positive or negative effect on the orderly growth and development of the area, 

b. 	
promote the general welfare of the residents of the Town, 

c. 	
adversely affect safety in the streets, 

d. 	
permit the retention of historic structures that would be in scale and com­patible with surrounding structures, 

e. 	
allow for the preservation of historic structures having special historical, cultural and/or architectural merit, including in the Commission's sole dis­cretion, but not limited to structures retaining historical integrity of those features related to history, architecture and/or construction methods, and 

f. 	
further the stated goals and policies of the current Plan of Conservation and Development. 


3. 	
After the required Public Hearing is held and findings are made, the Commis­sion may, in its sole discretion, allow an area, density, or dimensional re­quirement to be reduced or exceeded, up to the maximum allowed by Sub­section 7.7.D.1.a. Bonuses approved by the Commission shall be restricted to the minimum amount deemed necessary to encourage preservation of the historic structure. 

4. 	
Where a historic structure is preserved in connection with a first cut or subdi­vision application: 

a. 	
A suitable historic conservation easement shall be recorded on the New Canaan Land Records to ensure the continued maintenance of any such historic structure or property in accordance with the aforementioned standards; and, 

b. 	
The Commission may retain architectural review jurisdiction over the structure proposed on the newly established lot to ensure compatibility with the preserved, historic structure on the adjacent lot. 




January 8, 2016 
161 


E. Limitations 
1. 	
Once a Special Permit has been granted under this Section, the historic structure shall not be relocated or modified in any way unless such modifica­tion or relocation is approved by the Commission. If a modification is pro­posed as minor in nature, the Commission may delegate approval to the Zon­ing Inspector upon submission of appropriate information. 

2. 	
Any Special Permit granted under this Section shall prescribe the specific conditions to be observed and structural appearance to be maintained for the preserved structure. Any unauthorized deviation from these conditions shall constitute a nullification of the Special Permit approval. Upon such nullifica­tion, the property may be subject to any and all legal means available to the Commission to correct any unauthorized work at the property owners ex­pense, or may be subject to any other enforcement action the Commission, through the Zoning Inspector, deems necessary. In addition, any permits is­sued subsequent to the granting of the Special Permit may be voided and the work associated with any such permit may be required to be removed. 

3. 	
Any proposed modifications to the structure or the use of the structure shall be made known to the Commission at the time of the Special Permit applica­tion. Any subsequent changes to the use or the structure shall only be ac­complished as specified herein. Emergency repairs may be made by the owner as a result of fire or other similar type damage and the Zoning Inspec­tor shall be notified not later than 72 hours after the repair or stabilization is initiated. 

4. 	
Any significant maintenance requirements to any structure covered by this regulation shall be done promptly by the owner. Failing this, the owner shall be notified that, if the maintenance requirements of the original Special Per­mit are not complied with, the Special Permit may be determined to be violat­ed and may be nullified by the Commission. 

5. 	
Any change in use of any structure which has an approved Special Permit may only be authorized by application to, and approval by, the Commission. Said application shall contain all relevant information pertaining to the previ­ously approved and proposed change of use for the historic structure. The Commission shall determine if the proposed change in use is appropriate and in keeping with the intent of the original Special Permit granted for the subject historic structure according to the standards referenced in this Section. 


January 8, 2016 

162 

SECTION 7.8. TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES 
A. 	Purpose 
These regulations are intended to establish guidelines and standards for the siting of different types of antenna facilities in New Canaan in order to protect the public safety and general welfare and, through design, siting, and screening, to minimize any adverse effects. 
The Town of New Canaan recognizes that wireless communication ser­vices have become an important means of communication relied upon by residents and visitors. Wireless telecommunication services also have a public safety component since they can be used to summon police, fire and other emergency services, if or when needed. The Town intends to bal­ance the public need or benefit resulting from wireless communications service in New Canaan while seeking the least obtrusive means of having such services available and minimizing possible negative impacts. 
B. 	Antennae Permitted Without Zoning Permit 
1. 	Residential Household Antenna -An antenna used solely for residential household television / radio reception provided any such antenna meets required setbacks and: 
a. 	if attached to the principal building, does not extend more than 
ten feet (10’) above the height of the building, or 
b. 	if detached from the principal building, does not exceed the maximum total building height limitation for the zoning district in which it is located. 
2. 	Residential Satellite Dish Antenna -A satellite dish antenna in a resi­dential zone provided it is not visible from the street and: 
a. 	
the dish antenna measures 1 meter (3.28 feet) or less in diam­eter. 

b. 	
a building-mounted installation complies with yard setback and total building height standards for a principal structure. 

c. 	
a ground-mounted installation is located in the rear yard and complies with yard setback and total building height standards for an accessory structure. 


C. 	Antennae Permitted by Zoning or Other Permit (Staff) 
1. 	Commercial Satellite Dish Antenna -A ground-mounted or roof-mounted satellite dish antenna in a Retail or Business zone provided: 
a. 	
the dish antenna measures 2 meters (6.56 feet) or less in di­ameter. 

b. 	
the dish antenna is screened from public view. 


2. 	Amateur Radio Antenna -An amateur radio antenna owned and oper­ated by an amateur radio operator licensed by the FCC provided: 
a. 	
a ground-mounted installation is located in the rear yard. 

b. 	
a building-mounted installation is affixed to the rear of the resi­dential structure. 


June 18, 2018 
163 

c. 	
any tower and antenna combination is less than 40 feet in total height and is erected no nearer to any property line than a dis­tance equal to the vertical height of the tower and antenna. 

d. 	
a suitable safety fence may be required to be erected to pre­clude unauthorized access. 



3. 	Repair Of Existing Antennas And/Or Tower -Repair of existing anten­nas  and/or towers, provided there are no changes in design, height or appearance. 
D. Antennae Permitted by Site Plan Approval (PZC) 
1. 	Other Residential / Commercial Antenna -An antenna of the type per­mitted by Subsection 7.8.B. or Subsection 7.8.C. that does not comply with the standards for such antenna specified therein.  
E. Antennae Permitted by Special Permit (PZC) 
For the following antennae and/or telecommunication facilities requiring a Special Permit from the Planning and Zoning Commission, the proposed facility shall be reviewed for consistency with: 
. The purposes of this Section 7.8, . The Special Permit criteria contained in Section 8.2.B.4 of these Regulations, and . The Standards contained in Section 7.8.G of these Regulations. 

1. 	
Other Antennas on Existing Structures -Any other antenna which is not attached to a tower (such as antennae mounted on a building, water tank, or other structure not specifically constructed for the antennae in­stallation). 

2. 	
New Public Safety Tower or Antenna -A new antenna and/or tower intended and used primarily for the purpose of police, fire, ambulance, and/or other emergency services or similar emergency communica­tions. 

3. 	
New Tower or Antenna on Town-Owned Property -A new antenna and/or tower located on property owned, leased or otherwise controlled by the Town of New Canaan. 

4. 	
New Tower or Antenna -Any new antenna and/or tower not regulated by the Connecticut Siting Council or by the Public Utilities Regulatory Authority including but not limited to radio towers, meteorological tow­ers, or similar towers. 


June 18, 2018 

164 

F. Antennae Regulated By State Authorities (State) 
For telecommunication facilities regulated by the Connecticut Siting Council (CSC) or the Public Utilities Regulatory Authority (PURA), the standards contained in Section 7.8.G of these Regulations shall be submitted to such regulatory agency and shall be considered part of the “location preferences or criteria” as that term is used in CGS Chapter 277a. 
1. 	Connecticut Siting Council -As provided in Chapter 277a of the Con­necticut General Statutes (CGS Section 16-50g et seq.) and the rulings of the Connecticut Siting Council, telecommunications towers owned or operated by the state, a public service company, certified telecommu­nications provider or used in a cellular system including: 
a. 	
Establishment of new towers (or built to support telecommuni­cations antennae), 

b. 	
Co-location of new antennae on existing towers, 

c. 	
Modification of approved towers, and 

d. 	
Applications to attach small cells to a new structure, an electric transmission pole or other freestanding structure.  



Applicants to the Connecticut Siting Council are strongly encouraged 
to meet with the Planning and Zoning Commission within 30 days of 
the pre-application notice to a municipality as required by CGS Sec­
tion 16-50l.(f)(1), to review technical reports concerning: . the need for the facility including a map indicating the area of need and the location of existing surrounding facilities, . a description of the site selection process undertaken by the prospective applicant . the proposed and any alternate sites under consideration and a listing of other sites or areas considered and rejected, . the location of all schools and places of public assembly near the proposed facility, 
. 	an analysis of the potential aesthetic impacts of the facility as well as efforts or measures to be taken to mitigate such aes­thetic impacts, and 

Such meeting with the Commission shall not be in lieu of the public informational meeting as provided for by CGS Section 16-50l.(f)(1). 

2. 	Public Utilities Regulatory Authority – As provided in Chapter 283 of the Connecticut General Statutes (CGS Section 16-228 et seq.) and the rulings of the Public Utilities Regulatory Authority (PURA), the place­ment of small cell or similar (telecommunication) facilities on utility poles (including replacement or convenience poles) that are part of the electric distribution system. 
June 18, 2018 
165 


G. 	Standards 
The following standards apply to applications submitted to the Commission under Section 7.8.E and to applications submitted to the CSC or PURA un­der Section 7.8.F.  
Location 
1. 	
Protect the Town's visual quality and minimize any adverse visual im­pacts of wireless communication facilities through proper design, siting, and screening. 

2. 	
Avoid locating wireless communication facilities in: . Special Flood Hazard areas. . Regulated wetland areas.  

3. 	
Avoid locating wireless communication facilities in locations which will have adverse visual impacts upon: 


. 	recognized historic places (properties listed in the National Register of Historic Places and/or the State Register of Historic Places), 
. 	designated historic districts (National Register Historic Districts, State Register Historic Districts, and/or local historic districts), . scenic resources designated in the Plan of Conservation and Development or elsewhere, . Areas shown on the: 
i. 	Connecticut DEEP Natural Diversity Database, and/or 
ii. 	Federal Listed Species and Natural Communities Maps. 
June 18, 2018 

166 

Antenna Type 

4. 	
For new towers, New Canaan expresses its preference that the number of towers be minimized, especially visually prominent ground-mounted towers. 

5. 	
New Canaan expresses its preference for wireless communication fa­cilities in the following order / hierarchy: 


PREFERRED  
Existing Utility Poles  1. Small cell or other similar telecommunication facilities on existing utili­ty distribution poles.  
Structure Mounted (provided that such installa­tion preserves the character and integrity of those struc­tures)  2. Totally enclosed within: . an existing structure. . a new steeple, chimney, or similar architecturally compatible structure.  
3. Externally mounted on the wall of: . an existing structure. . a new steeple, chimney, or similar architecturally compatible structure.  
4. Mounted on or within a new purpose-built structure designed to fit New Canaan’s overall character (such as a structure designed to look like a water tank, bell tower, clock tower, silo, barn, or similar).  
5. Externally mounted on the roof of: . an existing structure. . a new steeple, chimney, or similar architecturally compatible structure.  
Internal Mount  6. New internally-mounted antennae on existing tower (monopole or  
on Tower  flagpole). 7. New monopole or flagpole (up to 10 feet above tree height) contain­ing internally-mounted antennae. 8. New monopole or flagpole (more than 10 feet above tree height) con­taining internally-mounted antennae.  
NOT PREFERRED  
Up-sized Utility Poles  9. Small cell or other similar telecommunication facilities on utility poles that are substantially larger in size or scale compared to existing utility poles.  

June 18, 2018 
167 

External 
10. 	New antennae externally-mounted on existing pole (co-location). 


Mount on 

11. 	New “monopine” with externally-mounted antennae, at least three 
Tower “branches” per vertical foot (or equivalent), and less than 10 feet above tree height. 

12. 	New “monopine” with externally-mounted antennae, with fewer than three “branches” per vertical foot (or equivalent), or extending more 
than 10 feet above tree height. 

13. 	
New monopole with externally-mounted antennae less than 10 feet above tree height). 

14. 	
New monopole with externally-mounted antennae extending more than 10 feet above tree height). 

15. 	
New lattice tower. 

16. 	
New guyed tower. 



Design 
6. 	For new installations, all wireless communication facilities and associ­ated equipment and material shall be visually shielded, camouflaged, and/or minimized to be as visually unobtrusive as possible when viewed from nearby properties and public roadways. 
. 	The design of the equipment, buildings and related structures shall, to the extent possible, use materials, neutral colors, fin­ish, textures, screening, and landscaping that will blend them into their location. 
. 	Any building mounted antenna shall not extend more than 10 feet above the highest point of the structure unless specifically approved by the Commission due to unusual circumstances. 
. 	Any building mounted antenna shall be completely screened or shall be designed and installed to be architecturally compatible with the structure in question. 

7. 	
New towers shall be located away from property lines and habitable buildings at least as far as the height of the tower, including any anten­nas or other appurtenances unless adequate information has been provided to demonstrate that a “yield point” or other approach has been designed into the tower to avoid a tower falling on adjacent properties or habitable buildings. 

8. 	
With regard to installations on utility poles: 


. 	Any replacement poles or convenience poles shall retain the general height and visual characteristics of the utility pole they are replacing. 
. 	All equipment shall be placed within one enclosure mounted in the least visually obvious location on the pole. 

9. 	
Lighting of any wireless communication facilities shall be clearly dis­closed and shall not exceed what is clearly necessary for public safety.  No towers shall be artificially lighted unless required by the FAA or oth­er applicable authority and specifically authorized by the Commission. 

10. 
Signage shall be clearly disclosed and should not exceed what is clear­ly necessary for public safety. 


June 18, 2018 

168 

11. 
Site development shall minimize impervious surfaces, avoid soil ero­sion and runoff problems, maintain natural buffers, and provide for se­curity and safe access. 

12. 
Towers shall be protected to prevent unauthorized climbing. 


Equipment Shelters 
13. For equipment shelters associated with telecommunications facilities: 
. 	the presence of wireless communication equipment shall be concealed  within buildings that resemble sheds and other building types found in New Canaan. 
. 	Such buildings shall not exceed one story in height and shall not exceed the maximum height in feet for an accessory build­ing as specified in Section 3.5.F.2 of these Regulations. 
. 	Such equipment and shelters shall be set back from property lines in accordance with the requirements in the zoning district for the minimum yard setbacks for principal buildings. 
. 	such equipment shelters shall, in the opinion of the Commis­sion, be appropri June 18, 2018 oor area, height) and designed for the setting and the number of carriers provided. 
. 	In unusual situations where the above is not practical or desir­able, the Commission may allow the use of underground vaults or ground-mounted equipment shielded by extensive landscap­ing and/or fencing. 
14. 
For building mounted antennae, equipment vaults shall be concealed or use screening appropriate to the building shall be used to shield equipment from view. 

15. 
Any equipment cabinets or other appurtenances used in association with the tower or antenna shall be clearly shown as part of the applica­tion including how such equipment is designed to blend with the sur­rounding landscape or be obscured from adjacent properties and streets. 

16. 
Security fencing, no more than six feet in height, may be required by the Commission around the antenna, tower, and equipment depending on the nature of the installation. 

17. 
Landscaping, including buffering, may be required by the Commission around the antenna, tower, and equipment depending on the nature of the installation. 


Operation / Maintenance of Towers / Antennae 
18. 
All antennae and equipment shall be operated in a manner consistent with FCC guidelines for radio frequency emissions and other require­ments. 

19. 
All antennae and equipment shall, under normal operating conditions, be consistent with the noise standards as stated in the Town of New Canaan Noise Ordinance, Chapter 6B of the Town of New Canaan Code. 


June 18, 2018 
169 


H. Application Requirements / Requests 
For applications filed with the Planning and Zoning Commission (PZC) un­der Section 7.8.E, the information identified below as relevant will generally be required unless modified or waived by the Commission. For applica­tions filed with the Connecticut Siting Council (CSC) or the PublicUtilities Regulatory Authority PURA), the information identified below as relevant is requested.  
PZC  CSC  PURA  
1. Carrier Identified – a. A statement identifying which licensed carrier is either an applicant or a co-applicant on the application.  •  •  •  
2. Emergency Service Needs Considered – a. A statement identifying whether an authorized emer­gency services organization (police, fire and/or ambu­lance services) is either an applicant or a co-applicant on the application. b. If an authorized emergency services organizations is not a co-applicant, statements from police, fire and ambulance services indicating whether they have any emergency service communication needs which could be addressed by the proposed facility. c. Documentation that the proposed facility will not cause any interference with any emergency or public safety radio system.  • • •  • • •  •  
3. Regulatory Compliance– a. A statement that all towers, antennas, and/or equip­ment will, at all times, be operated in accordance with relevant local, state, and federal regulations. b. Documentation regarding noise emission from equip­ment and steps to be taken so that any equipment noise is inaudible at the property line.  • •  • •  • •  
4. Coverage – a. Coverage parameters used in the analysis of potential sites. b. Information on all tower sites considered and the rea­sons for rejection of any site.  • •  • •  •  

(continued on next page) 
June 18, 2018 

170 

(continued from previous page) 

PZC  CSC  PURA  
5. Visual Impact And Extent – a. For a new tower, the boundaries of the tower’s viewshed (the area within which the tower can be seen based upon the topography surrounding the site). b. For a new tower, notice of a “balloon test” for the pro­posed height and site shall be published in a newspaper having a general circulation in New Canaan at least twice, at intervals of not less than two days, the first not more than 15 days or less than 10 days and the last not less than two days before the date set for the balloon test. c. Illustrations, dimensioned and to scale, of the proposed tower, antennas, equipment shelters, and any other con­struction or development attendant to the facility. d. Visual simulation of the proposed tower, antennae and equipment enclosure(s) e. A statement indicating whether utilities serving the facility will be overhead or underground. f. A statement indicating whether the site will require light­ing per the FAA regulations and, if so, what type of lighting is proposed g. A statement as to whether any commercial logo or identi­fication will be placed on any equipment so as to be visible from adjacent property or a public street.  • • • • • • •  • • • • • • •  • • •  
6. Construction Plans – a. For towers, site plans with two-foot contour intervals showing all proposed changes to the existing property, in­cluding vegetation removal, grading, structure and equip­ment location(s), temporary or permanent roads or drive­ways, existing and proposed drainage facilities, storm-water management, and other considerations. b. For utility pole installations, site plans showing all pro­posed changes within the street right-of-way or on nearby property including vegetation removal, grading, and other considerations. c. For towers, drawings of the tower and key dimensional pa­rameters including any built-in “yield point” or other pa­rameter.  d. Drawings of any building, underground vault, fence, screening, or other enclosure for equipment e. For towers or for any ground based equipment or struc­tures, landscaping drawings.  • • • •  • • • •  • •  

(continued on next page) 
June 18, 2018 
171 


(continued from previous page) 

PZC  CSC  PURA  
7. Other Requirements – a. A statement shall be submitted indicating whether there are any deed restrictions or easements or other encumbrances that would affect the installation of wireless communication facilities. b. For applications to PURA, the applicant shall submit a statement indicating their willingness to schedule a public information meeting in New Canaan if requested by the Town.  •  •  •  
8. Operational Considerations –  
a. A statement about whether the site will require lighting per the FAA regulations or be installed for any reason and, if so, what type of lighting is proposed. b. The applicant’s program for annual reporting of the contact person. c. The applicant’s proposal for documenting, upon re­quest by the Town: . whether radio frequency emissions from the an­tennae and/or equipment exceed FCC guidelines and actions taken to correct any non-compliance. . whether equipment at the site complies with noise limitations and actions taken to correct any non­compliance d. For new towers, the applicant shall prepare and submit an affidavit acceptable to the Commission, for record­ing on the land records, declaring responsibility for the orderly removal of towers, antennas and associated equipment and restoration of the site at the operator’s expense. e. A written maintenance plan for the site, including, but not limited to, all facilities including landscaping at the site.  • • • • •  • • • • •  • •  

June 18, 2018 

172 
Taxonomy of Towers / Antennae 
Household Antenna Residential Dish 

120 Ponus Ridge 70 Pine Street 
Public Utility Reg­ulatory Authority 
Connecticut Siting Council 

Procedures 

173 


Jurisdiction Of Connecticut Siting Council 

120 Ponus Ridge 70 Pine Street 

77 Main Street Waveny Park 39 Locust Street 




June 18, 2018 

174 

ARTICLE 8 -PROCEDURES 




SECTION 8.1. GENERAL PROCEDURES 

A. Application Submittal Requirements 
1. 	
Applications to the Commission or Board shall be submitted to the Planning and Zoning Office. 

2. 	
Applications shall be submitted on forms obtained from the Planning and Zoning Office for the type of application being submitted.  

3. 	
Applications shall be accompanied by the appropriate fee(s) except that the Commission or the Town shall be exempt from any application fee. 

4. 	
Applications shall be submitted with such supporting plans, materials, and other information as required by these Regulations.  

5. 	
Applications shall be signed by the applicant and, if applicable, the owner of the property affected. 


B. Date of Receipt 
For the purposes of calculating statutory timeframes for processing applica­tions, the date of receipt of an application to the Commission or the Board shall be: 
1. 	
the day of the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Commission or the Board immediately following the day of submission of the applica­tion to the Planning and Zoning Office, or 

2. 	
thirty-five (35) days after submission, whichever is sooner. 


C. Incomplete Applications 
1. 	
Each application shall be reviewed by the Planning and Zoning Office to determine whether the application is substantially complete. 

2. 	
An application requiring approval from the Commission or Board shall not be considered actually complete until all of the information as re­quired by these Regulations, the Commission, or the Board has been received by the Commission or the Board at a regularly scheduled meeting. 

3. 	
An incomplete application or an application submitted without the req­uisite fee may be denied. 


D. Sequence of Hearings 
Where a proposed development or activity requires multiple applications, the Commission or the Board may conduct any public hearings simultane­ously or in the order they deem appropriate. 
175 


Section 8.1 

E. Consultations 
1. 	
On any application, the Commission or Board may seek the advice and opin­ion of other officials, boards, or commissions to assist it in evaluating applica­tions. 

2. 	
On any application, the Commission or Board may retain an architect, engi­neer, landscape architect, professional land use planner, and/or other con­sultant to review, comment, and guide its deliberations on any application. If the Commission or Board determines that such consultant(s) are necessary, the Zoning Inspector shall obtain estimates from such consultant(s). The Zoning Inspector shall collect 150% of the estimate from the applicant which shall be held in escrow until the technical reviews are completed.  Any excess amount collected over the actual cost shall be refunded to the applicant.  This payment shall be considered as an integral part of the application. The fail­ure by the applicant to make this payment shall render the application incom­plete.   


F. Notice by Newspaper 
1. 	
When a public hearing is required by these Regulations or scheduled by the Commission or Board, the Planning and Zoning Office shall cause notice of the hearing to be published in a newspaper having a substantial circulation in New Canaan. 

2. 	
Such notice shall be published at least twice at intervals of not less than two 


(2) days, the first not more than fifteen (15) days, nor less than ten (10) days, and the last not less than two (2) days before the date of the hearing. 

G. Notification of Property Owners 
1. 	
When required by these Regulations, the applicant shall notify owners of property within one hundred (100) feet of the subject property (including own­ers of individual condominium units), whether inside or outside New Canaan, of a pending application by mailing a notice at least ten (10) days prior to the first scheduled hearing. In accordance with CGS 8-7d(d) as amended by PA 06-80, the Commission is exempt from this requirement. 

2. 	
At a minimum, such notice shall consist of: 

a. 	
a description of the proposed activity, 

b. 	
notification of the date, time, and place of the first scheduled hearing, and 

c. 	
a copy of the application form submitted to the Commission or the Board. 



3. 	
Notices to such property owners shall be sent either by “Certified United States Mail” or the applicant must provide a “Certificate of Mailing” except that where any property owner shall have listed with the Assessor an address outside the United States, the requisite notice shall be sent by International Express Mail or equivalent. 

4. 	
The latest records of the Town Assessor shall be utilized to determine the owner of each property and if such information is not readily available the fact shall be made known to the Zoning Inspector and the Commission or Board. 

5. 	
Prior to the first scheduled hearing regarding the application, the applicant shall submit the following to the Planning and Zoning Office or the application shall be considered incomplete: 

a. 	
a copy of the complete package of information sent to abutters, 

b. 	
a list of the abutters to whom the notices were sent, and 

c. 	
proof of mailing such as “Certificates of Mailing” issued by the United States Postal Service. 




August 1, 2013 

176 

H. Notification of Abutting Municipalities 
1. 	In accordance with CGS 8-7d(f), the Commission or Board shall notify the clerk of an adjoining municipality of any application concerning any project on any site in which: 
a. 	
any portion of the property affected by a decision is within five hundred 

(500) feet of the boundary of the adjoining municipality, 

b. 	
a significant portion of the traffic to the completed project shall use streets within the adjoining municipality to enter or exit the site, 

c. 	
a significant portion of the sewer or water drainage from the project shall flow through and significantly impact the drainage or sewerage system within the adjoining municipality, or 

d. 	
water runoff from the improved site shall impact streets or other munici­pal or private property within the adjoining municipality. 


2. 	
Such notice shall be made by certified mail, return receipt requested and shall be mailed within seven (7) days of the day of the submission to the Planning and Zoning Office of the application, petition, request or plan. 

3. 	
No hearing shall be conducted on any application, petition, request or plan unless the adjoining municipality has received the notice required under this Section. 

4. 	
Such adjoining municipality may, through a representative, appear and be heard at any hearing on any such application, petition, request or plan. 


I. Notification of Water Companies 
1. 	In accordance with CGS 8-3i, an applicant shall provide written notice to a water company and the Commissioner of Public Health when an application, petition, request or plan is filed with the Commission or Board concerning any project on any site that is within: 
a. 	
an aquifer protection area, provided such area has been delineated in accordance with CGS 22a-354c, or 

b. 	
the watershed of a water company, provided such water company or said commissioner has filed a map with the Commission or the Board and on the New Canaan land records showing the boundaries of the watershed. 


2. 	
Such notice shall be made by certified mail, return receipt requested and shall be mailed not later than seven days after the date of the day of the submission to the Planning and Zoning Office. 

3. 	
Prior to the scheduled meeting regarding the application, the applicant shall submit the following to the Planning and Zoning Office or the application shall be considered incomplete: 

a. 	
a copy of the complete package of information, and 

b. 	
proof of mailing. 



4. 	
Such water company and the Commissioner of Public Health may, through a representative, appear and be heard at any hearing on any such application, petition, request or plan. 


J. Beneficiaries of a Trust 
Any person who makes an application to the Commission or Board pertaining to real property, the record title to which is held by a trustee of any trust, shall file with said application a sworn statement disclosing the name(s) of the equitable owner (s) of such real property or the beneficiary(ies) of the trust. 
August 1, 2013 
177 


K. Bonds 
1. 	
Where a bond is required by any Section of these Regulations, it shall be in one (1) of the following forms and the Zoning Inspector shall require evidence of compliance with the following standards before accepting any bond: 

2. 	
Any required bond shall not be released by the Commission until: 

a. 	
the release has been requested, in writing, by the applicant, 

b. 	
the Town Engineer has submitted a letter stating that all required im­provements have been satisfactorily completed and that all conditions and requirements of the Commission's approval have been satisfied, and 

c. 	
the applicant's engineer or surveyor has certified to the Commission, through submission of a set of detailed "Record" plans on mylar, that all improvements and other work are in accordance with submitted site plans. 



3. 	
Any cost of collecting a bond, including without limitation, attorney, bank and other collection fees and expenditures, shall be for account of the applicant and may be deducted from amounts released in Subsection 8.1.K.2.  


a.  Cash deposited with the Town.  
b.  Certified check to the order of the Town when the amount of the check is  
fully insured by the FDIC.  
c.  Bank deposit assigned irrevocably and solely to the Town when the  
amount of the deposit is fully insured by the FDIC.  
d.  Irrevocable letter of credit naming the Town as sole beneficiary provided  
that:  
i. such letter of credit shall be issued by, and drafts thereunder pre­ 
sentable at, a branch of a bank in Connecticut provided that:  
a) such bank is included in the most recent list issued by the Securi­ 
ties Valuation Office of the National Association of Insurance  
Commissioners (or any successor office or organization,  
“NAIC”) as a bank meeting NAIC standards for issuing letters  
of credit for reinsurance purposes; or  
b) the long-term unsecured debt of such bank (or the long-term un­ 
secured debt of its holding company) is rated BBB or better  
by Standard & Poor's rating service or Baa or better by  
Moody's rating service.  
ii. The terms and conditions of such letter of credit shall be acceptable  
in form and substance to the Town and substantially in the form of  
the model letter of credit in the Appendix,  
iii. if and when such letter of credit shall, through the passage of time,  
have less than thirty (30) days remaining until its expiration or lapse  
date, and such date shall not have been extended, the Town may  
draw under said letter of credit the full amount thereof and the pro­ 
ceeds may be retained by the Town as the bond.  
e.  Other form of bond (such as a performance bond) acceptable in form and  
substance to the Town.  

178 

A. Site Plan Application 
1. 
Application Requirements 

2. 	
Proceedings 

a. 	
The date of receipt for the Site Plan Application shall be determined in accordance with Subsection 8.1.B. 

b. 	
An incomplete Site Plan Application may be denied in accordance with Subsection 8.1.C. 

c. 	
For new construction or other activity considered to be significant in the sole judgment of the Commission, the Commission: 

i. 	may hold a public hearing on the application, and 
ii. 	if such hearing is to be held, shall require that the applicant give no­tice to property owners in accordance with the requirements of Sub­section 8.1.G. of these Regulations. 
d. 	
Notification to adjoining municipalities may be required in accordance with the requirements of Subsection 8.1.H. 

e. 	
Notification to water companies may be required in accordance with the requirements of Subsection 8.1.I. 

f. 	
Whenever a Site Plan Application is required in conjunction with another application requiring a public hearing (such as a Special Permit Applica­tion or a Zone Change Application): 

i. 	the time period for acting on the Site Plan Application shall coincide with the time period for acting on the related application, and 
ii. 	a decision on the application shall be rendered within sixty-five days after the close of the public hearing on such other application except that the applicant may consent to one or more extensions of such pe­riod provided the total period of any such extension or extensions shall not exceed sixty-five days. 

g. 	
Whenever approval of a Site Plan is the only approval required, a deci­sion on the application shall be rendered within sixty-five days after the date of receipt of such Site Plan Application except that the applicant may consent to one or more extensions of such period provided the total peri­od of any such extension or extensions shall not exceed sixty-five days. 

h. 	
Notwithstanding the provisions of this Section, if an application involves an activity regulated pursuant to CGS 22a-36 to 22a-45, inclusive and the time for a decision by the Commission would elapse prior to the thirty-fifth day after a decision by the Environmental Commission, the time period for a decision shall be extended to thirty-five days after the decision of such agency. 

i. 	
Approval of a site plan shall be presumed unless a decision to deny or modify it is rendered within the applicable time period specified above (approval as a result of failure of the Commission to act). 

j. 	
The applicant may, at any time prior to action by the Commission, with­draw such application. 



3. 	Decision Considerations 
a. 	
On a Site Plan Application involving an activity regulated pursuant to CGS 22a-36 to 22a-45, inclusive, the Commission shall: 

i. 	wait to render its decision until the Environmental Commission has submitted a report with its final decision, and 
ii. 	give due consideration to any report of the Environmental Commis­sion when making its decision. 

b. 	
On a Site Plan Application involving notice to adjoining municipalities un­der Subsection 8.1.H or notice to water companies under Subsection 8.1.I, the Commission shall give due consideration to any report or testi­mony received. 

c. 	
Before the Commission approves a Site Plan Application, it shall deter­mine that the application is in conformance with the applicable provisions of these Regulations. 



d. 	
Before the Commission approves a Site Plan Application, it shall consider the following: 

i. 	the nature, location, height, and design of buildings, structures (in­cluding walls and fences), and landscaping on the site, 
ii. 	the nature, adequacy, and arrangement of driveways and parking fa­cilities, 
iii. 	the nature and arrangement of any site lighting and any loudspeakers or noise-making devices, 
iv. 	
the availability of adequate sewerage, water supply, drainage, and fire and police protection, 

v. 	
the proposed location and configuration of any signage, including any sign lighting and any signage for traffic control, 


vi. 	the proposed location and configuration of any outdoor storage areas including trash receptacles and proposed screening, 
vii. 	the preservation or enhancement of the character of the neighbor­hood, 
viii. conformity with any other applicable laws, codes or ordinances, and 
ix. 	the recommendations, if any, of all solicited departments, boards and commissions. 

e. 	
In approving a Site Plan Application, the Commission may impose condi­tions deemed necessary to protect the public health, safety, welfare, con­venience, and property values. 

f. 	
The Zoning Inspector may require that a bond be posted, in an amount and form acceptable to the Zoning Inspector, to ensure: 

i. 	that adequate erosion and sediment control measures are installed and maintained, before any Zoning Permit is issued for activities shown on the approved plan, and 
ii. 	that all of the improvements shown on the approved plan are imple­mented before a Zoning Permit related to issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy is granted. 

g. 	
The Commission shall not approve any Site Plan for any property on which there exists a zoning violation, unless such Site Plan application will remedy such violation. 




SECTION 8.2. COMMISSION PROCEDURES 

a.  A Site Plan Application shall be submitted:  
i. for any activity designated in the Regulations as requiring Site Plan  
Approval,  
ii. in a Residential zone, for any construction, development, expansion,  
or major alteration of a multi-family use or non-residential use, or,  
iii. in any Retail Zone or any Business Zone, for any construction, devel­ 
opment, expansion, or major alteration of any use including any al­ 
teration in site improvements such as parking, pedestrian or vehicle  
circulation, public utilities or reduction of landscaping.  
b.  A Site Plan Application shall be accompanied by five (5) full-size (24” by  
36”) and twelve (12) reduced-size (11” by 17”) copies of detailed plans,  
signed and sealed by an appropriate professional, for review by the  
Commission and its designees that comply with the requirements in the  
Appendix of these Regulations.  
c.  The Commission may, in accordance with the requirements of these  
Regulations and the Appendix of these Regulations, require the submis­ 
sion of additional information as deemed necessary to make a reasona­ 
ble review of the application.  
d.  If a Site Plan Application involves an activity regulated pursuant to CGS  
22a-36 to 22a-45, inclusive, the applicant shall submit an application for a  
permit to the Environmental Commission not later than the day such ap­ 
plication is filed with the Commission.  
e.  Where the Commission determines that, because of the particular size,  
location or nature of a proposal, the public interest would be best served  
by a three dimensional physical representation or a computer simulation  
of the project, the Commission may require that the applicant provide a  
digital model of the proposal or a physical model of the proposal at such  
appropriate scale as the Commission may approve. The Commission  
may also require that the model include three dimensional representation  
of all or portions of the abutting properties where this would significantly  
aid the Commission and the public to visualize and understand the pro­ 
posal.  

179 


180 

4. 	Action Documentation 
a. 	
Whenever it grants or denies a Site Plan Application, the Commission shall state upon its record the reason(s) for its decision. 

b. 	
The Commission shall send, by certified mail, a copy of any decision to the applicant within fifteen (15) days after such decision is rendered. 

c. 	
The Commission shall cause notice of the approval or denial of site plans to be published in a newspaper having a substantial circulation in New Canaan within fifteen (15) days after such decision is rendered. 

d. 	
In any case in which such notice is not published within the fifteen (15) day period after a decision has been rendered, the person who submitted such plan may provide for the publication of such notice within ten (10) days thereafter. 

e. 	
On any application for which the period for approval has expired and on which no action has been taken, the Commission shall send a letter of approval to the applicant within fifteen (15) days of the date on which the period for approval expired and such letter of approval shall state the date on which the five-year completion period expires. 


181 


5. 	Following Approval 
a. 	
Following approval of a Site Plan Application, two (2) fixed-line mylar cop­ies of the approved plan(s) shall be submitted to the Planning and Zoning Office: 

i. 	bearing the raised seal and signature of the appropriate professionals which prepared the drawing(s), 
ii. 	bearing a copy of the decision letter of the Commission and any other town regulatory agencies authorizing the activity, and 
iii. 	containing a signature block where the Chairman of the Commission can indicate the approval of the Commission. 

b. 	
Following signature by the Chairman, such plans shall be filed in the of­fice of the Building Official before any Building Permits are issued for the activities shown on the approved plan. 

c. 	
Proposed modifications to approved site plans shall be submitted to the Zoning Inspector for review and such proposed modifications may be: 

i. 	approved by the Zoning Inspector if minor in nature, or 
ii. 	submitted to the Commission for additional review if they propose major changes (i.e., additional building floor area, alteration of build­ing location, etc.). 

d. 	
Within a Village District, no approval shall be effective until a copy there­of, certified by the Commission, containing the name of the owner of rec­ord, a description of the premises to which it relates and specifying the reasons for its decision, is recorded by the applicant in the land records, indexed in the grantor's index under the name of the then record owner. 



6. 	Expiration and Completion 
a. 	
Any Site Plan Application under which no work is commenced within twelve (12) months from the date of approval, shall expire unless the Commission shall provide for a longer time period not to exceed twenty-four (24) months from the date of approval. 

b. 	
All work in connection with a site plan shall be completed within five (5) years after the date of approval of the plan and failure to complete all work within such five-year period shall result in automatic expiration of the approval of such site plan unless the Commission shall have granted an extension of the time to complete work in connection with such site plan. 

c. 	
The Commission may grant one (1) or more extensions of the time to complete all or part of the work in connection with the site plan provided the total extension or extensions shall not exceed ten (10) years from the date of approval of such site plan. 

d. 	
The Commission may condition the approval of such extension on a de­termination of the adequacy of any bond or other surety. 



182 

B. Special Permit Application 
1. 	Application Requirements 
a. 	
A Special Permit Application shall be submitted for any activity designat­ed in the Regulations as requiring a Special Permit. 

b. 	
Each application for a Special Permit shall be accompanied by a Site Plan Application unless the Zoning Inspector finds that there are no phys­ical changes proposed to the site or any building or structure and the submission of a Site Plan Application is not necessary for the Commis­sion to evaluate the proposal. 

c. 	
A Special Permit Application shall be accompanied by twelve (12) copies of the following information: 

i. 	a detailed statement describing the existing and proposed use or us­es, 
ii. 	a detailed statement describing how the Special Permit criteria in Subsection 8.2.B.4 are satisfied, and 
iii. 	any approval from any local, regional, state or federal agency or de­partment having jurisdiction over any aspect of the application, if such approval has been obtained at the time of application. 

d. 	
The Commission may require the submission of additional information as deemed necessary to make a reasonable review of the application. 

e. 	
If a Special Permit Application involves an activity regulated pursuant to CGS 22a-36 to 22a-45, inclusive, the applicant shall submit an applica­tion for a permit to the Inland Wetlands Commission not later than the day such application is filed with the Commission. 


November 1, 2009 
183 


2. 	Proceedings 
a. 	
The date of receipt of the Special Permit Application shall be determined in accordance with Subsection 8.1.B. 

b. 	
An incomplete Special Permit Application may be denied in accordance with Subsection 8.1.C. 

c. 	
The Commission shall hold a public hearing on the Special Permit Appli­cation and: 

i. 	publish a legal notice in accordance with the requirements of Subsec­tion 8.1.F. of these Regulations, and 
ii. 	require that the applicant give notice to property owners in accord­ance with the requirements of Subsection 8.1.G of these Regulations. 

d. 	
Notification to adjoining municipalities may be required in accordance with the requirements of Subsection 8.1.H. 

e. 	
Notification to water companies may be required in accordance with the requirements of Subsection 8.1.I. 

f. 	
The Commission shall process the Special Permit Application within the period of time permitted under CGS 8-7d: 

i. 	the public hearing shall commence within sixty-five (65) days after receipt of the application, 
ii. 	the public hearing shall be completed within thirty-five (35) days after such hearing commences, 
iii. 	all decisions shall be rendered within sixty-five (65) days after com­pletion of such hearing, and 
iv. 	the applicant may consent to one or more extensions of any period specified herein provided the total extension of all such periods shall not be for longer than sixty-five (65) days. 

g. 	
Notwithstanding the provisions of this Section, if an application involves an activity regulated pursuant to CGS 22a-36 to 22a-45, inclusive and the time for a decision by the Commission would elapse prior to the thirty-fifth day after a decision by the Inland Wetlands Commission, the time period for a decision shall be extended to thirty-five (35) days after the decision of such agency. 

h. 	
The applicant may, at any time prior to action by the Commission, with­draw such application. 

i. 	
The applicant shall bear the burden of demonstrating that any applicable Special Permit Criteria in these Regulations are satisfied. 


November 1, 2009 

184 

3. 	Decision Considerations 
a. 	
On a Special Permit Application involving an activity regulated pursuant to CGS 22a-36 to 22a-45, inclusive, the Commission shall: 

i. 	wait to render its decision until the Inland Wetlands Commission has submitted a report with its final decision, and 
ii. 	give due consideration to any report of the Inland Wetlands Commis­sion when making its decision. 

b. 	
On a Special Permit Application involving notice to adjoining municipali­ties under Subsection 8.1.H or notice to water companies under Subsec­tion 8.1.I, the Commission shall give due consideration to any report or testimony received. 

c. 	
Before the Commission approves a Special Permit Application, it shall determine that the application: 

i. 	is in conformance with the applicable provisions of these Regula­tions, 
ii. 	has, in the sole discretion of the Commission, satisfied all applicable Special Permit criteria in these Regulations, and 
iii. 	is in harmony with the purposes and intent of these Regulations. 

d. 	
Before granting a Special Permit, the Commission shall determine that any accompanying Site Plan Application is in conformance with the appli­cable provisions of these Regulations. 

e. 	
In granting a Special Permit, the Commission may: 

i. 	stipulate such conditions as are reasonable and necessary to protect or promote the public health, safety or welfare; property values; the environment; sound planning and zoning principles; improved land use, site planning and land development; or better overall neighbor­hood compatibility, and 
ii. 	impose additional requirements, conditions or safeguards as a pre­requisite to the issuance of the Zoning Permit by the Zoning Inspec­tor, if it shall be found necessary in order that the spirit of these Regulations may be observed, public safety and welfare secured or substantial justice done. 

f. 
Any condition or safeguard attached to the granting of a Special Permit: 

i. 	shall remain with the property as long as the Special Permit use is still in operation, and 
ii. 	shall continue in force and effect regardless of any change in owner­ship of the property.  

g. 	
The Commission shall not approve any Special Permit for any property on which there exists a zoning violation, unless such Special Permit ap­plication will remedy such violation. 


November 1, 2009 
185 


Section 8.2 

4. Special Permit Criteria 
In considering any application for a Special Permit, the Commission shall evalu­ate the merit of the application with respect to the following factors: 

November 1, 2009 

186 

d.  Adequate Public Utilities and Services  
i.  The provisions for water supply, sewage disposal, and storm water drainage conform to accepted engineering practices, comply with all standards of the appropriate regulatory authority, and shall not unduly burden the capacity of such facilities.  
ii.  The proposed use or activity shall provide easy accessibility for fire apparatus and police protection and is laid out and equipped to fur­ther the provision of emergency services.  
e.  Environmental Protection and Conservation  
Appropriate consideration shall be given to the protection, preservation, and/or enhancement of natural, scenic, historic, and unique resources in­cluding, where appropriate, the use of conservation restrictions to protect and permanently preserve natural, scenic, historic, or unique features which enhance the character and environment of the area.  
f.  Long Term Viability  
Adequate provision has been made for the sustained maintenance of the proposed development (structures, streets, and other improvements).  
g.  Plan of Conservation and Development  
The proposed use or activity does not conflict with the purposes of the Regulations set forth in Section 1.2, and promotes the goals, objectives, policies, or recommendations of the Plan of Conservation and Develop­ 


November 1, 2009 
187 

5. 	Action Documentation 
a. 	
Whenever it grants or denies a Special Permit, the Commission shall state upon its record the reason(s) for its decision. The Commission shall state the merits or demerits of the proposal and why approving or disapproving the application will positively or negatively affect the Town of New Canaan or the area or neighborhood impacted. 

b. 	
The decision to grant a Special Permit shall: 

i. 	state the name of the owner of record, 
ii. 	contain a description of the premises to which it relates, 
iii. 	identify the Section and/or Subsection of the Regulations under which the Special Permit was granted or denied, and 
iv. 	specify the nature of the Special Permit. 

c. 	
The Commission shall send, by certified mail, a copy of any decision on a Special Permit Application to the applicant within fifteen (15) days after such decision is rendered. 

d. 	
The Commission shall cause notice of the approval or denial of the Spe­cial Permit Application to be published in a newspaper having a substan­tial circulation in New Canaan within fifteen (15) days after such decision is rendered. 

e. 	
In any case in which such notice is not published within the fifteen-day period after a decision has been rendered, the person who submitted such application may provide for the publication of such notice within ten 


(10) days thereafter. 

6. 	Following Approval 
a. 	
A Special Permit granted by the Commission shall only become effective upon the filing of a copy, certified by the Commission, in the land records of the Town, in accordance with the provisions of CGS 8-3d. 

b. 	
A Special Permit shall only authorize the particular use or uses specified in the Commission's approval. 

c. 	
Failure to strictly adhere to the documents, plans, terms, conditions and/or safeguards approved by the Commission or its staff shall be a vio­lation of these Regulations and the Commission shall have the authority to revoke the permit at any time the operation is found to be in noncom­pliance with the original permit. 

d. 	
A Special Permit may be amended or modified in like manner as provid­ed above for the granting of a Special Permit except that amendments which shall be found to be of a minor nature or which do not materially al­ter the Special Permit, as determined by the Commission, may be author­ized with Commission approval only, without another public hearing. 



188 

November 1, 2009 

C. Regulation Amendment Application 
1. Application Requirements 
a.  A Regulation Amendment Application shall be submitted for any proposal to amend, change, or repeal any Section of these Regulations.  
b.  Any such application shall be accompanied by twelve (12) copies of the precise wording of the existing and proposed text and any other support­ing information.  
c.  The Commission may require the submission of additional information as deemed necessary to make a reasonable review of the application.  
d.  A Regulation Amendment Application shall only be submitted by: i. an owner of real property in New Canaan, ii. residents or persons having an interest in land in Town, or iii. by the Commission on its own initiative.  

e. 	The Commission shall not be required to hear any petition or petitions re­lating to the same changes, or substantially the same changes, more than once in a period of twelve (12) months unless it finds, on facts pre­sented in writing, that a material change in the situation justifies this ac­tion. A change of ownership of property or any interest therein shall not be deemed a material change in the situation for the purpose of this Sec­tion. 
2. 	Proceedings 
a. 	
The date of receipt for the Regulation Amendment Application shall be determined in accordance with Subsection 8.1.B. 

b. 	
An incomplete Regulation Amendment Application may be denied in ac­cordance with Subsection 8.1.C. 

c. 	
The Commission shall hold a public hearing on the Regulation Amend­ment Application and: 

i. 	shall cause a legal notice to be published in accordance with the re­quirements of Subsection 8.1.F. of these Regulations. 
ii. 	may publish the full text of such proposed regulation in full in such notice. 

d. 	
The Commission shall give written notice to the regional planning agency when any portion of the land affected by a regulation change affecting the use of a zone is located within five hundred (500) feet of the boundary of another municipality and: 

i. 	such notice shall be made by certified mail, return receipt requested. 
ii. 	such notice shall be made not later than thirty (30) days before the public hearing. 
iii. 	the regional planning agency may submit its advisory findings and recommendations to the Commission at or before the hearing but if such report is not submitted, it shall be presumed that such agency does not disapprove of the proposal. 

e. 	
Notification to adjoining municipalities may be required in accordance with the requirements of Subsection 8.1.H. 

f. 	
Notification to water companies may be required in accordance with the requirements of Subsection 8.1.I. 


189 


g. 	
A copy of the proposed regulation shall be filed by the applicant in the of­fice of the Town Clerk for public inspection at least ten (10) days before the public hearing. 

h. 	
The Commission shall process the Regulation Amendment Application within the period of time permitted under CGS 8-7d: 

i. 	the public hearing shall commence within sixty-five (65) days after receipt of the application. 
ii. 	the public hearing shall be completed within thirty-five (35) days after such hearing commences. 
iii. 	all decisions shall be rendered within sixty-five (65) days after com­pletion of such hearing. 
iv. 	
the applicant may consent to one or more extensions of any period specified herein provided the total extension of all such periods shall not be for longer than sixty-five (65) days. 

v. 	
these provisions shall not apply to any action initiated by the Com­mission regarding adoption or change of any Regulation. 



i. 	
The applicant may, at any time prior to action by the Commission, with­draw such application. 



3. 	Decision Considerations 
a. 	
The Commission shall act upon the changes requested in such Regula­tion Amendment Application. 

b. 	
Any report from an adjacent municipality or a regional planning agency shall be made a part of the record of such hearing. 

c. 	
On a Regulation Amendment Application involving notice to adjoining municipalities, water companies, or a regional planning agency, the Commission shall give due consideration to any report or testimony re­ceived. 

d. 	
In making its decision the Commission shall take into consideration the Plan of Conservation and Development, prepared pursuant to CGS 8-23. 

e. 	
Before approving any Regulation Amendment Application, the Commis­sion shall determine that the proposed regulation change will aid in: 

i. 	protecting the public health, safety, welfare, or property values, and 
ii. 	attaining the purposes of these Regulations. 

f. 	
Such Regulation(s) shall be established, changed or repealed only by a majority vote of all the members of the Commission except that, if a pro­test against a proposed change is filed at or before a hearing with the Commission, signed by the owners of twenty (20) percent or more of the area of the lots affected by such proposed change or of the lots within five hundred feet in all directions of the property included in the proposed change, such change shall not be adopted except by a vote of two-thirds of all the members of the Commission. 



4. 	Action Documentation 
a. 	
Whenever the Commission acts upon a Regulation Amendment Application, it shall state upon the record the reasons for its deci­sion. 

b. 	
In making its decision, the Commission shall state upon the rec­ord its findings on consistency of the proposed establishment, change or repeal of such Regulations with the Plan of Conserva­tion and Development, as amended. 

c. 	
As part of approving a Regulation Amendment Application, the Commission shall establish an effective date for the Regulation change provided that a notice of the decision of the Commission shall have been published in a newspaper having a substantial circulation in New Canaan before such effective date. 

d. 	
The Commission shall send, by certified mail, a copy of any deci­sion on a Regulation Amendment Application to the applicant within fifteen (15) days after such decision is rendered. 

e. 	
The Commission shall cause notice of the approval or denial of the Regulation Amendment Application to be published in a newspaper having a substantial circulation in New Canaan within fifteen (15) days after such decision is rendered. 

f. 	
In any case in which such notice is not published within the fif­teen-day period after a decision has been rendered, the person who submitted such application may provide for the publication of such notice within ten (10) days thereafter. 


5. 	Following Approval 
A regulation amendment approved by the Commission shall be filed in the office of the Town Clerk before the effective date. 
191 


D. Zone Change Application 
1. 
Application Requirements 

2. 	
Proceedings 

a. 	
The date of receipt of the Zone Change Application shall be de­termined in accordance with Subsection 8.1.B. 

b. 	
The Commission shall hold a public hearing on the Zone Change Application and: 

i. 	shall cause a legal notice to be published in accordance with the requirements of Subsection 8.1.F. of these Reg­ulations. 
ii. 	require that the applicant give notice to property owners in accordance with the requirements of Subsection 
8.1.G. of these Regulations. 

c. 	
The Commission shall give written notice to the regional planning agency when any portion of the land affected by a Zone Change Application is located within five hundred (500) feet of the bound­ary of another municipality and: 

i. 	such notice shall be made by certified mail, return receipt requested. 
ii. 	such notice shall be made not later than thirty (30) days before the public hearing. 
iii. 	the regional planning agency may submit its advisory findings and recommendations to the Commission at or before the hearing but if such report is not submitted, it shall be presumed that such agency does not disapprove of the proposal. 

d. 	
Notification to adjoining municipalities may be required in ac­cordance with the requirements of Subsection 8.1.H. 

e. 	
Notification to water companies may be required in accordance with the requirements of Subsection 8.1.I. 

f. 	
A copy of the proposed zone change shall be filed by the appli­cant in the Office of the Town Clerk for public inspection at least ten days before the public hearing. 




a.  A Zone Change Application shall be submitted for any proposal to alter the zoning designation of any parcel(s) of land or part thereof.  
b.  A Zone Change Application shall be: i. signed by the affected property owner(s), ii. initiated by petition, or iii. commenced by the Commission on its own initiative.  
c.  A Zone Change Application shall be accompanied by twelve (12) copies of a map signed and sealed by a land surveyor licensed in the State of Connecticut for review by the Commission and its designees that com­plies with the requirements in the Appendix of these Regulations.  
d.  The Commission shall not be required to hear a Zone Change Applica­tion that has been rejected within one (1) year from the date of rejection unless it finds, on facts presented in writing, that a material change in the situation justifies this action. A change of ownership of property or any in­terest therein shall not be deemed a material change in the situation for the purpose of this Section.  

g. 	
An incomplete Zone Change Application may be denied in ac­cordance with Subsection 8.1.C. 

h. 	
The Commission shall process the Zone Change Application within the period of time permitted under CGS 8-7d: 

i. 	The public hearing shall commence within sixty-five (65) days after receipt of the application. 
ii. 	The public hearing shall be completed within thirty-five 
(35) days after such hearing commences. 
iii. 	All decisions shall be rendered within sixty-five (65) days after completion of such hearing. 
iv. 	
The applicant may consent to one or more extensions of any period specified herein provided the total extension of all such periods shall not be for longer than sixty-five 

(65) days. 

v. 	
these provisions shall not apply to any action initiated by the Commission regarding a Zone Change Application. 



i. 	
The applicant may, at any time prior to action by the Commis­sion, withdraw such application. 


3. 	Decision Considerations 
a. 	
The Commission shall act upon the Zone Change Application. 

b. 	
On a Zone Change Application involving notice to adjoining mu­nicipalities under Subsection 8.1.H, notice to water companies under Subsection 8.1.I, or notice to a regional planning agency under Subsection 8.2.D.2.c, the Commission shall give due con­sideration to any report or testimony received. 

c. 	
In making its decision the Commission shall take into considera­tion the Plan of Conservation and Development, prepared pursu­ant to CGS 8-23. 

d. 	
Before approving any Zone Change Application, the Commission shall determine that the proposed zone change: 

i. 	is in accordance with the Plan of Conservation and De­velopment, 
ii. 	is suitable for the intended location, 
iii. 	will aid in protecting the public health, safety, welfare, or property values, and 
iv. 	will aid in attaining the purposes of these Regulations. 

e. 	
Such Zone Change shall be established, changed or repealed only by a majority vote of all the members of the Commission ex­cept that, if a protest against a proposed change is filed with the Commission at or before a hearing, signed by the owners of twenty (20) percent or more of the area of the lots affected by such proposed change or of the lots within five hundred (500) feet in all directions of the property included in the proposed change, such change shall not be adopted except by a vote of two-thirds of all the members of the Commission. 


193 


4. 	Action Documentation 
a. 	
Whenever the Commission acts upon a Zone Change Applica­tion, it shall state upon the record: 

i. 	the reason for its decision, and 
ii. 	its findings on consistency of the proposed zone change with the Plan of Conservation and Development, as amended. 

b. 	
As part of approving a Zone Change Application, the Commis­sion shall establish an effective date for the zone change provid­ed a notice of the decision of the Commission shall have been published in a newspaper having a substantial circulation in New Canaan before such effective date. 

c. 	
The Commission shall send, by certified mail, a copy of any deci­sion on a Zone Change Application to the applicant within fifteen 

(15) days after such decision is rendered. 

d. 	
The Commission shall cause notice of the approval or denial of the Zone Change Application to be published in a newspaper having a substantial circulation in New Canaan within fifteen (15) days after such decision is rendered. 

e. 	
In any case in which such notice is not published within the fif­teen-day period after a decision has been rendered, the person who submitted such application may provide for the publication of such notice within ten (10) days thereafter. 



5. 	Following Approval 
A Zone Change Application approved by the Commission shall be filed in the of­fice of the Town Clerk before the effective date. 
E. Change in Use Application 
1. 	
Unless waived by the Commission, a Change In Use application shall be submitted when a land or building use is proposed to be changed to a use that has different requirements in these Regulations for setbacks, parking, building coverage, or other requirements. 

2. 	
A Change In Use Application shall meet the same standards and be treated as a Site Plan Application unless the Regulations clearly indicate that it should be treated as a Zone Change Application, Special Permit Application, or similar application. 


F. Concept Plan Submission 
1. 	
If an application is of such size or nature that providing a Site Plan Application may produce an unreasonable hardship, the applicant may submit a Concept Plan for informal presentation to the Commission. 

2. 	
The Concept Plan shall provide information on the location of significant natu­ral features (wetlands, watercourses, steep slopes, flood plain) and other rel­evant information and shall provide sufficient information for the Commission to visualize how the finished use or development shall look and how it shall be built.  

3. 	
The Commission shall informally review the Concept Plan for general con­formance with these Regulations and may request additional information where deemed necessary. 

4. 	
A Concept Plan shall be considered only informational and advisory in nature and no development rights shall attach to the review or consideration of any Concept Site Plan.  

5. 	
Such review shall not be binding on the applicant or the Commission. 

6. 	
In accordance with PA 03-184, such review and any results or information obtained from it may not be appealed under any provision of the Connecticut General Statutes. 

7. 	
A Concept Plan shall be placed on file in the Commission's office for continu­ing reference purposes for any subsequent application. 


G. Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plan 
1. 	
A Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plan shall be submitted with or prior to any application for development requiring a Zoning Permit, Special Permit, Site Plan or Subdivision, when the disturbed area of any such development is more than one-half (1/2) acre. 

2. 	
Upon receipt of an application for approval of a Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plan, the Commission or its agent shall refer the plan to the Environ­mental Commission for action by delivering a copy of the plan to the Wet­lands Enforcement Agent. 

3. 	
The Commission shall incorporate any action taken by the Environmental Commission on the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plan into its decision. 

4. 	
The Zoning Inspector shall issue a Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Permit for a plan conforming to the approval granted by the Environmental Commis­sion. 


195 


SECTION 8.3. ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS 
PROCEDURES 


A. General Provisions 
1. 	Appointment 
There shall be a Zoning Board of Appeals appointed pursuant to the provisions of any special or public act adopted by the General Assembly and any Charter pro­visions adopted by the Town of New Canaan. 
2. 	Powers and Duties 
The Board shall have the following powers and duties: 
a. 	
To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is an error in any order, requirement or decision made by the Zoning Inspector. 

b. 	
To determine and vary the application of the Zoning Regulations solely with respect to a parcel of land where, owing to conditions especially affecting such parcel but not affecting generally the district in which it is situated, a literal enforcement of these Regu­lations would result in exceptional difficulty or unusual hardship and only when such determination or variance shall: 

i. 	be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of these Regulations, 
ii. 	give due consideration for conserving the public health, safety, convenience, welfare and property values, and 
iii. 	result in substantial justice being done and the public safety and welfare secured. 

c. 	
To hear and decide all matters referred to it and upon which it shall be required to pass under any provision of these Regula­tions. 

d. 	
The Board will not grant variances for the number of parking spaces required for any property in the Retail B, Business A, Business B or Business C Zones. 


February 1, 2012 

3. 	Meetings 
a. 	
All hearings of said Board shall be held at the call of the Chair­man or Secretary at such times as the Board may determine and shall be open to the public. 

b. 	
The Board, in considering and determining matters brought to it, may hold meetings to review and deliberate after the public hear­ing duly held on such matter. 

c. 	
The Chairman or, in his absence, the Acting Chairman, may ad­minister oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. 

d. 	
The Board shall keep Minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question or, if absent or failing to vote, shall indicate such fact, and shall keep records of its ex­aminations and other official acts. 

e. 	
Each rule or regulation and each amendment or repeal thereof and each order, requirement or decision of the Board shall im­mediately be filed in the office of the Board and shall be a public record. 

f. 	
If a regular member of the Board is absent, the member may designate an alternate from the panel of alternates to act in his or her place but if he or she fails to make such designation or if he or she is disqualified, the Chairman shall designate an alternate from such panel. 

g. 	
In choosing an alternate, the Chairman shall choose alternates in rotation so that they shall act as nearly equal a number of times as possible and, if any alternate is not available in accordance with such rotation, such fact shall be recorded in the minutes of the meeting. 


4. 	Conflict of Interest 
A member of the Board shall disqualify himself to act in a given case by reason of his relationship to any party involved or of financial interest in the matter before the Board. 
5. 	Jurisdiction 
No order, requirement or decision made by the Commission or by any administra­tive officer charged with the enforcement of any of these Regulations and made under the powers of the State of Connecticut by Chapter 126 of the General Stat­utes of Connecticut shall be subject to a review by the Board. 
February 1, 2012 
197 


B. Appeal of Order 
1. 	Authority 
In accordance with CGS 8-7, an appeal may be taken to the Board by any person aggrieved, where it is alleged that there is an error in any order, requirement or decision made by the Zoning Inspector. 
2. 	Application Requirements 
a. 	
Any such appeal shall be taken by filing with the Commission or the Zoning Inspector and with the Board a notice of appeal speci­fying the grounds thereof. 

b. 	
An appeal shall be taken within fifteen (15) days of the issuance of the order by the Zoning Inspector. 

c. 	
The Zoning Inspector shall forthwith transmit to the Board all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 

d. 	
The Board may fix a reasonable fee to be paid by the appellant in any appeal brought before the said Board and may include there­in the cost of any newspaper advertisement necessary in con­nection with such appeal. 

e. 	
The Board may require the filing of a survey prepared by a land surveyor if, in their opinion, such survey is relevant to the inter­pretation of the order, requirement or decision made by the Zon­ing Inspector. 



3. 	Effect of Appeal 
a. 	
An appeal of an order, requirement or decision made by the Zon­ing Inspector which prohibits further construction or expansion of a use in violation of the Zoning Regulations shall not be cause for such construction or expansion to continue except to such extent that the Board may allow. 

b. 	
An appeal from any other order, requirement or decision made by the Zoning Inspector shall stop all enforcement and proceed­ings with regard to such order, requirement or decision unless the Commission or the Zoning Inspector certifies to the Board af­ter the appeal has been filed that, by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would cause imminent peril to life or property. 

c. 	
If the Commission or the Zoning Inspector certifies to the Board that a stay would cause imminent peril to life or property, en­forcement and proceedings shall only be stayed by a Restraining Order granted by a court of record, on notice to the Commission or the Zoning Inspector and on due cause shown. 



4. 	Proceedings 
a. 	
The date of receipt of the Appeal of Order shall be determined in accordance with Subsection 8.1.B. 

b. 	
The Board shall hold a public hearing on the Appeal of Order and: 

i. 	publish a legal notice in accordance with the require­ments of Subsection 8.1.F. of these Regulations, and 
ii. 	require that the applicant give notice to property owners in accordance with the requirements of Subsection 
8.1.G. of these Regulations. 

c. 	
At such hearing, any party may appear in person or may be rep­resented by agent or by attorney. 

d. 	
Notification to adjoining municipalities may be required in ac­cordance with the requirements of Subsection 8.1.H. 

e. 	
Notification to water companies may be required in accordance with the requirements of Subsection 8.1.I. 

f. 	
An incomplete Appeal of Order may be denied in accordance with Subsection 8.1.C. 

g. 	
The Board shall process the Appeal of Order within the period of time permitted under CGS 8-7d: 

i. 	The public hearing shall commence within sixty-five (65) days after receipt of the appeal. 
ii. 	The public hearing shall be completed within thirty-five 
(35) days after such hearing commences. 
iii. 	All decisions shall be rendered within sixty-five (65) days after completion of such hearing. 
iv. 	The applicant may consent to one or more extensions of any period specified herein provided the total extension of all such periods shall not be for longer than sixty-five 
(65) days. 

h. 	
The applicant may, at any time prior to action by the Board, with­draw such application. 


199 


5. 	Decision Considerations 
a. 	
The Board shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal has been taken but only in accordance with the provisions of this Section. 

b. 	
The application of a regulation affirming a statute shall not be subject to an appeal of order. 

c. 	
The Board shall make such order, requirement, or decision as in its opinion should be made in the premises. 

d. 	
The Board may reverse or affirm wholly or partly or may modify any order, requirement or decision appealed from. 

e. 	
The concurring vote of four (4) members of the Board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, or decision of the official charged with the enforcement of the Regulations. 



6. 	Action Documentation 
a. 	
Whenever it grants or denies an Appeal of Order, the Board shall state the reason(s) for its decision upon the record. 

b. 	
Notice of the decision of the Board shall be sent by certified mail to any person who appeals to the Board within fifteen (15) days after such decision has been rendered. 

c. 	
Notice of the decision of the board shall be published in a news­paper having a substantial circulation in New Canaan within fif­teen (15) days after such decision has been rendered. 

d. 	
In any case in which such notice is not published within such fif­teen-day period, the person who took such appeal may provide for the publication of such notice within ten (10) days thereafter. 



C. Variance 
1. 	Authority 
In accordance with CGS 8-6, the Board shall have the power and duty to deter­mine and vary the application of the Regulations solely with respect to a parcel of land where, owing to conditions especially affecting such parcel but not affecting generally the district in which it is situated, a literal enforcement of these Regula­tions would result in exceptional difficulty or unusual hardship. 
2. 	Application Requirements 
a. 	
A Variance Application shall be accompanied by ten (10) copies of sufficiently detailed plans for review by the Board and its de­signees. 

b. 	
The Board shall require the filing of a survey prepared by a li­censed land surveyor when the variance is dimensional in nature or such survey is integral to the understanding of the application. 

c. 	
The Board may fix a reasonable fee to be paid by the applicant and may include therein the cost of any newspaper advertise­ment necessary in connection with such appeal. 

d. 	
The Board shall not be required to hear any application for the same variance or substantially the same variance for a period of six months after a decision by the Board or by a court on an ear­lier such application. 

e. 	
If a Variance Application involves an activity regulated pursuant to CGS 22a-36 to 22a-45, inclusive, the applicant shall submit an application for a permit to the Environmental Commission not lat­er than the day such application is filed with the Commission. 


3. 	Nature of Variance 
a. 	
Any variance granted by the Board shall run with the land and shall not be personal in nature to the person who applies for and receives the variance. 

b. 	
A variance shall not be extinguished solely because of the trans­fer of title to the property or the invalidity of any condition at­tached to the variance that would affect the transfer of the prop­erty from the person who initially applied for and received the var­iance. 


201 


4. 	Proceedings 
a. 	
The date of receipt for the Variance Application shall be deter­mined in accordance with Subsection 8.1.B. 

b. 	
The Board shall hold a public hearing on the Variance Application and: 

i. 	publish a legal notice in accordance with the require­ments of Subsection 8.1.F. of these Regulations, and 
ii. 	require that the applicant give notice to property owners in accordance with the requirements of Subsection 
8.1.G. of these Regulations. 

c. 	
At such hearing, any party may appear in person or may be rep­resented by agent or by attorney. 

d. 	
Notification to adjoining municipalities may be required in ac­cordance with the requirements of Subsection 8.1.H. 

e. 	
Notification to water companies may be required in accordance with the requirements of Subsection 8.1.I. 

f. 	
An incomplete Variance Application may be denied in accord­ance with Subsection 8.1.C. 

g. 	
The Board shall process the Variance Application within the peri­od of time permitted under CGS 8-7d: 

i. 	The public hearing shall commence within sixty-five (65) days after receipt of the application. 
ii. 	The public hearing shall be completed within thirty-five 
(35) days after such hearing commences. 
iii. 	All decisions shall be rendered within sixty-five (65) days after completion of such hearing. 
iv. 	The applicant may consent to one or more extensions of any period specified herein provided the total extension of all such periods shall not be for longer than sixty-five 
(65) days. 

h. 	
The applicant may, at any time prior to action by the Commis­sion, withdraw such application. 



5. 	Decision Considerations 
a. 	
Whenever a Variance Application is joined with an Appeal of Order Appli­cation, the Board shall first decide the issues presented by such Appeal of Order. 

b. 	
The application of a regulation affirming a statute shall not be subject to variance. 

c. 	
The Board shall find that a literal enforcement of these Regulations would result in exceptional difficulty or unusual hardship: 

i. 	solely with respect to the parcel of land that is the subject of the ap­plication, 
ii. 	owing to conditions especially affecting such parcel but not affecting generally the district in which it is situated. 

d. 	
The Board shall only grant the minimum variance necessary to alleviate the exceptional difficulty or unusual hardship: 

i. 	in harmony with the general purpose and intent of the Regulations. 
ii. 	with due consideration for conserving the public health, safety, con­venience, welfare and property values, and 
iii. 	so that substantial justice shall be done and the public safety and welfare secured. 

e. 	
The concurring vote of four (4) members of the Board shall be necessary to vary the application of the Zoning Regulations. 


6. 	Additional Considerations for Use Variances 
a. 	
No use variance shall be granted where a dimensional variance would re­lieve the exceptional difficulty or unusual hardship. 

b. 	
No use variance for a business use or an industrial use shall be granted in a Residence Zone. 

c. 	
No use variance shall be granted for an industrial use in any Retail Zone or any Business Zone. 

d. 	
A use variance shall only be granted where, without the use variance, the private property would be rendered valueless. 


203 


7. 	Action Documentation 
a. 	
Whenever it grants or denies a Variance Application, the Com­mission shall state upon its records: 

i. the reason for its decision, 
ii. 	the Regulation which is varied in its application, and 
iii. 	a specific description of the exceptional difficulty or unu­sual hardship on which its decision is based. 

b. 	
Notice of the decision of the Board shall be sent by certified mail to any person who appeals to the Board within fifteen (15) days after such decision has been rendered. 

c. 	
Such notice shall: 

i. state the name of the owner of record, 
ii. 	contain a description of the premises to which it relates, 
iii. 	state the nature of the hardship claimed, and 
iv. 	specify the nature of such variance including the Regula­tion which is varied in its application. 

d. 	
Notice of the decision of the Board shall be published in a news­paper having a substantial circulation in New Canaan within fif­teen (15) days after such decision has been rendered. 

e. 	
In any case in which such notice is not published within such fif­teen-day period, the applicant may provide for the publication of such notice within ten (10) days thereafter. 



8. 	Following Approval 
a. 	
A variance granted by the Board shall only become effective upon the fil­ing of a copy, certified by the Board, in the land records of the Town, in accordance with the provisions of CGS 8-3d. 

b. 	
A variance shall only authorize the particular activity specified in the Commission's approval. 



SECTION 8.4. STAFF PROCEDURES 
A. Zoning Permit 
1. 	Application Requirements 
a. 	
An application for a Zoning Permit shall be made to the Zoning Inspector on a form provided for that purpose before: 

i. 	any land, building, or structure is devoted to any new or changed use of premises within the category of business or residential uses, 
ii. 	the erection or alteration of any building or structure is commenced in any zone, 
iii. 	any other activity which requires a Zoning or other permit as required by these Regulations, or 
iv. 	any Building Permit or Certificate of Occupancy is issued by the Building Official relating to any of the foregoing. 

b. 	
Such application for a Zoning Permit shall be accompanied by: 

i. 	a plot plan and other drawings and documentation showing the in­formation required in the Appendix of these Regulations, and 
ii. 	the appropriate fee as determined by the Commission. 

c. 	
Any application for a Zoning Permit may be summarily rejected and may be considered void and of no effect if: 


i. 	another application for a Zoning Permit as to the same land, building, structure, or use of all parts or portions thereof is still pending before the Zoning Inspector or the Commission, 
ii. 	an appeal is pending before the Board or any legal proceeding is pending before any court of competent jurisdiction or pending in any other form of dispute resolution relating to a Zoning Permit or on an application for a Zoning Permit on the same land, building, structure or use thereof as to which such application is being made, 
iii. 	a Zoning Permit is outstanding on the same land, building, structure or use, but neither Certificates of Compliance nor Occupancy, nor both, have been approved in conjunction therewith, or 
iv. 	two (2) or more applications are filed simultaneously with the Zoning Inspector, whether similar or dissimilar, each application applying to the same land, building, structure or use thereof. 
205 


2. 	Proceedings 
a. 	
A decision on a Zoning Permit Application shall be made as soon as fea­sible but in no event shall such decision take longer than thirty (30) days from the date of acceptance of a complete submittal. 

b. 	
If the proposed new or changed use or if the proposed erection or altera­tion of any building or structure is found from the application to be in compliance with these Regulations, the Zoning Inspector shall issue a Zoning Permit setting forth the date on which the permit was issued and shall forward a copy thereof to the office of the Town Assessor. 

c. 	
No Zoning Permit shall be issued for the erection, the interior or exterior enlargement of gross floor area or the external alteration of any building or structure in a Retail Zone or a Business Zone, unless a Site Plan Ap­plication therefore has been approved by the Commission in accordance with the provisions of these Regulations. 

d. 	
Any application for a Zoning Permit shall be rejected if the Zoning Inspec­tor finds that: 

i. 	the application is incomplete and has notified the applicant in writing of the reason(s) why the application is incomplete, or 
ii. 	the application is not in compliance with the Zoning Regulations and has notified the applicant in writing of the reason(s) why the applica­tion does not comply with the Zoning Regulations. 

e. 	
An application for a Zoning Permit may be withdrawn by the applicant at any time prior to final action by filing a formal written request to that effect with the Zoning Inspector, except that there shall be no rebate of any por­tion of the fees which may have been paid by the applicant for a Zoning Permit application that is subsequently withdrawn. 

f. 	
The Zoning Inspector is not authorized to approve, and shall not approve, any zoning permit for any property on which there exists a zoning viola­tion, unless such zoning permit application will remedy such violation. 



3. 	Notice Provisions 
a. 	
In accordance with CGS Section 8-3(f), the Zoning Inspector shall inform the recipient of a Zoning Permit that notice of issuance of a zoning permit may be published by the recipient in a newspaper having substantial cir­culation in New Canaan in order to establish the appeal period per CGS 8-7. 

b. 	
Any such notice to be published by the recipient shall contain: 


i. 	a description of the building, use or structure, 
ii. 	the location of the building, use or structure, 
iii. 	the identity of the applicant, and 
iv. 	a statement that an aggrieved person may appeal to the Board of Appeals in accordance with the provisions of CGS 8-7. 

4. 	As-Built Plan Required 
a. 	
Unless waived by the Zoning Inspector due to clear compliance with the Zoning Regulations, an as-built plan shall be: 

i. 	prepared by a licensed Land Surveyor demonstrating that the loca­tion of the foundation of any building or addition to an existing build­ing or structure for which a Zoning Permit has been issued is in com­pliance with the Zoning Regulations and the approved site plan, 
ii. 	filed with the Zoning Inspector by the holder of the Zoning Permit up­on completion of the foundation of any building or addition to an exist­ing building or structure for which a Zoning Permit has been issued. 

b. 	
The Zoning Inspector may also request an interim as-built survey during construction to verify any height measurement of any proposed building, building wing or distinct portion in instances where the applicant has pro­posed to construct to or near the maximum height(s) allowed under the regulations. The interim height(s) shall be measured after the roof sheathing, but prior to other roofing materials are applied. 


Should the applicant fail to provide this As-Built as requested, the appli­cant will be proceeding with construction at their own risk. If the final As-Built survey indicates the structure exceeds any of the maximum height(s) allowed under the regulations, this shall not constitute a hard­ship. 
c. 	For a tennis court, swimming pool or other construction or use not requir­ing a Certificate of Occupancy, no further work shall be permitted until a certified interim location survey shall have been submitted to the Zoning Inspector showing full compliance with the applicable Zoning Regulations for: 
i. 	the location of forms or other construction devices prior to the pouring of concrete or placing of footings or non-concrete walls into the excavation; or 
ii. 	the actual areas prepared to be surfaced for courts or other uses prior to the laying of surface material. 
5. 	Zoning Permit Expiration 
Any Zoning Permit issued by the Zoning Inspector under the provisions of these Regulations, but under which no work is commenced within twelve (12) months from the date of issuance, shall expire by limitation. 
SECTION 8.5. ENFORCEMENT 
A. Enforcement Authority 
1. 	
These Regulations shall be administered and enforced by the Commission. 

2. 	
The Commission shall appoint an administrative agent, with the title of Zoning Inspector, with full power to administer and enforce these Regulations on be­half of the Commission. 

3. 	
The Commission may designate one or more Assistant Zoning Inspectors to aid in the enforcement of these Regulations. 

4. 	
The Commission or an Inspector may file information with the prosecuting authority upon violation of any of these Regulations. 


207 


B. Inspections 
The Zoning Inspector and members of the Commission shall have authority to cause an inspection to be made of any premises and the building and structures thereon and the use of any land and any kind of work upon any building or struc­ture being erected or altered, whether or not such work is being done under au­thority of a Zoning Permit. 
C. Violations 
1. 	
If the Zoning Inspector shall find a violation of these Regulations, he shall serve upon the owner, lessee, tenant, architect, engineer, builder, contractor, manager, or any agent, a violation notice and an order to discontinue such work and violation and to correct or abate the condition complained of within ten (10) days from service of such notice and order, or earlier in the case of earth removal, grading, erosion or sediment control, or other matters requir­ing more immediate attention. 

2. 	
The Zoning Inspector shall have the authority to remove or to cause the re­moval of any sign erected on, attached to, maintained on or displayed on any property or public right-of-way in any zone where no permit has been issued in accordance with these Regulations or where such sign is in violation of any provision of these Regulations. 

3. 	
Any person violating any of the provisions of these Regulations shall be sub­ject to the fines, injunctive procedures, and any other penalties prescribed by Chapter 124 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended, including, when warranted, a separate violation for each day that a violation exists. 


August 1, 2013 



APPENDIX 
The following forms, checklists, and other materials are considered part of the Appendix of these Regulations. Such materials may be obtained from the Planning and Zoning Office at Town Hall. 
Schedules 
Type Description 
Schedules Comprehensive schedule of residential zoning Comprehensive schedule of commercial zoning 
Application / Permit Forms Type Description 
Application Forms  Site Plan application form  
Special Permit application form  
(often with  Zone Change application form  
instructions)  Regulation Change application form  
Zoning Board of Appeals application form  
Subdivision application form  

Permit Forms  Zoning permit application form  
Sign permit application form  
(often with  Fill and excavation permit application form  
instructions)  Lot line revision application form  
First cut application form  
Erosion / sedimentation control permit application form  

Checklists / Worksheets Type Description 
Checklists Site Plan checklist with instructions Subdivision application checklist 
Worksheets Building height worksheet with instructions Building coverage worksheet with instructions 
209 


Technical Requirements Type Description 
Plan / Survey  A-2 survey requirements  
Requirements  As-built survey requirements  
Digital submission standards (future).  
Engineering  Drainage calculation requirements  
Requirements  
Bonding  Bonding requirements, with instructions  
Requirements  Model letter of credit  

Other Materials  
Type  Description  
Property Owner  Property owner notification instructions  
Notification  Property owner notification letter model  
Telecommunication  Telecommunication Policy Preferences  
Policy Preferences  
Affordable Housing  Housing affordability Plan Requirements  
Other materials  Model application extension letter  
Public hearing request / extension forms  
Exempt structure certification letter model with instruc­ 
tions  


APPENDIX AMENDMENT AMENDMENT DATES 
Section  Title  Hearing  Effective  Page Numbers  Page  
Date  Date  (at application)  Numbers  
(currently)  


Adoption of Zoning  06/14/32  

Major Modification of Zoning Districts  12/15/56  

Comprehensive Reorganization / Redrafting  04/05/05 04/19/05  06/18/05  

Review and Update  03/06/07 04/10/07 05/01/07  06/16/07  

4.5.C.10  New Car Sales (note: now listed as 4.5.C.13)  09/25/07  10/04/07  77  78  

4.2.C, 4.3.C 4.4.C  Six-month Moratorium on Banks in Retail A and B Zones  06/24/08  07/03/08  71-78  72-76  

4.2.C, 4.3.C, 4.4.C, 4.6.D  Determination on Where Banks can be Located Within Business Zones  09/30/08  10/09/08  71-78  72-79  

3.4.B, 3.4.C  Square Footage Limitations on Accessory Structures  09/30/08 10/28/08  12/01/08  51-54  51-53  

4.6.C, 4.6.D  To Correct Sections Regarding Banks  12/16/08  12/24/08  78  79  

4.2.C, 4.2.D, 4.2.E, 4.3.C, 4.3.E, 4.4.E, 4.5.C, 4.5.E, 4.6.C, 4.6.D  Outdoor Dining on Municipal Sidewalks and Private Properties and Restaurants in Business B Zone  07/28/09  08/21/09  71-78  72-79  

8.2.B  Special Permit Application  09/29/09  11/01/09  152-157  159-164  

4.4.D, 5.4.C  Quasi-Public Libraries  07/26/11  08/19/11  76 & 92  76 & 96  

4.3.D, 4.7.C, 4.7.E, 4.7.G, 4.7.I & 4.8.E  Modifications to the Retail B Zone, Area & Dimensional Re­quirements, Special Provisions for Business Zones. Note: (4.7 is now 4.8 & 4.8 is now 4.9)  10/25/11  01/01/12  75, 79-82 & 84  75, 82-85 & 88  

6.2.E.1&2, 6.2.E.4 & 8.3.A.2 mod.  Modified §6.2.E (25% parking reduction). Added §6.2.E.4 (fee­in-lieu-of parking) & amended § 8.3.A.2 no longer allowing vari­ances for required parking spaces.  12/20/11  02/01/12  104 -105, & 166  112, 113 & 172  

4.4.D  Wellness Centers  02/28/12  04/01/12  76  76  

2.2 4.3.D  Definition of Wellness Centers Tiered or Decked Parking Structure, Ret B  04/24/12  05/01/12  37 & 75  37 & 75  

3.7.E.2  Exceptions for Building Coverage Recreational Clubs  05/22/12 6/26/12  07/16/12  70  70  

5.4.C  Two-Family Dwellings in Apartment Zone  08/28/12  09/21/12  92  96  

211 


Section  Title  Hearing Date  Effective Date  Page Numbers (at application)  Page Numbers (currently)  

2.2, 3.2.C, 3.3.A, 3.3.C, 3.4.B, 3.4.C, 3.7.B, 4.2.C, 4.2.D, 4.3.C, 4.4.C, 4.5.C, 4.5.D, 4.6.C, 4.6.D, 5.4.B, 6.3.E, 6.3.F, 6.11.B, 8.1.E, 8.1.G, 8.4.A, App. A  Comprehensive changes including definitional changes & changes to the business zones.  6/25/13  8/1/13  11,13, 15-19, 21, 23, 24, 29, 30, 36, 42, 45, 46, 49, 51, 53, 68, 72-79, 93, 112, 127, 146 & 177  11,13, 16­19, 21, 23­24, 29, 30, 36, 42, 45­47, 49, 51, 53, 68, 72­79, 96, 119, 134, 152 & 183  

4.1  Moratorium regarding medical marijuana dispensaries and growing facilities.  10/22/13  10/24/13  71-72  71-72  

2.2 & 3.5.F.5  Amendments to the definition of building coverage as it relates to porches, decks & patios. Revised the side yard height set­back from P&Z to ZBA.  3/25/14  4/1/14  13,15,30, 31, 36 & 62  13, 15, 30, 31, 36 & 62  
4.7.G, 4.8.E & 6.2.G  Amendments to the Business B Zone for residential F.A.R. exceptions, building height & number of stories and for the maximum stall depth reduced to 18’. (now 4.8.G & 4.9.E)  11/24/14  12/15/14  82, 86, 109  84, 85, 88 & 115  
5.7  Millport Housing Zone (New)  1/27/15  2/15/15  98-102  100-104  
4.7  Added Business Zone D  3/31/15  4/15/15  79-81  79-81  
3.7.C  Exceptions for Lot Width  6/23/15  7/15/15  68  68  
4.7.D  Added Medical Office, up to 10,000 SF, by Special Permit  08/25/15  9/10/15  81  81  
4.1  1 Year Extension of Moratorium regarding medical marijuana dispensaries and growing facilities.  9/29/15  10/24/15  71-72  71-72  
7.7.A & 7.7.D  2 Text Amendments; 1) allowing density as addition criteria; and 2) a footnote added to 7.7.A exempting certain lot mergers.  12/15/15  1/8/16  145-146  145-146  
4.8.D, 4.8.E & 4.9.E  Allow building line to be reduced by Special Permit, allowed side and rear setbacks in Business A Zone to = Retail A Zone and allowed residential units to be excluded from F.A.R. in Business A Zone as well.  3/29/16  4/15/16  82, 83 & 88  82-88  
3.2.C.1  Allow legally non-conforming two-family to be rebuilt under certain conditions.  6/28/16  7/10/16  42  42  
4.5 4.8.C, 4.8.D (new), 4.8.E, 4.8.F, 4.8.H, 4.8.I, 4.8.J, 4.8.K, 6.2.C, 6.2.E, 6.2.F  Rewrite of the Business B Zones. Changes to the Area and Dimensional Requirements Changes to residential parking standards, changes to parking reductions and fee-in-lieu.  7/26/16  8/8/16  77-78 82-86 108-110 112-114  77-79 83-87 110-112 114-117  
5.8  New Special Zone for the Pedestrian Oriented Multi-Family Zone (POMFZ).  11/29/16  12/30/16  n/a  106-112  
6.5.C.2, 6.5.C.2.b 6.5.C.3  Modified standards for fence, gates, pillar and lights heights.  1/31/17  2/28/17  136-137  136-137  
4.5..C.14  To permit limited used car sales in Business B Zone.  5/30/17  6/1/17  78  78  
2.2  Modified definition of Use, Principal.  7/25/17  8/25/17  37  37  
3.2.C  Added language to permit more the one Principal Use by Spe­cial Permit.  7/25/17  8/25/17  42  42  
2.2  Modified definition of Use, Principal.  1/16/18  2/26/18  37  37  
3.2.C  Added language to permit more than one Principal Use by Spe­cial Permit.  1/16/18  2/26/18  42  42  
4.8.H  Added language for mixed-use story calculation of height.  1/30/18  2/26/18  86  86  
4.1  Extension of Medical Marijuana Dispensary or Production Fa­cility for six (6) months.  1/30/18  2/26/18  72  72  

212 

Section  Title  Hearing Date  Effective Date  Page Numbers (at application)  Page Numbers (currently)  
2.2  Added definition of Medical Marijuana Dispensary and Produc­tion Facility  4/24/18  5/14/18  29  29  
2.2  Modified definition of Service Establishment, Personal to in­clude Wellness activities  4/24/18  5/14/18  32  33  
4.1  Added language prohibiting Medical Marijuana Dispensaries and Production Facilities in all zones.  4/24/18  5/14/18  71  71  
4.2  Added language permitting Personal Service Establishments and/or Service Establishments on the floor.  4/24/18  5/14/18  73  72-73  
7.8  Telecommunications Facilities  5/29/18  6/18/18  160-162  163-174  
5.9  Canaan Parish Housing Zone  8/28/18  9/20/18  116-119  115-118  
4.4  Business A Zone (Village District)  11/27/18  12/13/18  78  77  



















Technical assistance in the comprehensive revision of these Regulations provided by 

213 
















09/30/08 PROPOSED - SECTION 3.4. PERMITTED ACCESSORY STRUCTURES 
A. Permitted Without Permit 
1.
 Minor Attached Accessory Structure - Accessory structures customarily and reasonably incidental to a permitted principal use and attached to the principal structure such as solar panels, and similar structures. 

2.
 Minor Detached Accessory Structure - One tool shed, play house, gazebo, 


or similar detached accessory structure that: 
a) does not have a permanent foundation, and 
b) has no plumbing or electrical service or heating equipment, and 
c) does not exceed 200 square feet in area, and 
d) is not located within a front yard unless it is located 150 feet or more from a front property 
line, and 
e) complies with the yard requirements for an accessory building. 

B. Permitted by Zoning or Other Permit 
1. Detached Garage - A detached garage accessory to a residence provided that: a) it is not located within a front yard unless it is located 150 feet or more from a front 
property line, and b) it does not exceed a gross floor area of 1,000 square feet, and c) it does not result in garage space for more than five (5) vehicles on the property, or one 
(1) commercial vehicle on the property. 
2.
 Signs - Sign(s) pertaining to a permitted principal use on a lot, as permitted by these Regulations. 

3.
 Minor Detached Accessory Structure - A tool shed, play house, gazebo, or similar detached 


accessory structure: 
a) in addition to the one permitted in Subsection 3.4.A.2, or 
b) that does not comply with Subsection 3.4.A.2, 
c) is not located within a front yard unless it is located 150 feet or more from a front property 
line, and 
d) that does not exceed a gross floor area of 1,000 square feet. 

4. Non-Illuminated Outdoor Recreation Facility - Outdoor recreation facility such as a tennis court, paddle tennis court, swimming pool, or similar facility with no above-ground artificial lighting provided that: 
a.
 a Building Permit is also obtained, and 

b.
 the facility is not located within a front yard unless it is located 150 feet or more from a front property line, and 

c.
 the facility complies with all yard and other applicable Regulations, and 

d.
 any swimming pool deck, patio, mechanical equipment, filtration equipment, and storage tanks or containers shall be visually screened and shall not be located within the yard setback required for accessory buildings and shall be located more than 50 feet from any public or private roadway or easement, and 

e.
 in the absence of a pool deck or patio, the yard setback for a swimming pool shall be measured to the back of the coping. 


S:\Web Site\Amendments to the Zoning Regulations\FINAL Accessory Structures SF Limitations Sec 3.4.doc 
5. Accessory Recreation Structure - A pool house or similar structure not used as a dwelling unit 
that is customarily and reasonably incidental to a permitted principal use provided that: 
a) a Building Permit is also obtained, and 
b) the facility is not located within a front yard unless it is located 150 feet or more from a 
front property line, and 
c) it does not exceed a gross floor area of 1,000 square feet, and 
d) the facility complies with all yard and other applicable Regulations 

6. Windmills - Windmills and similar energy conservation systems provided that: 
a.
 the lot shall have a minimum area of one acre (43,560 square feet) or as required by the applicable zone, whichever is greater, and 

b.
 the windmill or similar structure shall be set back from all lot lines and from the principal building a distance at least equal to the total building height of the windmill structure, and 

c. 
no windmill or similar structure shall: 

i.
 exceed forty (40) feet in total building height, or 


ii. be located within a front yard unless it is located 150 feet or more from a front property line, or 
iii. be located in any required yard setback. 
7. Ground-Mounted Solar Panels - Ground-mounted solar panels, provided that they shall: 
a.
 not exceed fifteen (15) feet in height including all supporting structures, and 

b.
 not be located within a front yard unless it is located 150 feet or more from a front property line, and 

c.
 not be located within any required yard setback, and 

d.
 be fully screened from any adjacent property line and the street line, and 

e.
 be permanently anchored in compliance with the State Building Code. 


8. Private Emergency Shelter - Private emergency shelter provided that it shall conform to applicable yard requirements and, if not constructed as an integral part of any dwelling or other conforming principal or accessory building or structure, it shall be covered with at least two (2) feet of soil and the finished ground level shall not be above natural ground level. 
C. Permitted by Special Permit 
1. Detached Garage - A detached garage accessory to a residence which does not comply with Subsection 3.4.B.1 since it is proposed to: a) contain space for more than five (5) vehicles on a property provided that any such garage 
space shall not be occupied by more than one (1) commercial vehicle, or b) be located within a front yard, or c) exceed a gross floor area of 1,000 square feet.  Such detached garage shall comply with 
the setback requirements for a principal structure in that zone. 
2. Illuminated Outdoor Recreation Facility - Outdoor recreation facility, including tennis courts and pools, in compliance with the requirements of Subsection 3.4.B.4. and which are artificially illuminated, provided that such lighting shall not create a hazard or nuisance upon adjacent properties with reference to the following standards: 
a.
 the source of such lights shall be concealed from surrounding residential properties. 

b.
 all lighting shall be located and be of such design that no illumination shall be directed toward surrounding residential properties. 

c.
 no lighting facilities shall be mounted at a height greater than twenty (20) feet above grade. 


S:\Web Site\Amendments to the Zoning Regulations\FINAL Accessory Structures SF Limitations Sec 3.4.doc 
3. Detached Accessory Residential Structure - a detached guest house or a detached accessory dwelling unit provided that: a) the property is located in a Residence Zone where the minimum area for a single-family dwelling is one (1) acre or more, and 
b) 	the property shall have one (1) full zone unit, as required by these Regulations for the existing house on the premises except that, in the Four Acre Zone, such accessory structure may be permitted on a lot having less than one (1) full zone unit provided that such lot shall have at least two (2) acres of buildable land, and 
c) 	both the existing house and the proposed accessory dwelling shall demonstrate compliance with the requirements of the Health Code, and d) any detached accessory dwelling unit shall comply with the requirements of Subsection 
3.3.B.6 except that access from the principal dwelling by an operable door along a common wall shall not be required. 
e) 	the detached accessory residential structure complies with the setback structures for a principal structure in that zone. 
4.
 Agricultural Use - Farm stand. 

5.
 Other Structures - Other accessory buildings or structures not customarily and reasonably incidental, as determined by the Commission, to a permitted principal use. 

6.
 Accessory Structures In A Front Yard - Accessory buildings or structures listed in Section 3.4.A or Section 3.4.B located within a front yard and located within 150 feet of the street. 

7.
 Accessory Buildings That Exceed a Gross Floor Area of 1,000 Square Feet - Accessory buildings listed in Section 3.4.B.3 or Section 3.4.B.5 that exceed a gross floor area of 1,000 square feet.  Such accessory building shall comply with the setback requirements for a principal structure in that zone and if proposed to be located within a front yard, must be at least 150 feet from the street. 


S:\Web Site\Amendments to the Zoning Regulations\FINAL Accessory Structures SF Limitations Sec 3.4.doc 
4. 	Fee-in-lieu-of Parking 
a. 	
Bya 2/3’s vote, the Commission may, by Special Permit, allow for a permanent reduction of all or a portion of the parking spaces required, provided the applicant pays a fee-in-lieu-of the required parking spaces, pursuant to Section 8-2c of the Connecticut General Statutes.  

b. 	
The Special Permit is applicable to any new construction or addition, or change in Use in the Retail B, Business A, Business B or Business C zones, which requires additional parking spaces pursuant to Section 

6.2.C of these regulations. 

c. 	
Fees collected from such payments shall be placed into a fund to be used solely for the acquisition, development, expansion or capital repair of public parking facilities. 

d. 	
The fee shall be determined as follows: 


1. 	For any proposed new construction and/or addition, the fee for one 
(1) parking space shall be no less than $15,000. Final price per space will be determined as follows: 
Number of Spaces x $15,000 
2. 	The price per space can be reduced to $12,500 if the applicant attains LEED Silver Certification for the proposed construction. The price per space can be reduced to $10,000 if the applicant attains LEED Gold Certification. 
The price reduction would be returned to the applicant upon written notification from the US Green Building Council or its equivalent that Certification had been granted. 
The Commission may also approve the same price reductions per space should the applicant seek accreditation from an alternative rating agency based on their equivalent rating to LEED standards. 
3. 	For any proposed change in Use that requires additional parking spaces per Section 6.2.C of these regulations, the final price per space will be determined as follows: 
Number of Spaces x $7,500 
4. 	The fees listed above will be reviewed by the Commission on an annual basis to determine whether they need to be adjusted based on such factors as materials costs, construction costs and/or inflation. 
e. 	
The fee shall be paid prior to the issuance of a Zoning Permit. 

f. 	
As part of this Special Permit Application, the applicant shall submit a Traffic Report, prepared by a qualified Traffic Engineer, to study the impacts that added development will have, if none or less than the required off-street parking is provided.  

g. 	
No Special Permit under this section shall be approved unless the Commission finds and declares that the number of parking spaces which would be required in connection with such use of land pursuant to any applicable planning or zoning regulation: 

1. 	
Could not be physically located on such parcel of land for which such use is proposed; 

2. 	
Will not detract from the village feel and quality of life in the downtown; and 

3. 	
The proposed development will be beneficial to the community and is consistent with the Plan of Conservation and Development and is in keeping with the Village District Design Guidelines. 




February 1, 2012 


Residence Zones 

Section 3.7 
2. 	The Commission may, by Special Permit, increase the permitted building coverage in a residential zone for the following uses: 
a.  Municipal facility.  
b.  Governmental facility.  
c.  Hospital in the Two Acre Residence Zone if permitted under Subsection  
3.2.C.18 of these Regulations.  
d.  Recreational clubs, in recognition that such clubs can provide unique  
facilities, programs and services serving a community need or  
convenience not provided by the Town, provided that:  
i. The club is open to the general public through paid memberships  
and financially-assisted memberships; receives widespread financial  
and volunteer support from the New Canaan community; and  
provides charitable services or programs to the New Canaan  
community;  
ii. The club is located on a parcel of at least 6 acres, and the portion  
added to the buildings and structures under this subsection shall  
meet the setback requirements for the zone;  
iii. The increase in coverage will enable the club to provide or improve a  
facility or use that will serve a community need or convenience not  
provided by the Town; and  
iv. The increase in building coverage that may be permitted by special  
permit shall be in addition to the existing building coverage as of the  
date of this amendment, and the aggregate of all such special permit  
increases from the date of this amendment shall not exceed 6  
percent (6%) of the total lot size of the subject lot existing as of the  
date of this amendment. Further, such permitted increase in building  
coverage shall be mitigated by attractive building and site design and  
by enhancements in screening and landscaping that will improve the  
overall appearance of the parcel (see Section 6.12-Design Review).  

A. Maximum Density Exceptions 
1. 	The Commission may, by Special Permit, increase the maximum density (lots / acre of buildable land) permitted in a residential zone above the limitation established in Subsection 3.5.B by: 
a. 	
allowing a calculation resulting in a fractional remainder of three-quarters 

(0.75) or above to be rounded up to the next whole number, or 

b. 	
considering some other method proposed by the applicant that will, in the sole discretion of the Commission, help preserve open space or the feeling of “openness” in New Canaan. 


Page 70 	July 16, 2012 

Red Lettering = proposed Strike Through = to be removed 
Section 2.2 – Definitions 
BED & BREAKFAST – An owner-occupied single-family residence that provides overnight accommodations in six (6) or fewer rooms and a morning meal to guests for compensation and where stays are limited to thirty (30) days or less. 
Building Coverage 
Building coverage includes: Building coverage excludes: 
. Driveways 

. 	Covered walkways and . Uncovered walkways breezeways generally as . Trellis, pergola, or other measured by the exterior similar structure with no roof 
walls or columns 
. 	Covered patio 
. 	Porte cochere 
. That portion of a deck or terrace, generally as measured by the area of the floor or decking, that: . has the deck surface elevated more than 36 inches above finished grade, or 
. 	is not attached to a building, or 
. 	is attached to a building and extends more than 10 feet from the building, or 
. 	exceeds 40 percent of the perimeter of the building measured at the points of 
. 	Patios, terraces 
. 	On-grade decks or patios 
. 	That portion of a deck or terrace that: 
. 	has the deck surface elevated no more than 36 inches above finished grade, and 
. 	is attached to, and extends no more than 10 feet from, the building, and 
. 	does not exceed 40 percent of the perimeter of the building measured at the points of attachment 

D:\Users\delucs\AppData\Local\Microsoft\Windows\Temporary Internet Files\Content.Outlook\5VTSS4Z5\Comprehensive Changes 4_13.doc 
BUILDING WING (or Distinct Portion) --A portion of a building (defined by the footprint or outline), which does not share a roof plane with another portion of the same building and where the roof ridge is offset from another roof ridge. by three (3) feet or more. 
CRAFTSPERSON – An individual having creative skills in manufacturing or arrangement of materials, resulting in a finished product or commodity such as wearing apparel, home decorations, jewelry, toys, furniture, dried flowers, or similar products. 
CRAFTSPERSON SHOP – An establishment primarily engaged in the manufacturing, fabrication, or assembling of wearing apparel, home decorations, jewelry, toys, furniture, dried flowers, or similar products. 
DORMER --A projection from a sloping roof, usually containing a window or a ventilating louver, which is clearly subordinate in area and volume to the sloping roof and does not exceed 50% of the linear distance of the sloping roof. 
DWELLING UNIT --A building or part thereof, providing provisions for cooking a kitchen and related housekeeping facilities for one family. 
FARMING --The use of any tract of land or building, either as a principal use or an accessory 
use as outlined in §CGS 1-1 (q), except that gardens incidental to the dwelling on the premises 
shall not constitute a farm. 
Remove the definitions of commercial and non-commercial farming. 
FOOD SHOPS, RETAIL – A retail establishment engaged in the sale of prepared food, primarily for offsite consumption including, but not limited to, establishments commonly known as delicatessens, bakeries, ice cream shops, or similar uses as determined by the Commission. Such establishments shall be limited to a total of eight (8) seats. Nothing in this definition is intended to include a restaurant of any variety as a principal use. 
GREEN GROCER – A retail establishment engaged primarily in the sale of groceries including perishable and non-perishable food items and food related items. In such stores, the sale of non­food items such as household, health and beauty goods and other miscellaneous wares may also be offered but the supply of such items must be clearly incidental and secondary to the primary purpose of the store which is the retail sale of groceries directly to the consumer for offsite consumption. 
High-Technology Incubator Business – Establishments primarily engaged in the research, design, development and marketing of a certain product and/or technology. 
INN – Any building or other structure kept, used, maintained, advertised or held out to the public to be a place where: . more than six (6) rooms but fewer than twenty (20) are used or offered for pay to guests for sleeping accommodations, and . there is one (1) dining room where meals are served to such guests as well as the public, and . such sleeping accommodations and dining rooms are provided in the same building, and 
. there is adequate kitchen and dining room equipment and capacity for preparing, cooking 
and serving suitable food for its guests and for members of the public. . guest stays are limited to thirty (30) days or less. . parking shall be provided at 1 space per room & 1 space per every 100 SF of dining room 
space. However, if the Inn is located within 300’ of a municipal parking lot the number of spaces may be reduced to 1 for every 2 rooms. 
MIXED USE DEVELOPMENT – A development which contains more than one type of use in a building or set of buildings. These developments must include residential units and may contain multiple combinations of the allowed uses as outlined and permitted in that zone. 
OFFICE, GENERAL – An office used for conducting the affairs of a business, profession, service or industry which may involve interaction with the public. Such uses may consist of architects, engineers, lawyers, accountants, financial or other consultants or real estate brokers but excludes those associated with the medical profession. 
OFFICE, MEDICAL – An establishment engaged in the diagnosis, prevention and/or treatment of human medical conditions or mental ailments provided by persons certified or licensed by the State of Connecticut to perform such services, provided that no such office or facility shall offer services requiring overnight stays. Such establishments may also include imaging centers, blood-draw facilities, physical therapy and out-patient treatment facilities. 
PATIO, on grade --An improved or graded area located on the ground and whose surface is no higher than 36 inches above the adjacent grade. A patio located at grade or ground level shall not be deemed a structure. 
PATIO, elevated or raised --See "Terrace". 
SUPERMARKETS – A retail establishment engaged primarily in the sale of groceries including perishable and non-perishable food items and food related items. In such stores, non-food items such as household, health and beauty goods and other miscellaneous wares are also permitted. 
TERRACE – An elevated structure that may be improved with retaining walls and may contain structural supports such as footings, is attached to a dwelling unit and whose surface is higher than 36 inches above the adjacent grade. 
Section 3.2.A – Permitted Principal Uses & Structures: Permitted w/Out Permit 
Delete # 2“Agricultural Uses” 
Section 3.2.C – Permitted Principal Uses & Structures: Special Permit 
Delete # 22 “Agricultural Uses”. Replace with “Farming” 
Section 3.3.A – Permitted Accessory Uses: Permitted w/Out Permit 
Delete # 5“Agricultural Uses – non-commercial farming” 
3.3.A.7: After current text for #7 “Commercial Vehicle Storage”, add: 
For purposes of this section “maintenance” means causing or allowing a commercial vehicle to 
be parked or otherwise kept on site or on any adjacent driveway, accessway, or public or private road, for more than four (4) hours, except that when the commercial vehicle is transportation for a contractor actually engaged in permitted work on site (e.g., the commercial vehicle of a builder, plumber, electrician, painter or landscaper that is used for transportation to and from the site and that is parked only while the contactor is present and engaged in construction or repairs in or on the residence or on the grounds of the residence). 
For purposes of this section “storage” means to keep or put aside for use when needed, and 
storage is presumed when a commercial vehicle is present on site or on any adjacent driveway, accessway or public or private road for more than twenty-four hours. 
Section 3.3.C – Permitted Accessory Uses: Special Permit 
Delete # 5 Agricultural Uses. Replace with Farming 
Section 3.4.B – Permitted Accessory Structures: Zoning Permit 
1.b: it does not exceed a gross floor area footprint of 1,000 square feet 
3.d: that does not exceed a gross floor area footprint of 1,000 square feet. 
5.c: it does not exceed a gross floor area footprint of 1,000 square feet 
Section 3.4.C – Permitted Accessory Structures: Special Permit 
1.c: exceed a gross floor area footprint of 1,000 square feet. Such detached garage shall comply with the yard setback for a principal structure in that zone. 
7: Accessory Buildings That Exceed a Gross Floor Area footprint of 1,000 Square Feet – Accessory Buildings listed in Section 3.4.B.3 or Section 3.4.B.5 that exceed a gross floor area footprint of 1,000 square feet. Such accessory building shall comply with the yard setback for a principal structure in that zone and if proposed to be located in a front yard, must be at least 150 feet from the street. 
Add new #8: 
Windmills and Ground Mounted Solar Panel that do not comply with the provisions of §3.4.B 
3.7.B.8 (new): Yard Exceptions 
The Zoning Inspector may allow an exception to the yard requirement or setback requirement for minor detached accessory structures such as generators, transformers or mechanical equipment when it is determined that the topography or lot configuration makes compliance with the regulations unreasonable. In such instances the structure must be thoroughly screened and not visible from adjoining properties. 
4.2 	RETAIL A ZONE (VILLAGE DISTRICT) 
B. Purpose 
The Retail A Zone is intended to provide a compact and cohesive, pedestrian-oriented shopping district which is scaled to serve the needs of the community, designed to retain the attractive village character valued by so many residents and restricted in area to limit the major public investment required to provide municipal parking to serve such a district. It is also the purpose of this district to allow for residential use of upper floors, particularly in existing structures, so that such buildings, which may be historic or architecturally significant, can contribute to the smaller-unit housing resources, thereby providing for diversity in housing choices and opportunity. 
C. Design Review Authorized 
The Retail A Zone is hereby designated as a Village District as authorized by CGS 8-2 and any new construction or remodeling of the exterior of a building shall be reviewed in accordance with the provisions of Section 6.12 of these Regulations. 
D. Uses Permitted with Site Plan Approval 
1. 	
Retail businesses containing a gross first-floor area of not more than 5,000 7,500 square feet per store, but not to include automotive sales or services. 

2. 	
Restaurants, excluding any designed or intended in whole or in part for food service to, or consumption by, patrons in motor vehicles on the premises. 

3. 	
Outside dining on a deck, porch, terrace or patio as an accessory use to a restaurant or food-serving establishment when located on the same property. 

4. 	
Food Shops, Retail 

5. 	
Theaters or groups of adjacent theaters containing a total gross floor area of not more than 7,500 square feet. 

6. 	
General and Medical Offices provided that: 

a. 	
offices shall not be permitted on the first floor of any building, and 

b. 	
not more than 10,000 square feet of total gross floor area of office use shall be in any one building, and 

c. 	
any floor used for offices shall be located more than seven feet in vertical height above or below the curb level of the adjacent street. 



7. 	
Personal service establishments provided that storage or work areas shall not occupy more than 80 percent of the total gross floor area of such use. 

8. 	
Service establishments that are not personal service establishments, provided that such uses shall not be permitted on the first floor of any building and storage and work areas shall not occupy more than 80 percent of the total gross floor area for such use. 

9. 	
Residential dwelling units provided that: 

a. 	
no such unit shall be permitted on the first floor of any building, and 

b. 	
no such unit shall contain more than 750 square feet of gross floor area, and 

c. 	
any floor used for such a unit shall be located more than seven feet in vertical height above the curb level of the adjacent street, and 

d. 	
no such unit shall contain more than one bedroom. 



10. 
Municipal facilities; public facilities; quasi-public charitable institutions; cultural facilities such as art galleries and museums; and public utilities; provided that each such use shall not contain more than 7,500 square feet of gross floor area. 


E. Uses Requiring Special Permit 
1. 	
Outside dining, including entertainment, on private property as an accessory use to a restaurant or food-serving establishment when located on the same property. 

2. 	
Retail businesses containing a gross first-floor area of more than 5,000 (not to exceed 10,000) square feet per store and may not include automotive sales or services. 


F. Sidewalk Cafés 
Outside dining on municipal sidewalks or walkways, as an accessory use to an adjacent restaurant or food-serving establishment, subject to the Sidewalk Café Permit Procedures approved by the Board of Selectman and the Commission. 
4.3 RETAIL B ZONE (VILLAGE DISTRICT) 
A. Purpose 
The Retail B Zone is intended to provide areas adjacent to the pedestrian-oriented Retail A Zone where parking shall be provided on-site yet where buildings are located close to the sidewalk for pedestrian access. It is also the purpose of this district to allow for residential use of upper floors, particularly in existing structures, so that such buildings, which may be historic or architecturally significant, can contribute to the smaller-unit housing resources, thereby providing for diversity in housing choices and opportunity. 
B. Design Review Authorized 
The Retail B Zone is hereby designated as a Village District as authorized by CGS 8-2 and any new construction or remodeling of the exterior of a building shall be reviewed in accordance with the provisions of Section 6.12 of these Regulations. 
C. Uses Permitted with Site Plan Approval 
1. 	
Retail businesses. 

2. 	
Banks. 

3. 	
Restaurants as permitted in Retail A Zone. 

4. 	
Outside dining as permitted in Retail A Zone. 

5. 	
Food Shops, Retail 

6. 	
Theaters as permitted in Retail A Zone. 

7. 	
General and Medical Offices as permitted in Retail A Zone. 

8. 	
Residential dwelling units as permitted in Retail A Zone. 

9. 	
Service establishments, including personal service establishments, provided that such operations which involve outdoor storage of equipment, supplies or products shall be located on a lot containing at least 80,000 square feet. 

10. 
New car dealerships, including a motor vehicle repair garage and sale of used cars, provided that: 

a. 	
such repair garage and/or sale of used cars is clearly accessory and incidental to the principal use, and 

b. 	
such accessory operations are located on the same parcel as the principal use or, with approval of the Zoning Board of Appeals, on a parcel within 300 feet of the principal parcel. 



11. 
Municipal facilities; public facilities; quasi-public charitable institutions; cultural facilities such as art galleries and museums; and public utilities. 

12. 
A public or commercial surface parking lot but not a parking structure, whether attached or detached. 

13. 
Green Grocers, not to exceed a gross floor area of 10,000 square feet. 


D. Uses Requiring Special Permit 
1. 	Dwellings units contained within a mixed-use development of multi-family dwellings and other permitted uses, provided that: 
a. 	
no dwelling unit shall contain more than 1,500 gross square feet; however, the Commission may increase the size of a dwelling unit beyond 1,500 square feet where the Commission finds that the larger units are appropriate for the site, promote excellence in design and contribute to the variety of housing choices, and 

a. 	
no dwelling unit shall contain more than two bedrooms; however, the Commission may increase the number of bedrooms beyond two, where the Commission finds that the number of bedrooms are appropriate for the site, promote excellence in design and contribute to the variety of housing choices, and 

b. 	
the total number of dwelling units on the lot shall not exceed one unit per 1,500 square feet of lot area, and 

c. 	
in addition to alterations to address compliance with the Special Permit criteria, the Commission may increase or decrease density and alter layout requirements based upon: 


i. 	special or unusual lot area, 
ii. 	shape or topography; 
iii. 	the density and layout of existing neighboring uses; 
iv. 	the official designation of infrastructure improvements or reconfigurations which may negatively impact residential use. 
2. 
Outside dining as permitted in Retail A Zone. 

3. 	
Outside dining on a deck, porch, terrace or patio as an accessory use to a restaurant when located on the same property. 

4. 	
Gas stations, including those which may have a Limited Repairer’s License as defined in Chapter 246 of the Connecticut General Statutes, but shall not include motor vehicle repair garages. 

5. 	
Underground parking provided: 

a. 	
the underground parking shall be provided in lieu of required surface parking facilities and not in addition thereto, 

b. 	
the underground parking allows the area normally occupied by parking to remain undisturbed or to provide open space, landscaping, and similar amenities, 

c. 	
the underground parking shall be hidden from view from abutting properties, 

d. 	
the street level views of such underground parking access shall be minimized, and 

e. 	
any first floor level above such parking shall not exceed the curb level of the street by more than two (2) feet. 



6. 	
Decked or tiered parking structure. 

7. 	
Inns. 


E. Sidewalk Cafés 
Outside dining on municipal sidewalks or walkways, as an accessory use to an adjacent restaurant or food-serving establishment, subject to the Sidewalk Café Permit Procedures approved by the Board of Selectman and the Commission. 
4.4 BUSINESS A ZONE (VILLAGE DISTRICT) 
A. Purpose 
The Business A Zone is intended to provide areas for single-purpose shopping and services which require on-site parking facilities. Retail sales of large or bulky items which would be difficult to carry any distance, automotive services, drive-in banking and certain professional and personal services which often represent a special-purpose trip are appropriate uses in this area. Residential uses may also be permitted under certain conditions to provide a greater variety of use alternatives for large lots, to include uses which generate less traffic and contribute to the housing resources for smaller households, thereby providing for diversity in housing choices and opportunity. 
B. Design Review Authorized 
The Business A Zone is hereby designated as a Village District as authorized by CGS 8-2 and any new construction or remodeling of the exterior of a building shall be reviewed in accordance with the provisions of Section 6.12 of these Regulations. 
C. Uses Permitted with Site Plan Approval 
1. 	
Any non-office use permitted with Site Plan Approval in the Retail B Zone subject to the same conditions. 

2. 	
Green Grocers, provided they do not exceed a total gross floor area of 10,000 square feet. 

3. 	
Supermarkets, provided they do not exceed a total gross floor area of 30,000 square feet. 

4. 	
General and Medical Offices provided that: 

a. 	
office usage shall not exceed 50 percent of the gross floor area of any building unless it is medical office and said building does not exceed a floor area ratio of 0.25, 

b. 	
medical offices are permitted on the first floor of any building, 

c. 	
general offices are not permitted on the first floor of any building, 

d. 	
not more than 10,000 square feet of total gross floor area of general and/or medical office use shall be in any one building, and 

e. 	
any floor used for general office shall be located more than seven feet in vertical height above or below the curb level of the adjacent street. 




D. Uses Requiring Special Permit 
1. 	
Any use permitted by Special Permit in the Retail B Zone subject to the same conditions. 

2. 	
Underground parking subject to the same requirements as for the Retail B zone except that public parking shall not be required to be hidden from public view or be a substitute for surface parking. 

3. 	
Quasi-Public Libraries 

4. 	
Wellness Centers 


E. Sidewalk Cafés 
Outside dining on municipal sidewalks or walkways, as an accessory use to an adjacent restaurant or food-serving establishment, subject to the Sidewalk Café Permit Procedures approved by the Board of Selectman and the Commission. 
4.5 BUSINESS B ZONE (VILLAGE DISTRICT) 
A. Purpose 
The Business B Zone is intended to provide areas where retail and service businesses of a heavier or more extensive nature may be located, provided that such uses are designed and operated so as to avoid undue nuisance, hazard or a deleterious effect on adjacent property values. Residential uses may also be permitted under certain conditions to provide for alternative uses on large parcels thereby providing for diversity in housing choices and opportunity. 
B. Design Review Authorized 
The Business B Zone is hereby designated as a Village District as authorized by CGS 8-2 and any new construction or remodeling of the exterior of a building shall be reviewed in accordance with the provisions of Section 6.12 of these Regulations. 
C. Uses Permitted with Site Plan Approval 
1. 	
Retail sales of garden supplies, hardware, lumber, or other products which may require extensive storage areas, but shall not include outdoor storage for scrap materials, unless properly screened form view of adjacent property owners and adjacent streets. 

2. 	
Specialty retail sales such as antiques, art galleries, or artisan/craftsperson goods. 

3. 	
Restaurants as permitted in Retail A Zone. 

4. 	
Outside dining as permitted in Retail A Zone. 

5. 	
Craftsperson Shops 

6. 	
Food Shops, Retail 

7. 	
Green Grocers, as permitted in the Business A Zone. 

8. 	
General Offices, provided that: 

a. 	
offices shall not be located on the first floor of any building, and 

b. 	
general office shall not exceed 50 percent of the gross floor of all buildings on a single piece of property. 



9. 	
Service establishments and personal service establishments. 

10. 
Laundries or dry cleaners. 

11. 
Specialty services which would be in keeping with the service business nature and stated purpose of the zone, as permitted in Retail A Zone. 

12. 
Publishers or printing services. 

13. 
Automotive services which do not involve outdoor storage of used auto parts or inoperable motor vehicles. 

14. 
New 	car sales provided there are no on-site repairs, outdoor storage of auto parts or inoperable motor vehicles. 

15. 
Health clubs, spas and other indoor athletic facilities. 

16. 
Municipal facilities; public facilities; quasi-public charitable institutions; cultural facilities such as art galleries and museums; and public utilities. 

17. 
Upholsterers or furniture repair services 

18. 
Quasi-public charitable institutions; cultural facilities, such as art galleries and museums. 


Removed: Contracting Services, Home Fuel, Religious Institutions & Surface Parking Lot 
D. Uses Requiring Special Permit 
1. 	Dwelling units as permitted by Special Permit in the Retail B Zone. 
2. 	
Outside dining as permitted in Retail A Zone. 

3. 	
Outside dining on a deck, porch, terrace or patio as an accessory use to a restaurant when located on the same property. 

4. 	
High-Technology Incubator Business, provided: 


a. 	Such businesses are, in the view of the Commission, consistent with the aim of developing and nurturing start-up, high-technology businesses. The Commission shall use NAICS descriptions, or its equivalent, in assisting them in determining if a particular Use is in keeping with the intent of the regulation. Some examples include, but are not limited to 
the research and development of: computer software, fuel cells, “green” products, solar 
cells, semiconductors, optical scanning devices, information technology, digital animation, computer hardware, computer facilities management and information retrieval services. 
b. 	
Such uses shall occupy a gross floor area of no more than 15,000 square feet. 

c. 	
Office use within such space shall not occupy more than 50% of the gross floor area. 


5. 	Underground parking provided: 
a. 	
the underground parking shall be provided in lieu of required surface parking facilities and not in addition thereto, 

b. 	
the underground parking allows the area normally occupied by parking to remain undisturbed or to provide open space, landscaping, and similar amenities, 

c. 	
the underground parking shall be hidden from view from abutting properties, 

d. 	
the street level views of such underground parking access shall be minimized, and 

e. 	
any first floor level above such parking shall not exceed the curb level of the street by more than two (2) feet. 


6. 	Inns 
E. Sidewalk Cafés 
Outside dining on municipal sidewalks or walkways, as an accessory use to an adjacent restaurant or food-serving establishment, subject to the Sidewalk Café Permit Procedures approved by the Board of Selectman and the Commission. 
4.6 BUSINESS C ZONE (VILLAGE DISTRICT) 
A. Purpose 
The Business C Zone is intended to allow for large office buildings in locations which would not be inconsistent with the village character and where proper traffic management can be provided. This district also allows for residential uses, thereby providing for diversity in housing choices and opportunity. 
B. Design Review Authorized 
The Business C Zone is hereby designated as a Village District as authorized by CGS 8-2 and any new construction or remodeling of the exterior of a building shall be reviewed in accordance with the provisions of Section 6.12 of these Regulations. 
C. Uses Permitted with Site Plan Approval 
1. 	
Any use permitted with Site Plan Approval in the Retail B Zone, excluding banks and outdoor dining, subject to the same conditions. 

2. 	
General and Medical Business or professional office buildings containing a gross floor area of not more than thirty-five thousand (35,000) square feet. 

3. 	
Parking in accordance with the provisions for the Business A zone. 


D. Uses Requiring Special Permit 
1. 	
Any use permitted by Special Permit in the Retail B Zone, excluding outdoor dining, subject to the same conditions. 

2. 	
Commercial garage. 

3. 	
Parking provided underground or in a separate structure on the same site. 


Removed: Veterinary Clinic. 
5.4 APARTMENT ZONE 
B. Permitted By Zoning or Other Permit 
1. 	
Single-family dwelling in accordance with the use, area, and dimensional requirements of the B-Residence zone. 

2. 	
For a single-family dwelling on lots of less than 10,000 square feet in area: 

a. 	
accessory uses subject to the same conditions and limitations provided in Section 3.3, and 

b. 	
accessory structures subject to the same conditions and limitations provided in Section 


3.4. 


3. 	
For a multi-family dwelling, a home office, keeping of animals and other customary uses subject to the same conditions and limitations provided in Subsection 3.3.A. 


6.3.E. Sign Illumination 
Signs which are visible from a public street or other public space may be illuminated, directly or indirectly, by white lights only. Light emittingdiodes (LED’s), CFL’s and fluorescent bulbs must be in the color range of 2,700K-3,000K. 
F. Prohibited Signs 
1. No sign illumination shall involve the use of light emitting diodes (LED) or the use of neon, argon or other gases, or any other method resulting in a similar appearance to neon or other gaseous illumination, including, but not limited to, illumination through fiber optics or similar media. Light boxes are not permitted. 
Add new #6. No sign shall contain a logo which is recognized as a company or entities trademark. 
Add new #7. Sandwich Board and easel type signs. 
Section 6.11 – Outdoor Lighting (B.1.a): 
a. prevent direct or objectionable glare or light trespass, 
Section 8.1.E – Consultations: 
1. 	
On any application, the Commission or Board may seek the advice and opinion of other officials, boards, or commissions to assist it in evaluating applications. 

2. 	
On any application, the Commission or Board may retain an architect, engineer, landscape architect, professional land use planner, and/or other consultant to review, comment, and guide its deliberations on any application. If the Commission or Board determines that such consultant(s) are necessary, the Zoning Inspector shall obtain estimates from such consultant(s). The Zoning Inspector shall collect 150% of the estimate from the applicant which shall be held in escrow until the technical reviews are completed. Any excess amount collected over the actual cost shall be refunded to the applicant. This payment shall be considered as an integral part of the application. The failure by the applicant to make this payment shall render the application incomplete. 

3. 	
, and require that the applicant: 

a. 	
deposit funds with the Commission for the costs of any consulting review fees, or 

b. 	
reimburse the Commission for the cost of such consulting review. 




Section 8.1.G.3 – General Procedures: 
3. 	Notices to such property owners shall be sent either by “Certified United States Mail” or the applicant must provide a “Certificate of Mailing” except that where any property owner shall have listed with the Assessor an address outside the United States, the requisite notice shall be sent by International Express Mail or equivalent. 
Section 8.4.A – Staff Procedures: Zoning Permit 
4.b (new): 
The Zoning Inspector may also request an interim as-built survey during construction to verify any height measurement of any proposed building, building wing or distinct portion in instances where the applicant has proposed to construct to or near the maximum height(s) allowed under the regulations. The interim height(s) shall be measured after the roof sheathing, but prior to other roofing materials are applied. 
Should the applicant fail to provide this As-Built as requested, the applicant will be proceeding with construction at their own risk. If the final As-Built survey indicates the structure exceeds any of the maximum height(s) allowed under the regulations, this shall not constitute a hardship. 
5.a: Bond Required (delete entire section) 
Appendix A: 
1. 	Natural Resource Information 
a. 	
Existing and proposed contours at two foot intervals or less to Class T-2 accuracy. Existing contours shall be measured prior to any construction, grading, landscaping, demolition or similar improvements that may manipulate the overall contour of the land. 

b. 	
Existing watercourses, swamps and marshes. 

c. 	
Accurate delineation of all soil types designated as Inland Wetlands. 

d. 	
Delineation of flood hazard areas. 

e. 	
Any existing trees greater than 12 inches in caliper. 


Drainage Certification Policy: Pending 
Zoning Boundary Change: 

SECTION 1.1. MILLPORT HOUSING ZONE 

A. Purpose 
The Millport Housing Zone is intended to increase economic diversity of housing types in New Canaan by allowing a small, well-designed and landscaped multi-family development. 
B. Properties Eligible for Rezoning to Millport Housing Zone 
To be eligible for rezoning to Millport Housing Zone, a parcel or parcels to be merged must total at least four (4.0) acres and have no less than 300 feet of frontage on Millport Avenue. 
C. Uses Permitted by Site Plan Approval 
Multi-family residential dwellings with a maximum of forty (40) units per building, with a total density of not more than thirty (30) units per gross acre. 
D. Accessory Uses Permitted by Site Plan Approval 
1. 	Free-standing garage structures of not more than six spaces, with a minimum side yard of ten 
(10) feet. 

2. 	Home offices and minor home occupations allowed by Sections 3.3.A.4 and 3.3.B.4. 
E. Dimensional Standards 
1. 
Lot-Related Standards 

Maximum building coverage 30 percent 
Maximum combined impervious coverage 65 percent 


2. 
Principal Building Standards 


Maximum height (vertical distance from average grade of building to 	40 feet 
highest mean elevation between highest ridge and lowest 
corresponding eave) 
Maximum total height 	50 feet 
Maximum stories 	4.0 stories 
Minimum front yard 	10 feet 
Minimum side yard 	12 feet 
Minimum rear yard 	15 feet 
Minimum separation distance between buildings 	5 feet 
Parking 	1.0 space per apartment home 
F. Site Plan Standards 
1. 	
In accordance with Subsection 3.6.C, new construction or renovation of the exterior of any multi­family residential building or any detached garage shall be reviewed using the criteria set forth in subsection 6.12.D of these Regulations. 

2. 	
All dwelling units and other uses shall be located within the sewer district, and shall be connected to public water. 

3. 	
Driveways and entrance and exit drives shall: 

a. 	
have a minimum width of eighteen (18) feet for two-way travel and twelve (12) feet for one-way travel; 

b. 	
be surfaced with asphalt or another suitable non-erodible surface; and 

c. 	
be laid out so as to prevent traffic hazards and nuisances. 



4. 	
Parking stalls shall be eight (8) feet, six (6) inches wide and twenty (20) feet long, and the site plan shall provide for driving aisles at least twenty-four (24) feet wide. 

5. 	
Exterior lighting shall: 

a. 	
be provided and maintained at all access points to streets, parking areas, building entrances, and elsewhere where required for the safety of vehicular or pedestrian traffic; 

b. 	
not be directed into any abutting properties; and 

c. 	
comply with Section 6.11. 



6. 	
Sidewalks shall: 

a. 	
have a minimum width of four (4) feet; 

b. 	
be concrete, brick, or other surface acceptable to the Commission; and 

c. 	
be provided between dwelling units and parking areas, streets, and driveways. 



7. 	
Retaining walls shall: 

a. 	
have a maximum height of fifteen (15) feet; 

b. 	
when tiered, be separated by at least four (4) feet; 

c. 	
be no closer to a side property line than five (5) feet; 

d. 	
have a surface treatment / appearance that is suitable to a residential development; and shall be screened from abutting property by planting or landscaping. 



8. 	
Stormwater Management: In addition to compliance with Section 6.4.J of these Regulations, applicant shall use Low Impact Design practices and techniques to the maximum extent possible, including the use of a "green roof" to collect and renovate stormwater. 

9. 	
Grading, Excavation, Soil Disturbance. 

a. 	
Excavating, grading, or soil disturbance, including removal of trees and vegetative ground cover, shall occur only as specifically approved by the Commission as part of site plan approval, and shall be granted only as essential to the construction or alteration of residential and accessory buildings, and installation of driveways, utilities, or amenities. 

b. 	
The applicant shall provide the Commission, in connection with its site plan application, a calculation and specification of the amount, lateral extent, and depth of earth materials to be excavated; materials to be reused on-site; materials to be imported; and a net cut / fill calculation. 

c. 	
The application erosion control plan shall specifically address controls tailored to the amount, location, and timetable for cut, fill, excavation, and import / export. 

d. 	
The applicant shall comply with the provision of Section 6.4.H and 6.4.I of these Regulations. 




G. 	Standards and Regulations for Household Income and Sale / Resale Price Limitations 
A development in a Millport Housing Zone shall be either a "set aside development" or "assisted housing" in compliance with General Statutes § 8-30g. 
H. 	Affordable Apartment Home Requirements 
The purpose of the Millport Housing Zone is to facilitate a residential community containing household income / price-restricted dwellings that comply with § 8-30g of the General Statutes. The following requirements shall apply: 
1. 	
Affordable apartment homes shall be of a construction quality that is comparable to a baseline specification for market-rate homes (if any) within the community. The Affordability Plan shall identify the locations within the community of the affordable apartment homes. 

2. 	
Calculation of the maximum monthly payment for affordable apartment homes, so as to satisfy General Statutes § 8-30g, shall utilize the median income data as published by the 

U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development in effect on the day a lease is executed. 

3. 	
The maximum monthly payment that the owner of an affordable apartment home shall pay shall not be greater than the amount that will preserve such unit as defined in General Statutes § 8­30g. 

4. 	
An affordable apartment home shall be occupied only as a principal residence. Sub-leasing of affordable apartment homes shall be prohibited. 

5. 	
Notice of availability of the apartment homes shall be provided by advertising such availability in the real estate section of a newspaper of general circulation in the Town of New Canaan, by providing notice to the New Canaan Town Council, the New Canaan Town Clerk, and the New Canaan Planning and Zoning Commission, and through the procedures outlined in the affirmative fair housing marketing plan in the Affordability Plan. 

6. 	
Each lease for an affordable apartment home will contain substantially the following provision: 

"This apartment home is an affordable housing unit and is therefore subject to a limitation at the date of leasing and occupancy on the maximum annual income of the household that may occupy the apartment home, and is subject to a limitation on the maximum monthly rent. These limitations shall be strictly enforced, and may be enforced by the zoning enforcement authority of New Canaan." 

7. 	
The forty (40) year affordability period shall be calculated separately for each affordable apartment home in a Millport Housing Zone, and the period shall begin on the date, as stated in the lease, of occupancy of the affordable apartment home. 

8. 	
A violation of the Regulations contained in this Section shall not result in a forfeiture or reversion of title, but the New Canaan Planning and Zoning Commission or its designated agent shall otherwise retain all enforcement powers granted by the Connecticut General Statutes, including the authority under § 8-12 to issue notices of violation, to impose fines, and to seek injunctive relief. 


I. Conflicts 
Where any provision of this Section conflicts with any other provisions of the New Canaan Zoning Regulations, the provisions of this Section shall govern. 
J. Submission Requirements 
1. 	
As applicant seeking approval of a site plan for a Millport Housing Zone development shall submit all information required by Section 8.2 of these Regulations. 

2. 	
The applicant shall also submit an Affordability Plan explaining how household income and rental price limits will be calculated and administered, and how the development will comply with General Statutes § 8-30g. 


PROPOSED TEXT CHANGES AS OF NOVEMBER 21, 2014 
1. Proposed text change to SECTION 4.8.E. “SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR 
BUSINESS ZONES” 
E. FLOOR AREA RATIO EXCEPTIONS 
Amendment-Add phrase “and Business B Zone” to text (See italics below): 
“In order to promote additional housing within the Retail B Zone and Business B Zone, the Commission may, by Special Permit, allow the gross floor area of residential units to be excluded from the calculation of FAR. Any proposed change for use in residential to a non residential use must include a square footage in the calculation of FAR and therefore comply with the FAR limitation listed in 
§4.7.J, in addition to other requirements set forth in these regulations.” 
2. Proposed amendment to text change to SECTION 4.7.G “AREA AND 
DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS” 
G. MAXIMUM BUILDING HEIGHT 
Amendment-Add a footnote 2 to Business B Zone (which parallels footnote 1 to the Retail B Zone in this section): 
Business B Zone (2) 
“By Special Permit in Business B Zone, the maximum building height may be increased above 30 feet and up to 3 stories provided the Commission shall make affirmative findings that: 
a. The proposed development will provide for a significant community benefit, such as: 
. Consolidation of two or more parcels into a meaningful master plan. 
. Excellence in design which enhances pedestrian experience 
and overall streetscape (such as avoiding driveways interrupting the sidewalk), 
and/or 

. Other meaningful public amenities or benefits consistent with the Plan of Conservation and Development. 
b. 
The increased building height and number of stories promote the town’s goal of providing mixed use with residential use of upper floors and contributes to the variety of housing choices; 

c. 
Due to the location and/or design of the proposed use and the building height of existing neighboring structures, no neighboring property will be materially adversely impacted by such structure; and 

d. 
The increased building height will be in harmony with the existing strategies and goals set forth in the Plan of Conservation and Development. 


The Commission may require any building height above 30 feet or 2 1/2 stories to be set back from the façade of the building so as to maintain a cornice line along 
the street and/or not overwhelm the street.” 
3. Proposed text change to SECTION 6.2.G. “SIZE OF PARKING AND LOADING 
FACILITIES” 
Amendment-Add a subsection 4 to read as follows: 
6.2.G.4 

“In order to promote additional parking for mixed-use projects within Business Zones (Village Districts) the Commission may, by Special Permit, allow the minimum stall depth to be reduced to not less than eighteen (18) feet from the standard indicated above, provided the Commission makes an affirmative finding that the dimensions provided for vehicular access, site circulation, and parking, are appropriate for the site and that the reduction in dimension may result in either additional landscape buffering features or aide in the use of LID features.” 
Proposed text change to zoning regulations 3.12.15 
C. Lot Width Exceptions 
1. 	
These Regulations shall not prohibit the erection of a single-family dwelling on any parcel which is smaller in width that that required for a single-family house by these Regulations provided that, at all times subsequent to the adoption of the zoning regulation which resulted in such lot being non-conforming as to width, such lot was in a different ownership from that of all abutting land. 

2. 	
In One-Half-Acre, One-Acre, Two-Acre and Four-Acre Zones, the following exceptions to the lot width requirements may be utilized where a parcel of land is located on a public street and has sufficient area for no more than two (2) zone units and one (1) of the zone units does not have the required lot width on a public street for the zone involved, Zoning Permits may be issued for both zone units, provided that: 

a. 	
The zone unit not having the required lot width on a public street has access thereto by means of an accessway serving such zone unit. 

b. 
Such accessway shall not be less than twenty-five (25) feet in horizontal width. 



3. 	
Where a parcel of land is located on a nonpublic roadway and has sufficient area and lot width for more than one zone unit, Zoning Permits may be issued for those zone units provided the private roadway has a width of at least fifty (50) feet, and has a traveled way to town standards of at least twenty (20) feet of asphalt, unless approved by the Commission through the granting of a Special Permit. 

4. 	
Where a parcel of land is located on a nonpublic roadway and has sufficient area for no more than two (2) one zone units and one (1) or more of the zone units does not have the required lot width for the zone involved, Zoning Permits may be issued for both these zone units provided that: 


a. 	
The zone unit not having the required lot width on a nonpublic street has access thereto by means of an accessway serving such zone unit(s); and 

b. 	
Such accessway shall not be less than twenty-five (25) feet in horizontal width; and 

c. 	
The private roadway has a width of at least fifty (50) feet, and has a traveled way to town standards of at least twenty (20) feet of asphalt, unless modified approved by the Commission through the granting of a Special Permit. 


OR 
Have been laid out prior to the effective date of this Section in accordance with the requirements and/or specifications of the Town, the Commission, or the Connecticut General Statutes existing at the time such roadway was load out. 
5. 	One (1) Zoning Permit may be issued for any tract of land that does not comply with the lot width requirement provided it was in different ownership than all abutting land on December 15, 1956, and has continued to be different ownership than all abutting land, if such tract of land has access to a public street by means of a private accessway having a width of at least 16.5 feet. 
D:\Users\delucs\AppData\Local\Microsoft\Windows\Temporary Internet Files\Content.Outlook\5M9AB31A\Amendment Proposal section 3 7 C DRAFT 1.docx 
6. 	For lots of record as of June 16, 2007, Zoning Permits may be issued for front lots having the required area and having an average width (minimum width plus maximum width divided by two) which is greater than or equal to the required minimum width by where the road frontage is less that the required minimum width, when such frontage is at least two-thirds (2/3) of the required lot width, and, if on a circle, the measurement may be on the arc of the circle. 
D:\Users\delucs\AppData\Local\Microsoft\Windows\Temporary Internet Files\Content.Outlook\5M9AB31A\Amendment Proposal section 3 7 C DRAFT 1.docx 


TOWN OF NEW CANAAN
SUBDIVISION
REGULATIONS
Planning and Zoning Commission
Effective - December 2, 2008

TABLE OF CONTENTS
ARTICLE 1.00 INTRODUCTION .........................................................1
1.01 AUTHORITY.............................................................................1
1.02 PURPOSES .............................................................................1
1.03 APPLICABILITY .......................................................................2
1.04 ENFORCEMENT......................................................................2
1.05 MODIFICATION OF STANDARDS ..........................................3
1.06 PRIVATE RESTRICTIONS ......................................................4
1.07 ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS............................................4
ARTICLE 2.00 INTERPRETATION .....................................................5
2.01 INTERPRETATION OF REGULATIONS .................................5
2.02 USE OF TERMS ......................................................................5
2.03 DEFINED TERMS....................................................................6
ARTICLE 3.00 PARCEL AND LOT REQUIREMENTS.....................13
3.01 LAND CHARACTER...............................................................13
3.02 PROTECTION OF IMPORTANT FEATURES........................13
3.03 LOT LAYOUT.........................................................................14
3.04 OPEN SPACE........................................................................15
3.05 SOLAR ACCESS ...................................................................18
3.06 DRIVEWAYS..........................................................................18
3.07 ACCESSWAYS......................................................................19
3.08 TREE PLANTING...................................................................20
ARTICLE 4.00 INFRASTRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS....................21
4.01 STREETS...............................................................................21
4.02 SIDEWALKS ..........................................................................25
4.03 SEWERAGE...........................................................................26
4.04 WATER ..................................................................................26
4.05 STORM DRAINAGE...............................................................27
4.06 WIRE UTILITIES ....................................................................31
4.07 STREET LIGHTING ...............................................................31
4.08 FIRE PROTECTION...............................................................32
ARTICLE 5.00 APPLICATION PROCEDURES................................33
5.01 GENERAL ..............................................................................33
5.02 PRELIMINARY PLAN PROCEDURE.....................................34
5.03 FORMAL SUBDIVISION APPLICATION................................34
5.04 RECEIPT AND SCHEDULING...............................................35
5.05 NOTICE PROVISIONS...........................................................35
5.06 PUBLIC HEARINGS...............................................................36
5.07 APPLICATION PROCESSING AND ACTION........................37
ARTICLE 6.00 POST- APPROVAL PROCEDURES ........................39
6.01 FINALIZING APPROVED PLANS ..........................................39
6.02 CANCELLATION OF APPROVAL..........................................40
6.03 GUARANTEE FOR COMPLETION OF IMPROVEMENTS....40
6.04 FILING OF APPROVED PLANS ............................................42
6.05 CONSTRUCTION - EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL 43
6.06 CONSTRUCTION - CLEARING AND GRADING...................43
6.07 CONSTRUCTION OF IMPROVEMENTS...............................44
6.08 INSPECTION OF IMPROVEMENTS......................................44
6.09 PERIOD FOR COMPLETION OF IMPROVEMENTS.............45
6.10 MONUMENTS AND MARKERS.............................................46
6.11 FINAL ACCEPTANCE AND MAINTENANCE ........................47
6.12 MODIFICATION OF APPROVAL ...........................................48
APPENDIX A - APPLICATION CHECKLIST..................................... A - 1
APPENDIX B - DRAWING CHECKLIST............................................. B - 1
PLAN INFORMATION OVERVIEW ................................................................ B - 6
ADDITIONAL FORMAL APPLICATION MATERIALS..................................... B - 8
APPENDIX C - APPROVAL BLOCKS................................................ C - 1
APPENDIX D - CONSTRUCTION PROCEDURES ............................ D - 1
APPENDIX E – SAMPLE LETTER OF CREDIT................................. E - 1
Article 1.00 - INTRODUCTION
Effective - December 2, 2008 1
ARTICLE 1.00
INTRODUCTION
1.01 AUTHORITY
These Regulations are adopted by the Planning and Zoning Commission of the
Town of New Canaan under the authority conferred by Chapter 126 of the Connecticut
General Statutes (CGS 8-18 et seq.), as amended.
1.02 PURPOSES
As provided in Section 8-25 of the Connecticut General Statutes, these Regulations
are adopted for the following purposes:
1. Protecting and providing for the public health, safety and welfare in the
community and promoting the general welfare and prosperity of its people;
2. Promoting the coordinated development of the community and guiding
future growth and development in New Canaan in accordance with the
Plan of Conservation and Development;
3. Ensuring that land to be subdivided is of such character that it can be
used for building purposes without danger to health or public safety;
4. Guiding public and private policy and action in order to provide safe,
adequate, and efficient transportation, drainage, water, sewer, parks,
schools and other public facilities;
5. Providing for the circulation of traffic throughout the community so that
proposed streets shall be in harmony with existing and proposed streets,
especially as regards safe intersections, and shall be so arranged and of
such width as to provide an adequate and convenient system for present
and future traffic needs;
6. Establishing reasonable standards of design and procedures for subdivisions
in order to further the orderly layout and use of land;
7. Ensuring that public facilities are available and have adequate capacities
to serve the proposed subdivision;
8. Preventing the pollution of air, streams, rivers and water bodies; assuring
the adequacy of drainage facilities; providing for protective flood control
measures; and encouraging the wise use and management of natural
features throughout the community in order to preserve the integrity, stability
and beauty of New Canaan and the value of the land;
9. Preserving the natural beauty and topography of the community and to
ensure appropriate development with regard to these natural features;
10. Encouraging energy efficient patterns of development and land use, use
of solar and other renewable forms of energy, and energy conservation.
Article 1.00 - INTRODUCTION
2 Effective - December 2, 2008
1.03 APPLICABILITY
1. These Regulations shall apply to any subdivision or resubdivision of land
within New Canaan, Connecticut.
2. Any subdivision of land shall be planned, designed, and constructed so that
the subdivision as a whole, any lot or parcel therein, and any improvement
required conforms to:
a. the applicable requirements of these Regulations,
b. the applicable requirements of the Zoning Regulations for the zoning district
within which the lot or parcel is located; and
c. any other applicable ordinances, regulations, or standards.
3. No subdivision of land shall be made and no land in any subdivision shall be
sold or offered for sale until a subdivision plan, prepared in accordance with
the requirements of these Regulations, has been:
a. approved by the Commission,
b. signed by the Chairman or other authorized agent to indicate approval by
the Commission, and
c. filed or recorded in the office of the Town Clerk within the time period
specified in Section 6.04.
4. Any recording of a subdivision plan not meeting the requirements of this Section
1.03 shall be null and void.
5. The Commission shall have the authority to determine whether the existing
or proposed division of any land constitutes a subdivision or resubdivision
under the provisions of these Regulations.
1.04 ENFORCEMENT
1. These Regulations shall be enforced by the Planning and Zoning Commission
and/or its designated representative(s).
2. Any person making any subdivision of land without the approval of the Commission
shall be fined as provided by CGS Section 8-25 for each lot subdivided,
offered for sale, or sold.
3. In the case of any violation of the provisions of these Regulations, the Commission
shall retain the right of pursuing any legal action and impose any and
all penalties provided by the Connecticut General Statutes.
Article 1.00 - INTRODUCTION
Effective - December 2, 2008 3
1.05 MODIFICATION OF STANDARDS
1. Overview
In accordance with the provisions of CGS Section 8-26, the Commission may
waive a regulation or standard contained in these regulations by a three-quarters
(3/4) vote of all members of the Commission.
2. Modification of Design Standard
The Commission may waive any design standard of these Regulations when it
finds that all of the following conditions have been satisfied:
a. conditions exist which adversely affect the subject property and are not
generally applicable to other property in the area,
b. strict compliance with the specific standard(s) will:
i. render the land under consideration, or portions thereof, virtually undevelopable,
ii. hinder the goal of protecting natural features, open space, trails,
community resources, cultural resources, or other recommendation
of the Plan of Conservation and Development, or
iii. not do justice to the land's particular physiography (including but not
limited to topography, subsurface conditions, wetlands and watercourses)
and thus outweigh the benefits to be derived from such
strict compliance,
c. the granting of the modification will not hinder or discourage the appropriate
use or development of adjacent property or the neighborhood or
impair the value thereof, and
d. the requested modification is the minimum deviation necessary from
these Regulations to permit reasonable development of the subject property.
3. Modification of Submission Requirement
The Commission may waive all or part of a subdivision application requirement
when it finds that the proposed subdivision involves establishment of lots fronting
on an existing street or is a resubdivision.
4. Requirements for Modification
As part of granting any modification authorized above, the Commission shall:
a. have received a specific written request from the subdivider for the modification,
b. find that the granting of the modification shall not have a significant adverse
effect on adjacent property or on public health, safety, or welfare,
c. find that such modification will not hinder implementation of the Plan of
Conservation and Development, and
d. state upon the record its reasons for which such a modification was
granted.
Article 1.00 - INTRODUCTION
4 Effective - December 2, 2008
1.06 PRIVATE RESTRICTIONS
1. If a subdivider places a covenant or restriction on any of the land being subdivided
which is greater than that required by these Subdivision Regulations
or the Zoning Regulations, such covenant or restriction shall be indicated on
the subdivision map and referenced in the deed(s) of the affected property.
2. The Commission or any other appropriate agency of the Town of New Canaan
shall have the right, but not the obligation, to enforce such covenants or
restrictions.
1.07 ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS
1. Agent - The Town Planner and authorized assistants shall be the administrative
agent(s) of the Commission with regard to these regulations.
2. Amendments - The Planning and Zoning Commission may amend or repeal
these Regulations after a public hearing in accordance with the requirements
of CGS Chapter 126, as amended.
3. Appeals - Any person aggrieved by an action or decision of the Commission
may appeal as provided by CGS Section 8-8, as amended.
4. Validation - Adoption of these regulations or any amendment hereto shall
not invalidate any subdivision or street layout approved by the Commission,
or its predecessor, prior to the effective date hereof.
5. Separability - Should any provision of these Regulations be declared unconstitutional,
invalid, or beyond the powers granted to the Commission by
law, such action shall not affect the validity of any other provision or part
hereof.
6. When Effective - These Regulations, and any amendments hereto, shall be
effective from and after the date established by the Commission.
Article 2.00 - INTERPRETATION
Effective - December 2, 2008 5
ARTICLE 2.00
INTERPRETATION
2.01 INTERPRETATION OF REGULATIONS
1. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of these Regulations
shall be the minimum requirements unless the context clearly indicates that
such provisions are intended to be a maximum limitation.
2. Where any conflict arises between the provisions of these Regulations and
any other law, ordinance, easement, covenant, rule, regulation, or permit, the
provision that establishes the greatest restriction or imposes the highest
standard shall control.
3. In the case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of
these Regulations and any caption, illustration, summary, table or illustrative
table, the text shall govern.
2.02 USE OF TERMS
1. Definitions To Be Applied - In the interpretation and enforcement of these
Regulations, the words and phrases set forth in these Regulations shall be
construed as defined in this Article, unless otherwise clearly qualified by their
context.
2. Specific Terms - In the interpretation and enforcement of these Regulations,
certain words contained herein shall be interpreted as follows:
a. The word “shall” is mandatory and not discretionary.
b. The word “may” is permissive.
c. When not inconsistent with the context:
i. Words in the present tense include the future and vice-versa.
ii. Words in the singular include the plural and vice-versa.
iii. Words in the masculine include the feminine and neuter and viceversa.
d. The word “person” also includes a partnership, association, trust, corporation,
limited liability company, or other legal entity.
3. Terms Not Defined - In the interpretation and enforcement of these Regulations,
words not defined in this Article shall be interpreted by the Commission
after consulting one or more of the following:
a. the Zoning Regulations, as amended;
b. the State Building Code, as amended;
c. the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended;
d. the “Illustrated Book of Development Definitions” (Rutgers University,
Center for Urban Policy Research), as amended,
e. Black's Law Dictionary,
f. a comprehensive general dictionary.
Article 2.00 - INTERPRETATION
6 Effective - December 2, 2008
2.03 DEFINED TERMS
A-2 Survey - Survey information meeting the standards for an "A-2" survey as
specified in "Code of Recommended Practice for Standards of Accuracy of
Survey and Maps" by the State Board of Registration for Professional Engineers
and Land Surveyors of the State of Connecticut.
AASHTO - American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials.
Accelerated Erosion - Any increase over the rate of natural erosion as a result
of earth-disturbing activities.
Accessway - Land containing a driveway intended to provide access to a rear lot
or to land(s) of others.
Acre - A land area equivalent to forty-three thousand five-hundred and sixty
(43,560) square feet.
Applicant - see “Subdivider.”
Application - The application form, maps, texts, reports, and supporting data
required by these Regulations for approval of a subdivision or resubdivision.
Article - A separate part of these Subdivision Regulations. See “Chapter” and
“Section”.
CGS - Connecticut General Statutes.
Chapter - The entire Subdivision Regulations. See “Article” and “Section”.
Commission - The New Canaan Planning and Zoning Commission.
Community Resources - Scenic views, scenic areas, open space, recreation
areas, greenways, trails, agricultural lands, prominent hillsides, ridgelines,
ridgetops, hill crests, significant trees, and similar resources. See “Cultural
Resources” and “Natural Features”.
Conservation Restriction - An encumbrance on real property filed on the land
records of the Town for the protection and permanent preservation of fragile,
vulnerable or valuable areas such as natural features, open space, natural
habitats, buffer zones, scenic areas, historic sites, riding and walking trails,
and land devoted to other similar purposes.
CTDOT - Connecticut Department of Transportation.
Cul-de-sac - See “Street, Dead End”.
Cultural Resources - Archeological sites, stone walls, historic buildings, historic
sites, and similar resources. See “Community Resources” and “Natural Features”.
Article 2.00 - INTERPRETATION
Effective - December 2, 2008 7
Curb Cut - The opening along the curb line at which point vehicles may enter or
leave the roadway.
Date of Approval - The date an application is considered approved based upon
the latest of the following dates:
• by reason of failure of the Commission to act within the statutory timeframe,
• by affirmative action of the Commission under any provision of these
Regulations, or
• if a decision of the Commission is appealed, by conclusion of any appeal
which results in a judgment approving or affirming approval of the application.
Date of Receipt - Unless otherwise provided in CGS 8-7d, the application shall
be considered received upon the date of the first regularly scheduled Commission
meeting after submission of the application or thirty-five (35) days after
submission of the application, whichever is sooner.
Developer - see “Subdivider.”
Development - Any construction or grading activity to improved or unimproved
real estate.
Director of Health - The person or persons responsible for enforcement of the
Public Health Code for the Town of New Canaan.
Disturbed Area - An area where the ground cover is destroyed or removed leaving
the land subject to accelerated erosion.
Drainage - The controlled or uncontrolled removal or discharge of surface or
ground water from land by drains, grading or other means which may include
runoff controls to minimize erosion, reduce suspended solids and maximize
groundwater recharge during and after construction or development.
Driveway - A paved or unpaved way providing access from a street or accessway
to the premises.
Driveway, Shared - A privately owned and maintained driveway shared by adjacent
property owners for access to more than one lot.
Earth Disturbing Activities - Any use of the land that results in a change in the
natural cover or topography and that may cause or contribute to erosion and
sedimentation.
Easement - A right in favor of one other than the owner of land to use the land
for a special purpose not inconsistent with the general property interest of the
owner.
Elevation - The height of a point above mean sea level based on the U.S.
Coastal & Geodetic survey datum.
Article 2.00 - INTERPRETATION
8 Effective - December 2, 2008
Engineer - A professional engineer as defined in CGS 20-299, licensed in the
State of Connecticut, qualified to design and construct roadways, utilities and
structures.
Erosion - The process of wearing away and removal of the earth’s surface by
natural agents including weather, running water, waves, currents, ice, wind
or gravity.
Erosion and Sediment Control Manual - The “Erosion and Sediment Control
Manual” applicable to Fairfield County, Connecticut that is available from the
Soil and Water Conservation District or the U.S. Department of Agriculture,
Natural Resource Conservation Service.
FEMA - Federal Emergency Management Agency.
Final Approval - Approval of a subdivision where lots may be offered for sale or
sold upon:
• compliance with any conditions of approval,
• completion of subdivision agreement or other necessary documentation
such as easements,
• completion of any required improvements or furnishing of a performance
guarantee, and
• filing of the plan with the Town Clerk.
Flood Plain - That area designated as subject to periodic flooding by a flood
having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year (a “one-hundred-year-flood”), consisting of the floodway and the
floodway fringe of the one-hundred-year flood as shown on the Flood
Boundary and Floodway Maps in the Flood Insurance Study prepared by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency, as amended.
Grading - Any excavating, grubbing, filling (including hydraulic fill) or stockpiling
of earth materials or any combination thereof which results in a change of
contour or elevation, either permanent or temporary.
Improvement - Any change or alteration to the existing conditions of the subdivision
site for the purpose of complying with these Regulations or rendering
the site more suitable for development and/or habitation.
Inspection - The periodic on-site review of property for the purpose of determining
compliance with these Regulations as authorized by these Regulations
and the Connecticut General Statutes.
Article 2.00 - INTERPRETATION
Effective - December 2, 2008 9
Lot - A unit of land created from a larger tract of land for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of sale or building development, expressly excluding
development for municipal, conservation or agriculture purposes.
Natural Features - Land, water, and biological resources including, but not limited
to, soil types, terrain, slopes, ridgetops, rock outcroppings, watercourses,
ponds, rivers, flood plains, wetlands, streambelts, endangered species,
wildlife habitat, prime and important farmland soils, pastures, and other
unique or fragile features. See “Community Resources” and “Cultural Resources”.
NFPA - National Fire Protection Association.
Open Space - Land preserved in perpetuity for protection of natural resources,
natural features, scenic resources, or community character.
Owner - The person shown by the Land Records of the Town of New Canaan to
be the holder of the fee title.
Parcel - The land contained within one continuous property line or a larger tract
of land that is to be divided to create smaller lots.
Performance Guarantee - A financial guarantee acceptable in amount, form and
substance to the Town for the purpose of ensuring that improvements or obligations
required by these Regulations or pledged by the subdivider will be
completed.
Plan of Conservation and Development - A comprehensive plan for the future
growth, protection and development of New Canaan adopted by the Planning
and Zoning Commission under CGS Section 8-23.
Premises - The real property, either land or buildings or both, which is being
evaluated.
Recreation Area - Land dedicated for recreation area, park, or playground purposes.
Reserve Strip - A privately-owned strip of land which controls access to land
dedicated, or to be dedicated, to use as a public street.
Article 2.00 - INTERPRETATION
10 Effective - December 2, 2008
Resubdivision - A change in a map of an approved or recorded subdivision
(See “Subdivision”) if such change:
• affects any street layout shown on such map,
• affects any area reserved thereon for public use, or
• diminishes the size of any lot shown thereon and creates an additional
building lot, if any of the lots shown thereon have been conveyed after
the approval or recording of such map.
Road - See “Street”.
Sale - A conveyance for a consideration or any transfer of title by gift, devise or
mortgage.
Section - A separate part of an Article within these Subdivision Regulations.
See “Chapter” and “Article”.
Sediment - Solid material, either mineral or organic, that is in suspension, is
transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by erosion.
Sidewalk - An area located within the street right-of-way improved for and dedicated
to pedestrian traffic.
Slope - An inclined surface, typically expressed as a percent representing the
number of feet rise in one-hundred feet of horizontal distance.
Soil - Any unconsolidated mineral or organic material of any origin.
Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plan - A scheme that is proposed to be
implemented in order to minimize soil erosion and sedimentation resulting
from development and includes, but is not limited to, a map and narrative.
Soil Scientist - A person who is qualified as a soil scientist in accordance with
the standards set by the United States Civil Service Commission.
Soils Map - Soils classification maps as shown in the Soil Survey, Fairfield
County Connecticut prepared by the U.S. Department of Agriculture, Soil
Conservation Service.
Solar Energy Techniques - Site design techniques which:
• maximize solar heat gain, minimize heat loss and/or provide thermal
storage within a building during the heating season, and/or
• minimize heat gain and provide for natural ventilation during the cooling
season.
Statute - Connecticut General Statutes.
Article 2.00 - INTERPRETATION
Effective - December 2, 2008 11
Street - A way permanently dedicated to movement of vehicles and pedestrians
and providing the principal means of access to abutting property, and which
is shown on a subdivision plan approved by the Commission or shown on
the Development Plan or on a map filed in the office of the Town Clerk prior
to February 11, 1946, or is a state road or town street, and shall include highways,
throughways, thoroughfares, parkways, avenues, roads, lanes, alleys,
driftways or other arteries of vehicular traffic, but not private driveways or accessways.
Accepted - Any street which has become a public highway by virtue of official
acceptance by the Town of New Canaan.
Approved - Any street whose location has been approved by official action
of the Commission.
Arterial (Major Street) - A through street which generally carries traffic between
communities or major activity centers and includes all State and
Federal highways although some Town streets as identified in the Plan
of Conservation and Development may be so classified.
Collector - A through street that provides intra-community traffic service and
neighborhood access to arterial streets.
Dead End - A street having only one intersection with another street.
Dead End, Permanent - A dead end street not designed to be extended
into adjoining undeveloped land.
Dead End, Temporary - A dead end street designed to be extended into
adjoining undeveloped land.
Local - A through street whose primary function is to provide access to abutting
property and linkage between properties and collector or arterial
streets.
Street Line - The line separating the street right-of-way and adjoining lots or
premises.
Subdivider - Any property owner, contract purchaser, person, firm, or other legal
entity or their successor who shall create any subdivision or part thereof, or
any resubdivision, for the purpose of sale or building development or who
applies for a subdivision, either for themselves or as an agent for others.
Subdivision - The division of a tract or parcel of land into three or more parts or
lots made subsequent to the adoption of subdivision regulations by the
Commission (February 11, 1946), for the purpose, whether immediate or future,
of sale or building development, expressly excluding development for
municipal, conservation or agricultural purposes. The word “subdivision”
shall also include resubdivision. See “Resubdivision”.
Article 2.00 - INTERPRETATION
12 Effective - December 2, 2008
Town - The Town of New Canaan, Connecticut.
Traveled Way - That portion of the surface of the street intended to be used by
vehicular traffic.
Turnaround - The area at the end of a dead-end street usually circular in shape,
provided for the purpose of enabling vehicular traffic to reverse direction
without having to back up.
Walkway - A sidewalk, path, trail, way, or any easement which provides for the
movement of pedestrian or other non-motorized traffic.
Watercourses - The term "watercourses" shall have the meaning set forth in the
Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations of the Town of New Canaan,
Connecticut.
Wetlands - The term "wetlands" shall have the meaning set forth in the Inland
Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations of the Town of New Canaan, Connecticut.
Zoning Regulations - The Zoning Regulations of the Town of New Canaan in
effect at the time of application for subdivision or resubdivision.
Article 3.00 - PARCEL AND LOT REQUIREMENTS
Effective - December 2, 2008 13
ARTICLE 3.00
PARCEL AND LOT REQUIREMENTS
3.01 LAND CHARACTER
1. Land which the Commission finds to be unsuitable in its present condition for
building purposes because of flooding, inadequate drainage, steep slopes,
depth to bedrock, erosive soils, utility easements or similar features which
might pose a threat to the public health, safety or welfare shall not be approved
as a building lot unless adequate provisions are made by the subdivider
to mitigate the unsuitable conditions in a manner satisfactory to the
Commission.
3.02 PROTECTION OF IMPORTANT FEATURES
1. Any subdivision shall be designed and arranged and provision shall be
made to:
a. preserve natural features as defined in these Regulations,
b. preserve and enhance community resources and/or cultural resources
as defined in these Regulations,
c. make best use of the natural terrain,
d. prevent the pollution of wetlands, watercourses, and water bodies,
e. protect the quality and quantity of water supplies, and
f. comply with any flood management ordinances and regulations adopted
by the Town.
2. In areas subject to flooding, proper provision shall be made for protective
flood control measures including, but not limited to, the following:
a. storm drainage shall be designed to reduce exposure to flood hazards,
b. streets shall be of such elevation or shall be suitably protected so as to
allow emergency access during flood conditions,
c. streets, drainage and other improvements shall be safe from flood damage,
d. public and private improvements shall be designed to minimize flood
damage and shall be capable of use without danger from flooding or
flood related damages,
e. All utilities and services (including sewage, water, and electric systems)
shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
3. During the review process, the Commission may require:
a. the preservation or enhancement of specific features,
b. the submission of additional information that demonstrates the subdivider’s
proposals (such as a conservation restriction and/or the dedication
of open space) for protecting the types of resource(s) identified in
Section 3.02.1 of these Regulations.
Article 3.00 - PARCEL AND LOT REQUIREMENTS
14 Effective - December 2, 2008
3.03 LOT LAYOUT
1. Any proposed lot shall comply in all respects with the Zoning Regulations for
the zoning district in which the lot is located.
2. The shape, size, location, topography, character, and arrangement of a lot
shall be such that there will be no foreseeable difficulties, for reasons of topography
or other conditions, in:
a. securing necessary permits to develop the lot in compliance with applicable
regulations, codes, and ordinances,
b. occupying and using such lot for building purposes without danger to the
health and safety of the occupants or the public,
c. providing safe and convenient access to principal buildings on such lot,
and
d. providing for grading and drainage without adversely affecting abutting or
downstream properties.
3. The Commission may determine that any parcel of land, regardless of size,
shall be unsuitable for building if it:
a. does not conform to the requirements of these or other applicable codes
and regulations,
b. is found unsuitable for occupancy and building by reason of lack of septic
suitability, lack of adequate water supply, topography, water, flooding,
or other conditions, or
c. does not meet the minimum zoning requirements.
4. Insofar as practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight street
lines or radial to curved street lines, unless a variation from this provision
would result in a better street or lot layout. In general, lot lines shall be laid
out so as not to cross municipal boundary lines.
5. Unless designated and preserved in perpetuity for open space, municipal,
conservation, or agricultural purposes; no parcel, reserve strip, or any other
remnant of land unsuitable for building shall be left in any subdivision.
6. No land or building lot shall be configured in such a way that, in the opinion
of the Commission, it could control access to other property or would landlock
an adjacent property unless the control of such land or building lot is
placed definitely within the jurisdiction of the Town under conditions approved
by the Commission.
Article 3.00 - PARCEL AND LOT REQUIREMENTS
Effective - December 2, 2008 15
3.04 OPEN SPACE
1. As provided for in CGS Section 8-25, every subdivision shall provide for
open space in order to:
a. protect and conserve natural features,
b. protect and conserve community resources and/or cultural resources,
c. establish greenbelts and other linkages that connect open spaces,
d. provide for parks, playgrounds, and other active and passive recreation
areas,
e. supplement existing open space areas,
f. provide, protect, or enhance local trails, and
g. implement the open space and other recommendations in the Plan of
Conservation and Development.
2. This open space requirement may, with approval of the Commission, be met
through:
a. dedication of land within the subdivision or elsewhere in New Canaan,
b. a fee-in-lieu-of-open-space donation,
c. dedication of land and a fee-in-lieu-of-open-space-donation, or
d. some other arrangement that shall be found by the Commission to be
acceptable (such as a streetscape protection easement, a trail easement,
a conservation easement, or similar proposal).
3. So that the Commission can fully evaluate the merits of the open space preservation
method proposed, the subdivider shall submit a map showing
where the open space land is located or would be located if a fee-in-lieu-ofopen-
space donation or other open space arrangement is not accepted.
4. The Commission may solicit comments from the Parks and Recreation
Commission, the Environmental Commission, the Conservation Commission,
the Board of Selectmen, the New Canaan Land Trust, or any other
person or entity regarding the best method of preserving open space as part
of the subdivision.
5. Dedication of Land
a. Where the open space requirement shall be met through the dedication
of land:
i. at least ten (10) percent of the total area of the subdivision shall be
set aside for open space, and
ii. unless waived or modified by the Commission, the area reserved to
meet the minimum open space requirement shall not consist of a
greater percentage of area classified as wetland, watercourse, 100-
year floodplain, or slopes in excess of twenty-five percent (25%) than
the parcel as a whole.
b. Such open space shall be shown on the subdivision plan or on another
suitable map if located elsewhere in New Canaan.
Article 3.00 - PARCEL AND LOT REQUIREMENTS
16 Effective - December 2, 2008
c. In determining the appropriateness of an area proposed for open space
or other public purposes, the Commission shall consider:
i. recommendations in the Plan of Conservation and Development,
ii. the presence or absence of any existing open spaces in the area,
iii. the opportunities to interconnect existing, proposed, and potential future
open space reservations into a comprehensive greenway and
trail system,
iv. the opportunity to preserve or protect significant natural features,
and
v. comments from other agencies regarding need, resources, connection
to the open space system of the Town, and preferred ownership.
d. When a subdivision abuts an existing open space, the Commission may
require the lot lines of such land form a continuation of the existing open
space to provide a single, unified area.
e. The subdivider shall designate which entity is, or entities are, proposed
to own the open space to ensure its permanent protection as provided in
these Regulations. The following is the order of preference for ownership
of open space:
i. The Town.
ii. A non-profit organization, acceptable to the Commission, legally constituted
to accept and maintain open space for conservation purposes.
iii. A neighborhood association reviewed and approved by the Commission.
f. Such open spaces shall be deeded in perpetuity.
g. Such open spaces deeded to a private organization or to a private association
shall provide in such deed that ownership shall revert to the Town
or other conservation organization for recreational or conservation purposes
if such corporation or association shall cease to exist or shall relinquish
ownership.
h. The Commission may defer the requirements for the immediate provision
of such land in a subdivision which is a part of a larger tract of land, provided
that the subdivider dedicates an area of land in the undeveloped
portion of the tract equal to the requirements of this section in the developed
portion.
i. If a subdivider transfers land to the Town for municipal purposes other
than for required street widening, such transfer may be considered by
the Commission as a credit toward any open space dedication requirements.
j. The Commission may require that any open space land have direct access
to a public street through a right-of-way dedicated to public use and
that it be graded and improved to allow for pedestrian access.
k. Open space areas shall not be used as a depository for brush, stumps,
earth, building materials, or debris.
Article 3.00 - PARCEL AND LOT REQUIREMENTS
Effective - December 2, 2008 17
6. Fees in Lieu of Open Space
a. As provided by CGS Section 8-25, the Commission may authorize the
subdivider to pay a fee to the Town, or pay a fee to the Town and transfer
land to the Town in lieu of any requirement to provide open spaces.
b. The Commission may also request the subdivider pay a fee to the Town
or pay a fee to the Town and transfer land in lieu of the requirement to
provide open space where dedication of land as open space will not
meet the purposes of this Section 3.04.
c. If payment of such a fee is proposed by the subdivider, the Commission
may refuse such fee if it determines, in its sole discretion, that there are
acceptable areas on the subdivision which merit preservation by one of
the methods set forth in these Regulations.
d. The open space payment shall be placed in a fund established by the
Town to be used for acquiring land for open space in accordance with
the purposes of this Section 3.04.
e. Unless otherwise agreed to by the Commission and the subdivider, fee
in lieu of open space procedures shall be in accordance with Section 8-
25 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended provided that any
required appraisal shall be performed by a Connecticut-certified appraiser
with an MAI designation.
f. The fee in lieu of open space may be paid in one lump sum by the subdivider
or may be made in partial payments at the time of the sale of each
approved lot in the subdivision. If partial payments are to be made, each
payment shall be prorated in value relative to the number of approved
lots in the subdivision.
g. When fractional payments are provided in lieu of open space land, the
subdivider shall provide a performance guarantee under Section 6.03 or
shall execute a mortgage securing the fee-in-lieu-of-open space and
such mortgage shall be recorded on the Town of New Canaan Land Records
with a first priority and a form and substance acceptable to the
Town Attorney. Partial releases shall be provided upon the tender of
each fractional payment.
7. Modification of Open Space Reservation
In accordance with CGS Section 8-25, as amended, the open space reservation
requirement shall not apply if:
a. the transfer of all land is in a subdivision of less than five (5) parcels and
is to a parent, child, brother, sister, grandparent, grandchild, aunt, uncle,
or first cousin of the transferor for no consideration, or
b. the subdivision contains affordable housing as defined in CGS Section 8-
39a equal to twenty percent (20%) or more of the total housing to be
constructed in such subdivision.
Article 3.00 - PARCEL AND LOT REQUIREMENTS
18 Effective - December 2, 2008
3.05 SOLAR ACCESS
1. Energy-efficient patterns of development and land use, the use of solar and
other renewable forms of energy, and energy conservation are encouraged.
2. The subdivider shall consider using solar energy techniques and site design
techniques which would not significantly increase the cost of the housing to
the buyer, after tax credits, subsidies and exemptions, and that have the potential
to:
a. maximize solar heat gain, minimize heat loss, and provide thermal storage
within a building during the heating season, and
b. minimize heat gain and provide for natural cooling during the cooling
season.
3. The site design techniques shall include, but not be limited to:
a. house orientation,
b. street and lot layout,
c. vegetation,
d. natural and man-made topographic features,
e. protection of solar access within the subdivision.
4. As part of the application, the subdivider shall demonstrate that these techniques
have been considered and employed, as appropriate.
3.06 DRIVEWAYS
1. Lots shall be laid out so that:
a. each lot is served by a driveway,
b. the driveway conforms to the requirements of the Zoning Regulations
(ZR Section 6.9) and other municipal regulations, and
c. the driveway serving each lot has access to a local street or to an accessway,
and not to a major street carrying general traffic except:
• where the lot fronts only on the major street, or
• such access is not, in the sole opinion of the Commission, feasible or
appropriate.
2. Any driveway shall be constructed in accordance with Chapter 54 of the
Town Code.
Article 3.00 - PARCEL AND LOT REQUIREMENTS
Effective - December 2, 2008 19
3.07 ACCESSWAYS
1. The Commission may authorize the use of an accessway to serve land that
would otherwise be landlocked provided that the aims and purposes of these
regulations are furthered by their use.
2. An accessway shall not serve more than two (2) residential lots unless the
Commission has granted a modification in accordance with Section 1.05 of
these Regulations.
3. Where so authorized, any accessway shall meet the following requirements
unless modified by the Commission in order to protect natural features, community
resources, or cultural resources:
a. the accessway shall be at least twenty-five (25) feet wide.
b. the traveled way shall be at least twelve (12) feet wide if serving one (1)
lot, and at least sixteen (16) feet wide if serving two (2) lots.
c. the traveled way shall be constructed with a gravel base at least twelve
(12) inches in thickness or eight (8) inches of approved processed stone
after compaction and a common traveled way shall be hard-surfaced.
d. the maximum slope shall be not greater than fifteen percent (15%), and a
vertical sight distance over a hill shall not be less than fifty (50) feet.
e. a minimum radius of fifty (50) feet will be required on all curves, as
measured from the center of all accessways.
4. Where two (2) accessways abut one another, the Commission may require
the installation of a common traveled way in lieu of two (2) separate traveled
ways.
5. Each lot owner depending upon an accessway for access to a street must
either own in fee simple a proportioned part of the accessway or have a permanent
easement over it and the Commission may require verification of
such ownership or easement.
6. Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for any building served by
an accessway, construction of the accessway shall be substantially complete
to the satisfaction of the Town Engineer with completion of the remaining improvements
guaranteed by a performance guarantee.
7. An emergency pull-off area may be required by the Commission based on
the length and width of the proposed accessway.
Article 3.00 - PARCEL AND LOT REQUIREMENTS
20 Effective - December 2, 2008
3.08 TREE PLANTING
1. Unless waived by the Commission due to the preservation of existing healthy
trees or inappropriate topographic or geologic conditions, trees shall be
planted on both sides of the street in each subdivision.
2. A planting plan showing the proposed location of tree planting shall be submitted
for approval by the Commission.
3. Trees to be planted shall:
a. be located approximately fifty (50) feet apart, subject to variations made
necessary by existing vegetation, driveways and street corners as well
as by the species of trees planted.
b. be located within ten (10) feet of the edge of the pavement unless modified
by the Commission due to possible interference with wetlands, watercourses,
topography, soils, scenic views, intersection sight lines, winter
conditions, or underground or overhead utilities.
c. be an indigenous tree species approved by the Commission.
d. be two (2) inch caliper or larger.
e. be planted and protected during street construction using good horticultural
practices.
Article 4.00 - INFRASTRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS
Effective - December 2, 2008 21
ARTICLE 4.00
INFRASTRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS
4.01 STREETS
1. Overall Layout
a. Proposed streets shall be planned and designed in harmony with existing
and proposed streets as shown in the Plan of Conservation and Development
or by the Commission through its own deliberations particularly
with regard to location, extent, and classification of streets.
b. Proposed streets shall be designed and constructed to provide a safe
and convenient system for prospective traffic and for continuation onto
adjoining properties when subdivided.
c. Proposed streets shall have at least one intersection with a State Highway,
an existing Town street, or a proposed Town street which has been
approved by the Commission and has a performance guarantee on file
with the Town in accordance with these Regulations.
d. In general, proposed streets shall be designed to follow the contour of
the land with consideration given to preserving natural features, community
resources, and cultural resources.
2. Street Design and Construction Standards
a. Proposed streets shall be laid out, designed and constructed in accordance
with the requirements of Chapter 54 of the Town Code and any
other applicable regulations. In the event there is any conflict between
regulations, the higher standard shall prevail.
b. Where a subdivision has frontage on an existing Town street or State
highway that does not meet the appropriate roadway requirements or
design standards or has a dangerous condition, the Commission:
i. shall require that the subdivider dedicate the required right-of-way
and any appurtenant slope or other easements to the Town or appropriate
agency along the frontage of the subdivision owned or controlled
by the subdivider to correct the deficiency, and
ii. may require that the subdivider evaluate and determine the improvements
required to meet the appropriate roadway requirements
or design standards or resolve a dangerous condition and propose a
resolution wherein the roadway deficiency will be addressed.
c. Curbs shall be required on all streets except where the Commission,
upon recommendation of the Town Engineer, finds them to be unnecessary
or undesirable.
d. In the event that a proposed street crosses a gas transmission line, the
Commission shall not approve the street layout until evidence satisfactory
to the Commission is presented showing that the pipe line will be
adequately reinforced in accordance with standards as may be established
by the pipeline owner and federal and state regulations.
Article 4.00 - INFRASTRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS
22 Effective - December 2, 2008
3. Intersection Design
a. Intersections of streets shall be at angles as close to ninety degrees
(90°) as possible. A street which approaches another street at an
oblique angle should be curved so that the intersection may be at a right
angle, as nearly as practicable, for a distance of fifty (50) feet. Wherever
two (2) streets intersect at an angle smaller than seventy-five degrees
(75°), the right-of-way returns and the relation of gutter slopes shall be
given special treatment, as determined by the Commission.
b. Multiple intersections at one location shall be avoided.
c. Except when the Commission finds conditions are present which justify a
variation from these requirements, the centerlines of intersecting streets
shall be spaced a minimum of:
i. 800 feet apart on an arterial street,
ii. 400 feet apart on a collector street,
iii. 200 feet apart on local streets when on the same side of the street,
and
iv. 150 feet apart on local streets when on the opposite side of the
street.
d. Proposed streets shall intersect other streets such that the pavement
slope on the proposed street shall not exceed two (2) percent within fifty
(50) feet of the intersection unless otherwise approved by the Commission
on the recommendation of the Town Engineer.
e. Proposed streets shall intersect other streets that the centerline of the
proposed street shall be a straight line for a distance of at least 100 feet
from the intersecting street lines unless otherwise approved by the
Commission on the recommendation of the Town Engineer.
f. Intersections shall have unobstructed view from a driver’s eye (located at
a height of 3.5 feet above the surface of the proposed street and a location
twenty feet (20’) back from the edge of the travel way of the intersected
street) along both directions of the intersected street that is in
conformance with current CTDOT and AASHTO standards for the 85th
percentile speed. The “desirable” sight distance shall be provided whenever
possible and no street shall be approved that does not provide for
the “minimum” sight distance. Such sight distance shall not be impaired
by curvature or slope, except in extreme conditions, in which case adequate
alternative safety measures shall be designated.
g. At a street intersection, no obstruction to sight over three (3) feet in
height from street grade shall be allowed within 25 feet of the lot line intersection.
Article 4.00 - INFRASTRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS
Effective - December 2, 2008 23
4. Dead-End Street Length Limitation
a. Unless otherwise approved by
the Commission, no permanent
dead-end street shall be
created that:
i. is less than 250 feet in
length, or
ii. exceeds 1,800 feet in
length measured from the
nearest intersection,
whether inside or outside
the subdivision, that has
two means of access and
egress.
b. A greater length may be permitted by the Commission, in its sole discretion,
due to adverse topographic or soil conditions, difficult site configuration,
future street extension, or similar circumstances.
5. Turnaround Design
a. A permanent dead-end street shall termi- Permanent Dead-End
nate in a turnaround right-of-way that is at
least 100 feet in width with the outer
edges of the paved area at least 80 feet
apart.
b. The outer edge of such permanent turnaround
shall be located at least onehundred
(100) feet from the property line
of the overall parcel being subdivided or
the minimum lot depth prescribed by the
Zoning Regulations, whichever is greater.
c. The paved turnaround shall not exceed a slope of three percent (3%) measured
from the start of the turnaround to its end.
d. The Commission may require that pedestrian, drainage and/or utility easements
of appropriate width be provided from the terminus to the abutting
property line(s).
e. The Commission may allow alternative turnaround configurations (such as
landscaped center islands) in order to enhance the character of the community
when adequate provision has been made for long-term maintenance by
others than the Town of New Canaan.
Article 4.00 - INFRASTRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS
24 Effective - December 2, 2008
6. Street Extensions and Temporary Dead-End Streets
a. The arrangement of streets in a subdivision shall provide for the extension of
existing streets and for the future extension of proposed streets into abutting
property not yet subdivided, except where the Commission determines that
topography, soils or other conditions make such continuation impractical or
undesirable.
b. The Commission may require the subdivider to demonstrate the feasibility
and practicality of extending the proposed street onto or through adjacent
property to another street.
c. Unless otherwise approved by the Com- Temporary Dead-End
mission, any proposed subdivision street
which extends towards any undeveloped
land capable of being subdivided shall
have:
i. the full width of the right-of-way extended
to the property line of the subdivision
plus any grading rights required
for the future street,
ii. the paved area of a temporary turnaround
brought as close to the
boundary as is practical,
iii. temporary easements provided to the Town, where such easements
shall revert to the abutting property owners when the street is extended,
outside the standard right-of-way for:
i) the temporary turnaround area, and
ii) grading associated with the future street extension.
iv. a 10 foot paved spur extending from the turnaround area toward the undeveloped
land.
d. Unless otherwise approved by the Commission, any proposed future access
to abutting undeveloped property which is perpendicular to the proposed
street shall have:
i. the right-of-way deeded to the Town,
ii. the future roadway area graded with all slopes made necessary by
such street prepared and stabilized,
iii. no reserve strips left at the end or side of any access which adjoins
abutting property.
e. The subdivider of the adjoining land shall be responsible for:
i. preparing drawings showing and including all work required to connect
and complete the improvements and utilities between the existing
street and the proposed subdivision,
ii. removing all segments of any temporary turnaround or other temporary
improvements outside the normal paved surface and suitably
grading and seeding the ground at such time as the street is extended.
Article 4.00 - INFRASTRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS
Effective - December 2, 2008 25
7. Street Names
a. All streets shall be named and proposed street names:
i. shall be indicated on the subdivision plan and shall be approved by the
Commission,
ii. shall be selected so as to avoid similarity in spelling or sound with existing
private or public street names, and
iii. may be drawn to reflect on national, state or Town historical events and
personalities, and natural, aesthetic and historic features of the subdivision
area or its immediate environs.
b. The following street nomenclature is recommended:
i. Court or Place - a permanent dead-end street,
ii. Circle - a street that returns to its starting point of a street, both ends of
which intersect the same street at different locations,
iii. Drive or Lane - a local minor street,
iv. Road or Street - a major arterial or collector street or a street in a nonresidential
zone
8. Street Signs and Traffic Controls
a. Prior to Town acceptance of subdivision streets, the subdivider shall provide
and install at the subdivider’s sole cost and expense:
i. suitable traffic control devices and signs in accordance with the standards
set forth in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, and
ii. suitable permanent street name signs at all street intersections in accordance
with Town standards.
b. During street construction and prior to the issuance of any building permit,
temporary street name signs and suitable traffic control devices of a durable,
weatherproof material shall be installed by the subdivider at street intersections.
4.02 SIDEWALKS
1. The Commission may require that sidewalks be provided within subdivisions.
2. When required by the Commission, sidewalks shall be at least five (5) feet
wide and shall conform to Chapter 54 of the Town Code.
3. Sidewalks shall be built in compliance with the requirements of the Americans
with Disabilities Act (ADA).
Article 4.00 - INFRASTRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS
26 Effective - December 2, 2008
4.03 SEWERAGE
1. It is the responsibility of the subdivider to supply satisfactory evidence to the
Commission and the Director of Health that each lot will either be served by
the Town sewer system or that the lot will adequately satisfy the requirements
of the State Health Code for a sewerage system and not endanger
public health, safety or general welfare.
2. Where private sewage disposal is to be used, approval by the Director of
Health, as provided in Chapter 29 of the Town Code, must be obtained.
3. The Commission shall not approve any lot where insufficient evidence has
been provided with regard to sewerage disposal to satisfy the requirements
of the State Health Code.
4. Where Town sewers will be provided, all sewer mains and laterals within the
street right-of-way shall, where practicable, be installed prior to the final surfacing
of the street.
4.04 WATER
1. It is the responsibility of the subdivider to supply satisfactory evidence to the
Commission and the Director of Health that a potable water supply will be
provided for each lot.
2. In the event the proposed subdivision should or shall be served by a public
water supply system, provision shall be made for the installation of water
mains and fire hydrants within the proposed development.
3. Water mains shall be installed parallel to and at a fixed distance from the
center line of the street.
4. In accordance with CGS Section 8-25a, any subdivision using water supplied
by a water company incorporated on or after October 1, 1984 shall not be
approved unless such company has been issued a certificate pursuant to
CGS Section 16-262m.
5. The Commission shall not approve any lot where insufficient evidence has
been provided with regard to water supply to satisfy the requirements of the
State Health Code.
6. Where public water will be provided, all water lines and supply connections
within the street right-of-way shall, where practicable, be installed prior to the
final surfacing of the street.
Article 4.00 - INFRASTRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS
Effective - December 2, 2008 27
4.05 STORM DRAINAGE
1. General
a. The subdivider shall be responsible for constructing adequate facilities for
the control, collection, treatment, conveyance and acceptable disposal of
storm water, other surface water and subsurface water, whether originating
in the subdivision or in a tributary drainage area.
b. All drainage facilities shall be designed by a Connecticut licensed professional
engineer and shall be subject to the approval of the Town Engineer
and the Commission.
2. Design of Drainage Facilities
a. Storm drainage facilities shall be constructed in accordance with Town Construction
Standards and Specifications, unless modified by the Commission
with the approval of the Town Engineer.
b. Drainage facilities shall be laid out so as to provide positive drainage away
from all buildings and to prevent ponding of water after construction of
streets, drainage and buildings are completed. All driveways shall be designed
to have appropriate drainage in order to minimize discharge of water
to the Town street, right-of-way, and adjacent property.
c. Drainage shall be designed so as to comply with drainage policies of the
Town of New Canaan (such as the Drainage Certification Policy dated July
22, 1999, as amended) and:
i. to avoid or prevent any increase in the rate of storm water runoff from the
property,
ii. to the extent required by the Town Engineer, to minimize any increase in
the amount of storm water runoff from the property, and
iii. to the extent required by the Town Engineer, to minimize any increase in
the concentration of storm water runoff from the property.
d. The design and construction of storm drainage facilities shall:
i. be adequate for present and potential future uses based upon the maximum
ultimate development of the upstream watershed as permitted under
existing Zoning Regulations,
ii. not cause flooding of abutting property from the headwater and backwater
produced by bridges, culverts, and other structures,
iii. eliminate standing or stagnant water within the limits of the proposed
subdivision unless such condition is specifically approved by the Commission
as part of a stormwater management plan except that this requirement
shall not authorize any activity in regulated wetland, watercourse,
or vernal pool areas unless specifically approved by the Environmental
Commission.
iv. make proper provision (including easements or manholes) for drainage
from development of adjacent properties, and
v. not divert water from one watershed to another without a State permit.
Article 4.00 - INFRASTRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS
28 Effective - December 2, 2008
e. The design engineer shall prepare a pre-development analysis and a postdevelopment
analysis of storm water runoff from the site and shall:
i. submit such calculations for a 2-year, a 5-year, a 10-year, a 25-year, a
50-year, and a 100-year storm, and
ii. demonstrate, unless specifically approved by the Commission, that there
will be no increase in the peak rate of storm water runoff from the development
based on a 25-year storm frequency with a duration of 24 hours.
f. Where detention/retention basins are provided or are required by the Town
Engineer, hydrographs shall be generated to document overall flows through
the basin.
g. All drainage design formulas and analyses shall adhere to acceptable engineering
practice and the calculations and their method of derivation shall be
indicated as part of the application.
h. The following information shall be submitted to the Commission:
i. plan showing watershed areas for each structure,
ii. calculations showing the design criteria used for each pipe length, and
iii. information showing that drainage pipes will provide a self-cleansing velocity
of at least 2.5 feet per second when flowing full.
i. Rainfall intensities used for storm drainage design shall be taken from the
U.S. Weather Bureau “Rainfall Intensity - Duration Frequency Curves” for the
nearest rain gauge.
j. Drainage structures shall be designed to accommodate the following storm
frequency:
i. a 25-year storm frequency for streets within the subdivision and detention/
retention on individual lots (including catch basins, inlets, pipes, underdrains
and gutters)
ii. a 100-year storm frequency for culverts, bridges through watercourses,
and detention/retention basins.
Article 4.00 - INFRASTRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS
Effective - December 2, 2008 29
3. Drainage Facilities
a. Swales or ditches may be used for drainage if approved by the Town Engineer
and designed and constructed to minimize soil erosion and danger to
public health or safety. Proposed surface drainage and stream structures
shall be designed in accordance with the Connecticut Erosion and Sedimentation
Control Manual (2002), as amended.
b. Drainage facilities located within the street right-of-way shall be enclosed in
suitable conduits, where necessary or desirable. Long, diagonal drainage
crossings under the pavement that can cause differential street settling shall
be avoided. Where a development connects to existing streets, the subdivider
shall provide appropriate drainage at the intersections.
c. Drainage facilities outside of the street right-of-way shall be:
i. enclosed in suitable underground pipes wherever desirable, and
ii. located in perpetual, unobstructed drainage easements deeded to the
Town of New Canaan and such easements shall be of adequate width
centered on the pipe and, where possible, centered on property lines.
d. Where it is necessary to discharge storm water across private property not
included in the subdivision, the subdivider shall obtain, in writing, permanent
drainage rights in favor of the Town for flows across adjacent properties. If
the system is to be accepted by the Town, the rights for the Town to enter
and maintain existing or proposed facilities shall be included. The subdivider
shall submit copies of such agreement to the Commission prior to final approval
of the subdivision. Such drainage easements shall be shown on the
subdivision plan and filed on the Land Records.
e. When provided, the first set of catch basins in a storm drain system shall be
located a maximum of 350 feet from the roadway high point.
f. Spacing between sets of catch basins shall be a maximum of 300 feet unless
closer spacing is required by the Town Engineer based on a gutter flow
analysis.
g. A drainage structure shall also be placed along a storm drain at each vertical
grade change, at each change in horizontal direction, and at each junction
point of two or more storm drains.
h. Unless modified by the Town Engineer, the minimum pipe size for all storm
drain systems constructed under these Regulations shall be 12-inch inside
diameter.
i. The material for all storm drain systems constructed under these Regulations
shall be reinforced concrete, except that the Town Engineer may allow the
use of High Density Polyethylene (HDPE) in appropriate circumstances.
j. Unless modified by the Town Engineer, a minimum cover of two (2) feet shall
be provided for all storm drains.
k. Proper bedding, grading, and cover shall be provided around and for all
drainage structures.
Article 4.00 - INFRASTRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS
30 Effective - December 2, 2008
4. Drainage Outlets and Channels
a. All storm drain system outlets shall be terminated with an approved outlet
structure and stabilized as necessary. Easements for outlet pipes shall extend
to a suitable existing storm drain or a natural watercourse. No storm
drain system shall discharge into a natural watercourse, without the approval
of the Environmental Commission. No storm drain system shall outlet into a
natural watercourse, whether continually flowing or intermittent, so as to exceed
the capacity of the watercourse.
b. A two-stage detention basin may be required by the Commission if recommended
by the Town Engineer to prevent silting of streams, wetlands, or
other areas contiguous to the drainage outfall and/or to reduce the rate of
runoff to pre-construction conditions.
c. When drainage outlets or channels are required by the Commission for
drainage purposes, the subdivider shall provide the Town a plan and any required
rights-of-way for long-term maintenance.
5. Private Drains
a. The size and location of all private storm drains that connect to the Town
storm drain system shall be approved by the Town Engineer prior to installation.
Yard, cellar, or foundation drains that connect to the storm drainage
system shall be shown on the final “as-built” plan of the drainage system.
b. For any such private storm drain, the subdivider shall file an indemnity agreement
with the Commission to be filed on the Land Records and run with the
land, relieving the Town of responsibility and liability, and from repair or relocation
costs, for:
i. any stoppage in the public storm water drain or any back-flow therefrom;
ii. any breakage or stoppage occurring in the connection line;
iii. any change in road grade or any relocation of the road which will cause
the connection to become inoperative;
iv. any relocation or abandonment of the storm water drain; and
v. any damages caused by any failure of the private storm water drainage
system.
c. The property owner(s) shall be responsible for paying for any repair and relocation
costs relating to the private storm drainage.
d. All sanitary waste shall be prohibited from entering the storm drainage system.
Article 4.00 - INFRASTRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS
Effective - December 2, 2008 31
4.06 WIRE UTILITIES
1. New electric, telephone, television cable and other utility wires shall be installed
underground unless the Commission determines, based on a written
report submitted by the subdivider and reviewed by the Town Engineer, that
such underground installation is inappropriate or infeasible for all or a part of
the subdivision or resubdivision after considering:
a. the type of service existing in the area adjacent to the subdivision,
b. topographic and construction conditions, and
c. the size of the subdivision or resubdivision.
2. All utility pipes and conduits shall be installed in the side strips of the Town
right-of-way wherever possible and such pipes and conduits shall be installed
prior to final surfacing of the street.
3. Any utility located outside of the Town right-of-way shall be located in an
easement adequate in width to allow for present or future connections or extensions
of such utilities and for the maintenance thereof.
4. All utilities associated with the subdivision shall be installed at the subdivider’s
expense prior to acceptance of the street by the Town. Electric, telephone,
cable television, and any other utilities shall be installed in proposed
and existing streets as specified by the appropriate utility company and shall
be subject to the inspection and acceptance of such company and the Town
Engineer.
5. All utilities must be located and mapped on an as-built drawing prior to acceptance
of the street by the Town.
4.07 STREET LIGHTING
1. Where required by the Commission, street-lighting poles and fixtures shall be
of a design approved by the Commission and shall be placed in a manner
and location approved by the Commission.
2. All street lighting associated with the subdivision shall be installed at the subdivider’s
expense prior to acceptance of the street by the Town.
Article 4.00 - INFRASTRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS
32 Effective - December 2, 2008
4.08 FIRE PROTECTION
1. Wherever public water service is available, each subdivider shall, unless
such requirement is modified by the Commission under Section 1.05, provide
fire hydrants to protect public safety as required by Section 4.04 of these
Regulations.
2. Where public water service is not available or provided, each subdivider
shall, unless such requirement is modified by the Commission under Section
1.05, provide supplemental water supply system(s) to protect public safety.
3. Such supplemental water supply system(s) may, with approval of the Commission,
consist of:
a. hydrant(s) to existing or proposed fire ponds,
b. hydrant(s) to underground cistern(s),
c. residential sprinkler systems,
d. a fee-in-lieu of a supplemental water system in the amount of ten thousand
dollars ($10,000) per lot to be deposited in a municipal account
dedicated to providing supplemental water supply systems in the community,
and/or
e. other mechanisms acceptable to the Commission to provide for supplemental
fire protection (such as an easement for future installation of an
underground cistern).
4. Facilities for fire protection shall be sized and constructed in accordance with
NFPA Standard 1141 - “Fire Protection in Planned Building Groups” and
NFPA Standard 1231 - “Standard on Water Supplies for Suburban and Rural
Firefighting”, as amended.
5. The Town Engineer shall, in conjunction with the Fire Marshal, make recommendations
to the Commission regarding the proposed location, size, design,
construction specifications, and installation of such supplemental water
supply system(s) and access thereto.
6. The land area containing any supplemental water supply system(s) shall be
easily accessible by emergency personnel and shall, as necessary, be encumbered
by easements approved by the Town Attorney to ensure the
Town’s perpetual right to access, maintain, and or improve any supplemental
water supply system(s) and access thereto for firefighting purposes, and obligate
the property owners not to inhibit the use of the fire protection facility
for firefighting purposes without the approval of the Fire Marshal.
7. The Commission may require the use of landscaping or other materials to
screen access routes, pipes, or other structures associated with the installation
of supplemental water supply system(s). Such landscaping or other materials
shall be approved by the Fire Marshal.
8. All fire protection measures required by the Commission and the Fire Department:
a. may be required to be installed prior to issuance of a building permit for
any dwelling in the subdivision, and
b. shall be completed prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for
any dwelling in the subdivision.
Article 5.00 - APPLICATION PROCEDURES
Effective - December 2, 2008 33
ARTICLE 5.00
APPLICATION PROCEDURES
5.01 GENERAL
1. Any subdivision or resubdivision application shall be accompanied by forms,
fees, maps, plans, profiles and all additional documentation, information and
reports as prescribed in these Regulations.
2. Plans submitted under these Regulations shall be prepared by the following
person or persons:
Stage Type of Design Type of Person
Preliminary
Plan
Schematic / conceptual design. A registered professional engineer,
licensed land surveyor,
architect, land planner, landscape
architect, or other qualified
individual.
Formal Application
Delineation of the boundary lines
of the outside perimeter of a parcel
as well as the interior lots and
streets.
Sealed by a Connecticut licensed
land surveyor
Design of streets, drainage systems,
sanitary sewer systems,
sewage disposal systems, and
water supply and distribution.
Sealed by a Connecticut licensed
engineer
3. Each application shall be signed by the owner of record or his/her duly authorized
agent or representative. If the application is signed by an agent or
representative, a written instrument evidencing the agent's authority to apply
must accompany the application.
4. All applications shall be submitted to the Planning and Zoning Office during
regular working hours. The application shall be dated as of the actual date
submitted.
5. The Commission retains the right to have any information submitted with regard
to an application reviewed by Town staff or officials, and to consult with
any other qualified agency or person as, in the opinion of the Commission,
may be advisable for their information, review and recommendations. In accordance
with CGS Section 8-1c and any Municipal Land Use Fee Ordinance,
the subdivider may be required to compensate the Town for any review
fees and related expenses.
6. Submission of a subdivision application shall be deemed permission for the
Commission and the Town or their agents or representatives to enter the
property for the purposes of:
a. reviewing the proposed subdivision,
b. inspecting the property and any proposed improvements,
c. installing the proposed and required improvements in the event of failure
of the subdivider to make such improvements or properly maintain them
until the Town has assumed responsibility for them.
Article 5.00 - APPLICATION PROCEDURES
34 Effective - December 2, 2008
5.02 PRELIMINARY PLAN PROCEDURE
1. The Commission encourages informal discussion of the general design of
the subdivision and its improvements to assure coordination with the Plan of
Conservation and Development and these Regulations in order to prevent
undue delay or extensive modification to a Final Plan.
2. The Preliminary Subdivision Plan procedure is suggested to prospective subdividers,
their agents or engineers, so that they may discuss the design of
the subdivision in the formative stages with the Commission and other Town
officials.
3. Since the procedure is a review of a conceptual design and a pre-application
process:
a. receipt of materials shall not constitute a “formal application,”
b. any discussion or opinions rendered are advisory only and are not binding
on the Commission or the potential subdivider and shall not be the
basis for a claim of predetermination by the Commission.
4. Three copies of materials as described in the Appendix of these Regulations
shall be submitted to the Commission, and the potential subdivider shall be
advised of the date to appear at a meeting of the Commission for informal
review and comment.
5.03 FORMAL SUBDIVISION APPLICATION
1. A formal application for subdivision or resubdivision shall include the following:
a. one (1) copy of the prescribed application form, fully and properly completed
and executed.
b. the required application processing fee.
c. plans and other documents as required by the Appendix of these Regulations
or as required by the Commission.
2. The Commission may require the submission of:
a. funds to compensate the Commission for any costs of review or guidance
as authorized by CGS Section 8-1c and any Municipal Land Use
Fee Ordinance,
b. evidence of application to CTDOT seeking approval of access onto any
State Highway or discharge of drainage into a State system or onto State
property,
c. a detailed statement of the estimated cost of constructing the proposed
subdivision streets, accessways and other improvements,
d. any proposed grant or grants to the Town, in form satisfactory to Town
Attorney, including any required easements for drainage access, utility,
or other purposes,
e. any additional information and data as may be required from the subdivider
in order to establish that the proposed subdivision complies with
these Regulations,
f. additional copies of application materials as necessary for review by the
Commission or other Town agencies.
Article 5.00 - APPLICATION PROCEDURES
Effective - December 2, 2008 35
5.04 RECEIPT AND SCHEDULING
1. If a formal application for subdivision approval involves land regulated as an
inland wetland or watercourse, the subdivider is encouraged to acquire permits
and approvals from the Environmental Commission prior to submission
to the Commission. In any event, the subdivider shall submit an application
to the Environmental Commission no later than the date the application is
filed with the Commission.
2. The date of receipt of an application shall be the date of the next regularly
scheduled meeting immediately following the day of submission of such application
or 35 days after submission, whichever is sooner.
3. The Commission shall not be required to consider an application for approval
of a subdivision plan while another application for subdivision of the same or
substantially the same parcel is pending before the Commission.
4. Upon receipt of an application for subdivision or a resubdivision, the Commission
shall schedule a public hearing.
5. The Commission may require field staking of proposed improvements, such
as proposed streets and accessways, for visual inspection. Such stakes
shall be installed at intervals of fifty (50) feet along the center lines. The
Commission or its agent shall retain the right to field-check and inspect the
layout prior to acting on the proposed subdivision.
6. At any time following the submission of an application and prior to final action
by the Commission, an application may be withdrawn by filing with the Commission
a written request to that effect.
5.05 NOTICE PROVISIONS
1. The subdivider shall send, by certified mail, written notice of the date and
subject matter of the public hearing to the owners of all land within Connecticut
located within one hundred (100) feet of the subject property at least ten
(10) days prior to the date of the first public hearing. Prior to or at the public
hearing, the subdivider shall deliver to the Commission proof of mailing of
such written notice.
2. In accordance with CGS 8-26b, when any proposed subdivision or resubdivision
will abut land in another Connecticut municipality or include land in two
(2) or more Connecticut municipalities:
a. the Commission shall give written notice of such subdivision plan to the
regional planning agency or agencies in which it or the other municipality
is located by certified mail, return receipt requested not later than thirty
days before the date of the first public hearing to be held in relation
thereto,
b. a regional planning agency receiving such notice shall, at or before the
hearing, report to the Commission and to the subdivider on its findings
on the inter-municipal aspects of the proposed subdivision, including
street layout, storm drainage, sewer and water service and such other
matters as it considers appropriate.
c. if the report of a regional planning agency is not submitted at or before
the hearing, it shall be presumed that such agency does not disapprove
of the proposed subdivision.
Article 5.00 - APPLICATION PROCEDURES
36 Effective - December 2, 2008
3. In accordance with CGS 8-7d(f), the Commission shall:
a. notify the clerk of any adjoining Connecticut municipality by certified mail,
return receipt requested, within seven (7) days of the date of receipt of
an application concerning any project on any site in which:
i. any portion of the property affected by the decision of the Commission
is within five-hundred (500) feet of the boundary of the adjoining
municipality,
ii. a significant portion of the traffic to the completed project on the site
will use streets within the adjoining municipality to enter or to exit the
site,
iii. a significant portion of the sewer or water drainage from the project
on the site will flow through and significantly impact the drainage or
sewerage system within the adjoining municipality, or
iv. water run-off from the improved site will impact streets or other municipal
or private property within the adjoining municipality.
b. No hearing shall be conducted on any application unless the adjoining
municipality has received the notice required hereunder.
c. Such adjoining municipality may, through a representative, appear and
be heard at any hearing on any such application.
4. The Commission may require that the subdivider post a notice on the property,
facing the principal street giving access thereto, stating that an application
for subdivision of the property has been submitted to the Commission
and that the application may be inspected in the office of the Town Planner.
5.06 PUBLIC HEARINGS
1. In accordance with CGS 8-7d, when a hearing is to be held on an application,
such hearing shall:
a. commence within sixty-five (65) days after receipt of such petition, application,
or request, and
b. be completed within thirty-five (35) days after such hearing commences,
unless a shorter period of time is required.
2. In accordance with CGS 8-7d, notice of the hearing shall be published in a
newspaper having a general circulation in New Canaan at least twice at intervals
of not less than two days, the first not more than fifteen days, nor less
than ten days, and the last not less than two days before the date set for the
hearing.
3. All applications and maps and documents relating thereto shall be open for
public inspection.
4. At such hearing any person or persons may appear and be heard and may
be represented by agent or by attorney.
Article 5.00 - APPLICATION PROCEDURES
Effective - December 2, 2008 37
5.07 APPLICATION PROCESSING AND ACTION
1. The Commission shall act upon an application by approving, modifying and
approving, or disapproving the application.
2. Such action on an application shall be rendered within sixty-five (65) days
after completion of the public hearing unless a shorter or longer period of
time is required or allowed pursuant to CGS Section 8-7d, as amended.
3. The subdivider may consent to one or more extensions of any period specified,
provided the total extension of all such periods shall not be for longer
than sixty-five (65) days.
4. In making its decision, the Commission shall give due consideration to the
material contained in the record.
5. Any action by the Commission shall:
a. set forth the reasons for approval or disapproval,
b. set forth any conditions to which the approval is subject, and
c. be stated on the Commission's records.
6. As provided in CGS Section 8-26, as amended, a subdivision plan shall be
taken as approved by reasons of the Commission’s failure to act in accordance
with the statutory timeframe and a certificate to that effect shall be issued
by the Commission on demand.
7. Commission approval of the plans shall not be deemed an acceptance by the
Town of any street or other land shown as offered for dedication to public
use.
8. The Commission shall cause notice of its action to be:
a. delivered to the subdivider by certified mail,
b. posted in the Office of the Town Clerk, and
c. published in a newspaper having substantial circulation in New Canaan
as provided in CGS Section 8-26.
9. If the Commission fails to cause notice of its action to be published as provided
in CGS Section 8-26 (within fifteen days after a decision has been rendered),
the subdivider may publish such notice within ten (10) days thereafter.
Article 5.00 - APPLICATION PROCEDURES
38 Effective - December 2, 2008
(this page intentionally left blank)
Article 6.00 - POST-APPROVAL PROCEDURES
Effective - December 2, 2008 39
ARTICLE 6.00
POST- APPROVAL PROCEDURES
6.01 FINALIZING APPROVED PLANS
1. Based upon the resolution of approval or the resolution of modification and
approval, the subdivider shall have the subdivision plan and supporting plans
revised to conform to any modifications called for in the Commission’s action.
No subdivision plan shall be signed by the Commission Chairman or Secretary
until all applicable conditions of approval have been met.
2. After approval by the Commission, no other changes, erasures, modifications
or revisions shall be made in any subdivision plan or supporting plans without
the express written consent of the Commission.
3. The subdivider shall then submit:
a. three (3) paper sets and one (1) mylar set of the approved plans, with
any required modifications, to the Commission for signature,
b. a performance guarantee or other acceptable surety in a form acceptable
to the Town Attorney and an amount approved by the Town Engineer,
c. filing fees as required to place the documents on the Land Records,
d. one (1) electronic copy of all drawings and data of the approved subdivision
in a format acceptable to the Public Works Department (AutoCad),
and
e. one (1) electronic copy of all drawings of the approved subdivision in a
format acceptable to the Planning and Zoning Department (GIS).
4. The subdivider shall also submit, in a form satisfactory to the Town Attorney:
a. any required grant or grants to the Town in executed form,
b. any required easements for drainage, access, utility, or other purposes in
executed form,
c. a certificate of title indicating that any proposed conveyance is free of
encumbrances,
d. evidence of the signatory’s authority to sign on behalf of the grantor.
5. Such grants or easements shall not be recorded on the Land Records until
the Subdivision Plan shall have been filed on the Land Records, and until
any necessary action shall have been taken by any other appropriate Town
body or bodies.
6. Such final plans shall be submitted for Commission signature with adequate
time to allow the maps to be filed within the filing period (see Section 6.04) or
approval will be considered expired. The subdivider should allow at least ten
(10) working days within the filing period for the Commission to sign the mylar
plan(s) and for the mylar plan(s) to be filed with the Town Clerk.
Article 6.00 - POST-APPROVAL PROCEDURES
40 Effective - December 2, 2008
6.02 CANCELLATION OF APPROVAL
1. If approval of an application has been granted, a written request for cancellation
of such approval may be filed with the Commission by the owner of record
or his/her duly authorized agent.
2. A notice of cancellation shall be noted on the approved unrecorded map.
6.03 GUARANTEE FOR COMPLETION OF IMPROVEMENTS
1. To ensure satisfactory completion of required subdivision improvements or
other requirements of these Regulations, the Commission shall, prior to filing
of the subdivision plans on the Land Records:
a. accept a performance guarantee securing to the Town the satisfactory
construction and installation of such improvements and utilities,
b. authorize the filing of the plans with a conditional approval, or
c. acknowledge that no performance guarantee is required.
2. No construction activity of any kind, including the removal of trees, shall commence
until the corresponding performance guarantees (if required) shall
have been posted.
3. Performance Guarantee
a. No final subdivision plan shall be filed and no building permits shall be
issued until the Town Attorney, Chief Financial Officer, and Town Engineer
have reviewed the proposed performance guarantee and approved
it as to form, substance, and credit-worthiness, such as:
i. a passbook savings account from a financial institution approved by
the Chief Financial Officer provided:
a) such account shall be federally insured, and
b) the account shall only be in the name of the Town of New
Canaan.
ii. a certified check from a financial institution approved by the Chief Financial
Officer made payable only to the Town of New Canaan,
iii. a certificate of deposit from a financial institution approved by the
Chief Financial Officer provided:
a) such instrument shall be federally insured, and
b) the instrument shall only be in the name of the Town of New
Canaan.
iv. a money market account from a financial institution approved by the
Chief Financial Officer provided:
a) such account shall be federally insured, and
b) the account shall only be in the name of the Town of New
Canaan.
v. an unconditional irrevocable letter of credit substantially in the form
of Appendix E approved by the Chief Financial Officer and issued by
a financial institution authorized to do business in Connecticut naming
the Town as the sole beneficiary.
Article 6.00 - POST-APPROVAL PROCEDURES
Effective - December 2, 2008 41
b. The amount of the performance guarantee shall be equal to 110 percent
of the estimated cost of all public improvements. Public improvements
include, but are not limited to, the following:
i. The building of any streets, in accordance with specifications of the
Town,
ii. The installation of drainage, utilities, and other required or provided
items,
iii. Payments by the subdivider in lieu of open space requirements,
iv. Monumentation of subdivision streets and marking of lot corners with
pins,
v. All erosion control measures, including those measures specified in
the Erosion and Sediment Control Manual,
vi. Fire protection costs, and
vii. Any other costs as determined by the Town Engineer.
c. The Town Planner or Town Engineer may require that up to 20 percent
of the performance guarantee be in the form of a passbook savings account
or other cash equivalent in favor of the Town of New Canaan for
erosion and sediment control and other purposes.
d. An estimate of the cost of all public improvements shall be prepared by
the subdivider’s engineer and approved by the Town Engineer.
e. Each performance guarantee which has an expiration date shall include:
i. a provision that the performance guarantee shall not expire unless
the Commission or its designated agent has received written notice
of such expiration at least thirty (30) days but not more than forty-five
(45) days before such expiration is to occur, and
ii. a provision that, in case such notice is received, the Town may draw
without further condition the balance of the performance guarantee,
and
iii. a provision that, unless such notice is received, the performance
guarantee shall automatically be extended for periods of not less
than one year each year until all improvements or other requirements
of these regulations are completed.
f. Reduction in the amount of the performance guarantee may be considered
by the Commission for the completed public improvements provided
that the performance guarantee shall not be reduced below
twenty-five percent (25%) of the original amount of the performance
guarantee.
g. Any interest or dividend accruing on any account or instrument shall accrue
in the name of the subdivider and such funds:
i. shall be deemed to increase the principal amount of the performance
guarantee, and
ii. may be used by the Town in the same manner as the principal.
h. Except to the extent that the proceeds from a performance guarantee
are actually used to satisfy obligations hereunder, the obligations under
these regulations are not satisfied by an inability of the Town to collect a
performance guarantee.
Article 6.00 - POST-APPROVAL PROCEDURES
42 Effective - December 2, 2008
6.04 FILING OF APPROVED PLANS
1. Once signed and authorized by the Chairman, the signed mylar set of the
approved plans shall be filed with the Town Clerk at the subdivider’s expense.
2. Unless otherwise provided by CGS Section 8-25 as amended, such plans
shall be filed in the Town Clerk’s office within ninety (90) days of the expiration
of the appeal period under CGS Section 8-8, or in the case of an appeal,
within ninety (90) days of the termination of such appeal by dismissal, withdrawal
or judgment in favor of the subdivider.
3. The Commission may extend the time for such filing for two (2) additional
periods of ninety (90) days, and the approval shall remain valid until the expiration
of such extended time.
4. Any plan not so filed or recorded within the prescribed time shall become null
and void.
5. In the event that any Subdivision Plan, when recorded, contains any changes
not approved or required by the Commission, the Plan shall be considered
null and void and the Commission may then file a notice with the Town Clerk
voiding the subdivision.
6. No building permits shall be issued for the approved subdivision until the approved
plans signed by the Chairman have been filed with the Town Clerk.
7. The filing of an approved subdivision plan in the Office of the Town Clerk:
a. shall constitute an irrevocable offer of dedication to the Town for acceptance
as a street of any land shown as a street on such plan,
b. shall constitute an irrevocable offer to the Town for the dedication of land
for easements or other public use as shown on such plan,
c. shall be binding upon the owner of such land, his heirs, successors and
assigns, and
d. shall not obligate the Town to accept or not to accept such dedication(s).
e. The procedure for acceptance of any street shall be as determined by
the Town of New Canaan.
8. All expenses for the preparation of instruments, plans and profiles, and for
the recording and filing of the approved plan and for the publication of the required
legal notices shall be borne by the subdivider.
Article 6.00 - POST-APPROVAL PROCEDURES
Effective - December 2, 2008 43
6.05 CONSTRUCTION - EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL
1. In order to minimize erosion and sedimentation resulting from development,
any subdivider shall adhere to the erosion and sedimentation control standards
set forth in the:
a. New Canaan Zoning Regulations,
b. “Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control (2002),”
as amended, and
c. “Connecticut Stormwater Quality Manual (2004)”, as amended.
2. A soil erosion and sediment control plan and narrative shall:
a. be provided as part of any application,
b. contain provisions to control accelerated erosion and sedimentation, and
c. reduce the danger from storm water runoff on the proposed site based
on the best available technology.
3. In the event that soil erosion and sediment control measures are not being
satisfactorily implemented, the Town Planner or his authorized agent may:
a. issue a cease and desist order,
b. order in writing the remedying of any condition found to be contrary to
these Regulations or the certified Control Plan,
c. redeem the performance guarantee in order to rectify erosion and sediment
control issues at the site.
.
4. A soil erosion and sediment control performance guarantee may be required
as per Section 6.03.3.c of these Regulations.
6.06 CONSTRUCTION - CLEARING AND GRADING
1. Clearing of vegetation shall be kept to a minimum and shall not occur until:
a. erosion and sediment control measures are in place, and
b. a soil erosion and sediment control performance guarantee has been
provided (if required) as per Section 6.03.3.c of these Regulations.
2. Tree stumps, logs, shrubs, other decomposable material or building debris
shall not be used as fill material and the burial of such materials shall be
prohibited within the limits of the proposed subdivision.
3. When rocks or boulders are used for fill, they shall be:
a. located only in areas of the lot where they shall not adversely affect foundations,
septic systems, drainage facilities, water supply systems, fire
protection systems, or underground utilities, and
b. so deposited that, in the opinion of the Town Engineer, voids likely to
cause undue soil settling will not be created.
4. Where filling of lots for final grading is required, compactable fill, and topsoil
as required for lawn or plant growth, shall be used.
5. The slope of final graded areas shall comply with the provisions in the Zoning
Regulations.
Article 6.00 - POST-APPROVAL PROCEDURES
44 Effective - December 2, 2008
6.07 CONSTRUCTION OF IMPROVEMENTS
1. The subdivider shall complete, at his own expense, all of the streets, street
and area drainage, sanitary and other improvements in accordance with the
Commission's decision and to the satisfaction of the Town Engineer.
2. All such improvements shall be constructed in accordance with
a. Town Standard Detail Drawings and Specifications existing as of the
date of approval of the Subdivision Plan, and
b. the construction standards contained in the Appendix to these Regulations.
6.08 INSPECTION OF IMPROVEMENTS
1. The improvements to be completed as part of the subdivision approval shall
be inspected by the Town Engineer or his authorized agent. In order to conduct
inspections, the Town Engineer or his authorized agent shall have free
access to the construction work at all times.
2. Prior to starting a project, the subdivider and all contractors and all subcontractors
shall meet with the Town Engineer to:
a. review job conditions,
b. advise the Town of the construction schedule,
c. review the New Canaan Roadway Construction Standards and Specifications
(if any),
d. obtain said Specifications for all contractors and subcontractors.
3. In the case of a new street or a change in an existing street, the work shall
be inspected at the following stages of construction:
a. Rough grading completed.
b. Drainage and all other underground facilities installed, and prior to backfilling.
c. Graveling and rolling being done.
d. A screened gravel topping being applied.
e. Binder course pavement being done.
f. Finish course pavement being done.
4. Notice for inspection shall be made at least 48 hours in advance. The subdivider
shall not proceed to work on any subsequent stage until such inspection
has been made by the Town Engineer or his authorized agent on the
preceding stage and approval in writing has been obtained on the preceding
stage.
5. In no case shall any paving work be done without permission from the Town
Engineer.
6. The Commission shall be authorized to take any material, samples, cores
and tests as deemed necessary to determine compliance with these Regulations.
The Commission may require the subdivider to pay to have such tests
made and certified by a professional engineer licensed to practice in the
State of Connecticut.
Article 6.00 - POST-APPROVAL PROCEDURES
Effective - December 2, 2008 45
7. Inspection by the Town Engineer or his authorized agent during development
shall ensure compliance with the approved plans.
8. If the Town Engineer or his authorized agent finds, upon inspection, that any
of the required improvements have not been constructed and maintained in
accordance with the approved plans, he shall notify the subdivider and the
Commission, in writing, and the subdivider shall be responsible for completing
or repairing said improvements according to specifications.
9. If unforeseen field conditions arise during construction (such as, but not limited
to, springs, ancient drains, side hill drainage from cuts, ledge rock or
other conditions not apparent at the time of the approval by the Commission)
which in the opinion of the Town Engineer require modification to the intended
construction procedure, the subdivider shall:
a. prepare and submit a proposed construction procedure in conformance
with accepted engineering practices to address the field conditions,
b. submit such procedure to the Town Engineer for review,
c. if required, provide a supplemental performance guarantee for the additional
work.
10. The Town Engineer shall maintain records of inspections in order to document
that the work is in accordance with the approved plans and specifications.
6.09 PERIOD FOR COMPLETION OF IMPROVEMENTS
1. The subdivision improvements shall be completed in accordance with the
statutory timeframe as provided in CGS Section 8-26c. The Commission’s
endorsement of approval on the plan shall state the date on which completion
period expires.
2. Planned soil erosion and sediment control measures and facilities shall be
installed as scheduled according to the certified plan and maintained in effective
condition to ensure the compliance with the certified plan.
3. The sub-grade, sub-base, pavement binder course, and all drainage required
for any proposed street shall be completed prior to issuance of any Certificate
of Occupancy for any structure served by such street.
4. Upon application by the subdivider, the Commission may make one or more
extensions of the time period for completion provided that:
a. the time for all extensions shall not exceed ten years from the date the
subdivision was approved,
b. the Commission may revise the amount of the performance guarantee
securing the actual completion of the work.
5. Expiration of the time period for completion shall:
a. result in automatic expiration of the approval of such plan provided the
Commission shall file notice on the Land Records of such expiration,
b. prevent the conveyance of any additional lots in the subdivision by the
subdivider or his/her successor in interest,
c. require a new application for subdivision approval of the subject land including
a new filing fee as well as a review of all previous findings.
Article 6.00 - POST-APPROVAL PROCEDURES
46 Effective - December 2, 2008
6. Until the improvements are accepted by the Town of New Canaan, the subdivider
shall maintain all improvements and provide for snow removal on
streets.
7. If the improvements are not maintained or snow removal is not provided and
the situation is not corrected within two (2) days following written notice from
the Commission to the subdivider, the Town may proceed to put the street or
other improvement into suitable condition and the cost of any such work shall
be a charge against the performance guarantee.
6.10 MONUMENTS AND MARKERS
1. The street lines of all new subdivision street shall be marked with stone or
concrete monuments set by a Connecticut-licensed surveyor.
2. Corners of all lots, open space, conservation easements, and other parcels
or areas shall be marked with a one (1) inch steel pipe or a 3/4-inch reinforcing
rod at least eighteen (18) inches long, or with stone or concrete monuments
and such markings shall be set by a Connecticut-licensed surveyor.
3. All open space and conservation areas shall be suitably identified with a conservation
marker.
4. Stone or concrete monuments along street lines shall be:
a. at least five (5) inches square by 30 inches in length with a suitable
marked top.
b. set flush with proposed grades and with the marked point set on the
point of reference.
c. installed at all points of curvature, all points of tangency, all angle
points and no more than 400 feet apart on straight sections of
streets.
d. indicated and located on the subdivision plan and as-built drawing.
5. All stone or concrete monuments shall be set in place at the subdivider’s expense
after all street construction is completed and prior to street acceptance
by the Town. The cost of installing monuments shall be included in the
performance guarantee as required by Section 6.03.
Article 6.00 - POST-APPROVAL PROCEDURES
Effective - December 2, 2008 47
6.11 FINAL ACCEPTANCE AND MAINTENANCE
1. For final acceptance of subdivision improvements, the subdivider shall submit
to the Commission:
a. a letter requesting a recommendation to the Board of Selectmen that the
Town accept the street(s),
b. one mylar and three paper copies of plans showing the "as-built" location
of all street and associated improvements approved by the Commission
or their authorized agent and where the as-built plans differ from the approved
construction plans due to field conditions or authorized changes,
c. a letter from a registered land surveyor certifying that all required monuments
and property corner pins are properly installed in the correct location,
d. a letter from the design engineer stating that all improvements, including
all street signs, stop signs, and traffic control signs and devices have
been installed or satisfactorily completed in accordance with the approved
plans or indicating where exceptions were made,
e. a letter from any companies providing utility services to the effect that
such utilities have been satisfactorily installed,
f. a maintenance performance guarantee as per Section 6.03 of these
Regulations to protect the Town against faulty construction and materials
that will remain in effect for a fourteen (14) month period after the Town
has accepted the public improvements,
g. a copy of all proposed deeds and easements to the Town and other information
as required for review and approval by the Town Attorney, if
not previously provided,
h. a copy of all other proposed deeds and easements to other parties that
are integral to public improvements or conditions of approval or the proposed
development for possible review by the Town Attorney.
2. The Commission or its authorized agent shall conduct a final inspection of all
improvements and utilities to evaluate the general condition of the site and
determine whether the work is satisfactory and in substantial agreement with
the approved final drawings and applicable regulations, ordinances, and
standards.
3. Any improper installations shall be reported to the Commission and remedied
by the subdivider. A report shall be submitted to the Commission.
4. If all items are satisfactory, the Commission shall recommend to the Board of
Selectmen that the street(s) be accepted.
5. If the Board of Selectmen agrees to accept the street(s), all executed deeds
and easements to the Town shall be submitted to the Planning and Zoning
Commission office for filing by the Town after the street acceptance.
6. The maintenance performance guarantee of at least ten (10) percent of the
original approved estimate of the cost of construction and installation of such
public improvements shall be in effect for a period of fourteen (14) months
from the date of acceptance of the subdivision improvements by the Town.
7. Once the public improvements are accepted by the Town and the maintenance
performance guarantee is in place, the Town shall release the performance
guarantee as set forth herein.
Article 6.00 - POST-APPROVAL PROCEDURES
48 Effective - December 2, 2008
6.12 MODIFICATION OF APPROVAL
1. Any subdivider requesting to modify an approved plan, or any condition of
approval, shall file a written request with the Commission, together with the
required fee.
2. The subdivider shall state the reason why a modification is requested, and
shall describe any change in facts or circumstances or any unforeseen natural
or technical difficulties forming the basis for the request.
3. The Commission may approve minor changes to an approved plan, or to
conditions of approval, if the changes do not materially alter the original approval.
4. The Commission, in its sole discretion, may require a public hearing on any
request, or may require the subdivider to submit a complete application under
Article 5.00 of these Regulations.
5. The Commission shall require a complete application under Article 5.00 of
these Regulations for any change meeting the definition of “resubdivision”
under CGS Section 8-18, as amended.
APPENDIX
December 2, 2008 A - 1
APPENDIX A -
APPLICATION CHECKLIST
Quantity Submittal Provided?
1 The prescribed application form fully and properly completed
and executed ??
1 Required application processing fee in the form of a
check or money order payable to the Town of New Canaan
??
1 Any additional fees to defray the application processing
fee in the form of a check or money order payable to the
Town of New Canaan
??
8 Sets of plans containing the maps or documents as required
by these Regulations or as required by the Commission
??
2 Sanitary waste disposal report prepared by a professional
engineer licensed to conduct business in the State ??
2 Water report prepared by a professional engineer licensed
to conduct business in the State ??
2 Drainage report prepared by a professional engineer,
licensed to conduct business in the State, documenting
the storm drainage system design
??
1 Permission from the subdivider and owner authorizing
applicable municipal agencies to enter upon the area
included in the subdivision for the purposes of inspecting
the site and assuring that improvements are constructed
in accordance with the specifications and other conditions
prescribed by the Commission
??
1 A written instrument signed by the subdivider and owner
stating that no construction of any kind, including any
building, street or any drainage facility or any clearing of
trees or disturbance of land involved in such application,
not otherwise permitted as of right, shall be performed or
commenced without the specific approval of the Commission
subsequent to the submission of an application
and prior to the approval of such application by the
Commission
??
1 An application for resubdivision shall also include a copy
of the plan(s) of the original subdivision and any subsequent
resubdivision as approved by the Commission and
filed with the Town Clerk showing all of the land area
involved in the original subdivision.
??
APPENDIX
A - 2 December 2, 2008
If applicable, a formal application for subdivision shall also include the following:
Quantity Submittal Provided?
2 A certificate of public convenience and necessity as required
by CGS Section 16-262m, if water is to be supplied
by a water company by means of a community
water supply system as defined in that section
??
2 Copies of any other application filed with, and decisions
rendered by, local, state or federal agencies in connection
with the proposed development, even if such application
is made or decision is rendered subsequent to the
filing of a subdivision application with the Planning and
Zoning Commission and prior to its decision on the application
??
If applicable, the Commission may require the submission of:
Quantity Submittal Provided?
Funds to compensate the Commission for any costs of
review or guidance as authorized by CGS Section 8-1c
and any Municipal Land Use Fee Ordinance
??
Evidence of application to CTDOT seeking approval of
access onto any State Highway or discharge of drainage
into a State system or onto State property
??
A detailed statement of the estimated cost of constructing
the proposed subdivision streets, accessways and
other improvements.
??
Any proposed grant or grants to the Town, in form satisfactory
to Town Attorney, including any required easements
for drainage access, utility, or other purposes
??
Any additional information and data as may be required
from the subdivider in order to establish that the proposed
subdivision complies with these Regulations
??
Additional copies of application materials as necessary
for review by the Commission or other Town agencies ??
APPENDIX
December 2, 2008 B - 1
APPENDIX B - DRAWING CHECKLIST
1. Drawing Requirements
Preliminary
(optional)
Formal
Application Provided?
a. A title block indicating:
• names of owner, subdivider, engineer
and/or surveyor,
• name of subdivision, drawing date
and revision dates
Required Required
??
b. A north arrow and a map scale 1”=40’ to
1”=200’
1”=40’
unless modified
by PC ??
c. Size of Sheet Optional 24’ by 36” ??
d. Embossed or stamped seal of the appropriate
professional and an original
signature
Recommended
Required ??
e. A Key Map at a scale of 1”=1,000’ or
less locating:
• the subdivision within the surrounding
properties
• the proposed street system in relation
to existing streets
Required Required on
at least one
drawing ??
f. An Index Map for multiple sheets or
sections showing the entire subdivision
with lots, lot numbers, streets, street
names, sheet delineation and match
lines between sections
Recommended
Required
with “match”
lines on all
sheets ??
g. Zoning data table showing zoning district,
lot area requirements, setback requirements,
and other relevant information
Recommended
Required on
at least one
drawing ??
h. Number of sets of prints Three (3) Eight (8) ??
i. Bound sets Recommended
Required ??
APPENDIX
B - 2 December 2, 2008
2. Property Information
Preliminary
(optional)
Formal
Application Provided?
a. Existing and proposed property
boundaries with pin and monument locations
Approximate A-2 accuracy
??
b. Parcel areas (including area of each
proposed lot excluding areas designated
as inland wetlands and watercourses)
Approximate
(acres)
A-2 accuracy
??
c. Parcel numbering prepared in conjunction
with the Assessor’s office
Suggested Required ??
d. Data on abutting parcels including
owner’s name and lot line locations
Required Required ??
e. Existing and proposed easements and
other rights-of-way for utilities drainage,
access, walks, etc.
Suggested Required ??
3. Site Conditions
Preliminary
(optional)
Formal
Application Provided?
a. Existing and proposed topography for
the subject property and within 100
feet of the perimeter with:
• 10’ contours for preliminary plan
• 2’ contours for formal application
USGS
acceptable
Field or aerial
topography
??
b. Wetlands, watercourses, and other
water bodies on and near the property
(flagged by a soil scientist and surveyed)
Recommended
Required ??
c. Existing drainage features on and near
the property
Recommended
Required ??
d. Base flood elevation data and floodplain
data
Recommended
Required ??
e. Historic buildings and sites, including
archeological sites
Recommended
Required ??
f. Stonewalls and monuments, and other
structures having historical or cultural
significance
Recommended
Required ??
g. Identification of trees greater than 18
inches in diameter in areas of proposed
improvements or clearing
Suggested Required ??
h. Other significant site features Suggested Required ??
APPENDIX
December 2, 2008 B - 3
4. Soils Information
Preliminary
(optional)
Formal
Application Provided?
a. Soil types consistent with the National
Cooperative Soil Survey of the USDA
Soil Conservation Service
Recommended
Required ??
b. All areas with slopes exceeding 15% or
twenty inches (20") or less of consolidated
till above bedrock
Recommended
Required ??
c. Locations and identification numbers of
percolation test holes and deep hole
tests for each lot
Recommended
Required ??
d. Results of percolation tests and deep
pits
Recommended
Required ??
e. Notes setting forth any limitations or
requirements of the Director of Health
Recommended
Required ??
5. Open Space Information
Preliminary
(optional)
Formal
Application Provided?
a. Areas recommended in the Plan of
Conservation and Development for
open space preservation
Recommended
Required ??
b. Location and configuration of existing
open spaces in the vicinity
Required Required ??
c. Map showing location of open space to
be dedicated if fee-in-lieu of open
space or other arrangements are not
accepted by the Commission
Recommended
Required ??
d. Open Space / Trail Plan Recommended
Required ??
APPENDIX
B - 4 December 2, 2008
6. Design of Lot Improvements
Preliminary
(optional)
Formal
Application Provided?
a. Building set-back lines with dimensions Recommended
Required ??
b. Location of existing and proposed
structures and other improvements (retaining
walls, culverts, or fences)
Recommended
Required ??
c. Location of proposed septic- fields with
distances to property lines and any
well within 200' (on or off site)
Recommended
Required ??
d. Location of proposed wells and water
sources for each lot, keyed to the Sanitary
Report
Recommended
Required ??
e. Driveway design with proposed grading
and slopes
Suggested Required ??
APPENDIX
December 2, 2008 B - 5
7. Design of Overall Improvements
Preliminary
(optional)
Formal
Application Provided?
a. All proposed soil erosion and sediment
control procedures
Optional Required ??
b. Street design including overall layout
and grading, plan and profile, construction
details and, where applicable:
• centerline profiles for 300’ on existing
and future streets to which a
subdivision street connects
• cross sections with field topography
at 50’ intervals
• sight line plan and profile
Recommended
Required ??
c. Drainage design plan and profile and
construction details and, where applicable:
• points of discharge to or from any
street or property
• location of storm water detention
Recommended
Required ??
d. Utility design (including connections to
existing lines)
Schematic Final ??
e. Detailed drawings of any bridges, box
culverts, deep manholes, and other
special structures
Suggested Required ??
f. The location and design of supplemental
water supply systems or fire protection
systems to be installed in the development
Recommended
Required ??
8. Miscellaneous Requirements
a. Lots intended for separate ownership or building shall be numbered consecutively
throughout the entire subdivision beginning with the number "1." Resubdivisions of
lots may be lettered consecutively beginning with the letter “A.” Adjoining sections of
the same subdivision having the same title shall not duplicate numbers.
b. When a plan covers only a portion of the subdivider’s entire holdings, a sketch of the
prospective future street and lot layout in the entire holding shall be furnished at a
suitable scale
c. Design of streets and utilities shall be based on official Town, State or USGS topographic
benchmarks or other permanent benchmarks approved by the Town Engineer
and the benchmarks used shall be noted on the plan
d. All appropriate details and dimensions necessary to clearly explain the proposed
street, drainage, and utility construction, including type of construction, material, top of
frame, size, pitch, invert elevations and stream cross sections and profiles, etc. shall
be shown, and shall be in conformity with applicable standards
APPENDIX
B - 6 December 2, 2008
PLAN INFORMATION OVERVIEW
1. General Information
Subdivision
Plan
Plan and
Profile
Site Development
Plan
Scale 1”=40’
horizontal
1”=40’
horizontal
1”=40’
horizontal
2. Property Information
1”=4’
vertical
a. Existing and proposed lot boundaries
with monument locations ?? ?? ??
b. Parcel areas (including area with wetlands
and watercourses excluded) ?? n/a ??
c. Owners name and lot line locations of
abutting parcels ?? ?? ??
d. Existing and proposed easements and
other rights-of-way ?? ?? ??
3. Site Conditions
a. Existing and proposed topography - 2’
contours n/a ?? ??
b. Existing drainage features n/a ?? ??
c. Field located wetlands and watercourses
on the property ?? ?? ??
d. Generally located wetlands and watercourses
near the property ?? ?? ??
e. Base flood elevation data and floodplain
data ?? ?? ??
f. Other site features and areas intended
for preservation n/a ?? ??
g. Analysis of special site conditions
and/or significant resources n/a n/a ??
4. Open Space Information
a. Location and configuration of existing
open spaces in the vicinity n/a n/a ??
b. Open Space Plan ?? ?? ??
5. Soils Information
a. Soil types information n/a n/a ??
b. Soils with severe limitations and low
potential for sewage disposal facilities n/a n/a ??
c. Slopes exceeding 15% and areas with
shallow depth to bedrock n/a n/a ??
d. Location and identification of percolation
test holes and deep hole tests n/a n/a ??
e. Notation regarding the need for engineered
septic designs ?? n/a ??
APPENDIX
December 2, 2008 B - 7
6. Design of Lot Improvements
Subdivision
Plan
Plan and
Profile
Site Development
Plan
a. Building set-back lines with dimensions
?? n/a ??
b. Location of existing structures, driveways,
and other improvements ?? n/a ??
c. Location of proposed structures,
driveways, and other improvements n/a n/a ??
d. Location of existing primary and reserve
septic-leach fields ?? n/a ??
e. Location of proposed primary and reserve
septic-leach fields n/a n/a ??
f. Location of existing wells and water
sources within 200’ of the parcel ?? n/a ??
g. Location of proposed wells and water
sources for each lot n/a n/a ??
7. Design of Overall Improvements
a. All proposed soil erosion and sediment
control procedures n/a ?? ??
b. Street design including street names n/a ?? ??
c. Drainage design including the location
of any drainage discharge n/a ?? ??
d. Utility design (including connections to
existing lines) n/a ?? ??
e. Any existing or proposed retaining
walls, culverts, or fences n/a ?? ??
f. Supplemental water supply systems,
fire protection systems n/a ?? ??
APPENDIX
B - 8 December 2, 2008
ADDITIONAL FORMAL APPLICATION MATERIALS
1. Sanitary Waste Disposal Report
a. Every application for approval of a subdivision must include a report prepared
by a professional engineer licensed by the State of Connecticut
addressing the manner in which the properties are to be provided with
sanitary waste disposal.
b. The report shall provide:
i. a detailed description of proposed sewage disposal facilities in compliance
with the requirements of the State Health Code,
ii. a statement by the engineer that, in his/her professional opinion,
each lot for proposed development is suitable for the installation of
individual sanitary sewage disposal systems of the general type and
size described in the report, and
iii. a statement of any reservations, special conditions, or special precautions
that the engineer may consider necessary to provide proper
functioning of the proposed disposal system.
c. If, in the opinion of the Director of Health or the Planning and Zoning
Commission, the sanitary report is incomplete as to the required information,
additional information sufficient to correct the deficiencies of the report
may be required.
d. A report from the Director of Health shall be obtained and submitted to
the Commission by the subdivider certifying that the land to be subdivided
and the subdivision plans are satisfactory for the installation of private
septic systems.
2. Water Report
a. Every application for approval of a subdivision shall address the manner
in which the properties are to be provided with domestic water supply.
b. A report from the Director of Health shall be obtained and submitted to
the Commission by the subdivider certifying that the land to be subdivided
and the subdivision plans are satisfactory for the installation of private
wells.
APPENDIX
December 2, 2008 B - 9
3. Drainage Report
a. A report shall be submitted by a registered professional engineer including:
i. a base map used to determine existing watershed and drainage patterns,
including downstream runoff areas affected by the storm water
runoff from the subdivision,
ii. the proposed drainage plan for the property,
iii. the drainage treatment for different areas,
iv. the methodology used to compute drainage volumes (runoff) and
pipe sizes,
v. documentation of the design of special structures (if any), and
vi. a pre-development and post-development drainage study.
4. Erosion and Sediment Control Report
a. Every application for approval of a subdivision must include a narrative
report identifying the manner in which erosion and sediment control will
be addressed.
b. The narrative report may be placed on the site development plan, a
separate soil erosion and sediment control drawing, or may be a separate
document.
c. The narrative report shall include:
i. a description of the development of the project,
ii. overall design criteria relative to erosion and sediment control,
iii. recommended construction details and detailed installation procedures
and maintenance programs,
iv. a summary of the sequencing of erosion and sediment control measures
with construction phasing, and
v. a time schedule for:
i) all major construction activities indicating their anticipated start
and completion,
ii) creating and stabilizing disturbed areas,
iii) grading operations,
iv) applying erosion and sediment control measures and facilities on
the land.
APPENDIX
B - 10 December 2, 2008
(this page intentionally left blank)
APPENDIX
December 2, 2008 C - 1
APPENDIX C - APPROVAL BLOCKS
TOWN OF NEW CANAAN
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
FINAL SUBDIVISION APPROVAL
I hereby certify that at a meeting on , the Town of New Canaan Planning
and Zoning Commission gave final approval to this plan in accordance with the Town of
New Canaan Subdivision Regulations.
Chairman Date Signed
In accordance with CGS 8-26c, all work in connection with this subdivision shall be completed
within five years of the date of approval. The completion date shall be
.
Received for filing on by .
Town Clerk
APPENDIX
C - 2 December 2, 2008
(this page intentionally left blank)
APPENDIX
December 2, 2008 D - 1
APPENDIX D - CONSTRUCTION PROCEDURES
1. All streets, drainage and appurtenances shall be staked out by a licensed
land surveyor and shall be certified as to correctness of grade, of completed
sub-grade and finished grade of pavement and shoulders. Line and grade
stakes shall be spaced not more than fifty (50) feet apart and shall be set
and maintained in good order during construction and until the street is approved
by the Town Engineer. Cut and fill sheets must be supplied for all
grade stakes and for laser beam control points.
2. If at the time of construction, certain changes appear desirable in the approved
design as shown on the subdivision construction plans, such
changes may be ordered by the Town Engineer, or may be made after obtaining
approval by the Town Engineer of revised plans showing such
changes.
3. After all underground piping and drainage and other underground structures
and facilities have been installed, the sub-grade of a street shall be shaped
to proper grade and cross section at the required depth below finished
grade. Fill under streets shall be of material acceptable to the Town Engineer
and be free from loam, tree cuttings, stumps or frozen dirt and shall be
thoroughly compacted. Soft areas shall be excavated, drained and filled with
gravel or selected fill.
4. After the sub-grade has been shaped and checked for proper elevation and
cross section by the contractor's surveyor and inspected by the Town Engineer,
a gravel base, twelve (12) inches deep after compaction, shall be constructed.
Gravel shall be selected bank-run gravel, which shall be well
graded from maximum four-inch coarse to sand consisting of sound durable
aggregate, free from thin shale, clay, loam or vegetable matter. A sample of
the gravel proposed to be used and the name of the gravel pit from which it
came shall be furnished to the Town Engineer for approval before work is
begun. The gravel shall meet the requirements of the CTDOT Standard
Specifications.
5. The gravel shall be placed and graded to proper grade and cross section
and, when thoroughly compacted, shall be the thickness called for on the
town standard details. Rolling and compacting shall be done with a roller
weighing not less than ten (10) tons and a minimum of 95% compaction
shall be achieved.
6. The Town Engineer shall be given forty-eight (48) hours' notice before any
gravel is placed.
APPENDIX
D - 2 December 2, 2008
7. In lieu of a gravel base, processed aggregate, sometimes known as "Item
4", may be used after the sub-grade has been shaped to the proper grade
and cross section and inspected by the Town Engineer. The processed aggregate
shall meet the requirements of the CTDOT Standard Specifications.
The Contractor shall then spread uniformly upon the prepared sub-base one
and three quarters (1 3/4) inch processed aggregate for a depth of not more
than four (4) inches after final compaction, which shall be thoroughly compacted
and during the compacting, water shall be applied from an approved
watering device by a vertical spray delivering a flushing stream. Brooms
shall be used during the wetting and compacting, to distribute any fines uniformly
over the surface. The compacting and wetting shall continue until the
voids in the aggregate have been reduced to a minimum. When the compacting
of the bottom course has been completed, a second course shall be
added until a final depth of eight (8) inches has been achieved. Rolling and
compacting shall be done with a roller weighing not less than ten (10) tons
and a minimum of 95% compaction shall be achieved.
8. All new streets shall be paved with a two course bituminous concrete pavement
in accordance with construction procedures as specified in State of
Connecticut Department of Transportation Form 811, Section 4.02 "Two
Course Bituminous Concrete", Section 4.03 Bituminous Concrete, Class 1
and Section 4.04, Bituminous Concrete, Class. 2 unless modified by the
Town Engineer.
9. After the sub-grade of the gravel or processed stone has been rolled to
proper grade, a two (2) inch course of approved bituminous concrete, (Class
1) from an approved mixing plant, shall be spread over the gravel or processed
stone base by using a self-powered paving machine with an adapter
to provide guidance of the screeding action and also means shall be provided
for heating and screeding members by some method that will prevent
accumulations of, bituminous material. Hand spreading will be permitted in
areas too small for the self-powered machine and care must be used in
these areas so that a two (2) inch layer and a smooth surface is obtained.
10. When sufficient set has developed to permit proper compaction the surface
shall be rolled with a ten (10) ton roller. Rolling shall continue until all roller
marks are eliminated: The second course of two (2) inches of bituminous
concrete, (Class 2), can then be applied in the same manner.
11. Where the new pavement abuts the existing pavement, the existing pavement
shall be cut so that the new pavement has a vertical face to butt
against.
12. The total bituminous concrete pavement shall be at least four (4) inches
thick after rolling with a ten (10) ton roller and shall be true in section and
profile with maximum depression of one-quarter (1/4) inch when tested with
a ten (10) foot long straight edge.
13. The Town Engineer shall have forty-eight (48) hours notice before paving
begins. The street shall not be open to traffic until the new pavement has
cooled.
APPENDIX
December 2, 2008 D - 3
14. Where called for on plans, asphalt curbs and gutters shall be constructed of
dense mix asphaltic concrete of fine aggregate for curbs, in accordance with
standard sections as shown on Town Standard Drawings (see Section 55-
5.12). Curbs and gutters shall be laid true to section and line and on true
grades.
15. Where called for on plans, concrete curbs shall be constructed of three
thousand (3,000) pounds per square inch, air-entrained concrete of section
shown on Town Standard Drawings (see Section 55-5.12). When forms are
removed, exposed faces shall be rubbed.
16. Forms for concrete curbs shall be set true to line and grade and properly
and thoroughly braced. In hot drying weather, concrete shall be kept covered
and moist for seven (7) days.
17. Through expansion joints shall be provided, on ten (10) foot centers, of onequarter
(1/4) inch premoulded bitumastic expansion joint material.
18. The contractor shall notify the Town Engineer forty-eight (48) hours in advance
of placing concrete and no concrete shall be placed until the forms
have been inspected and approved and unless the Town Engineer, or his
representative, is present. The Town Engineer has the right to request test
cylinders to be made and the concrete tested to insure compliance with concrete
specifications.
19. No concrete shall be poured in freezing weather unless proper precautions
are taken and then only with the approval of the Town Engineer.
20. All granite curbing shall be obtained from an approved quarry.
21. For granite curbing, the sawn tops shall all be six (6) inches wide, the depth
shall be between sixteen (16) and eighteen (18) inches deep and the
lengths shall be approximately six (6) feet with length not less than three (3)
feet at closures. Lengths of greater than six (6) feet may be used on straight
grades. Curbing shall be set on six (6) inches of compacted approved gravel
or processed stone. All granite curbing, special cuttings and installation
must be approved by the Town Engineer.
22. Street shoulders shall be constructed according to Town Standard Sections
(see Section 55-5.12) to the full width of the right-of-way and, except where
gravel is approved by the Town Engineer, shall be covered with a stand of
grass. No stumps shall be buried in shoulders except that, if existing trees
have to be cut down, their stumps may be left in place when cut off and removed
to a level twelve (12) inches below finished grade.
23. Manholes, catch basins and headwalls shall be built in accordance with
Town Standards and placed according to location and elevations on approved
plans. Where structures of special design, such as retaining walls,
bridges or box culverts, are required, they shall be designed by a licensed
engineer and shall be submitted to the Town Engineer for approval. No
structures shall be backfilled until inspected and approved by the Town Engineer.
APPENDIX
D - 4 December 2, 2008
24. Sewers and drains shall be laid true to line and grade and shall be certified
by a licensed engineer or surveyor that they are in accordance with approved
plans and drawings.
25. Pipe in streets shall be reinforced concrete pipe, State Highway Standard
weight, unless heavier weight is required under major streets except that the
Town Engineer may allow the use fo High Density Polyethylene (HDPE) in
appropriate circumstances. Pipe shall be laid on firm ground free of frost
and shall be firmly bedded. No rock over twelve (12) inches in diameter
shall be backfilled over pipe. Fill over pipe shall be thoroughly compacted to
avoid future settlement.
26. Sub-grade drains, where required, shall be installed in accordance with
Town Standards and shall be properly located and graded to accomplish
their function.
27. No pipes shall be backfilled until inspected by the Town Engineer or his representative.
APPENDIX
December 2, 2008 E - 1
APPENDIX E – SAMPLE LETTER OF CREDIT
[Letterhead of issuing bank]
[issue date]
IRREVOCABLE LETTER OF CREDIT No. XXXX
Beneficiary:
Town of New Canaan
Town Hall
New Canaan CT 06840
Attn: Town Engineer
Re: Application for [Subdivision] at [address of jobsite]
Dear Sir:
At the request and on the instructions of our customer, [full legal name of owner],
[home/office address of owner] (the "Applicant"), we (the "Bank") hereby
establish in your favor this irrevocable letter of credit (the "Credit") in the amount
of $[amount in numbers] ([spell out amount in words and xx/100 dollars]), as
reduced pursuant to the second paragraph hereof (the "Stated Amount"). This
Credit is effective immediately and expires at the close of business on the
Expiration Date.
Drawings hereunder shall not, in the aggregate, exceed the Stated Amount.
Each drawing under this Credit shall reduce the Stated Amount by the amount
drawn.
Funds under this Credit are available to you against your sight drafts drawn on
the Bank, stating on their face: "Drawn under Irrevocable Letter of Credit No.
XXXX issued by [name and address of bank]", and accompanied by your
certificate reading as follows: "I certify that the amount of the accompanying
draft is payable pursuant to the Subdivision Regulations of the Town of New
Canaan."
This Credit shall terminate on the date (the "Expiration Date") which is the earlier
of (i) the date on which the Stated Amount is reduced to zero pursuant to the
second paragraph of this Credit, and (ii) [mmmm dd, 20yy]; provided, however, if
the Stated Amount shall not have been reduced to zero pursuant to the second
paragraph of this Credit, it is a condition of this Credit that the Expiration Date
shall be automatically extended, without other amendment, for an additional
period of one year from the Expiration Date hereof, or any future Expiration Date,
unless at least 30 (thirty) days prior to any Expiration Date we notify you by
certified mail (return receipt requested) that we elect not to consider the
Expiration Date of this Credit extended for any such additional period. Upon
receipt of such notice, funds under this Credit are available to you against your
sight drafts drawn on the Bank and stating on their face: “Drawn under
Irrevocable Letter of Credit No. XXXX issued by [name and address of bank]”,
and accompanied by your certificate reading as follows: “I certify that the amount
of the accompanying draft is drawn and will be held by the Town of New Canaan
APPENDIX
E - 2 December 2, 2008
as a performance guaranty because we have received notice that the Letter of
Credit will expire”.
Each draft and certificate shall be presented (1) at the branch of the Bank at [full
branch address, which must be in Connecticut], Attention: Letter of Credit
Department or (2) by telecopier addressed to and received by [telecopier number
of Bank’s Letter of Credit Department]. If presentation is made by telecopier, you
will provide telephone notification thereof to us at (telephone number) prior to or
simultaneously with the sending of such presentation but receipt of such
telephone notice shall not be a condition to payment hereunder. All documents
presented to the Bank in connection with your demand for payment hereunder,
as well as all notices and other communications to the Bank in respect of this
Credit, shall specifically refer to Letter of Credit No. XXXX.
Payment of each sight draft shall be made by us promptly, but in no event later
than the banking day following receipt, in immediately available funds by wire
transfer by us to [name of bank and branch where Town of New Canaan has its
demand deposit account], [ABA nnnnnnnnn (bank routing number of bank where
Town of New Canaan has its demand deposit account)], for credit to account
#nnnnn (account number of Town of New Canaan), attention: (Chief Financial
Officer).
We agree that all drafts drawn under and in compliance with the terms of this
Credit will be duly honored upon delivery of the draft and certificate as specified if
so presented on or before the Expiration Date. Our obligations hereunder are
primary obligations and shall not be affected by the performance or
nonperformance by you or by the Applicant of any obligations under any
agreement between the Applicant and you or between the Applicant and us.
This Credit is subject to the International Standby Practices 1998, International
Chamber of Commerce Publication No. 590 (“ISP98”)]. This Credit shall be
deemed to be a contract made under the laws of the State of Connecticut and
shall, as to matters not governed by ISP98, be governed by and construed in
accordance with the laws of the State of Connecticut.
Sincerely yours,
[name of bank]
[name of signatory]
[title]
NOTES & COMMENTS
Technical assistance in the preparation of these Regulations provided by:


