TOWN OF 

PLAINVILLE 


Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Construction and Penalties
[Adopted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. II)]
§ 1-1. Definitions and rules of construction.
A. In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances, the following
terms shall have the meanings indicated, unless the context clearly
indicates otherwise:
COUNCIL — The Town Council of the Town of Plainville.
COUNTY — The County of Hartford in the State of Connecticut.
KEEPER and PROPRIETOR — Includes persons, firms, associations,
corporations, clubs and copartnerships, whether acting by themselves or
through a servant, agent or employee.
OWNER — Applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, joint tenant, or tenant by the entirety of the
whole or of a part of such building or land.
PARK — Includes a park, reservation, playground, play field, building,
swimming pool, beach, recreation center and any other area in the Town
owned, leased, controlled or administered by the Town and used for or
devoted to active or passive recreation.
PERSON — Shall extend and be applied to associations, firms,
partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals.
PERSONAL PROPERTY — Includes every species of property except real
property, as herein defined.
PROPERTY — Includes real and personal property.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any and all streets, highways and boulevards, alleys
or other publicly owned or controlled ways and any and all publicly
owned or controlled parks, squares, spaces, grounds and buildings.
REAL PROPERTY — Lands, tenements and hereditaments.
SIDEWALK — Any portion of a street between the curbline and the
adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding
parkways.
STATE — The State of Connecticut.
STATE LAW, GENERAL LAW or GENERAL STATUTES — The General
Statutes of Connecticut, as amended.
STREET — Streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts
and all other public ways.
TENANT; OCCUPANT — Applied to a building or land, includes any
person holding a written or oral lease of, or who occupies, the whole or
a part of such building or land, either alone or with others.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-1
1:3
TOWN — The Town of Plainville in the County of Hartford and the State
of Connecticut.
B. In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances, the following rules
shall be observed, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
(1) Gender. The use of any gender shall include the other genders.
A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be
applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as
well as to males.
(2) Number. The use of the singular shall include the plural, and the
use of the plural shall include the singular. A word importing the
singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons
and things as well as to one person and thing.
(3) Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as
well as the past and present.
(4) Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring
the head of a department or an officer of the Town to do some
act or make certain inspections, it is to be construed to authorize
the head of the department or officer to designate, delegate and
authorize subordinates to perform the required act or make the
required inspections unless the terms of the provision or section
designate otherwise.
(5) Officers and employees. The title of any officer or employee used
herein shall be construed as if the words "of the Town" followed it
and shall include his duly authorized representative.
§ 1-2. Catchlines of sections.
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type
are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the sections
and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any
part of the sections, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so
deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended
or reenacted.
§ 1-3. Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances.
All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code of Ordinances which amend,
repeal or in any way affect this Code of Ordinances may be numbered
sequentially and shall make reference to the portion of this Code intended
to be affected and shall be printed for inclusion herein. In the case of
chapters, parts, articles, sections and subsections, or any part thereof,
repealed by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be
excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby.
§ 1-4. Effect of repeal of ordinances.
The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinance in force before or
at the time the ordinance repealed took effect, unless expressly stated. The
repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred
before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding
§ 1-1 PLAINVILLE CODE § 1-4
1:4
pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed under the
ordinance repealed.
§ 1-5. General penalty.
Whenever in this Code or in any other ordinance, rule or regulation
promulgated by any officer or agency of the Town under authority vested
in him or it by law or ordinance any act is prohibited or declared to be
unlawful or the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is
declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided therefor either
by this Code or state law, the violation of any such provision of this Code
or any other ordinance, rule or regulation shall be punished by a fine not
exceeding $250. Each day any violation of any provision of this Code or any
other ordinance, rule or regulation of the Town continues shall constitute
a separate offense. The imposition of any punishment hereunder shall not
prevent the enforced abatement of any unlawful condition by the Town.
§ 1-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-5
1:5

ARTICLE II
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 7-25-2016]
§ 1-6. Adoption of Code.
The compilation of the ordinances of the Town of Plainville, codified and
consolidated into chapters, articles and sections in the form attached hereto
and made a part hereof, and consisting of Chapters 1 through 374, is
hereby approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as the "Code of the Town
of Plainville, Connecticut," hereinafter called the "Code." All provisions
contained in the compilation provided for herein and known as the "Code of
the Town of Plainville" shall be in force and effect on and after the effective
date of this ordinance.
§ 1-7. Continuation of existing provisions.
The provisions of the Code, insofar as they are substantively the same as
those ordinances in force immediately prior to the enactment of the Code
by this ordinance, are intended as a continuation of such ordinances and
not as new enactments, and the effectiveness of such provisions shall date
from the date of adoption of the prior ordinance. All such provisions are
hereby continued in full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to
their adoption by the Town.
§ 1-8. Repealer.
A. All ordinances or parts of ordinances of the Town of Plainville of a
general and permanent nature in force on the date of the adoption of
this ordinance which are inconsistent with any provisions of the Code
are hereby repealed from and after the effective date of this ordinance.
B. The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for
in Subsection A of this section shall not affect the Town Zoning and
Subdivision Regulations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal.
C. The following ordinances are specifically repealed:
(1) Ordinance No. 4, adopted January 24, 1956: Bylaws Prohibiting
the Throwing or Placing of Waste Materials in the Highways of
the Town of Plainville, Regulating the Disposal of the Same, and
Providing a Penalty for Violating Thereof.
(2) Ordinance No. 9, adopted September 26, 1960: Ordinance
Regarding Town of Plainville Participation in Regional Planning.
(3) Ordinance No. 10, adopted July 10, 1961: Ordinance Regarding
Pollution of Water in the Town of Plainville.
(4) Ordinance No. 11, adopted July 16, 1962: Ordinance Regarding the
Department of Public Works.
(5) Ordinance No. 12, adopted October 15, 1962: An Ordinance
Relating to the Obstruction or Pollution of Any River, Stream, Brook
or Watercourse in the Town of Plainville.
(6) Ordinance No. 21, adopted July 7, 1969: Specifications for Street
Construction Within the Town of Plainville.
§ 1-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-8
1:7
(7) Ordinance No. 33, adopted June 2, 1975: Ordinance Relating to
Installation, Repair and Maintenance of Sidewalks.
(8) Ordinance No. 36, adopted June 21, 1976: Ordinance Establishing
the Youth Commission.
(9) Ordinance No. 37, adopted May 16, 1977: An Ordinance
Concerning Property Tax Exemption for Solar Energy Systems.
(10) Ordinance No. 42, adopted October 6, 1980: An Ordinance
Concerning Property Tax Exemption for Buildings Equipped With A
Passive Solar System.
§ 1-9. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section, article or part of this ordinance
or of any ordinance appearing in the Code or included in this Code through
supplementation, or the application thereof to any person or circumstances,
shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such
judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof or
the application thereof to other persons and circumstances but shall be
confined in its operation to the clause, sentence, paragraph, section, article
or part thereof and the persons and circumstances directly involved in the
controversy in which judgment shall have been rendered.
§ 1-10. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code has been filed in the office of the Town Clerk of the Town
of Plainville and shall remain there for use and examination by the public
until final action is taken on this ordinance; and, if this ordinance shall be
adopted, such copy shall be certified to by the Town Clerk of the Town of
Plainville, and such certified copy shall remain on file in the office of said
Town Clerk to be made available to persons desiring to examine the same
during all times while said Code is in effect. The enactment and publication
of this ordinance, coupled with the availability of a copy of the Code for
inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered to be due
and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-11. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to any of the
ordinances in the Code of the Town of Plainville, or any new ordinances,
when enacted or adopted in such form as to indicate the intention that they
be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into such Code so
that reference to the Code shall be understood and intended to include such
additions, deletions, amendments or supplements.
§ 1-12. Code to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Town Clerk to keep up-to-date the certified copy
of the Code of the Town of Plainville required to be filed in the office
of the Town Clerk for use by the public. All changes in said Code and
all ordinances adopted by the Town subsequent to the enactment of this
§ 1-8 PLAINVILLE CODE § 1-12
1:8
ordinance in such form as to indicate the intention that they be a part of
said Code shall, when finally enacted or adopted, be included therein by
temporary attachment of copies of such changes until such changes are
included as supplements to said Code book.
§ 1-13. Sale of Code book; supplementation.
Copies of the Code, or any chapter or portion of it, may be purchased from
the Town Clerk of the Town of Plainville or an authorized agent of the Town
Clerk upon the payment of a fee to be set by the Town Council. The Town
Clerk may also arrange for procedures for the periodic supplementation
thereof.
§ 1-14. Penalties for tampering with Code.
Any person who, without authorization from the Town Clerk, changes or
amends, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of the Code of the
Town of Plainville, or who alters or tampers with such Code in any manner
whatsoever which will cause the legislation of the Town of Plainville to
be misrepresented thereby, or who violates any other provision of this
ordinance, shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine as provided in
§ 1-5 of the Code.
§ 1-15. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances for publication as the Code
of the Town of Plainville, no changes in the meaning or intent of such
ordinances have been made, except as provided in Subsections B and
C of this section. Certain grammatical changes and other minor
nonsubstantive changes were made in one or more of said ordinances.
It is the intention of the Town Council that all such changes be adopted
as part of the Code as if the ordinances had been previously formally
amended to read as such.
B. The following changes are made throughout the Code: the term
"Chairman" is amended to "Chairperson"; the title "Director of Public
Safety" is amended to "Director of Safety": the title "Finance Director"
is amended to "Director of Finance"; and the title "Tax Collector" is
amended to "Revenue Collector."
C. The amendments as set forth in Schedule A1 attached hereto and made
a part hereof are made herewith, to become effective upon the effective
date of this ordinance. (Chapter and section number references are to
the ordinances as they have been renumbered and appear in the Code.)
1. Editor’s Note: In accordance with § 1-15C, the chapters, parts and sections which were
added, amended, adopted or repealed by this ordinance are indicated throughout the Code
by a footnote referring to Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II. During routine
supplementation, footnotes indicating amendments, additions or deletions will be
replaced with the following history: “Amended (added, repealed) 7-25-2016.” Schedule A,
which contains a complete description of all changes, is on file in the Town offices.
§ 1-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-16
1:9
§ 1-16. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect upon passage and publication as required
by law.
§ 1-16 PLAINVILLE CODE § 1-16
1:10
Chapter 14
COMMISSIONS AND OTHER AGENCIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Regional agencies — See Ch. 115.
§ 1-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-16
1:11

ARTICLE I
Insurance Commission
[Adopted 2-22-1960; amended 7-17-1972]
§ 14-1. Membership; terms of office; compensation.
There shall be in the Town of Plainville an Insurance Commission of three
resident electors appointed by the Town Council. Not more than two
members of the Commission shall belong to the same political party. One
member shall be appointed for the term of one year, one for two years
and one for three years, and thereafter all appointments shall be for a
term of three years, each member to hold office until his successor has
been appointed and has qualified. The original Commission members shall
commence their term on March 1, 1960. The Commission shall serve
without compensation and its necessary expenses shall be paid by the Town.
No member of the Commission shall participate either directly or indirectly
with the commissions to be received from any contracts of insurance or
bonds purchased by the Town of Plainville. The Commission members shall
appoint their own Chairperson and Secretary. The Council shall determine
whether any Commission member is participating either directly or
indirectly with the commissions to be received and its decision shall be final.
§ 14-2. Duties.2
It shall be the duty of the Insurance Commission to provide and procure,
on behalf of the Town of Plainville, its boards, commissions, officials and
employees, such contracts of insurance and bonds as in its judgment are
reasonably necessary to safeguard the interests of the Town against loss or
damage.
§ 14-3. Awarding contracts of insurance and bonds.3
All contracts of insurance and bonds designating the Town of Plainville or
any of its agencies as sole beneficiary or joint beneficiary with others shall
be awarded, renewed or cancelled only by the Insurance Commission.
§ 14-4. Inventory and data to be provided to Insurance Commission.
All Town boards, commissions, officials and employees shall provide the
Insurance Commission in writing with an inventory of property or other
insurable risks within their jurisdiction or field of operation and any
changes in the status of the same as may occur from time to time, together
with such data relating to existing insurance coverage as the Commission
may request.
2. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
3. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 14-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-5
1:13
§ 14-5. Filing requirements.
The Insurance Commission shall file each July with the Town Manager and
Town Council a complete list of such insurance and bonds, containing data
as to name of insurance or bonding company, policy number, effective date,
expiration date and nature and amount of coverage, and shall maintain and
keep current such a list properly filed and catalogued.
§ 14-6. Cooperation with Town Manager.
The Insurance Commission shall work in cooperation with the Town
Manager and shall keep him informed as to what insurance policies and
bonds are in effect at all times.
§ 14-7. Determining bond amounts.
The Insurance Commission shall aid any Town agencies upon request in
determining the amounts of bonds that should be required from any
contractors, subcontractors or developers or for any other reason
whatsoever.
§ 14-8. Insurance agent requirements.
Any insurance agent desiring to participate in commissions derived from
municipal contracts of insurance and bonds shall furnish the Insurance
Commission, for the purpose of clarification, eligibility and commission
allocation, such written data, with properly sworn affidavit, as may be
required on a form provided by the Insurance Commission.
§ 14-9. Providing information to insurers.
The Insurance Commission may, as occasion requires, provide each insurer
an official list showing the accrued net commission distribution to
participating insurance agents.
§ 14-10. Premium billing examination.
All bills for insurance and bond premiums shall be examined and approved
by the Insurance Commission prior to payment thereof.
§ 14-11. Budget.
The Insurance Commission shall prepare a budget setting forth estimated
costs for insurance and bond contracts for the various Town agencies during
the ensuing fiscal year and submit the same to the Town Manager in time for
inclusion in the regular annual Town budget in accordance with the Charter.
§ 14-5 PLAINVILLE CODE § 14-12
1:14
§ 14-12. Rate and coverage changes.
The Insurance Commission shall recommend to any and all Town agencies
and officials such changes which in its judgment will result in rate
reductions or improved coverage.
§ 14-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-12
1:15

ARTICLE II
Veterans Council
[Adopted 2-22-1960]
§ 14-13. Council established; duties.4
There shall be and the same is hereby established in the Town of Plainville a
Veterans Council to assist any and all veterans of the Town of Plainville. The
duties of said Veterans Council shall include those enumerated in § 27-135
of the General Statutes of Connecticut.
§ 14-14. Membership; terms of office.
The Veterans Council shall consist of three members who shall be veterans
and electors of the Town, who shall be appointed by the Town Council for
a term of two years, the first term commencing March 1, 1960. The Town
Council shall fill any vacancies in said Veterans Council by an appointment
for the unexpired portion of the term becoming vacant.
§ 14-15. Removal.
Any member of the Veterans Council may be removed by the Town Council
for just cause, provided that, before removal, charges shall be presented in
writing to such member, and he shall be afforded reasonable opportunity to
be heard in his own defense.
§ 14-16. Meetings; officers; compensation.5
The Veterans Council shall meet at least 50 weeks of each year at such time
and place to be determined by it. It shall appoint its own Chairperson and
Secretary in accordance with its own regulations. Each Council member
shall receive compensation twice a year as determined by the Town Council.
§ 14-17. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ARMED FORCES — The United States Army, Navy, Marine Corps, Coast
Guard, Air Force and their reserve components.6
VETERAN — Any person honorably discharged from or released under
honorable conditions from active service in the armed forces.
4. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
5. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
6. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 14-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-18
1:17
§ 14-18. Budget.
The Veterans Council shall prepare its budget in accordance with the
provisions of the Charter.
§ 14-18 PLAINVILLE CODE § 14-18
1:18
ARTICLE III
Water Pollution Control Authority
[Adopted 6-22-1961; amended 7-16-1979]
§ 14-19. Town Council designated as Water Pollution Control
Authority.7
In accordance with the provisions of Chapter 103 of the General Statutes
of Connecticut, as amended, the Town Council is hereby designated as the
Water Pollution Control Authority of the Town with all the powers and duties
set forth in Special Act No. 532 titled "An Act Concerning a Sewerage
System for the Town of Plainville," as amended, and such powers as are
conferred upon water pollution control authorities under said Chapter 103.
§ 14-20. Regulations continued.
Any and all regulations and resolutions previously enacted and adopted by
the Plainville Sewer Commission or the Town Council acting as the Sewer
Authority of the Town under authority granted by any general or special act
are hereby adopted and shall remain in full force and effect.
7. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 14-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-20
1:19

ARTICLE IV
Planning and Zoning Commission Alternate Members
[Adopted 11-18-1963]
§ 14-21. Appointment of alternate members.
A. The Town Council of the Town of Plainville shall appoint three electors
of the Town of Plainville as alternate members to the Plainville Town
Planning and Zoning Commission for four-year terms.
B. No political party shall nominate more than two persons to be alternate
members.
C. No alternate member shall be a member of any other board or
commission or alternate member thereto.
D. The Chairperson of the Plainville Town Planning and Zoning Commission
shall designate an alternate to act for an absent or disqualified regular
member of the Planning and Zoning Commission, and said alternate
member, when seated, shall have all the powers and duties as any
regular member of said Planning and Zoning Commission.
§ 14-22. Powers and duties.
All other powers, duties, rights and obligations set forth in Public Act 249,8
when not above specified, shall be incorporated in this article as if fully set
forth herein.
8. Editor's Note: See § 8-1b of the Connecticut General Statutes.
§ 14-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-22
1:21

ARTICLE V
Conservation Commission
[Adopted 10-18-1971; amended 7-16-1979; 10-21-1991; 6-7-2004]
§ 14-23. Membership; terms of office; compensation.
There is hereby established in the Town of Plainville a Conservation
Commission, hereinafter referred to as the "Commission," consisting of 11
members, appointed by the Town Manager with the approval of the Town
Council, who shall serve for a term of four years from date of appointment.
Members serving on the Conservation Commission in existence on the date
of adoption of this article, as amended, shall continue to serve for the
terms for which they have been appointed. The Town Manager, with the
approval of the Town Council, shall fill any vacancy on said Commission
by appointment for the unexpired portion of such term. Members of said
Commission shall serve without compensation.
§ 14-24. Officers; rules and records; replacement of disqualified
member; technical, legal and clerical assistance.
A. The Commission shall elect a Chairperson, Vice Chairperson, and
Secretary from among its members for such terms as the Commission
may designate, to hold office until their successors have been elected
and qualified.
B. Said Commission shall make rules and regulations for the transaction of
its business and shall keep a record of all votes and other proceedings of
its meetings.
C. Should a member of the Commission be disqualified for any reason
regarding any matter upon which the Commission is to take action, the
remaining members may appoint another elector to take his place, to
perform duties in respect to the particular matter and for no longer.
D. The Commission may employ necessary technical, legal and clerical
assistance and prescribe the compensation for such services rendered.
However, nothing in this article shall be construed to authorize the
Commission to expend funds other than appropriations made to it
pursuant to law or funds derived from gifts, grants or other sources and
made available to its use for purposes prescribed herein.
§ 14-25. Functions and duties.
The Commission shall concern itself with the development, conservation,
supervision and regulation of natural resources and shall coordinate its
efforts with other municipal and state agencies, as appropriate. Its
functions shall be investigative in nature and shall include but not be limited
to the following:
A. Water. Review problems of water pollution and water supply, maintain
continuous inspection of streams and water areas, and report violation
of pollution control laws simultaneously to offenders, Town officials and
state officials.
§ 14-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-25
1:23
B. Soil and land. Urge adoption of good land use and soil conservation
practices. Establish, and periodically revise, a conservation study of
the Town, including appropriate maps. The Commission may conduct
research into the utilization and possible utilization of land area of
the municipality and may coordinate the activities of unofficial bodies
organized for similar purposes. The Commission may keep an index
of all open areas, public or privately owned, including wetlands, for
the purpose of obtaining information on the proper use of such areas
and may, from time to time, make recommendations to the Planning
and Zoning Commission on plans and programs for the development
and use of such areas. The Commission may make recommendations
to the Planning and Zoning Commission, Inland Wetlands Commission
and other municipal agencies on proposed land use changes. The
Commission may recommend to the Town Council the acquisition of
land or easements for open space use. The Commission may, with the
prior approval of the Town Council, acquire land and easements in the
name of the Town and promulgate rules and regulations, including but
not limited to the establishment of reasonable charges for the use of
land and easements, for any of its purposes as set forth in Connecticut
General Statutes § 7-131a.9
C. Recreation. Work with the Department of Recreation and Parks in
planning for present and future park and recreation needs. Study and
urge development of multiple-use and open green areas principles.
D. Wildlife. Urge use of open spaces, marshland and floodplains for wildlife
development and sanctuary. Stress importance of such land and other
"waste areas" to wildlife.
E. Information and education. Act as coordinating agency for the Town on
conservation matters. Inform citizens of services available from federal,
state and private conservation agencies. Promote and encourage
conservation activities.
F. Grants. The Commission may receive gifts or grants in the name of the
Town for any of the Commission's purposes and shall administer the
same for such purposes subject to the terms of the gift or grant. If the
Town Council grants approval, the Commission may apply for grants-inaid
for programs established to preserve the use of open space land or
restrict it to conservation or recreation purposes. Any such application
made by another Town agency may be submitted for prior approval by
the Conservation Commission prior to submission.
G. Other. Such other duties as may be conferred upon the Commission by
state statute or by assignment from the Town Council.
9. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 14-25 PLAINVILLE CODE § 14-25
1:24
ARTICLE VI
Committee on Aging
[Adopted 8-20-1973; amended in its entirety at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
§ 14-26. Membership; terms of office.
There is hereby established within the Town of Plainville a Committee on
Aging, to be known as such, which Committee shall consist of nine members
to be appointed by the Town Council of the Town of Plainville. Members
shall serve for terms of three years.
§ 14-27. Duties.
The Committee shall study continuously the conditions and needs of elderly
persons in the community in relation to housing, economic, employment,
health, recreational and other matters. It shall analyze the services for
the aged provided by the community, both by public and private agencies,
and shall make recommendations to the Senior Center Director, who shall
forward them along with his or her comments to the Town Council
regarding the development and integration of public and private agencies,
in cooperation with state and other services to the extent possible. The
Committee is further charged with advising the Senior Center Director in
the management, operation, and supervision of the Senior Center and its
programs.
§ 14-28. Officers.
The Committee on Aging shall choose from among its members a
Chairperson, a Vice Chairperson, a Secretary and a Treasurer. The
Secretary shall keep appropriate minutes of the meetings of the Committee.
The Treasurer shall review all books and records of account and shall make
regular reports as to their condition to the Senior Center Director, who
in turn shall make regular reports to the Committee on Aging and to the
Director of Finance.
§ 14-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-28
1:25

ARTICLE VII
Inland Wetlands Commission
[Adopted 12-17-1973; amended 2-17-1975]
§ 14-29. Purpose.
Pursuant to § 22a-42 of the Connecticut General Statutes, there is hereby
established in the Town of Plainville the Plainville Inland Wetlands
Commission, to promulgate such regulations as are necessary to protect
the wetlands and watercourses within the Town of Plainville, license such
activities as may be regulated by its regulations or those of the State of
Connecticut, and perform such further functions as may be prescribed to
such agencies by the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut.
§ 14-30. Membership; terms of office; alternate members.
A. The Plainville Inland Wetlands Commission shall consist of seven regular
members and three alternate members, to be appointed by the Town
Council of the Town of Plainville for terms of two years. Vacancies in
unexpired terms shall be filled by the Town Council for the unexpired
portion of the term.10
B. If a regular member of the Commission is absent from a Commission
meeting, the Chairperson of the Commission shall designate an alternate
to act in his or her place, choosing the alternates in rotation, so that they
shall act as nearly equal a number of times as possible. If an alternate
is not available in accordance with such rotation, such fact shall be
recorded in the minutes of the meeting. An alternate member, when
seated, shall have all the powers and duties of any regular member of
the Commission.
§ 14-31. Officers; records; advisors.11
The regular members of the Commission shall elect from among its
members a Chairperson, Vice Chairperson, and a Secretary. The
Commission shall keep a public record of its activities. The Commission
shall have full access to the services of the Town Engineer, Director of
Planning and Economic Development, and other Town employees, and upon
advance approval by the Town Council may engage outside expert advisors.
10.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
11.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 14-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-31
1:27

ARTICLE VIII
Economic Development Agency
[Adopted 10-5-1992; amended 8-17-1998]
§ 14-32. Agency established.
There is hereby established in the Town of Plainville an Economic
Development Agency, hereinafter referred to as the "Agency," for the
promotion and development of the economic resources of the Town.
§ 14-33. Membership; terms of office; compensation; alternate
members.
A. The Agency shall consist of five members appointed by the Town Council.
Members shall be experienced in business or industry or shall have
an active interest in community economic development. Not more than
three members of the Agency shall belong to the same political party.
Two members shall be appointed for the term of two years, two for four
years and one for five years, each member to hold office until his or her
successor has been appointed by the Town Council. Agency members
shall serve without compensation and their necessary expenses shall be
paid by the Town.
B. The Council may also appoint up to three alternates for the term of two
years to perform the duties of an absent member. Any vacancy in the
membership of the Agency shall be filled for the unexpired portion of the
vacated member's term by one of the Council-appointed alternates.12
§ 14-34. Officers; rules and records.
On or before December 1, 1992, and thereafter on an annual basis, the
Agency shall select one of its members to serve as Chairperson and one
of its members to serve as Secretary. Said Agency shall make rules and
regulations for the transaction of its business and shall keep a record of all
votes and other proceedings of its meetings.
§ 14-35. Requests for information; technical, legal and clerical
assistance.
A. The Agency may request such information as it may require from the
Town Manager or the Manager's designee, who shall respond in a
reasonably timely manner or provide reasonable access to such matters
as the Agency may require. All such requests for information shall be
made through the Chairperson of the Agency or, in the Chairperson's
absence, through the Secretary.
B. The Agency may employ necessary technical, legal and clerical
assistance and prescribe the compensation for such services rendered.
12.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 14-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-36
1:29
§ 14-36. Purpose.
The purpose of the Agency shall be:
A. To encourage the involvement of business and industry in the community
and improve the public's understanding of the value of responsible
economic development compatible with the character of the
municipality.
B. To preserve existing business and industry and foster appropriate
opportunities for potential economic development.
§ 14-37. Duties and responsibilities.
The responsibilities of the Agency shall include but shall not be limited to at
least the following duties in furtherance of the purposes noted above:
A. Conduct research into the economic conditions and trends in Plainville.
B. Make recommendations to appropriate officials and agencies regarding
action to improve Plainville's economic condition and development.
C. Promote the overall continued growth of industry and business through
infrastructure improvements and the initiation and administration of all
aspects of any municipal development projects undertaken pursuant to
Chapter 132 of the Connecticut General Statutes.
D. Cooperate with and coordinate the activities of unofficial bodies
organized to promote economic development.
E. Annually prepare and transmit to the Town Council a report of its
activities and its recommendations for improving economic conditions
and development.
§ 14-38. Conflicting orders, rules and regulations superseded.
At all times when any orders, rules and regulations made and promulgated
pursuant to this article shall be in effect, they shall supersede all existing
resolutions, orders, rules and regulations insofar as the latter may be
inconsistent therewith.
§ 14-39. Construal with state and federal regulations.
This article shall not be construed to conflict with any state or federal
statute, rule or regulation.
§ 14-36 PLAINVILLE CODE § 14-39
1:30
ARTICLE IX
Aquifer Protection Agency
[Adopted 2-22-1994]
§ 14-40. Authority and findings.
A. Section 22a-354o of the Connecticut General Statutes provides that a
town in which an aquifer protection area is located shall authorize,
by ordinance, an existing board or commission to act as an aquifer
protection agency.
B. It is determined by the Town Council that it is in the best interest of the
Town of Plainville to designate the Planning and Zoning Commission as
the Town's Aquifer Protection Agency.
§ 14-41. Planning and Zoning Commission designated as Aquifer
Protection Agency.
A. In accordance with the provisions of § 22a-354a et seq. of the
Connecticut General Statutes, the Planning and Zoning Commission of
the Town of Plainville is hereby designated as the Aquifer Protection
Agency of the Town of Plainville. The staff of the Planning and Zoning
Commission shall serve as the staff of the Aquifer Protection Agency.
B. Members of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall serve coexisting
terms of office on the Aquifer Protection Agency. The membership
requirements of the Aquifer Protection Agency shall be the same as
those of the Planning and Zoning Commission, including but not limited
to the number of members, term of office, method of selection and
appointment, method of removal from office and the filling of vacancies.
C. At least one member of the Aquifer Protection Agency or staff of the
Aquifer Protection Agency shall complete the course in technical
training formulated by the Commissioner of Energy and Environmental
Protection of the State of Connecticut pursuant to § 22a-354v of the
Connecticut General Statutes.13
§ 14-42. Regulations to be adopted.
A. The Aquifer Protection Agency shall adopt regulations in accordance
with § 22a-354p of the Connecticut General Statutes.
B. Said regulations shall provide for:
(1) The manner in which boundaries of aquifer protection areas shall be
established and amended or changed.
(2) The form for an application to conduct regulated activities within the
area.
(3) Notice and publication requirements.
(4) Criteria and procedures for review of applications.
(5) Administration and enforcement.
(6) Procedures for the regulation of activities within the area.
(7) Such other duties and responsibilities which from time to time may
be provided for by state statute or regulation.
13.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 14-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-43
1:31
§ 14-43. Construal with state regulations.
This article shall not be construed to conflict with any state statute, rule or
regulation.
§ 14-43 PLAINVILLE CODE § 14-43
1:32
ARTICLE X
Recycling and Solid Waste Commission
[Adopted 10-15-2001]
§ 14-44. Findings.
The State of Connecticut has mandated laws affecting the collection,
disposal and recycling of solid waste and other refuse within the cities and
towns of the State of Connecticut. Disposal of such items is a significant
social and health concern affecting the well-being of the citizens of the Town
of Plainville. A separate commission is desirable, proper and necessary to
assist the Town of Plainville in the discharge of its obligations to be in
conformance with such state-mandated laws.
§ 14-45. Membership.14
There shall be a Recycling and Solid Waste Commission, which shall consist
of seven members who must be electors and residents of the Town of
Plainville. No more than four members shall be members of the same
political party. These members shall be appointed by the Town Council.
§ 14-46. Terms of office; officers; alternate members; rules and
records; technical, legal and clerical assistance; quorum.
A. The term of all members shall run for two years, except that the initial
terms shall be staggered as follows: three initial terms of one year and
four initial terms of two years.
B. The Commission shall elect a Chairperson, Vice Chairperson and
Secretary from among its members for such terms as the Commission
may designate, to hold office until their successors have been elected
and qualified.
C. The Town Council may also appoint up to three alternates to perform the
duties of an absent member. The alternate's term shall run for two years.
D. The Commission shall make rules for the transaction of its business and
keep a record of all votes and other proceedings of its meetings.
E. The Commission may employ necessary technical, legal and clerical
assistance and prescribe the compensation for such services rendered.
However, nothing in this article shall be construed to authorize the
Commission to expend funds other than appropriations made to it
pursuant to law or funds derived from gifts, grants or other sources and
made available to its use for purposes prescribed herein.
F. A quorum at any meeting shall consist of a majority of the membership
of the Commission.
§ 14-47. Powers and duties.
The purpose of the Recycling and Solid Waste Commission will be to
prepare a solid waste plan for the Town, and it shall amend said plan
14.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 14-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-47
1:33
from time to time as required by enactments of the federal, state or Town
governments. It shall review and recommend to the Town Council proposals
for local and regional solid waste disposal and recycling. It may propose
ordinances for adoption by the Town Council. It shall review and
recommend to the Town Council an annual budget for operation of a local
and regional solid waste program. It shall encourage the recycling of
materials and proper disposal of solid, bulk and hazardous wastes from
residences, public buildings, businesses and industries in the Town through
educational programs, dissemination of literature and other methods. The
Commission may perform such other duties as may be assigned to it by the
Town Council.
§ 14-48. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BULK WASTE — A waste product that by its very nature is too heavy and/
or too large to be included in the curbside solid waste collection program
and may require special efforts in collection and disposal. Items may include
but not be limited to furniture, large appliances, miscellaneous iron/steel
(bicycles, wagons, landscape tools and equipment, grills, barrels, and
drums), yard wastes, etc., and other wastes that have a reasonable
possibility of adversely affecting the operation of a resource recovery
facility.
HAZARDOUS WASTES — Those household waste products that may be
considered toxic (can injure or kill if swallowed, inhaled or absorbed
through the skin), flammable (may explode or ignite, even when cool),
corrosive (can cause permanent tissue damage through contact) and/or
irritant (can irritate or inflame the skin, eyes, nose, throat or lungs).
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Any discarded materials which are mandated
by the State of Connecticut to be recycled, as well as other items which are
deemed recyclable by the Commission.
SOLID WASTE — The type of household waste normally collected from
residential, institutional, commercial and industrial areas (included but
not limited to garbage, refuse, rubbish, yard waste and other discarded
materials and substances) that:
A. Does not represent substantial endangerment to public health or safety;
Does not cause applicable air quality or water effluent standards to be
violated by the normal operation of a resource recovery facility; or
B.
Does not adversely affect the operation of a resource recovery facility
because of its quantity, size or bulk.
C.
§ 14-47 PLAINVILLE CODE § 14-48
1:34
ARTICLE XI
Downtown Beautification Commission
[Adopted 11-19-2001; amended 12-17-2012]
§ 14-49. Commission established; purpose.
A. There is hereby established a Downtown Beautification Commission for
the specific purpose of improving and maintaining the appearance of
downtown Plainville.
B. For the purposes of this article, "Downtown" shall mean the area
adjacent to both sides of East Main Street, starting at and including Neal
Court and heading west; West Main Street from the intersection of East
Main Street heading west to Pierce Street; and Whiting Street from the
intersection of East/West Main Street to Maple Street.
§ 14-50. Membership.
A. The Downtown Beautification Commission shall consist of five members,
each of whom shall be a resident and elector of the Town. No more than
three members shall be of the same political party.
B. Among the five members of the Downtown Beautification Commission
there shall be at least one downtown Plainville business owner and at
least one downtown Plainville property owner.
C. The Town Manager, the Director of Planning and Economic
Development, and the Executive Director of the Plainville Chamber of
Commerce shall be ex officio members of the Commission and shall have
no vote.15
§ 14-51. Terms of office.
Upon adoption of this article, the Town Council shall appoint two members
to serve until December 31, 2002, two members to serve until December
31, 2003, and one member to serve until December 31, 2004. Thereafter, all
members shall be appointed to a term of three years.
§ 14-52. Chairperson; meetings; quorum.
A. The Downtown Beautification Commission shall meet each January to
elect a Chairperson from its membership.
B. The Downtown Beautification Commission shall meet no fewer than six
times each year. A schedule of meetings shall be established by the
Commission.
C. A quorum shall consist of three voting members.
§ 14-53. Powers and duties.
A. The Downtown Beautification Commission shall be responsible to the
Town Council on matters relating to downtown beautification and, as
such, may:
15.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 14-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-53
1:35
(1) Review site plans and make written recommendations to the
Planning and Zoning Commission on issues regarding downtown
Plainville.
(2) Identify beautification needs in downtown Plainville not addressed
by existing boards or commissions.
(3) Assess available Town resources to meet the needs of downtown
Plainville.
(4) Work to recommend the establishment of short- and long-term goals
and objectives for downtown Plainville.
(5) Recommend priorities for the establishment, expansion, or
abandonment of projects affecting downtown Plainville.
(6) Develop and recommend a strategic plan for downtown Plainville.
(7) Promote a network of volunteer citizens, churches, and civic groups
and identify private and public resources (including education
resources) in the development and operation of downtown Plainville
beautification programs.
(8) Inform local and state officials of downtown Plainville beautification
issues and develop and advocate specific solutions to these issues.
(9) Engage technical, legal and clerical assistance in the performance of
its duties.
B. The Downtown Beautification Commission shall annually provide the
Town Council with a written report on or before December 1. The
report should address the Commission's activities, the status of existing
beautification programs, short- and long-range goals of the Commission,
and any other recommendations the Commission may have.
C. The Commission shall perform any matters assigned by the Town Council
that relate to the beautification of downtown Plainville.
§ 14-54. Construal with local, state and federal regulations.
This article shall not be construed to conflict with any local, state or federal
statute, rule, regulation or ordinance.
§ 14-53 PLAINVILLE CODE § 14-54
1:36
ARTICLE XII
Aviation Commission
[Adopted 10-5-2009]
§ 14-55. Membership; terms of office; officers; alternate members.
A. There shall be in the Town of Plainville an Aviation Commission of
seven resident electors appointed by the Town Council. Not more than
four members of the Commission shall belong to the same political
party. Three members shall be appointed for the term of three years,
three members for two years and one for one year, and thereafter all
appointments shall be for a term of three years. Each member shall
hold office until his successor has been appointed and has qualified.
The original Commission members shall commence their terms as of
November 1, 2009. A member appointed to the Commission to replace
a member whose term has not expired shall be appointed for the
unexpired term only. The Commission members shall appoint their own
Chairperson and Secretary who shall serve for a term of one year
commencing on November 1 of each year.
B. The Town Council may also appoint up to two alternates to perform
the duties of an absent member. Each alternate shall serve for a term
of three years. The original alternates' terms shall commence as of
November 1, 2009. Any vacancy in the membership of the Commission
shall be filled for the unexpired portion of the vacated member's term by
one of the Town Council's appointed alternates.
§ 14-56. Meetings and reports.
The Aviation Commission shall meet as often as it deems necessary but at
least monthly. It shall file a report on matters such as activity at the airport,
revenues, expenses, capital improvements, grants and such other items of
interest. The report shall be filed with the Town Council and Town Manager
no later than the 10th day of each month.
§ 14-57. Duties.
The Aviation Commission shall be responsible for such duties as are
provided by state statutes, the Town Charter or by legislation approved
by the Town Council which deals with Robertson Airport and its related
activities and facilities.
§ 14-58. Budget.
The Aviation Commission shall work in cooperation with the Town Manager
in the preparation of a budget setting forth estimated costs, revenues and
capital improvements during the ensuing fiscal year to be included in the
regular annual Town budget in accordance with the Town Charter.
§ 14-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-58
1:37
Chapter 23
ELECTIONS
§ 14-58 PLAINVILLE CODE § 14-58
1:38
ARTICLE I
Voting Districts
[Adopted 12-20-1982; amended 1-27-1992; 2-19-2002]
§ 23-1. Voting districts established.
Pursuant to § 9-169 of the Connecticut General Statutes and Chapter II,
Section 6, of the Charter of the Town of Plainville, said Town shall be and is
hereby divided into four voting districts, as follows:
A. District I: East Street and all streets easterly of East Street and southerly
of the east-west rail line.
B. District II: Cronk Road, East Main Street, Neal Court, Norton Place, and
all streets westerly of East Street and southerly of the east-west rail line.
C. District III: All streets northerly of the east-west rail line and westerly of
the north-south rail line and railroad right-of-way.
D. District IV: All streets northerly of the east-west rail line and easterly
of the north-south rail line and railroad right-of-way except Cronk Road,
East Main Street, Neal Court and Norton Place.
§ 23-2. Repealer.
An ordinance titled "An Ordinance Establishing Voting Districts" adopted by
the Town Council on August 17, 1970, is hereby repealed upon the effective
date of this article.
§ 23-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 23-2
1:39
Chapter 29
ETHICS, CODE OF
§ 29-1. Purpose.
The proper operation of democratic government requires that public
officials and employees be independent, impartial and responsible to the
people; that governmental decisions and policy be made free from undue
influence and in the proper channels of governmental structure; that public
office not be used for personal gain; and that the public have confidence in
the integrity of its government. In recognition of these goals there is hereby
established a Code of Ethics for all Town officials and employees, whether
elected, appointed or in the employ of the Town or of any of its boards or
agencies, whether paid or unpaid, full time or part time. The purpose of this
code is to establish standards of conduct for all such officials and employees
by setting forth those acts or actions that henceforth shall be deemed to be
incompatible with the best interests of the Town of Plainville.
§ 29-2. Prohibited acts.
A. No Town official or employee shall secure or attempt to secure personal
profit or gain by virtue of his public office or by virtue of confidential
information of which he is aware by reason of his public office. No Town
official or employee shall aid, abet or encourage anyone in securing or
attempting to secure personal profit or gain by virtue of confidential
information of which he is aware by reason of his public office. No Town
official or employee shall disclose confidential information outside of the
proper performance of his duties to anyone.
B. No Town official or employee shall grant any special consideration,
treatment or advantage to any citizen beyond that which is available by
law or regulation to every other citizen.
C. No Town official or employee shall request or permit the use of Townowned
equipment, property or materials for personal convenience or
profit except when such services are available to the public generally or
are provided for the use of such official or employee in the conduct of his
official business.
D. Any Town official or employee who makes decisions on behalf of the
public shall disqualify himself from consideration of such matters in
which he, his spouse, offspring, sibling, parent, members of his
household, or employer will gain financial advantage or suffer financial
detriment as a result of the decision reached. In any situation in which a
decision on any question cannot be arrived at without the participation
of a decision-maker who would otherwise be disqualified under this
subsection, such decision-maker may participate and act but shall make
his conflict of interest public.
E. No Town official or employee shall engage in or accept private
employment or render services for any private interest when such
employment or service is incompatible with the proper discharge of his
official duties or would tend to impair his independence of judgment or
§ 23-2 PLAINVILLE CODE § 29-2
1:40
action in the performance of his official duties. Any official or employee
who shall desire to accept private employment or render services to
private interests may submit his prospective employment to his
immediate superior, if an employee, or to the appointing body, if an
official, for prior clearance of the prospective employment's
compatibility with the public functions or duties of the official or
employee.
F. No Town official or employee shall accept any gift, favor or
entertainment which comes to him by reason of his public office or
employment, except for ceremonial, public or open functions.
§ 29-3. Ethics Commission.
A. The Town of Plainville hereby establishes a Municipal Ethics
Commission (hereinafter the "Commission") consisting of five members.
The members shall be appointed by the Town Council. Appointments
to the Commission shall require at least six Town Council votes. The
members of the Commission shall serve a term of three years. No
individual shall be appointed for more than nine consecutive years. No
more than three shall be members of the same political party.16
B. All members of the Commission shall be electors of the municipality. No
member of the Commission shall:
(1) Hold or campaign for any public office during his term;
(2) Hold office in any political party or political committee;
(3) Serve as a member of any other agency of the municipality;
(4) Be a public official or public employee of the municipality or an
official or employee of a quasi-public agency of the municipality;
(5) Be a party to any contract to do business with the Town of Plainville;
or
(6) Have held elected office for Town Council, Board of Education,
Registrar of Voters, Judge of Probate, Board of Library Trustees or
Constable in a three-year period prior to appointment.17
C. Political activity.
(1) Although any member or employee of the Commission shall have
an unrestricted right to vote, make political contributions or attend
fund-raising or other political events, no member or employee shall
publicly support any candidates for any municipal office subject
to the Commission's jurisdiction, including but not limited to
volunteering as a campaign worker, giving a speech at a political
event or formally endorsing a candidate, or posting a sign at his/her
home or business.
(2) No candidate for municipal office may disseminate information that
indicates that a Commission member or employee supports the
candidate's candidacy.
D. The members of the Commission shall elect a Chairperson who shall
preside at meetings of the Commission and a Vice Chairperson to
16.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
17.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 29-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-3
1:41
preside in the absence of the Chairperson. Three members shall
constitute a quorum. A majority vote of the Commission shall be
required for action of the Commission. The Chairperson or any three
members may call a meeting of the Commission.
E. Any member of the Commission may be removed upon recommendation
of the Town Manager and by vote of the Town Council, after a hearing,
in the event that said member is found to have violated the provisions of
this chapter or the Code of Ethics.
F. The Commission shall:
(1) Compile and maintain a record of all reports, advisory opinions,
statements and memoranda filed by and with the Commission to
facilitate public access to such reports and statements;
(2) Issue advisory opinions with regard to the requirements of the Code
of Ethics upon the request of any person bound by the code;
(3) Participate in and coordinate ethics training for Town officials and
employees;
(4) Distribute a copy of the Code of Ethics to each Town official and
employee; and
(5) Report annually on or before February 1 to the legislative body of
the municipality, summarizing the activities of the Commission.
G. Advisory opinions rendered by the Commission, until amended or
revoked, shall be binding on the Commission and shall be deemed to be
final decisions of the Commission. Any advisory opinion concerning the
person who requested the opinion and who acted in reliance thereon, in
good faith, shall be an absolute defense in any matter brought under the
provisions of this code.
H. The Commission may employ necessary staff or outside counsel within
available appropriations from the Town Council.
§ 29-4. Complaint procedure.
A. The jurisdiction of the Commission's investigatory powers is limited to
alleged violations of the Code of Ethics. Upon the complaint of any
person on a form prescribed by the Commission, signed under penalty
of false statement, or upon its own complaint, signed by at least four
members of the Commission, the Commission shall investigate any
alleged violation of the code. If a complaint alleges criminal acts, as
defined by state or federal law, the Commission shall forward the
complaint to the Town Manager and Police Chief, who shall have
independent and exclusive jurisdiction over the matter until such time
as the records of the investigation become public.
B. Not later than 15 days after the receipt or issuance of such complaint,
the Commission shall provide notice of such receipt or issuance and a
copy of the complaint by registered or certified mail to any respondent
against whom such complaint is filed and shall provide notice of the
receipt of such complaint to the complainant.
C. If the complaint has been filed by a member of the public, the
Commission shall review the complaint to determine whether or not the
allegations contained therein if substantiated constitute a violation of
any provision of the Code of Ethics. If the Commission determines that
§ 29-3 PLAINVILLE CODE § 29-4
1:42
the complaint does not allege sufficient acts to constitute a violation of
the code, the Commission shall dismiss the complaint and duly notify
the complainant and respondent by registered or certified mail. If the
Commission determines that the complaint alleges sufficient acts to
constitute a violation, then within 30 days after so determining the
Commission shall fix a date for the commencement of a hearing on the
allegation(s) contained in the complaint. The hearing date regarding
any complaint shall be not more than 60 days after the filing of the
complaint.
D. In the conduct of its investigation of an alleged violation of the code,
the Commission shall have the power to hold hearings, administer oaths,
examine witnesses, receive oral and documentary evidence, subpoena
witnesses and require the production for examination by the
Commission of any records which the Commission deems relevant in any
matter under investigation or in question.
E. The respondent shall have the right to appear and to be represented by
legal counsel and to examine and cross-examine witnesses at any such
hearing. Any hearing conducted by the Commission shall be governed by
the Administrative Procedures Act as set forth in Connecticut General
Statutes § 4-166 et seq.
F. The Commission shall make no finding that there is a violation of any
provision of the code except upon the concurring vote of at least four of
its members.
G. No complaint may be made under the code except within one year after
the violation alleged in the complaint has been committed.
H. After receipt of information from an individual, the Commission shall not
disclose the identity of such individual without the individual's consent
unless disclosure is unavoidable.
I. Each complaint under this chapter and the record of the Commission's
investigation shall remain confidential, except upon the request of the
respondent, unless and until the Commission determines that there is
probable cause that a violation was committed. Probable cause means
more than mere suspicion. There must be facts and circumstances, of
which the Commission possesses trustworthy information, sufficient to
justify the belief of a reasonable person that a violation of the Code of
Ethics has been or is being committed and that the respondent is the
person who committed it. See e.g. State v. Glen, 251 Conn. 356 (1999).
No complainant, respondent, witness, designated party or Commission
member or employee shall disclose to any third party any information
learned from an investigation of a complaint, including knowledge of the
existence of a complaint.
J. The Commission shall inform the complainant and the respondent of
its finding with regard to the complaint and provide them a summary
of its reasons for making such a finding by registered or certified mail
not later than 15 business days after termination of the hearing. The
Commission shall make public a finding of a violation not later than 20
business days after the termination of the hearing. Upon a finding of
violation, the entire record of the investigation shall be disclosable. If
the complaint is dismissed or there is a finding of no probable cause, the
§ 29-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-4
1:43
respondent shall be indemnified in accordance with Connecticut General
Statutes § 7-465(a), including reimbursement of reasonable attorney's
fees incurred as a result of the complaint.
K. Any respondent aggrieved by a decision of the Commission regarding a
finding of a violation may, within 30 days, take an appeal to the Superior
Court for the judicial district in which the municipality is located.
§ 29-5. Ethics violations.
Violation of any provision of the Code of Ethics shall constitute grounds for,
and may be punished by:
A. Public censure and reprimand;
B. In the case of an elected official, request of resignation by the
Commission;
C. In the case of a public employee, recommendation of dismissal from
employment or recommendation of suspension from employment for not
more than 30 days without pay, provided that the violation or record of
cumulative violations constitutes "just cause" in accordance with settled
labor law, upon advice of counsel;
D. A civil penalty in accordance with the Municipal Powers Act;18 or
E. Restitution of any pecuniary benefits received because of the violation
committed.
§ 29-6. Code of conduct for Ethics Commission.
The members of the Commission shall adhere to the following Code of
Conduct under which the members shall:
A. Observe high standards of conduct so that the integrity and
independence of the Commission may be preserved;
B. Respect and comply with the law and conduct themselves at all times
in a manner which promotes public confidence in the integrity and
impartiality of the Commission;
C. Be faithful to the law and maintain professional competence in the law;
D. Be unswayed by partisan interests, public clamor or fear of criticism;
E. Maintain order and decorum in proceedings of the Commission;
F. Be patient, dignified and courteous to all persons who appear in
Commission proceedings and to other persons with whom the members
deal in their official capacity;
G. Refrain from making any statement outside of a Commission proceeding
which would have a likelihood of prejudicing a Commission proceeding;
H. Refrain from making any statement outside of a Commission proceeding
that a reasonable person would expect to be disseminated by means
of public communication if the member or employee should know that
such statement would have a likelihood of materially prejudicing or
embarrassing a complainant or a respondent;
I. Preserve confidences of complainants and respondents;
J. Exercise independent professional judgment on behalf of the
Commission; and
18.Editor's Note: See Connecticut General Statutes § 7-148.
§ 29-4 PLAINVILLE CODE § 29-6
1:44
K. Represent the Commission competently.
Chapter 38
FIRE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarms — See Ch. 150. Fires and fire prevention — See Ch. 219.
§ 38-1. Composition.
There shall be a Division of Fire Suppression also known as the "Plainville
Fire Department" comprised of a Chief, a Deputy Chief, a First Assistant
Chief and a Second Assistant Chief.
§ 38-2. Fire Company.
A. The Town of Plainville (hereinafter referred to as "Town") shall enter
into an agreement with the Plainville Fire Company, Incorporated
(hereinafter referred to as "Company"), for the protection of the Town
from fire with such conditions as to financial assistance and the
observance of such ordinances, rules and regulations as the Town
Council shall prescribe.
B. The Company shall consist of call members, which include Department
officers, Company officers, Fire Police and support staff appointed by the
Town Council.
C. Company line officers shall consist of such officers as may be determined
by the Company through its bylaws, not inconsistent with this chapter
and the rules and regulations of the Department, and shall be approved
by the Town Council.
D. The Company shall not leave town with Fire Department apparatus
except by permission of the Director of Safety. Such requests shall be
submitted to the Director of Safety by the Fire Chief.
E. The Company may make bylaws not inconsistent with the rules and
regulations of the Department and Town ordinances.
F. The Company shall be paid a stipend for members' attendance at alarms
and emergencies from the time of the alarm (or such time as the member
arrives at the fire if later) until the member is excused or until roll is
called.
§ 38-3. Membership in Department and Company.
A. An applicant for membership in the Department and Company must
fulfill the following minimum requirements:
(1) Applicant shall have attained the age of 18 years or the statutory age
of majority, whichever may be higher.
(2) Applicant shall be a resident of the Town of Plainville or, if a resident
of a neighboring town, live within three driving miles of the Town of
Plainville Fire Station. The Town Council will consider extensions of
§ 29-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-3
1:45
this distance, not to exceed five driving miles, upon recommendation
of the Fire Chief. Applicants who are not residents of Plainville
and do not meet the mileage requirement are eligible so long as
they work full time in Town and have written verification from their
employer that it is acceptable for them to answer fire calls during
work hours.
(3) Applicant shall be of good moral character.
(4) Applicant shall submit to all physical exams and medical tests, as
required by the Director of Safety, by a physician appointed by
the Town licensed to practice the healing arts by the State of
Connecticut, attesting to the physical fitness for service with the
Department and Company, prior to becoming a member. The
applicant shall also execute a release of medical records directed to
any physician if requested by the Director of Safety.
(5) Applicant must successfully complete all training courses for basic
firefighting as established by the Fire Chief of the Department and
Company bylaws. The training courses shall be completed within two
years of the applicant's appointment as a probationary firefighter
by the Town Council. Applicants with verified prior firefighting
experience which in the judgment of the Fire Chief of the
Department is of equivalent standing may be granted a waiver of this
requirement.
B. All members and officers of the Department and Company shall be
retired from the Department and Company upon attaining the age of 65
years unless the person is appointed to the Fire Police or support staff
(see §§ 38-10 and 38-11).
§ 38-4. Requirements for continued membership.
A. Each member of the Department and Company shall be required to
submit to the Director of Safety a certificate from a physician licensed
to practice the healing arts by the State of Connecticut attesting to the
member's physical fitness for continued service with the Department
after any hospital confinement, bone fracture or burns. The member
shall also execute a release of medical records directed to any physician
if requested by the Director of Safety. The member shall not return to
Fire Department duties until cleared by the Town's medical advisor.
B. The Fire Chief may suspend a member of the Department and Company
when he/she has substantial evidence of physical or mental impairment
which may affect the member's ability to perform the duties and
responsibilities of a firefighter.
C. The Director of Safety, at the Town's expense, may require a member of
the Department and Company to submit to physical exams and medical
tests by a physician licensed to practice the healing arts by the State
of Connecticut or by a person qualified to administer such tests when
the Director of Safety has significant evidence of physical or mental
impairment which may affect the member's ability to perform the duties
and responsibilities of a firefighter. Such exams or tests are to determine
the member's physical and mental fitness for continued service with
the Department and Company. The member shall execute a release of
§ 38-3 PLAINVILLE CODE § 38-4
1:46
medical records directed to any physician who treated the member if
requested by the Director of Safety. Should the member refuse to be
examined or tested as directed by the Director of Safety, the member
shall be immediately suspended from the Department and Company.
D. A member shall execute a letter of understanding at the time of his/
her appointment acknowledging that he/she understands that an
unsatisfactory physical and/or medical examination makes him/her
ineligible for service and he/she has no right to a hearing before the
Town Council pursuant to the Town Charter provision relating to
removal of appointees of the Town.
E. All members and officers shall attend all special training sessions that,
in the opinion of the Fire Chief and Director of Safety, are deemed
appropriate and necessary for the continued safe operation of the
Department. Any member or officer who fails to attend those sessions as
directed by the Fire Chief may be subject to disciplinary action by the
Fire Chief.
F. Members shall be required periodically to complete refresher training in
basic firefighting skills.
(1) Such training shall be made available through the Department and
the content of said training program shall be determined by the Fire
Chief of the Department or his/her designee.
(2) Each component of such refresher training program shall be offered
by the Department no less than twice each year.
(3) A tentative schedule for such training shall be posted no later than
the first Monday in February of each year.
(4) Each member shall complete all components of the refresher
training as required.
(5) Determination of successful completion of the refresher training
shall be made by the Fire Chief of the Department or his/her
designee.
(6) Failure to complete said refresher training may result in suspension
by the Fire Chief of the Department. The Fire Chief of the
Department is authorized to grant waivers from the provisions of this
section when extenuating circumstances exist.
(7) Members assigned to specialty units may be required to show proof
of refresher training for such specialty areas in addition to the
above-mentioned requirements. Such specialty training shall be
subject to the requirements of Subsection F(6) of this section.
G. The chief officers shall establish the standards for response to alarms
and other Department functions. Any member who fails to meet these
standards may be subject to disciplinary action by the Fire Chief.
§ 38-5. Fire Chief.
A. The Fire Chief shall be appointed by the Town Council. Such
appointment may be made following written test and/or oral interview
with consideration given to firefighting experience and training, or by
any other manner determined by the Town Council.
B. The Fire Chief shall serve for a term of two years, the term commencing
on his/her appointment at the first Town Council meeting in January of
§ 38-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-5
1:47
each odd year. The Fire Chief may be reappointed for three additional
successive terms of two years. No person shall be reappointed to Fire
Chief after eight continuous years in such position unless at least two
years have passed from the last term served. Qualified Fire Department
members can submit applications to the Town Council by October 15 of
the even-number years.
C. The duties and responsibilities of the Fire Chief are as follows. The Fire
Chief:
(1) Shall have command at fires and alarms over all members of the
Department and Company, and all apparatus and equipment
belonging to the same, and may direct such measures as he/she may
deem appropriate to bring the incident under control.
(2) Shall direct and command the Fire Police, Chaplains, and Fire
Marshals not inconsistent with the Connecticut General Statutes.
(3) Shall inspect fire houses, apparatus and equipment as often as every
month and make report to the Director of Safety as to the condition
of the same and such suggestions and recommendations as may be
deemed proper.
(4) Shall have the power to take disciplinary action up to suspension
from duty of any officer or member of the Company, and to supervise
the administration of discipline by any line officer in accordance
with § 38-14 of this chapter (regarding fire-related duty, for
insubordination, disorderly conduct, or neglect of duty) for violation
of this chapter, rules or regulations, or medical reason when he/she
believes the member's life or other lives may be in jeopardy. Such
suspension may be for a definite period not exceeding 180 days or, if
dismissal is warranted, shall continue pending the action of the Town
Council.
(5) May call out the Company for parades, drills, inspections, or for
testing apparatus.
(6) Shall be responsible for providing suitable training programs for fire
personnel.
(7) Shall have the administrative responsibility for the Division of Fire
Suppression.
(8) Shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed by ordinance
or by order of the Director of Safety.
§ 38-6. Deputy Chief.
A. The Deputy Chief shall be appointed by the Town Council. Such
appointment may be made following written test and/or oral interview
with consideration given to firefighting experience and training or by any
other manner determined by the Town Council.
B. The Deputy Chief shall be appointed at the first Town Council meeting
in January of each odd year for a term of two years. Qualified Fire
Department members can submit applications to the Town Council by
October 15 of the even-number years.
C. In the absence of the Fire Chief, the Deputy Chief shall possess all the
powers, duties and responsibilities of the Fire Chief.
§ 38-5 PLAINVILLE CODE § 38-7
1:48
§ 38-7. First Assistant Chief.
A. The First Assistant Chief shall be appointed by the Town Council. Such
appointment may be made following written test and/or oral interview
with consideration given to firefighting experience and training or by any
other manner determined by the Town Council.
B. The First Assistant Chief shall be appointed at the first Town Council
meeting in January of each odd year for a term of two years. Qualified
Fire Department members can submit applications to the Town Council
by October 15 of the even-number years.
C. In the absence of the Fire Chief and Deputy Chief, the First Assistant
Chief shall possess all the powers, duties and responsibilities of the Fire
Chief.
§ 38-8. Second Assistant Chief.
A. The Second Assistant Chief shall be appointed by the Town Council
annually at the first Town Council meeting in January. The Second
Assistant Chief shall have obtained the rank of Captain. Such
appointment may be made following written test and/or oral interview
with consideration given to firefighting experience and training or by any
other manner determined by the Town Council. The initial appointment
date of the Second Assistant Chief will be at the recommendation of the
Fire Chief.
B. In the absence of the Fire Chief, Deputy Chief and First Assistant Chief,
the Second Assistant Chief shall possess all the powers, duties and
responsibilities of the Fire Chief.
§ 38-9. Chain of command.
A. There shall be established a chain of command to assure direction
and leadership. During the absence or inability of the Chiefs, the next
ranking line officer shall possess all the powers, duties and
responsibilities of the Fire Chief.19
B. The Fire Chief will determine the chain of command at the beginning
of his/her term and make changes as necessary. The following members
shall be eligible to be included in the chain of command: chief officers,
company officers, Fire Marshal, Safety Officer, and the senior ranking
Company member.
C. If there is a catastrophic event, the Town Council may appoint an Acting
Fire Chief to ensure a chain of command.20
§ 38-10. Fire Police.
A. Eligibility.
(1) An active member who desires consideration for appointment as a
Fire Police shall notify in writing the Fire Chief or his/her designee
of his/her desire.
19.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
20.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 38-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-10
1:49
(2) Upon receipt of such written notice, the Fire Chief, or his/her
designee, shall verify that the member is in compliance with
§ 38-3A(4) of this chapter.
(3) Upon compliance with § 38-3A(4) of this chapter, the Fire Chief
having been satisfied that the member is able to perform the duties
of a Fire Police, the Fire Chief shall submit a written request to
the Town Council through the Town Manager that the member be
appointed as a Fire Police.
(4) A Fire Police shall be ineligible for service upon reaching the age of
70 years.
B. Duties.
(1) Fire Police shall perform powers and duties as set forth in § 7-313a
of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended. Such powers and
duties may be exercised in other communities when the Department
is engaged in mutual assistance.
(2) Such powers and duties shall include traffic control and regulation,
maintaining order at fire or incident scene, protection of property
removed from fire or incident scene and such other powers and
duties as directed by the incident commander, all under the
command of the Fire Chief.
(3) Fire Police may be passengers in any Fire Department vehicle but
shall have no right to operate or drive Fire Department vehicles and
apparatus other than utility vehicles, as directed by the Fire Chief.
(4) Fire Police shall not perform any firefighting duties or be issued any
structural firefighting personal protective equipment (PPE).
C. Miscellaneous provisions. Upon appointment, a Fire Police shall be
covered under the Town's workers' compensation insurance, which
coverage shall be the same as provided to active members of the
Department.
§ 38-11. Support staff (non-firefighting position).
A. Eligibility.
(1) An active member who desires consideration for appointment as
support staff shall notify in writing the Fire Chief or his/her designee
of his/her desire.
(2) Upon receipt of such written notice, the Fire Chief, or his/her
designee, shall verify that the member is in compliance with
§ 38-3A(4) of this chapter.
(3) Upon compliance with § 38-3A(4) of this chapter, the Fire Chief
having been satisfied that the member is able to perform the duties
of support staff, the Fire Chief shall submit a written request to
the Town Council through the Town Manager that the member be
appointed as support staff.
(4) Support staff shall be ineligible for service upon reaching the age of
70 years.
B. Duties.
(1) Support staff shall perform powers and duties as assigned by the
Fire Chief. Such powers and duties may include assignment as a
Safety Officer, Accountability Officer, Rehabilitation Leader, Staging
§ 38-10 PLAINVILLE CODE § 38-11
1:50
Officer and any other administrative functions as determined by the
Fire Chief.
(2) Support staff may be passengers in any Fire Department vehicle but
shall have no right to operate or drive Fire Department vehicles and
apparatus other than utility vehicles, as directed by the Fire Chief or
Incident Commander.
(3) Support staff shall not perform any firefighting duties or be issued
any structural firefighting personal protective equipment (PPE)
without the specific approval of the Fire Chief and acknowledgment
by the Town Council. [Amended 6-15-2015]
C. Miscellaneous provisions. Upon appointment, support staff shall be
covered under the Town's workers' compensation insurance, which
coverage shall be the same as provided to active members of the
Department.
§ 38-12. Chaplains.
A. The Company may designate members of the clergy as Chaplains.
B. Such Chaplains shall be acknowledged by the Town Council as holding
the status of probationary firefighters and shall thereafter be provided
such insurance and workers' compensation coverage as is provided other
firefighters of the Town.
C. Chaplains shall not perform any firefighting duties or be issued any
structural firefighting personal protective equipment (PPE).
§ 38-13. Duties of members.
A. All members shall act in accordance with written rules and procedures
established by the Fire Chief.
B. All members shall report back to the firehouse after each incident unless
excused by the officer in command.
§ 38-14. Code of Conduct.
A. Statement of purpose.
(1) This Code of Conduct establishes the platform for acceptable
behavior within the Plainville Fire Service, the members of which
represent the Plainville Fire Company, the Plainville Fire
Department, and the Town of Plainville. Becoming a firefighter is
accompanied by being granted the public trust, which requires
exemplary behavior, a reputation that is beyond reproach, personal
and professional discipline, professional competence, and
responsibility for all actions.
(2) Therefore, this Code of Conduct shall ensure that each member
of the Plainville Fire Service conducts himself/herself in such a
manner as to not bring discredit to himself/herself, the Company, the
Department, or the Town. This code shall apply at all times, whether
in or out of uniform, in or out of Town, and whether or not displaying
any insignia that identifies him/her as a Plainville firefighter.
B. Definitions.
(1) As used in this code, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
§ 38-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-14
1:51
CHAIN OF COMMAND — The Fire Service chain of command as
defined in § 38-9 of this chapter.
FIRE COMPANY — The Plainville Fire Company, Inc., a corporation
organized under the laws of the State of Connecticut, and its
predecessor organizations, which staffs the Plainville Fire
Department below the level of Chief Officers and has had an
unwritten contract to provide fire protection and related services to
the community since 1885.
FIRE DEPARTMENT — The organization provided for and
established by the Charter of the Town of Plainville, Chapter VI,
Section 3b, to provide fire protection and related services to the
community.
FIREFIGHTER —
FIRE SERVICE — The officers of the Plainville Fire Department, the
officers and firefighters of the Plainville Fire Company and the office
of the Fire Marshal, as elsewhere defined.
LINE OFFICER — Any person appointed as a Chief Officer by the
Town Council, and any person elected as an officer by the Fire
Company (Captain through Lieutenants).
(2) Word usage.
(a) Gender. As used in this code, the masculine gender shall also
refer to the feminine gender.
(b) May. An optional action, or a choice of actions.
(c) Shall. A mandatory action.
C. Violations. While every act or omission which will be sufficient cause
for disciplinary action is not and cannot be identified, the following
constitute serious violations that are prohibited on the part of
firefighters and shall constitute grounds for disciplinary action:
(1) Alcohol.
(a) Being under the influence of alcohol when responding to any
fire or other emergency, or when participating in any Fire
Any person whose application has been accepted by the Fire
Company and appointed by the Town Council and who is training
in firefighting and related duties.
(a)
Any person who has completed the training necessary to be
appointed an active firefighter and is awaiting appointment.
(b)
(c) Any active firefighter.
(d) Fire Police and support staff.
Any person who has resigned as a firefighter but retains
associate membership in the Plainville Fire Company.
(e)
(f) Any retired firefighter.
§ 38-14 PLAINVILLE CODE § 38-14
1:52
Service activity, such as training or apparatus or equipment
maintenance or repair.
(b) Operating any Department vehicle after having consumed any
alcohol.
(2) Bribes.
(a) Soliciting or accepting favors, privileges, bribes, gratuities or
items of value.
(b) Failure to report attempted solicitation, offered bribes or
gratuities, offered favors, privileges or items of value for
personal gain.
(3) Conduct unbecoming. Any act or omission that tends to discredit
the firefighter, the Plainville Fire Service, the community as a
whole, and/or the Town, or tends to impede the operation or lower
the morale of the Fire Service.
(4) Breach of confidentiality.
(a) Making unauthorized public statements, oral or written,
concerning Fire Service activities or matters.
(b) Making public statements, oral or written, which are known to
be false or to be in reckless disregard of known facts related to
Fire Service matters.
(c) Releasing material concerning confidential Fire Service
records, reports, information or matters. Authority for any
statement or release of information shall rest with the Fire
Chief or his/her designee.
(d) Spreading gossip or reports injurious to the character of
another member or tending to be injurious to the welfare of the
Fire Service.
(5) Disorderly conduct. Including, but not limited to, public
intoxication; breach of peace; immoral or indecent conduct;
tampering with apparatus, equipment, radios or personal
protective equipment; and reckless or negligent behavior, including
operation of a motor vehicle, that may result, or does result, in
damage to or destruction of Department property, the property of
others, or injury to another person or persons.
(6) Falsification. Intentional falsification of, or omission from, any
document or record related to Fire Service membership or
activities. Acts of commission consist of conscious and known
deceptive statements. Acts of omission consist of withholding of
information necessary to correct false assumptions.
(7) Harassment. Actions, words, jokes or comments based on an
individual's sex, race, ethnicity, age, religion, handicap, or any
other legally protected characteristic.
(8) Illegal drugs. Possession, distribution, sale or being under the
influence of illegal drugs at any time.
(9) Prescription medication. Being under the influence of any
prescription medication which in any way impairs abilities when
responding to any fire or other emergency, or when participating
in any Fire Service activity, such as practice or apparatus or
equipment maintenance or repair.21
§ 38-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-14
1:53
(10) Insubordination. Including, but not limited to:
(a) Refusal to follow the direct order of a superior.
(b) Refusal to perform assigned tasks.
(c) Refusal to cooperate in an inquiry or investigation.
(d) Refusal to follow standard operating procedures or safety rules
and regulations.
(11) Loss or damage. Failure to report loss of or damage to Department
or Company property.
(12) Theft. The unauthorized use, removal or misappropriation of
property, including but not limited to property of the Town,
Department, Company, other members of the Fire Service, and
owners or occupants of emergency scenes. Also, misuse or
misappropriation of Company or Department funds.
(13) Unauthorized entry. Unauthorized entry into any office, storage
space, desk or locker of another.
(14) Unsanitary conditions. Knowingly causing or contributing to
unsanitary conditions.
(15) Violence. Threatened or actual physical violence/assault, with or
without a weapon.
D. Disciplinary actions. Progressive discipline is a process that assists a
firefighter in meeting the standards of the Code of Conduct. Discipline
addresses unacceptable behavior and attempts to prevent further
violations. If problems can be discussed and resolved informally, the
need for discipline may be avoided. Therefore, this subsection of the
Code of Conduct shall not prohibit any line officer from coaching any
firefighter as to performance or behavior, which coaching shall not
be construed to be discipline. Disciplinary action may be initiated as
the result of a formal complaint by an eyewitness to a violation or by
physical evidence of a violation. All firefighters as defined in Subsections
(a) through (d) in the definition of "firefighter" in Subsection B(1) of
this section shall be subject to discipline under this subsection. All
firefighters as defined in Subsections (e) and (f) in the definition of
"firefighter" in Subsection B(1) of this section shall be referred to the
Plainville Fire Company for disciplinary action. There are four levels of
disciplinary action:
(1) Level 1: Oral reprimand.
(a) A first minor violation.
(b) Shall be administered by any line officer and must be initiated
immediately upon an officer becoming aware of a violation.
(c) Documentation of a Level 1 reprimand shall consist of an original
and two copies and shall be signed by the firefighter in the
presence of a witness. The original shall be promptly submitted
to the Fire Chief for review and filing in the firefighter's
personnel folder. A copy shall be given to the firefighter and a
second copy shall be retained by the originating officer.
(2) Level 2: Written reprimand.
(a) A second minor violation or a serious violation.
21.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 38-14 PLAINVILLE CODE § 38-14
1:54
(b) Investigation must be initiated within three days of an officer
becoming aware of the offense.
(c) Shall be administered by any line officer.
(d) Documentation of a Level 2 reprimand shall consist of an original
and two copies and shall be signed by the firefighter in the
presence of a witness. The original shall be promptly submitted
to the Fire Chief for review and filing in the firefighter's
personnel folder. A copy shall be given to the firefighter and a
second copy shall be retained by the originating officer.
(3) Level 3: Suspension for a defined period.
(a) A third violation at Level 1 or Level 2, or a combination of
these in any consecutive twenty-four-month period beginning on
the date of the first violation, or a first serious or significant
violation.
(b) Investigation must be initiated within five days of an officer
becoming aware of the offense.
(c) Shall be administered by the Fire Chief or, in his/her absence,
the next senior Assistant Chief.
[1] May not exceed a period of 180 days and shall be in force
pending action of the Disciplinary Appeal Board, if appealed.
[2] May prohibit the firefighter from performing specific
functions or may prohibit the firefighter from participating in
any way in Fire Department and/or Fire Company activities,
depending upon the nature of the violation.
[3] An exception to such prohibition may be made by the Fire
Chief for extenuating circumstances such as a funeral,
participation in the Memorial Day parade, or meeting a
required physical examination or self-contained breathing
apparatus (SCBA) fit test.
(d) Documentation of a Level 3 suspension shall consist of an
original and two copies and shall be signed by the firefighter
in the presence of a witness. The original shall be promptly
submitted to the Fire Chief for review and filing in the
firefighter's personnel folder. A copy shall be given to the
firefighter and a second copy shall be retained by the originating
officer.
(e) Extension of a suspension, or consecutive suspensions, for the
same offense is prohibited.
(4) Level 4: Suspension pending dismissal.
(a) A violation at Level 3, combined with two additional Level 1 or
Level 2 offenses in any consecutive twenty-four-month period
beginning on the date of the first violation, or a violation of
such significance as to have severe and lasting impact upon
the individual's ability to perform his/her duties as a firefighter,
or which brings discredit to himself/herself, the Company, the
Department or the Town.
(b) Investigation must be initiated within five days of an officer
becoming aware of the offense.
§ 38-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-14
1:55
(c) Shall be administered by the Fire Chief or, in his/her absence, the
next senior Assistant Chief and shall be in force pending action
by the Disciplinary Appeal Board, if appealed, and by the Town
Council.
(d) Shall prohibit the firefighter from participating in any activities
of the Fire Department and Fire Company.
(e) Documentation shall consist of an original and four copies. The
original shall be retained by the Fire Chief and filed in the
firefighter's personnel folder; one copy shall be forwarded to
the Director of Safety; one copy shall be forwarded to the Town
Manager after five days but in no more than 10 days, excluding
Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays, together with the Fire
Chief's report and recommendation, for transmission to the Town
Council; one copy shall be given to the firefighter; and one copy
shall be retained by the originating officer. The firefighter shall
sign the original and all copies in the presence of a witness prior
to their distribution.
(f) Dismissal of the firefighter shall be by the Town Council, as
appointing authority, subject to appeal if requested by the
firefighter. Such appeal shall be in accordance with Chapter III,
Section 13, of the Plainville Town Charter.
E. Appeals process.
(1) Disciplinary Appeal Board.
(a) There shall be established a Disciplinary Appeal Board, which
shall consist of five regular members and two alternates, the
makeup of which shall be as follows:
[1] A Deputy or an Assistant Chief, to be appointed annually in
February by the Fire Chief for a one-year term commencing
March 1.
[2] A Company line officer, to be appointed annually in February
by the Captain for a one-year term commencing March 1.
[3] Three elected Company members, active or retired, each
of whom shall have served at least five years as an active
firefighter. Election shall be held in December to fill the
expiring term for three years, commencing March 1.
[4] Two elected Alternates, who shall be Company members,
active or retired, each of whom shall have served at least
five years as an active firefighter. Election shall be held
in December to fill the expiring term for three years,
commencing March 1.
[5] Alternate members may attend all meetings of the Board but
shall have no voice or vote in the proceedings, unless acting
in the absence of one of the three elected regular members.
[6] The Fire Chief or his/her designee shall call a meeting of
the Appeal Board in March to elect a Chairperson, Vice
Chairperson and Secretary for the year. All Disciplinary
Appeal Board members will annually sign a confidentiality
agreement with respect to any proceedings held during their
term.
§ 38-14 PLAINVILLE CODE § 38-14
1:56
(b) Meetings and appeal hearings shall be electronically recorded
and transcribed verbatim. The Department shall be responsible
for providing said recording and transcription and shall be the
official repository for the minutes of any appeal hearing and of
any meeting for the purpose of rendering a recommendation.
A copy of the minutes shall be kept in the firefighter's record.
Both the electronic recording and the transcribed minutes shall
be retained by the Department in accordance with the retention
schedule referenced in § 7-109 of the Connecticut General
Statutes.
(c) If an appeal has been initiated and cannot be completed before
March 1, the seated Disciplinary Appeal Board shall remain in
office until the hearing(s) is completed.
(2) Appeal.
(a) There shall be no right of appeal from Level 1 or Level 2
disciplinary action.
(b) Level 3 disciplinary action may be appealed only to the
Disciplinary Appeal Board.
(c) Any firefighter desiring to appeal a Level 3 or Level 4
disciplinary action must within five days, excluding Saturdays,
Sundays and legal holidays, notify the Chairperson or, in his/
her absence, the Vice Chairperson of the Disciplinary Appeal
Board, in writing, of his/her intent to appeal the disciplinary
action. However, he/she shall remain on suspension pending the
outcome of the appeal hearing.
(d) Upon notification of a firefighter's desire to appeal from a Level
4 suspension, the Chairperson of the Board shall promptly notify
the Fire Chief, who shall not transmit the disciplinary action
documents to the Town Manager for action by the Town Council,
pending action by the Disciplinary Appeal Board.
(e) The Board shall hold an initial meeting to review the Level
3 or Level 4 disciplinary action and any relevant documents.
The Board shall notify witnesses deemed necessary within the
Company membership. Not to impede the progress of the
hearing, any witnesses failing to appear at the designated
hearing, without having a valid excuse given to the Fire Chief,
shall be automatically suspended from the Department for 30
days.
(f) The Chairperson shall call a hearing not less than 10 nor more
than 15 calendar days following receipt of an appeal, unless
justifiable and extenuating circumstances delay said hearing.
Notice of the hearing shall be provided to all members and
alternates of the Board, the Fire Chief, any officers involved in
the disciplinary action, and the appealing firefighter.
(g) Any Board member who is a party to the disciplinary action or
witness shall be excluded from the Board from sitting on that
hearing and shall be replaced, in the case of an assistant chief
by another assistant chief, in the case of a line officer by another
§ 38-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-14
1:57
line officer, and in the case of a regular member by an alternate
member.
(h) All hearings shall be held in executive session.
(i) The Chairperson shall preside over the hearing. No formal rules
of evidence shall apply but the Chairperson may exclude
irrelevant or duplicative evidence.
(j) The Board shall hear testimony, under oath administered by the
presiding Board officer, from the officer initiating the complaint,
from the chief officer initiating the disciplinary action, and from
the firefighter.
(k) Both the Board and the firefighter shall be permitted to ask
questions and to call witnesses to the incident, who shall testify
under oath administered by the presiding Board officer.
(l) Upon completion of the hearing, the Board shall meet in
executive session to determine its recommendation. The Board
may adjourn from time to time but shall reach a decision within
five days, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays. If
the Board is unable to reach a decision within the time specified,
the disciplinary action shall stand.
(m) Any recommendation of the Board shall require four affirmative
votes for adoption.
(n) It shall be the duty of the Board to determine if the disciplinary
action:
[1] Was justified and should be upheld;
[2] Should be amended, and reduced or increased; or
[3] Should be withdrawn.
(o) The Board shall submit its recommendation and the reasons
therefor in writing and signed by all Board members who sat on
the hearing to the Fire Chief in a meeting in executive session
with the Fire Chief and shall transmit a copy thereof to the
firefighter. A copy of the recommendation shall be included with
the minutes of the meeting as filed with the Department.
(p) Upon receipt of the recommendation of the Board, the Fire Chief
shall take the recommendation into consideration in making his/
her final decision.
Chapter 44
FUNDS
§ 38-14 PLAINVILLE CODE § 38-14
1:58
ARTICLE I
Self-Insurance Trust Fund
[Adopted 10-17-1988]
§ 44-1. Purpose.
A. After investigation, research and study, the Plainville Insurance
Commission has recommended to the Town Council that it is in the
best interest of the Town to establish a Self-Insurance Trust Fund. The
Self-Insurance Trust Fund is for the purpose of funding uninsurable
liabilities, deductibles, and such other liabilities as from time to time the
Town Council decides that it is in the best interest of the Town not to
contract for insurance coverages.
B. The further purpose economically of the Self-Insurance Trust Fund is to
make adequate provisions for payment of losses of and claims against
the Town, using the insurance contracts and the Self-Insurance Trust
Fund.
§ 44-2. Funding.
A. The funds and monies held within the Self-Insurance Trust Fund shall
be by action and authority of the Town Council and shall be from the
following sources:
(1) Dividend returns on existing or prior years' policies;
(2) Credits generated by any Town insurance policy;
(3) Reimbursement of insurance claims;
(4) Interest earned from investment of trust funds; and
(5) Appropriations by the Town Council from unappropriated general
fund balance.
B. The Town Council shall maintain in said Trust Fund a minimum balance
of $250,000. Should at any time the balance be reduced below said
figure by payment of a claim or claims authorized by this article, then the
Town Council shall appropriate funds from the unappropriated general
fund balance to said trust fund in a timely fashion to replenish said
$250,000.
C. Such trust fund shall be allowed to increase up to the amount of
$3,000,000. Thereafter, any funds under this article shall revert to the
general fund of the Town.
§ 44-3. Payments from trust fund.
The following types of payments shall be made from the Self-Insurance
Trust Fund:
A. Claims for benefits and/or settlements provided for under § 7-433c of
the Connecticut General Statutes, commonly known as the "Police Heart
and Hypertension Statute." Such payments of settlements shall only be
subsequent to approval of the settlements by the Town Council.
B. Payment of deductibles on policies of the Town as contracted for by the
Plainville Insurance Commission. At no time shall the payment of any one
deductible exceed the current insurance deductibles unless approved by
the Town Council.22
§ 44-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-3
1:59
C. Payment of retrospective rating liabilities under workers' compensation
policies contracted for by the Plainville Insurance Commission. At no
time shall the payment of any retrospective rating exceed the current
insurance deductibles unless approved by the Town Council.23
D. Payment of any claim, settlement, judgement or award not covered by
an existing insurance policy. These types of payment shall only be made
after approval by the Town Council where such approval is required.
§ 44-4. Management of trust fund.
A. The Self-Insurance Trust Fund shall be administered (as to investments
and accounting) by the Director of Finance under the general direction
and supervision of the Town Manager, subject only to limitations
imposed by the Town Charter and statutes as relating to the Town
Treasurer and Town Attorney.
B. The Plainville Insurance Commission shall have the authority to interact
with the Town Manager and the Town Council in setting policies, goals
and aims of the Self-Insurance Trust Fund.
C. The Plainville Insurance Commission shall implement programs to
establish a database as to losses paid from the fund to assist in
projecting the funding of the Self-Insurance Trust Fund.
22.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
23.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 44-3 PLAINVILLE CODE § 44-4
1:60
ARTICLE II
Health Insurance Trust Fund
[Adopted 5-18-1992; amended 12-17-2012]
§ 44-5. Purpose.
A. After investigation, research and study, the Town Manager and the
Director of Finance have recommended to the Town Council that it
is in the best interest of the Town to establish a Town and Board of
Education employees' Health Insurance Trust Fund, hereinafter referred
to as the "fund." The fund is for the purpose of stabilizing premiums for
medical insurance coverage for employees of the Town and its Board of
Education.
B. The further purpose of the fund is to make adequate, financially sound
provisions for payments of premiums for medical coverages, which
premiums may vary significantly.
§ 44-6. Funding.
A. Annually, and as soon as practical, the Town Manager or his designee
shall request and obtain from the insurers who provide medical and
hospitalization coverage for the Town and Board of Education employees
proposals for recommended insurance premiums for such coverages.
B. Upon receipt by the Town of such proposals for recommended insurance
premiums, and within the constraints of the Charter's budgetary
provisions, 1/12 of the annual recommended insurance premiums for
such coverage shall be transferred and paid into the fund by the Town
and the Board of Education.
C. Any interest earned from investment of monies in the fund shall become
part of the fund.
D. Any credits, dividends, or reimbursements received by the Town or
Board of Education from insurers providing said coverages shall become
part of the fund.
E. Other appropriations may be made to the fund by the Town Council from
unappropriated general fund balance or as otherwise provided for by the
Charter.24
§ 44-7. Payments from trust fund.
The following types of payments or expenditures shall be made from the
fund:
A. Charges and/or premiums to insurers providing hospital and medical
coverages for Town and Board of Education employees.
B. Payment of any medical or health claim, settlement, judgments or cause
not covered by an existing insurance policy. These types of payments
shall be made only after authorization by the Town Council where such
authorization is necessary.
24.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 44-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-7
1:61
C. Payments of any costs or expenses relating to health and hospitalization
of Town or Board of Education employees which shall have been
approved by the Town Council where such approval is required.
§ 44-8. Management of trust fund.
A. The fund shall be administered (as to investments and accounting) by the
Director of Finance under the general direction and supervision of the
Town Manager and Superintendent of Schools, subject only to limitations
imposed by the Charter and statutes as relating to the Town Treasurer
and Town Attorney.
B. The Town Manager and Town Council shall set policies, goals and aims of
the fund. They may enter into contracts with consultants to assist them
in such endeavors.
§ 44-7 PLAINVILLE CODE § 44-8
1:62
ARTICLE III
Berner Swimming Pool Trust Fund
[Adopted 12-13-1993]
§ 44-9. Purpose.
A. Pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Victor C. Berner Trusts, the
Town has received substantial funds from the Trusts, which funds are to
be used for construction and maintenance of a swimming pool within the
Town.
B. After investigation, research and study, the Plainville Advisory
Recreation and Park Board has recommended to the Town Council that
it is in the best interest of the Town to establish a Berner Swimming
Pool Trust Fund. Such monies placed in the trust fund and the earnings
thereon shall be for funding the maintenance, repairs, capital
improvements and like expenses for the swimming pool after its
construction. Further, the Board is of the opinion that the initial funding
of the trust fund should be an amount of money which represents those
unexpended funds received from the Berner Trusts which have not been
used to construct the swimming pool and any of its amenities.
§ 44-10. Funding.
A. The funds held within the Berner Swimming Pool Trust Fund shall be by
action and authority of the Town Council and shall be from the following
sources:
(1) Any unexpended funds received from the Berner Trust which trust
funds had not been used for the construction of the swimming pool
and its amenities.
(2) Interest earned from investments of trust funds.
(3) Any funds donated to the Town from any other source, which funds
the donor directed to be used for expenses of any nature relating to
the swimming pool or its amenities.
(4) Appropriations made by the Town Council as are authorized by the
Town Charter.
B. There shall be no limitations on the amount of funds which may
accumulate in the Berner Swimming Pool Trust Fund. The trust fund
shall stay in existence until such time as there are no funds available or
upon repeal of this article by the Town Council.
§ 44-11. Payments from trust fund.
A. The following types of payments shall be made from the Berner
Swimming Pool Trust Fund:
(1) Cost of expenses for maintenance, alteration, replacement,
enlargement, repairs or modification of the swimming pool and its
amenities.
(2) Such capital projects which have been approved by the Town Council
in its Five-Year Capital Plan pursuant to the provisions of the Town
Charter and the Connecticut General Statutes.
B. All of the payments provided for in Subsection A above shall be approved
by the Town Council. The Plainville Advisory Recreation and Park Board
§ 44-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-11
1:63
shall, at least annually, make recommendation to the Town Council of
proposed expenditures as provided herein.
§ 44-12. Management of trust fund.
A. The Berner Swimming Pool Trust Fund shall be administered (as to
investments and accounting) by the Director of Finance under the
general direction and supervision of the Town Manager, subject only to
limitations imposed by the Town Charter and state statutes as relate to
the Town Treasurer.
B. The Plainville Advisory Recreation and Park Board shall have the
authority to interact with the Town Manager and the Town Council in
setting policies, goals and aims of the Berner Swimming Pool Trust Fund.
§ 44-11 PLAINVILLE CODE § 44-12
1:64
ARTICLE IV
Economic Development Trust Fund
[Adopted 2-3-1997]
§ 44-13. General purpose.
The general purpose of this article is to:
A. Encourage and promote the development of industry and business in
the Town and to investigate, study and undertake ways and means of
promoting and encouraging development and protecting the legitimate
interests and welfare of Plainville business, industry and commerce.
B. Promote and encourage the location and development of new business in
the Town as well as the maintenance and expansion of existing business.
C. Plan and conduct a program of information and publicity designed to
attract business, industry and commerce to develop within the Town.
D. Provide assistance to business, industry and commerce in obtaining
grants, funding and assistance from the state and any other sources.
§ 44-14. Purpose.
A. After investigation, research and study, the Plainville Economic
Development Agency has recommended to the Plainville Town Council
that it is in the best interest of the Town to establish an Economic
Development Trust Fund. The Economic Development Trust Fund is for
the purpose of funding projects, programs, and undertakings to fulfill the
general purpose of this article.
B. The Economic Development Agency shall advise the Town Council in
regard to marketing the Town and its economic development programs
and business recruitment, expansion and retention activities. The
Economic Development Agency shall also develop a plan for raising and
spending funds for such purposes.
§ 44-15. Funding.
A. The funds and monies held with the Economic Development Trust Fund
shall be by action and authority of the Town Council and shall be from
the following sources:
(1) Appropriations by the Town Council from unappropriated general
fund balance;
(2) Monies received from the regional agencies and the state and the
federal governments available for economic development;
(3) Interest earned from investment and trust funds;
(4) Monies repaid to the Town under loans or contracts made pursuant
to this article; and
(5) Funds and monies raised by the Economic Development Agency.
B. The trust fund shall be allowed to increase up to the amount of $250,000.
Thereafter, any funds under this article shall revert to the general fund
of the Town unless specifically designated otherwise by the source of the
funds.
§ 44-16. Payments from trust fund.
§ 44-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-16
1:65
A. The following types of payments shall be made from the Economic
Development Trust Fund:
(1) Grants-in-aid to business and industry locating or relocating in Town;
(2) Loans for development of business and industry in Town; and
(3) Other forms of assistance to business and industry.
B. These types of payments shall only be made after approval by the Town
Council and after recommendation from the Economic Development
Agency.
§ 44-17. Management of trust fund.
A. The Economic Development Trust Fund shall be administered (as to
investments and accounting) by the Director of Finance under the
general direction and supervision of the Town Manager, subject only to
limitations imposed by the Town Charter and statutes as relating to the
Town Treasurer and Town Attorney.
B. The Economic Development Agency shall have the authority to interact
with the Town Manager and the Town Council in setting policies, goals
and aims of the Economic Development Trust Fund.
C. The Economic Development Agency shall implement programs to
establish a database as to payment from the fund to assist business and
industry.
§ 44-16 PLAINVILLE CODE § 44-17
1:66
ARTICLE V
Land Acquisition Trust Fund
[Adopted 4-4-2005]
§ 44-18. Purpose.
A. After investigation, research and study, the Plainville Conservation
Commission has recommended to the Town Council that it is in the
best interest of the Town to establish a Land Acquisition Trust Fund.
The Town Council has reviewed the information provided to it by the
Plainville Conservation Commission and agreed with the
recommendations that there is a need for a fund to be used for the
acquisition of land to be used for open space or recreation.
B. The Land Acquisition Trust Fund is for the purpose of funding the
acquisition of land to be used for open space or recreation. The
acquisition of land shall be at the discretion of the Town Council when
it decides that it is in the best interest of the Town to acquire land
for open space or recreation. "Open space/recreation" is defined as any
parcel or area of land or water, unimproved except for recreational
purposes of a noncommercial or non-membership-based nature, and set
aside, dedicated, designated, or reserved for the public's recreational
use, resource conservation, wildlife habitat, or a combination of these or
similar purposes.
C. Funds in the Land Acquisition Trust Fund shall not lapse at the close
of the Town's fiscal year. By allowing funds to accumulate, the Town
Council will be able to acquire land when the opportunity arises and to
react quickly.
§ 44-19. Funding.
The funds and monies held within this Land Acquisition Trust Fund shall
accumulate by action and authority of the Town Council and may be from
the following sources:
A. An appropriation made by the Town Council in the annual budget for the
upcoming fiscal year. The amount of the appropriation shall not exceed
the amount which would be generated by the imposition of a tax of two
mills against the property subject to tax in the Town pursuant to Chapter
203 of the Connecticut General Statutes.
B. Funds approved by a Town-wide referendum or special appropriation as
provided for in the Town Charter.
C. Grant funds from any source, which grant requests were authorized and
approved by the Town Council.
D. Donations from any sources received with the approval of the Town
Council.
E. Net proceeds from the sale or disposition of land of the Town, which land
had been acquired by use of funds from the Land Acquisition Trust Fund.
F. Income earned from investment of trust funds.
§ 44-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-20
1:67
§ 44-20. Land Acquisition Committee.25
The Town Council shall appoint a committee to be the Land Acquisition
Committee to consist of two citizens at large and one member of each of
the following: Planning and Zoning Commission, Conservation Commission
and Advisory Recreation and Park Board. The persons appointed shall serve
at the pleasure of the Town Council. The Land Acquisition Committee
shall elect its Chairperson and a Secretary and shall meet periodically
as needed but not less frequently than quarterly. Its charge shall be to
identify potential acquisitions of land or interests in land for open space
or recreation and to make recommendations of such land and other proper
uses of the Land Acquisition Trust Fund.
§ 44-21. Payments from trust fund.
Payments from the Land Acquisition Trust Fund shall be made following
approval by the Town Council in meeting duly assembled. The payments
shall be to acquire interests in land to be used for open space or recreation.
The Town Council shall determine the type of interest in the land which the
Town shall have. The interest can be a fee interest, a long-term lease, an
easement, or such other interest as the Town Council determines to be in
the best interest of the Town.
§ 44-22. Management of trust fund.
A. The Land Acquisition Trust Fund shall be administered (as to
investments and accounting) by the Town's Director of Finance under
the general direction and supervision of the Town Manager, subject only
to limitations imposed by the Town Charter and Connecticut General
Statutes.
B. The Plainville Conservation Commission shall have the authority to
interact with the Town Manager and the Town Council in setting policies,
goals and aims of the Land Acquisition Trust Fund.
25.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 44-20 PLAINVILLE CODE § 44-22
1:68
Chapter 72
MUNICIPAL PROPERTY
§ 44-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-22
1:69

ARTICLE I
Exemption from Zoning Regulations
[Adopted 5-21-1973]
§ 72-1. Use of property.
Property owned by the Town of Plainville shall be exempt from the operation
of the zoning regulations prescribed or adopted or henceforth to be adopted
or prescribed by the Plainville Planning and Zoning Commission or its
successor agency. No use shall be made of any property of the Town of
Plainville not in conformity with the zoning regulations without approval of
the Town Council of the Town of Plainville.
§ 72-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 72-1
1:71
Chapter 83
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code of Ethics — See Ch. 29. Personnel — See Ch. 91.
§ 72-1 PLAINVILLE CODE § 72-1
1:72
ARTICLE I
Assistants to Town Counsel
[Adopted 3-15-1965]
§ 83-1. Clerical assistants.
The Town Counsel shall have the right to engage all clerical assistants he
deems necessary for the proper performance of his office at his discretion
without the necessity of a vote by the Town Council of the Town of Plainville.
§ 83-2. Legal assistants.
The Town Counsel, if and when he deems necessary, shall have the right to
engage legal assistants in the performance of his duties after first securing
the approval of the Town Council of the Town of Plainville. The Town Council
of the Town of Plainville must vote such approval, but such vote need not be
in the form of an ordinance or resolution nor require a public hearing.
§ 83-3. Ratification.
All clerical and legal assistants engaged in the past and presently engaged
are hereby ratified and affirmed by the Town Council upon the passage and
publication of this article.
§ 83-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 83-3
1:73

ARTICLE II
Registrars of Voters
[Adopted 8-7-1972]
§ 83-4. Terms of office.
The Registrars of Voters of the Town of Plainville shall be elected at the
state election to be held in 1972 and at four-year intervals thereafter, to
hold office for the term of four years from the Wednesday following the first
Monday of the January next succeeding their election until the Wednesday
following the first Monday of the fifth January succeeding their election.
§ 83-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 83-4
1:75

ARTICLE III
Terms of Elected Officials
[Adopted 6-16-1975]
§ 83-5. Commencement of term.
Except as may be otherwise set forth by the Charter of the Town of
Plainville, or the prescriptions of the Connecticut General Statutes
pertaining to specific offices, the terms of all officials elected by and for the
Town of Plainville shall commence from the date of their election.
§ 83-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 83-5
1:77

ARTICLE IV
Historian
[Adopted 12-7-1992; amended 12-17-2012]
§ 83-6. Purpose.
Pursuant to § 7-148 of the General Statutes, State of Connecticut, a Town
Historian shall be appointed in the Town of Plainville to promote a
knowledge, appreciation and dissemination of Town of Plainville history.
§ 83-7. Qualifications.
A. The Town Historian shall be a legal resident and elector of the Town of
Plainville.
B. The Town Historian shall be qualified by a knowledge of Plainville history
as well as general state and American history; by a knowledge of
historical research; and by good writing, speaking, and computer skills.
§ 83-8. Term of office and method of appointment.
A. The Town Historian shall be appointed to a term of two years. The Town
Historian shall be appointed by the Town Manager and confirmed by the
Town Council. The same person may be appointed to additional terms.
B. A vacancy in the office of Town Historian shall be filled by appointment
by the Town Manager and confirmation by the Town Council for the
unexpired portion of the term vacated.
§ 83-9. Duties and responsibilities.
The Town Historian shall:
A. Promote an awareness of and an appreciation for the Town's history
through research, writing and public speaking; through publications,
projects, exhibits, displays, electronic media, celebrations, and
commemorations; through the maintenance of plaques, markers and
monuments; and through the preparation of classroom aids, guides,
workshops and training.
B. Advise the Town government on historical issues and subjects, including
historical objects, historical structures and sites, historic districts,
National Register properties and historic preservation.
C. Serve as a liaison among the Town's museums, libraries and historical
associations, and with similar outside groups, to encourage historical
coordination, cooperation and resource sharing.
D. Maintain a reference library of historical information.
E. Serve as a central referral point for inquiries for information.
F. As appropriate, and pursuant to directions of the Town Council and Town
Manager, supervise staff and programs of the municipality, maintain an
office, expend funds, and obtain contributions and grants to carry out
these duties.
§ 83-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 83-10
1:79
§ 83-10. Expenditure of public funds.
No person shall have the right to expend any public funds of the Town in
carrying out any activity authorized by this article without prior approval
by the Town Council, nor shall any person have the right to bind the Town
by contract, agreement or otherwise without prior approval of the Town
Council.
§ 83-11. Construal with other legislation.
This article shall not be construed to conflict with any federal or state
statutes, the Charter, rules, regulations or Town ordinances.
§ 83-10 PLAINVILLE CODE § 83-11
1:80
ARTICLE V
Justices of the Peace
[Adopted 4-1-1996]
§ 83-12. Number; nominations.
A. The number of Justices of the Peace to be elected in the Town of
Plainville on November 5, 1996, and quadrennially thereafter shall be
30.
B. Each major party, as defined in § 9-372(5)(B) of the Connecticut General
Statutes, as amended, shall be entitled to nominate 10 candidates for
Justice of the Peace.
C. When there is a political party which is a major party as defined in
§ 9-372(5)(A) of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended, but is
not a major party as defined in said § 9-372(5)(B), said party shall be
entitled to nominate six candidates for Justice of the Peace.
D. Electors who are not members of major parties as defined in § 9-372(5)
of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended, shall be appointed as
Justices of the Peace in accordance with the provisions of § 9-184c of the
Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
§ 83-13. Repealer.
The ordinance titled "Justice of the Peace Ordinance" adopted by the Town
Council on July 20, 1964, is hereby repealed upon the effective date of this
article, which shall be 30 days following passage and publication.
§ 83-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 83-13
1:81
Chapter 91
PERSONNEL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code of Ethics — See Ch. 29. Officers and employees — See Ch. 83.
§ 83-13 PLAINVILLE CODE § 83-13
1:82
ARTICLE I
Retirement
[Adopted by the Town Meeting 3-29-1954; amended in its entirety
by the Town Council at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II)]
§ 91-1. Retirement allowances.
The Town Council may provide by ordinance a system of retirement
allowances for the Town's regular full-time paid employees and for
contributions by employees and the Town to a fund from which such
allowances shall be paid. The Town may enter into contract with any
company or institution authorized to do business in this state for the
purpose of insuring the whole or any part of this retirement plan; elect
to participate in the Connecticut Municipal Employees Retirement Fund;
elect to participate in the old-age and survivors insurance system under
Title II of the Social Security Act, in accordance with the provisions of the
Connecticut General Statutes; or elect any combination thereof. The Town
Council may authorize the transfer of the management and investment of
the Town's pension funds to any fiduciary institution chartered or licensed
to operate in the State of Connecticut under the provisions of the
Connecticut General Statutes.
§ 91-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 91-1
1:83

ARTICLE II
Indemnification of Town Officials
[Adopted by the Town Council 6-16-1975]
§ 91-2. Indemnification authorized.
Except as otherwise provided in this article, the Town of Plainville shall
indemnify any person who was or is a party, or was threatened to be made
a party, to any threatened, pending or completed civil or administrative
action, suit or proceeding (other than an action by or in the right of the
Town), when it should appear that such person, or the person whose legal
representative he is, was serving as an officer, employee or agent of the
Town, whether elected or otherwise appointed, and when it further should
appear that such service to the Town was or is the basis of such threatened
or actual proceedings.
§ 91-3. Counsel provided.
The Town shall provide the services of the Town Attorney, or other counsel
if appropriate, at no expense to any person entitled to indemnification,
and the Town Attorney or other counsel shall provide a full and complete
defense on behalf of such person to all proceedings, including any appeals.
Any counsel other than the Town Attorney to be provided under this section
shall be subject to the approval of the Town Council.
§ 91-4. Expenses covered.
Indemnification shall include attorney's fees, reimbursement of judgments,
amounts paid in settlement, and other expenses actually and reasonably
incurred in connection with such proceedings, or any appeal therefrom.
In addition to such indemnification, expenses may be paid in advance of
the final disposition of proceedings as authorized by the Town Council, the
members of which shall be entitled to vote consistent with the provisions of
the Code of Ethics (Chapter 29 of this Code), whether or not they are parties
to the proceedings.
§ 91-5. Conditions.
No such indemnification or defense shall be provided by the Town unless
the party who seeks to rely on this article notifies the Town Council of the
threatened proceeding promptly upon learning of the same, nor shall such
indemnification be provided where such person did not act in good faith
and in a manner that he reasonably believed to be in the best interests
of the Town. The final determination, other than through settlement or
compromise, of the proceedings in a manner favorable to such person
shall be conclusive evidence that such person acted in good faith, but
determination in a manner unfavorable to such person shall not be
conclusive that such person is not entitled to indemnification.
§ 91-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 91-6
1:85
§ 91-6. Greater indemnification.
The Town shall not indemnify any person to any extent greater than that
authorized by this article, but the Town may procure insurance providing
greater indemnification.
§ 91-6 PLAINVILLE CODE § 91-6
1:86
Chapter 97
POLICE DEPARTMENT
§ 97-1. Department established.
There shall be a Division of Police also known as a "Police Department"
comprised of one Chief of Police and such number of ranking officers, police
officers and other employees of the Police Department as the Town Council
may from time to time authorize.
§ 97-2. Ranks and grades.
For the purpose of efficient conduct and operation of the Police Department,
its functions shall be divided into the following ranks and grades:
A. Chief of Police.
B. Captains.
C. Lieutenants.
D. Sergeants.
E. Corporals.
F. Police officers.
G. Other employees (clerks, dispatchers, etc.).
§ 97-3. Appointments and promotions.
A. Police officers. Appointments to fill funded, vacant positions in the rank
of police officer are to be open to all persons of good moral character
who have attained the age of 21 at the time of application and who meet
the qualifications established by the State of Connecticut Police Officer
Standards and Training Council and the Director of Safety. Appointments
shall be made by an examination, including a written test and oral
interview, and other testing, including physical ability and mental and
physical health, as may be required by the Director of Safety. The Town
Council may appoint from the list of those qualified candidates such
number of candidates, from time to time, as it deems necessary to
provide an adequate number of police officers to provide police service
to the Town. Upon appointment by the Town Council a candidate shall
become a police officer. Any person appointed a police officer shall,
as a requirement of continued appointment, establish and maintain a
residence within the State of Connecticut.
B. Corporals. Promotion to a funded, vacant position in the rank of Corporal
in the Plainville Police Department shall be made within the Division
of Police from among the police officers with at least three years of
service, by an examination, including written test and oral interview, and
such other testing, including physical agility and mental and physical
health, as may be required by the Director of Safety. The Town Council
may appoint from the list of those qualified candidates such number
of candidates, from time to time, as it deems necessary to provide an
adequate number of Corporals to provide police service to the Town.
Upon promotion by the Town Council, a candidate shall be a Corporal.
§ 91-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-3
1:87
Any person appointed to the rank of Corporal shall, as a requirement
of continued appointment, establish and maintain a residence within the
State of Connecticut.
C. Sergeants. Promotion to a funded, vacant position in the rank of
Sergeant in the Plainville Police Department shall be made within the
Division of Police from among the police officers with at least three
years of service, by an examination, including written test and oral
interview, and such other testing, including physical agility and mental
and physical health, as may be required by the Director of Safety. The
Town Council may appoint from the list of those qualified candidates
such number of candidates, from time to time, as it deems necessary
to provide an adequate number of Sergeants to provide police service
to the Town. Upon promotion by the Town Council, a candidate shall
be a Sergeant. Any person appointed to the rank of Sergeant shall,
as a requirement of continued appointment, establish and maintain a
residence within the State of Connecticut.
D. Lieutenants. Appointment to fill a funded, vacant position of Lieutenant
shall be made by an examination, including written test and/or oral
interview, and such other testing, including physical agility and mental
and physical health, as may be required from time to time by the
Director of Safety. An examination shall be open to Sergeants or others
deemed qualified by the Director of Safety within or without the Police
Department. Consideration shall be given to police experience and
training in Plainville and elsewhere. The names and scores of the top
three candidates who qualify shall be submitted to the Town Council
for its review, and from among those presented it may appoint such
candidates to fill the number of funded, vacant Lieutenant positions as
the Town Council decides to fill. Upon promotion by the Town Council,
a candidate shall be a Lieutenant. Any person appointed to the rank of
Lieutenant shall, as a requirement of continued appointment, establish
and maintain a residence within the State of Connecticut.
E. Captains. Appointment to fill a funded, vacant position of Captain shall
be made by written examination and/or oral interview and consideration
shall be given to police experience and training in Plainville and
elsewhere and any other qualifications deemed pertinent by the Town
Council. Candidates for Captain may be recruited from outside the Town
of Plainville and from outside the Plainville Division of Police, and the
names and scores of the top three candidates who qualify shall be
submitted to the Town Council for its review, and from among those
presented it may approve and appoint the Captain. Any person appointed
to the rank of Captain shall, as a requirement of continued appointment,
establish and maintain a residence within the State of Connecticut.
F. Chief of Police. An appointment to Chief of Police shall be made by
written examination and/or oral interview and consideration shall be
given to police experience and training in Plainville and elsewhere and
any other qualifications deemed pertinent by the Town Council.
Candidates for Chief may be recruited from outside the Town of
Plainville and from outside the Plainville Division of Police, and the
names and scores of the top three candidates who qualify shall be
§ 97-3 PLAINVILLE CODE § 97-3
1:88
submitted to the Town Council for its review, and from among those
presented it may approve and appoint the Chief of Police. Any person
appointed to the rank of Chief of Police shall, as a requirement of
continued appointment, establish and maintain a residence within the
State of Connecticut.
§ 97-4. Police Manual.
The Police Manual titled "Police Manual, Police Department, Town of
Plainville, Connecticut, June 25, 1979, amended February 4, 1980, and April
9, 2014," is hereby continued in full force and effect.
A. Wherever the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut, the Charter
of the Town of Plainville or this chapter contradicts or conflicts with the
Police Manual, the General Statutes, the Charter of the Town of Plainville
and/or this chapter shall take precedence.
B. The Town Council shall revise the Police Manual from time to time, as
deemed necessary.
§ 97-5. Special duties.
All police personnel shall be subject to such special duties as assigned by
the Chief of Police.
§ 97-6. Chain of command.
There shall be established a chain of command to assure direction and
leadership. During the absence or inability of the Chief, the Captain shall be
in command. During the absence or inability of the Chief and the Captain,
the next senior Lieutenant shall be in command. During the absence or
inability of the Chief, the Captain and Lieutenants, the on-duty shift
commander shall assume command.
§ 97-7. Employment lists.
All lists of qualified candidates shall expire two years from the date of
submission of the lists and shall not thereafter be used for appointment or
promotion.
§ 97-8. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect after passage and 30 days after publication,
and shall affect all appointments and promotions after that date.
Chapter 106
PURCHASING
§ 97-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-8
1:89

ARTICLE I
Purchasing Procedures
[Adopted 8-18-1969; 8-2-1985; 12-17-2007]
§ 106-1. Purpose.26
The purpose of this article is to establish uniform purchasing procedures
in accordance with Chapter VII, Sections 10 and 11, of the Charter of the
Town of Plainville and any other applicable provisions thereof.
§ 106-2. Purchasing Agent.
The Town Manager or his or her designee shall be the Purchasing Agent for
the Town of Plainville and shall have the rights and responsibilities set forth
in Chapter VII of the Charter.
§ 106-3. Requisitions.
All requests for supplies, material and equipment required by any
department, office, board, commission or agency of the Town shall be made
on requisition forms. The following information shall be recorded on all
requisitions:
A. Name of agency requesting goods or services.
B. Name of suggested vendor.
C. Description of kind and quantity of goods or services required, indicating
part number, unit price, and total price per item. If prices are
unavailable, estimated dollar value shall be required.
D. Location to which goods are to be shipped.
E. The purpose of expenditure shall be required and the budget account
number to be charged shall be shown.
F. All requisitions shall be signed by the department head or chairperson
of the board, commission or agency requesting goods or services.
§ 106-4. Exceptions.
A. The following purchases shall be exempt from § 106-3 of this article:
(1) Subscriptions for magazines, periodicals, or professional
publications.
(2) Maintenance on office equipment.
(3) Vehicles and building maintenance, not exceeding $10,000 in
value.27
(4) Established monthly billings, such as business machine charges,
communications equipment service charges, utilities, and like items.
B. Receipts for items purchased under Subsection A shall be turned into
the Department of Finance on the next normal workday following the
purchase.28
26.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
27.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 106-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 106-5
1:91
§ 106-5. Bid purchases.
Purchases to be made on a bid basis shall be the responsibility of the
Purchasing Agent. He or she shall have the cooperation of any and all
agencies requesting purchases on bids. This shall include preparation and
publication of bid specifications and other necessary information.
§ 106-6. Purchase orders.
The Director of Finance shall approve all requisitions and purchase orders
for goods or services and lease purchases.
§ 106-7. Administrative procedures.29
A. The Department of Finance shall be notified of goods or services
received by agencies. This shall be either in the form of a verified
packing slip or by verbal notification. When invoices are received for
goods or services rendered by the vendor, such invoices shall be
distributed to the appropriate agency. The department head or agency
chairperson shall be required to approve payment and forward to the
Department of Finance.
B. This purchasing procedure is to maintain control of costs. The
Department of Finance shall provide information concerning budget
performance and status to each department head or agency chairperson.
This shall give the department head or agency chairperson the
opportunity to maintain control of the particular departmental
expenditures and thus stay within budget appropriations.
§ 106-8. Violations.
Violations of the provisions of this article shall be the same as provided
in Chapter VII, Section 15, of the Charter of the Town of Plainville, which
section is hereby incorporated herein as if fully set forth herein.
§ 106-9. Bid procedures applicable to purchases and contracts for
services.
A. If any purchase or contract for services, including a continuing contract
for the same service over a period of time, involves the expenditure of
$25,000 or more, either the Town Council or the Town Manager shall
invite sealed bids or proposals, giving 10 days' public notice thereof
by at least one publication in a newspaper having circulation in the
Town, unless the Town Council determines that it is against the best
interests of the Town to require bidding with respect to a particular
purchase or contract for service (for example, sole source items, etc.).
If a purchase or contract for services is put to bid, the Council shall
either let the contract to the lowest responsible bidder thereon or shall
reject for any reason all such bids and proposals. All such sealed bids
28.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
29.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 106-5 PLAINVILLE CODE § 106-9
1:92
and proposals shall be opened publicly. No transaction essentially a unit
shall be divided for the purpose of evading the provisions of this section.
Records of bids, formal and informal, and of the successful bidder shall
be kept in the office of the Purchasing Agent where they shall be open
to the public inspection. For expenditures between the amount of $1 and
up to $15,000 the Purchasing Agent may require one written or verbal
quote. For expenditures between the amount of $15,000 and $25,000 the
Purchasing Agent may require three written quotes.30
B. Contracts for professional services may be negotiated rather than put
out to bid and therefore will not be subject to the provisions of
Subsection A above.
§ 106-10. Cooperative bidding.31
The Purchasing Agent may utilize cooperative bidding services in an effort
to maximize cost benefits. Cooperative bidding services may consist of
but may not be limited to bidding procedures initiated by the State of
Connecticut, other municipalities in Connecticut, the Plainville Board of
Education, or other regional purchasing authorities. If cooperative bidding
services are utilized, the bid procedures set forth in § 106-9 of this article
are not applicable. The Purchasing Agent shall present cooperative bid
proposals to the Town Council for approval.
30.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
31.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 106-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 106-10
1:93

ARTICLE II
Encumbrances
[Adopted 1-17-2012]
§ 106-11. Purpose.
The purpose of the policy below is to limit Town entities from initiating new
purchases late in the fiscal year and to prevent the carrying of encumbered
funds across fiscal years. For reasons of fiscal and budgetary soundness,
this policy below shall apply to all departments, offices and agencies of the
Town of Plainville.
§ 106-12. Definition.
A. An encumbrance is defined as an executed contract for goods or services
that will be delivered, provided or performed by the vendor outside of
the budget year in which the contract was executed. Personnel costs are
not encumbrances.
B. In order for an encumbrance to be confirmed, a specific purchase order
must be placed and/or contract executed with a purchase order issued
(i.e. mailed) to the vendor prior to June 30 of each year and subject to
the procedure outlined below.
§ 106-13. Procedure for outstanding encumbrances.
A. A listing of all outstanding encumbrances shall be submitted to the Town
Council by July 1 of every fiscal year. The list shall include the vendor
name, date of contract or purchase order, a description of the goods
or service, the budget account number and a purchase order posting
report. Copies of all contracts for goods or services and purchase orders
shall be attached.
B. The Town Council will review all outstanding encumbrances by July 15 of
each year. If requested by the Town Council, any Town staff responsible
for encumbering Town funds will attend meetings of the Town Council
to answer questions and provide additional information regarding the
encumbrances. The Town Council will confirm all encumbrances as
defined above and make Town funds from the current fiscal year
available to pay said encumbrances.
C. Town funds from the current fiscal year will not be made available to
pay outstanding encumbrances after June 30 of each fiscal year unless
confirmed by the Town Council.
§ 106-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 106-13
1:95
Chapter 115
REGIONAL AGENCIES
§ 106-13 PLAINVILLE CODE § 106-13
1:96
ARTICLE I
Regional Health District
[Adopted 4-18-2011]
§ 115-1. Creation and purpose.
The Town of Plainville hereby unites with the Town of Southington to
form the Plainville-Southington Regional Health District pursuant to the
provisions of the Chapter 368F of the Connecticut General Statutes. It is
hereby declared that the purpose of this article is to protect, preserve
and improve the public health of the citizens of the municipalities of the
Plainville-Southington Regional Health District.
§ 115-2. Health District Board.
A. The affairs of the Health District shall be managed by a Board which
shall have all the duties exercised or performed immediately prior to the
effective date of the creation of this Health District by the Directors of
Health of the constituent municipalities of the Health District.
B. The Health District Board shall exercise all the authority as to public
health required of or conferred upon the constituent municipalities by
law and shall have the powers set forth in § 19a-243 of the Connecticut
General Statutes, as amended.
C. Appointment of Board. The appointment of the Board shall be governed
by statutes and regulations for the State Department of Public Health.
Based upon current guidelines, the Town Council for the Town of
Southington shall appoint five members to the Board and the Town
Council for the Town of Plainville shall appoint two members to the
Board. Of the five members to be appointed by the Town of Southington,
one shall be its Town Manager, and of the two members appointed
by the Town of Plainville, one shall be its Town Manager. The other
appointments shall be in the discretion of the Town Council.
D. Term of office. The term of office for members of the Health District
Board shall be three years, except that during the initial formation of
the Board appointments shall be staggered into one-, two- or three-year
terms.
§ 115-3. Director of Health.
A. Appointment.
(1) The Health District Board, with approval of the Commissioner of
Public Health, shall appoint a full-time Director of Health for the
Health District pursuant to the procedure and qualifications set forth
in § 19a-242 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended. The
Board may also appoint an acting full-time Director of Health to
serve in the Director of Health's absence or if a vacancy exists,
provided that such acting Director meets the same qualifications as
the Director of Health as set forth in § 19a-242 of the Connecticut
General Statutes, as amended, or such qualifications as may be
approved by the Commissioner of Public Health. Upon the
appointment of a Director of Health for the Health District, the
§ 115-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 115-3
1:97
terms of office of the present Director of Health of each constituent
municipality shall terminate.32
(2) The Health District shall also appoint the current Medical Advisor
from Southington and the current Medical Advisor from Plainville
for a period of at least two years. After such time, it shall be in
the discretion of the Board as to the appointment of the Medical
Advisor(s).
B. Powers and duties. The Director of Health shall perform all such duties
as are required of directors of health by the Connecticut General
Statutes or the State of Connecticut Public Health Code. In addition,
the Director of Health shall enforce all ordinances of the constituent
municipalities within said municipalities as long as said ordinances do
not conflict with the Connecticut General Statutes or the State of
Connecticut Public Health Code; provided, however, that any provision
of a municipal ordinance which is more strict than the State of
Connecticut Public Health Code shall not constitute a conflict and the
provision of the municipal ordinance shall prevail.
C. Removal. The Director of Health may be removed upon vote of a majority
of the members of the Health District Board upon a finding of
misconduct, material neglect of duty, or incompetence in the conduct
of this office in accordance with § 19a-242 of the Connecticut General
Statutes, as amended.
§ 115-4. Powers and duties of Health District Board.
A. General powers. The Health District Board may make and promulgate
reasonable rules and regulations for the promotion of general health
within the district; such rules and regulations shall not be in conflict with
the State of Connecticut Public Health Code or any municipal ordinance
of each constituent municipality; provided, however, that any provision
of such rules and regulations which is more strict than the State of
Connecticut Public Health Code shall not constitute a conflict and the
provision of the rules and regulations shall prevail. No such rule or
regulation shall be adopted until a public hearing has been held by the
Board of the proposed rule or regulation. Notice of the time, place and
purpose of the hearing shall be by publication in a newspaper having
a substantial circulation in each constituent municipality at least seven
days prior to the hearing. The powers of the Board shall include but not
be limited to the following: to sue and be sued; to make and execute
contracts and other instruments necessary or convenient to the exercise
of powers of the Health District; to make and from time to time amend
and repeal bylaws, rules and regulations; to acquire real estate; to have
whatever other powers are necessary to properly carry out its powers
as an independent entity of government; to develop and implement a
budget; and to develop and implement public health policy for the Health
District.
B. Meetings; Chairperson. The Board shall meet at least quarterly and
at other times determined by the Chairperson. At the Board's initial
32.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 115-3 PLAINVILLE CODE § 115-4
1:98
meeting and thereafter at each fall meeting the Board shall elect a
Chairperson, and the Health District shall furnish the necessary offices
and equipment to enable the Board to carry out its duties.
C. Fiscal year; budget. The fiscal year of the Health District shall be from
July 1 to June 30, and by the 31st day of January in each year the
Board shall estimate the amount of money required to pay the costs and
expenses of the Health District during the ensuing fiscal year. Pursuant
to § 19a-243 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended, such
Board shall hold a public hearing on its proposed budget, two weeks'
notice of which shall be given in a newspaper having a circulation in
each constituent municipality of such district. From time to time the
Board shall draw upon the Treasurer of each Town within the district
a proportionate share of the expenses of such district, from such funds
as may have been appropriated by each, to pay the cost of operating
the Health District, such apportionment to be made equitably on a
per capita basis as established by the most recent annual population
estimate by the State Department of Public Health. The Health District
shall make timely applications to the State Department of Public Health
for reimbursements to which it is entitled, as set forth in § 19a-245
of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended. The Health District
shall provide said Department with all budgetary and other information
necessary for the Health District to qualify for any reimbursements or
other funds allowable under state or federal law.33
33.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 115-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 115-4
1:99
Chapter 150
ALARMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 38.
Police Department — See Ch. 97.
Fires and fire prevention — See Ch. 219.
§ 150-1. Purpose and intent.
A. The purpose of this chapter is to encourage alarm users and alarm
businesses to maintain the operational reliability and proper use of
alarm systems and to reduce or eliminate false alarm dispatch requests.
B. This chapter governs systems intended to summon Police and Fire
Department responses, requires permits, establishes a system of
administration, and sets conditions for suspension or loss of permits.
§ 150-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALARM ADMINISTRATOR — A person or persons designated by the Chief
of Police to administer, control and review alarm applications, permits and
alarm dispatch requests.
ALARM BUSINESS — The business, by any person, partnership,
association, corporation, limited liability company or any legal entity, of
selling, leasing, maintaining, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing,
moving, installing or monitoring an alarm system in an alarm site.
ALARM DISPATCH REQUEST — A notification to the Police or Fire
Department that an alarm, either manual or automatic, has been activated
at a particular alarm site.
ALARM SITE — A single premises or location served by an alarm system or
systems.
ALARM SYSTEM — A device or series of devices, including but not limited
to systems interconnected with radio frequency signals, which are
designated to discourage crime by emitting or transmitting a remote or
local audible, visual or electronic signal indicating an alarm condition.
"Alarm system" does not include an alarm installed on a motor vehicle.
ALARM USER — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
limited liability company, or any other legal entity who (which) uses an
alarm system at its alarm site.
AUTOMATIC DIAL ALARM — Any telephone device or attachment that
mechanically or electronically selects a telephone line to notify police or
§ 115-4 PLAINVILLE CODE § 150-2
1:100
fire headquarters and produces a pre-recorded voice message to report a
criminal act, fire, or other emergency.
CENTRAL STATION — An office to which remote alarm devices transmit
signals where operators monitor those signals and relay information to the
Police or Fire Department.
DURESS ALARM — A silent alarm signal generated by the manual
activation of a device intended to signal a crisis situation requiring police
response.
FALSE ALARM DISPATCH — An alarm dispatch request to the Police
Department or Fire Department, when the responding police or fire officer
finds no evidence of a criminal or attempted criminal offense or fire after
having completed a timely investigation of the alarm site. An alarm dispatch
request which is cancelled by the alarm business or the alarm user prior to
the time the responding police or fire officer reaches the alarm site shall not
be considered a false alarm dispatch.
FIRE ALARM — An automatic or manual activation of smoke detectors, heat
detectors, pull stations, or sprinkler systems.
FIRE ALARM SYSTEM — Any heat-activated, smoke-activated, flameactivated
or other such automatic device capable of transmitting a fire
alarm signal to a central station operating company. All fire alarms shall be
installed, tested and maintained in accordance with the Connecticut State
Fire Code, NFPA 72 and applicable building codes.
FIRE CHIEF — The Chief of the Fire Department of the Town of Plainville.
FIRE DEPARTMENT — The Plainville Fire Department of the Town of
Plainville, Connecticut.
FIRE MARSHAL — The person appointed as Fire Marshal by the Town of
Plainville, Connecticut, or such person's designee.
HOLDUP ALARM — A silent alarm signal generated by the manual
activation of a device intended to signal a robbery in progress.
INTRUSION ALARM — Any alarm system which transmits an alarm signal
to a central station operating company indicating a burglary, robbery or
other intrusion into a building or which emits or causes to be emitted an
audible alarm signal.
MONITORING — The process by which an alarm business receives signals
from alarm systems and relays an alarm dispatch request to the Town for
the purpose of summoning police or fire.
PERSON — An individual, corporation, partnership, association,
corporation, limited liability company or any other legal entity.
POLICE CHIEF — The Chief of Police of the Town of Plainville, Connecticut.
POLICE DEPARTMENT — The Police Department of the Town of Plainville,
Connecticut.
§ 150-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-2
1:101
RECORDED MESSAGING ALARM SYSTEM — A signaling device that dials
a predetermined number when the alarm system signals an intrusion,
attempted intrusion, or fire and audibly reports such an intrusion,
attempted intrusion or fire from a recorded message at the premises.
VERIFY — An attempt, by the alarm business or its representative, to
contact the alarm site by telephonic or other electronic means, whether or
not actual contact with a person is made, before requesting a police or fire
dispatch, in an attempt to avoid an unnecessary alarm dispatch request.
§ 150-3. Initial implementation of permit registration.
In order to effectively phase in this chapter and provide a grace period to
alarm users, the following implementation will be in effect from the date of
passage of this chapter by the Town Council. Once the alarm site obtains
a permit all portions of this chapter will be in effect. All alarm users not
obtaining a permit within this time period will be considered in violation of
§ 150-4.
A. Any alarm site that presently is not monitored by an alarm business
or central station is required to obtain a permit from the Alarm
Administrator within 60 days.
B. Any commercial or business alarm site that is presently monitored by an
alarm business or central station is required to obtain a permit from the
Alarm Administrator within 90 days.
C. Any existing residential alarm site that is presently monitored by an
alarm business or central station is required to obtain a permit from the
Alarm Administrator with 180 days.
§ 150-4. Permit registration requirements.
A. Any location which utilizes an alarm system to summon police or fire
services within the Town of Plainville must be registered with the Town
of Plainville care of the Alarm Administrator, Plainville Police
Department, 19 Neal Court, Plainville, Connecticut. There is no
registration fee for burglar or fire alarms reported through an alarm
business or connected directly to the Police or Fire Department.34
B. Any modifications of a central station alarm system or change in
occupancy or ownership of the premises must be reported to the Alarm
Administrator within 10 days of such change.
§ 150-5. Alarm registration.
A. All alarm system owners must provide three local key holders (maximum
twenty-minute response time) and a repair service provider, with an
alarm technician licensed in the State of Connecticut. Automatic dialers,
which call 911, police or fire directly, are not permitted. Alarm systems
may be registered by the alarm user or the central station in the form
required and provided by the Town of Plainville.
34.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 150-2 PLAINVILLE CODE § 150-5
1:102
B. The owner of any alarm system who causes a central station to report
alarm conditions to the Plainville Police or Fire Department for any
location which does not have a permit or for which he has been notified
that his permit has been suspended or revoked shall be subject to fines
under § 150-11 of this chapter.
C. Central stations must be able to make contact with a key holder 24 hours
a day, seven days per week.
§ 150-6. Installation and equipment.
A. All alarm systems must be installed, inspected and approved by a
licensed Connecticut installer.
B. Equipment requirements.
(1) Zones. Alarm systems located at commercial sites must be zoned
to identify the area of the alarm condition and identify the type of
condition for which the alarm is activated.
(2) Motion detectors. Motion detectors must be of type and quality
which are not white light (halogen headlight) sensitive and not
utilized where pets or rodents are present.
(3) Double trip activation. Magnetic contacts for exterior doors where a
vestibule is provided or where a common entrance services several
individually alarmed offices or suites must utilize double trip
activation sensors or motion detectors so that a break in contact of
only the exterior doors does not activate the alarm.
(4) Trouble signals. Trouble alarms can be transmitted to the central
station or police or fire monitoring system, but services will not be
provided other than notification to the listed key holder.
(5) Audible burglar alarms. Locations utilizing audible alarms for
burglar or intrusion devices must have a ten-minute reset feature
which deactivates the alarm after 10 minutes and not reactivate the
alarm until manually reset.
(6) Audible fire alarms. Locations utilizing audible fire alarms shall
remain activated and audible until such time the property has been
investigated and the system is reset.
(7) Fire alarm systems. All fire alarm systems shall be installed in
accordance with local and state building codes and accepted
standards.
§ 150-7. Security monitoring procedures for commercial or
business premises.
An alarm business performing security monitoring services shall:
A. Not request dispatch for police response during the first week after
installation of an alarm system but rather use that week to train the
alarm user on the proper use of the alarm system, unless extenuating
circumstances necessitate immediate requests for police response as
determined by the Alarm Administrator.
B. Request dispatch for fire response from the date and time the fire alarm
or sprinkler system is installed and approved by the Fire Marshal and
placed in service for use.
§ 150-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-7
1:103
C. Report alarm signals by using telephone numbers designated by the
Alarm Administrator.
D. Attempt to verify every alarm signal, except fire, duress, or hold-up
alarm activation, before requesting Police or Fire Department response
to an alarm signal.
E. Communicate alarm dispatch requests to the Police or Fire Department
in a manner and form determined by the Alarm Administrator, Police
Chief, or Fire Chief.
F. Ensure that all alarm users of alarm systems equipped with duress or
hold-up alarms are given adequate training as to the proper use of the
duress or hold-up alarm.
G. Ensure that all users of the alarm systems are given adequate training
as to the proper use of the fire alarm system.
§ 150-8. Security monitoring procedures for residential premises.
An alarm business performing security monitoring services shall:
A. Ensure that the residents are properly trained in the operation of the
alarm system.
B. Report alarm signals by using telephone numbers designated by the
Alarm Administrator.
C. Attempt to verify every alarm signal, except fire or panic alarm
activation, before requesting Police or Fire Department response to an
alarm signal.
D. Communicate alarm dispatch requests to the Police or Fire Department
in a manner and form determined by the Alarm Administrator, Police
Chief, or Fire Chief.
§ 150-9. Duties of Alarm Administrator.
The Alarm Administrator shall:
A. Designate a manner, form and telephone numbers for the
communication of alarm dispatch requests.
B. Communicate to the fire dispatcher the alarm of fire without delay and
cancel an alarm response on a notification of a property owner that the
alarm is a false alarm.35
C. Develop a procedure to accept verified cancellations of alarm dispatch
requests.
D. Provide and maintain a database to track alarm users' information and
key holders and provide access 24 hours per day, seven days per week, to
all emergency service organizations operating in the Town of Plainville.36
E. Create field-usable reporting forms in order to maintain records of
alarms as outlined in § 150-12.
35.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
36.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 150-7 PLAINVILLE CODE § 150-10
1:104
§ 150-10. Access to alarmed premises.
Alarm conditions require inspection of the premises by responding
emergency personnel; therefore:
A. Alarm users are required to provide a key holder response for any
location which is interior to other structural limitations, such as fencing,
common entrances, protective awnings, etc. Failure to provide access to
perform a proper inspection of the premises will be deemed to be a false
alarm.
B. Alarm users with fire alarm systems are recommended to install an
exterior key safe (emergency access systems, Knox Box®) to allow fire
personnel access to the building without damage to the building. In case
of a suspected actual fire, forcible entry will be gained by fire personnel
without notification to the key holder.
C. Access gained using an exterior key safe (emergency access systems,
Knox Box®) with no fire found will be deemed a false alarm.
D. The alarm user is responsible for maintaining updated keys within the
exterior key safe (emergency access systems, Knox Box®). Access by
the alarm users into the key safe will be scheduled with the Fire
Department. Failure to update keys to perform a proper inspection of the
premises will be deemed to be a false alarm.
§ 150-11. Penalties for offenses.
A. An alarm user shall be subject to fines, warnings and suspension or
revocation of a permit depending on the number of false alarm dispatches
emitted from an alarm system within a rolling twelve-month period based
upon the following schedule:
Fine Schedule
False Alarm
Dispatches Action Taken Police Fire
1st false alarm On-site written warning No. 1 $0 $0
2nd false alarm On-site written warning No. 2 $0 $0
3rd false alarm Written notice and fine $25 $50
4th false alarm Written notice, permit
suspension
$25 $75
5th false alarm Written notice, warning letter
of revocation of permit
$25 $100
6th false alarm Revocation of permit and/or
alarm disconnect to Fire
Department master alarm
system
$50 $100
B. In addition, any person operating a non-permitted alarm system (whether
revoked, suspended or never acquired) will be subject to a citation and
assessment of a fine of $50 for each false alarm dispatch, in addition to any
other fines. The Alarm Administrator may waive this additional fine for a
§ 150-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-11
1:105
non-permitted system if the alarm user applies for a permit within 10 days
after such violation.
C. The Alarm Administrator may reinstate a suspended permit upon receipt
of acceptable evidence that the cause has been addressed and appropriate
corrective action has been taken as outlined in § 150-16. Any refusal of
reinstatement of a suspended permit may be appealed per § 150-15.
D. If payment is not paid within 30 calendar days, an additional $15 will be
assessed to the original amount for every 15 days the ticket is not paid.
§ 150-12. Alarm dispatch request records.
A. The police or fire officer responding to an alarm dispatch request shall
record such information as necessary to permit the Alarm Administrator
to maintain records, including but not limited to the following
information:
(1) Alarm type: police or fire;
(2) Identification of the permit number for the alarm site;
(3) Name and address of the alarm site;
(4) Arrival time at the alarm site and dispatch received time;
(5) Date, time and weather conditions;
(6) Name of alarm user's representative on premises, if any;
(7) Name and address of alarm business; and/or
(8) Unable to locate the address.
B. The responding police and/or fire officer shall log whether the dispatch
was caused by a fire, criminal offense, an attempted criminal offense, or
a false alarm dispatch.
C. In the case of the assumed false alarm dispatch, the responding police
or fire officer shall leave written notice at the alarm site that the Police
or Fire Department responded to a false alarm dispatch. The notice shall
include the following information:
(1) Alarm type: police or fire;
(2) The date and time of the response to the false alarm dispatch;
(3) The identification number or name of the responding officer; and
(4) A statement urging the alarm user to ensure that the alarm system
is properly operated, inspected, and serviced in order to avoid fines.
§ 150-13. Appeal from fines.
An alarm user may appeal assessment of a fine to the Alarm Administrator
by filing a written request for hearing setting forth the reasons for the
appeal within 10 days after receipt of the fine. The filing of a request for
an appeal hearing with the Alarm Administrator stays the assessment of the
fine until the Alarm Administrator makes a final decision. The final decision
must be rendered in writing within 30 days after the request for an appeal
hearing is filed.
§ 150-14. Revocation or suspension of alarm permit; other
enforcement actions.
§ 150-11 PLAINVILLE CODE § 150-14
1:106
A. In addition to suspension or revocation of a permit for false alarm
dispatches, the Alarm Administrator may suspend or revoke an alarm
permit if it is determined that:37
(1) There is a false statement of a material matter in the application.
(2) The permit holder has failed to make timely payment of a fine
assessed to him.
B. Unless there is separate indication that there is a crime in progress, the
Chief of Police may refuse police response to an alarm dispatch request
at an alarm site for which the alarm permit is revoked.
C. The Fire Marshal may order the building closed for failure to properly
maintain an operating fire alarm system in accordance with the
Connecticut State Fire Safety Code.
§ 150-15. Appeal from denial, suspension or revocation of permit.
A. If the Alarm Administrator denies the issuance or renewal of a permit,
or suspends or revokes a permit, he or she shall send written notice of
his/her actions and a statement of right to an appeal, by certified mail,
return receipt requested, to both the applicant or alarm user and the
alarm business.
B. The applicant or alarm user may appeal the decision of the Alarm
Administrator to the Chief of Police for intrusion alarms and to the Fire
Chief for fire alarms by filing a written request for a review setting forth
the reasons for the appeal within 20 days after receipt of the notice from
the Alarm Administrator. An alarm business may submit the request on
behalf of the alarm user.
C. Filing of a request for appeal shall stay the action by the Alarm
Administrator suspending or revoking a permit until the Chief of Police
or Fire Chief has completed his/her review. If the request for appeal
is not made within the twenty-day period, the action of the Alarm
Administrator is final.38
§ 150-16. Reinstatement of permit.
A person whose alarm permit has been revoked may be issued a new permit
if the person:
A. Submits an updated application and pays a reinstatement fee as
provided in Chapter 215, Fees;39
B. Pays, or otherwise resolves, all citations and fines; and
C. Submits a certification from an alarm business stating that the alarm
system has been inspected and repaired (if necessary) by the alarm
business.
Chapter 158
37.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
38.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
39.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 150-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-16
1:107
ANIMALS
§ 158-1. Authority.
This chapter is adopted pursuant to the provisions set forth in Title 22 and
Title 53 of the Connecticut General Statutes.
§ 158-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER — Any such officer appointed by the Director
of Safety or his or her designee and enumerated under Connecticut General
Statutes § 22-331.
ANIMALS — Any type of animal both domestic and wild.
AT LARGE — Off the premises of the owner or custodian and not under the
immediate control of the owner or custodian, either by leash, cord, chain or
otherwise.
DOG — Any member of the canine species, male, female, neutered male or
spayed female.
KEEP — Possessing, controlling, exercising or allowing to run at large.
KENNEL — One pack or a collection of dogs which are kept under one
ownership at a single location and are bred for show, sport or sale.
OWNER — Any person possessing, keeping, harboring or having custody of
a dog.
VACCINATION — Any anti-rabies vaccination using a type of vaccination
approved by the state.
VETERINARIAN — Any veterinarian licensed by the state.
VICIOUS ANIMAL — Any animal that attacks, bites or has a known
propensity to attack human beings or other animals.
§ 158-3. License tag and registration requirements.
A. Tags required. Each dog kept by the owner in the Town shall be licensed
and registered, if six months of age or over, on or before June 30
annually, or when the dog becomes six months of age. Dog licenses shall
be issued by the Town Clerk upon payment of a license fee as established
by the Connecticut General Statutes. The owner shall state at the time
application is made for such license and upon printed forms provided for
such purpose name and address and the name, breed, color and sex of
each dog owned and kept by the owner. The owner shall submit to the
Town Clerk a rabies certificate, signed by a veterinarian, or copy thereof.
B. Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to dogs whose
owners are nonresidents temporarily within the Town, conditioned upon
possession of a valid tag from any jurisdiction; nor to dogs brought into
the Town for the purpose of participation in any dog show; nor to seeing
§ 150-16 PLAINVILLE CODE § 158-3
1:108
eye dogs properly trained to assist a blind person when such dogs are
actually being used by blind persons for the purpose of aiding them in
going from place to place.
C. Kennel licenses.
(1) The Town Clerk shall issue to such applicant a kennel license for a
period from the date of such application until the 30th day of the
ensuing June. The license shall specify the name and number of the
kennel, the name of the owner and the name of the keeper and
shall be in lieu of any other license required for any dog of either
sex which may be kept in such kennel during the period for which
the license is issued. Each license may be renewed from year to
year by the Town Clerk upon application of such owner or keeper.
Each such owner or keeper shall cause to be kept, upon each dog
in such kennel, while it is at large, a collar or harness of leather or
other suitable material, to which collar or harness shall be securely
attached a tag or plate upon which shall appear the number of the
kennel license, the name of the Town issuing the license and the year
of license.
(2) Upon receipt of an application and prior to the issue of any kennel
license, an animal control officer shall inspect the proposed kennel
facility to ensure that it is in good repair and is sanitary and that
adequate facilities are available to ensure the dogs will be treated in
a humane manner.
§ 158-4. Rabies vaccination requirements.
A. Any owner of a dog or cat three months of age or over shall have such
dog or cat vaccinated against rabies. Any animal vaccinated prior to
one year of age or receiving a primary rabies vaccine at any age shall
be considered protected for only one year and shall be given a booster
vaccination one year after initial vaccination and shall be vaccinated at
least every three years thereafter. Those animals revaccinated after one
year of age shall be given booster vaccinations at least every three years
thereafter.
B. Proof of such vaccination shall be a certificate issued by a veterinarian
and provided to an animal control officer upon request.
§ 158-5. Annoyance by dog on highway.
No owner shall allow a dog to go out on any highway, road or street and
growl, snap, bite or otherwise annoy any person or domesticated animal
lawfully using such highway or chase or interfere with any motor vehicle so
using such highway, road or street.
§ 158-6. Nuisance by dog.
No owner shall own or harbor a dog which is or dogs that are a nuisance by
reason of vicious disposition or excessive barking or other disturbance or,
by such barking or other disturbance, is or are a source of annoyance to any
sick person residing in the immediate vicinity.
§ 158-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-7
1:109
§ 158-7. Vicious animals.
A. Any animal that habitually bites or injures any human being or other
animals or which has a known propensity to attack or bite human beings
or other animals shall be known as a vicious animal.
B. When any dog, cat or other animal has bitten a person on the premises of
the owner or keeper of such dog, cat or other animal, any animal control
officer may quarantine such dog, cat or other animal on the premises
of the owner or keeper of such dog, cat or other animal. Any animal
control officer may make any order concerning the restraint or disposal
of any biting dog, cat or other animal as the officer deems necessary.
Notice of any such order shall be given to the person bitten by such
dog, cat or other animal within 24 hours. The owner of such animal
shall pay all fees associated with the quarantine, including the costs
of rabies testing. On the 14th day of such quarantine the dog, cat or
other animal shall be examined by the animal control officer and/or a
veterinarian to determine whether such quarantine shall be continued
or removed. Whenever any quarantine is ordered under the provisions
of this subsection, notice thereof shall be given to the person bitten or
attacked by such dog, cat or other animal within 24 hours.
§ 158-8. Dogs roaming at large.
A. No owner of any dog shall allow such dog to roam at large in or upon
any street, park, school grounds or other public places or upon private
premises other than the owner's property unless such dog is attached
to a secure leash held continuously in the hand of a responsible person
capable of controlling it or is securely leashed upon such unfenced
premises in such a manner that the chain or cord or other attachment by
which it is held does not permit it to go beyond the boundaries of such lot
or premises or unless the dog is securely confined within a motor vehicle
which is adequately ventilated.
B. This section shall not apply to any dog while performing in a show or
exhibition, or any guide dog for the blind, or dogs used during open
hunting or training season.
§ 158-9. Removal of feces.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person owning, keeping, walking or in
any control of any dog to allow or permit such animal to defecate
upon any private property owned by another, condominium common
elements, street, sidewalk, gutter or other public areas unless such
person shall remove all feces so deposited by such animal before leaving
the immediate premises.
B. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any person who is blind,
walking or in control of a dog, and accompanied by a guide dog or to any
person who is physically unable to remove said feces.
§ 158-10. Kennels.
A. Any owner or keeper of a kennel who breeds more than two litters of
dogs annually shall apply to the Town Clerk for a kennel license. Any
owner or keeper of a kennel who breeds not more than two litters of
§ 158-7 PLAINVILLE CODE § 158-10
1:110
dogs annually may apply to the Town Clerk for a kennel license. For the
purposes of this section, "annually" shall refer to the kennel license year
which begins July 1.
B. Any animal control officer may at any time inspect any kennel including
all facilities of any kennel in which dogs are bred or housed or cause it
to be inspected by a Connecticut-licensed veterinarian appointed by the
Commissioner of Agriculture. If, in the judgment of the animal control
officer, such kennel is not being maintained in good repair and in a
sanitary and humane manner or if the animal control officer finds that
communicable or infectious disease or other unsatisfactory conditions
exist in the kennel, he or she may issue such orders as he or she deems
necessary for the correction of such conditions and may quarantine
the premises and animals. If the owner or keeper of such kennel fails
to comply with such orders, the animal control officer shall revoke or
suspend the kennel license of such owner or keeper.
§ 158-11. Fees.
Licensing and kennel fees are set forth in Chapter 215, Fees.
§ 158-12. Penalties for offenses.
Violation of any section of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine of $60.
§ 158-13. Seizure and impoundment of animals.
A. If an owner or keeper fails to comply with a quarantine or restraining
order made pursuant to § 158-7 or 158-8, the animal control officer may
seize the dog, cat or other animal to ensure such compliance.
B. Any dog, cat or other animal captured or impounded under the
provisions of this chapter shall be redeemed by the owner or keeper
thereof, or the agent of such owner or keeper, upon proper identification
and, if the animal in question is a dog, upon presentation to the animal
control officer of a license and tag for such dog, and upon the payment
by such owner or keeper or his/her agent of the redemption fee provided
in Chapter 215, Fees. When the owner or keeper of any such impounded
dog, cat or other animal fails to redeem such dog, cat or other animal
within 24 hours after receiving notification to do so or, where the owner
was unknown, within 24 hours after notification was effected by means
of publication in a newspaper, such owner or keeper shall pay, in addition
to such redemption fee and the cost of advertising, the amount
determined by the Town to be the full cost of detention and care of such
impounded dog, cat or other animal.
C. The owner or keeper of any dog, cat or other animal impounded for
the purpose of quarantine shall pay for the full cost of detention, rabies
testing and care of such quarantined animal. In addition, any owner or
keeper of any such impounded dog, cat or other animal who fails to
redeem such dog, cat or other animal within 120 hours after receiving
notification to do so shall have committed an infraction and shall be
subject to all applicable fees and $1 per day not to exceed $95.
§ 158-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-14
1:111
§ 158-14. Enforcement.
A. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter, tickets may
be issued by any person authorized to issue tickets, summons or
infractions under the authority of the Connecticut General Statutes or
the Charter of the Town of Plainville.
B. The adoption of this chapter shall not preclude the enforcement, by
properly authorized officials, of like provisions of the Connecticut
General Statutes.
C. All penalties received for violation of this chapter shall be paid to the
Town of Plainville and remitted to the Plainville Police Department within
15 days of the ticket date. If any fine is not paid within 15 days a
penalty in the amount equal to the fine shall immediately become due
and payable in addition to the original fine and a warrant may be issued
for the arrest of the violator.
Chapter 166
BAZAARS AND RAFFLES
§ 166-1. Adoption of statutory provisions.
Pursuant to the provisions of § 7-171 of the Connecticut General Statutes,
the Town hereby adopts all the provisions of §§ 7-170 to 7-186, inclusive,
as amended, of the Connecticut General Statutes concerning bazaars and
raffles.
Chapter 180
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 185.
Erosion and sediment control — See Ch. 210.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 225.
Historic preservation — See Ch. 238.
Housing Code — See Ch. 243.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 300.
§ 158-14 PLAINVILLE CODE § 166-1
1:112
ARTICLE I
Building Permits
[Adopted by the Town Meeting 1-25-1954]
§ 180-1. Restriction on issuance of building permits.40
No building permit shall be issued for the erection of any building or
structure, other than farm or accessory buildings, in any subdivision or
resubdivision in the Town of Plainville not approved by the Planning and
Zoning Commission of Plainville or on any lots abutting on unaccepted
highways or streets in the Town of Plainville.
§ 180-2. Applicability.
A. Section 180-1 shall not be applicable in a case where, prior to the
effective date of this article, the lot upon which the building or structure
is to be erected had been sold to a bona fide purchaser by the person,
partnership or corporation laying out such subdivision or resubdivision
or such street.
B. Section 180-1 shall be applicable, however, to any lots which such
person, partnership or corporation or its successor in interest owns on,
or acquired subsequent to, the effective date of this article. For the
purposes of this subsection "successor in interest" means any person,
partnership or corporation succeeding to the ownership of all the
predecessor's unsold land in any unapproved subdivision or
resubdivision or abutting on any unaccepted highway or street if such
land consists of three or more lots.
§ 180-3. Appeals.41
Any person denied a building permit by reason of § 180-1 may appeal to
the Zoning Board of Appeals of Plainville. The Zoning Board of Appeals
shall hold a public hearing on such appeal, notice of the hearing to be
given not less than seven days prior thereto in a newspaper of general
circulation in Plainville. The Board shall by majority vote of those members
present at such hearing determine whether or not § 180-1 is applicable to
such person. The Board shall also have the power by majority vote of those
members present at such hearing to grant to such person an exception to
the application of § 180-1, if the Board finds that such person will suffer
undue or exceptional hardship by virtue of the application of § 180-1. In all
instances of appeal requesting an exception to the application of § 180-1 the
person appealing shall pay a fee as provided in Chapter 215, Fees, at the
time of filing of such appeal.
40.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
41.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 180-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-3
1:113
Chapter 185
BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 180.
§ 185-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter shall be to promote public safety and
convenience through the provision of a rational street numbering system
whereby addresses may be identified with the ease and speed which is
essential to the quick response of emergency services such as firefighting,
police and emergency medical care.
§ 185-2. Duty of owner.
It shall be the duty of the owners of all dwellings, apartments, houses,
multiple-family dwellings, rooming houses, hotels, commercial
establishments, and other buildings within the Town of Plainville to number
such buildings or units with numerals as herein provided. It shall be
unlawful for any person, whether owner or occupant of the building or any
apartment or unit therein, to place, maintain or allow to remain thereon any
number other than the one required by this chapter.
§ 185-3. Assignment of numbers.
A. The Building Official of the Town of Plainville, at his discretion and
without notice, may assign each building or part of a building, other
than an accessory building, a street identification number by which
such building or part thereof shall be known and may change such
numbers of such buildings or part of such buildings. The Building Official
shall be authorized to change a street identification number of any
individual building or buildings or parts thereof when such change shall
be necessary by reason of readjustment of any kind, inaccuracy or
mistake, or for any other reason. It shall be the duty of the Building
Official, whenever a new street or highway is laid out, to assign to the
land abutting on such street or highway numbers at such measured
intervals or distances as in the opinion of the Building Official the public
interests shall require. When buildings fronting on such new street or
highway are completed for occupancy, the owners thereof shall affix
numbers to their buildings.
B. All new structures on any street or highway within the Town of Plainville
shall have affixed thereto numbers as assigned by the Building Official
prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy by the Building
Official.
§ 185-4. Notice of assignment; time frame for posting numbers.
§ 180-3 PLAINVILLE CODE § 185-4
1:114
A. Whenever the Building Official, acting in accordance with this chapter,
shall have assigned numbers to a building, he shall send to the owner or
owners of each and all buildings a written notice informing them of such
numbering or renumbering and directing them to affix to such premises
numerals indicating the number thereto assigned. It shall thereupon
become the duty of the owner or owners to affix said numbers within 30
days after the sending of such notice.
B. It shall be the duty of the owners of all buildings existing at the effective
date of this chapter, without prior notice, to affix numerals indicating the
street identification number which has previously been assigned to such
buildings by the Town or, if there is no record of such assignment, the
street identification number which customarily has been used for such
premises. Such numbers shall be affixed within 30 days of the effective
date of this chapter.
§ 185-5. Specifications for type and location of numbers.
A. Numerals used to indicate the street identification number of buildings
shall be located on the exterior front of the building which they identify
or on a post, sign, mailbox or other device located between the building
and the street. Such numerals shall be at least three inches in height
and shall be of a color contrasting with the color of the background
material to which they are affixed. They shall be positioned not less than
four feet nor more than 12 feet from the surface of the ground directly
below them. The location and size of such numerals shall be sufficient
to assure their legibility when the building which they identify is viewed
from one or more points along the center line of the street on which
it fronts between projections of the sides of such building intersecting
perpendicularly with said center line.
B. If a building fronting on a street or private road is set back more than
100 feet from the center line of such street or private road or if any
numerals affixed to such a building in accordance with Subsection A
cannot be made legible from such center line because of obstruction, the
aforesaid numerals shall also be affixed to a post, sign, mailbox or other
device which shall be located within 10 feet of the driveway entrance
which provides the closest vehicular access to the building or part of the
building to which the numerals have been assigned.
C. For buildings containing two or more dwelling units, stores, offices,
or any combinations thereof, and which have entrances from interior
passageways, numerals for such dwelling units, stores or offices shall be
affixed within five feet of every exterior door of the building by which the
building may be entered and from which access to such dwelling units,
stores or offices may be gained. In addition, the same number shall be
affixed to the entrance door of each unit, store, office or combination
thereof. Otherwise the specifications and locations for such numerals
shall be as for other buildings.
D. All numbers must be made of substantial and permanent material and
must be so placed or affixed as not to be easily effaced or removed.
§ 185-6. Penalties for offenses.42
§ 185-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-6
1:115
A. Every owner or occupant of any building or part thereof and every agent
of any said owner who shall neglect or refuse for 30 days to affix to the
same the number assigned by the Building Official, or who shall affix to
the same or retain thereon more than five days any number contrary to
the direction of the Building Official, or who shall refuse or neglect to
comply with any provision of this chapter, shall be guilty of an infraction
punishable by a fine of $25. For the purposes of enforcing this provision
of this chapter, tickets may be issued by any person authorized to issue
tickets, summons or infractions under the authority of the Connecticut
General Statutes or the Charter of the Town of Plainville. Each day of
neglect or refusal to comply with the directions of said Building Official
shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
B. If any fine is not paid within seven days of the issuance of a ticket, a
warrant may be issued for the arrest of the violator on a misdemeanor,
and upon conviction the violator shall be punished by a fine or not less
than $25 nor more than $50 for each offense. All penalties received for
violations of this chapter shall be paid to the Town of Plainville and
remitted to the Plainville Police Department.
Chapter 189
BUSINESSES
42.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 185-6 PLAINVILLE CODE § 185-6
1:116
ARTICLE I
Going Out of Business
[Adopted 6-21-1971]
§ 189-1. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, association or corporation
in the Town of Plainville to cease operations, go out of business, or to
advertise or hold out by any means that any sale of goods, wares or
merchandise is a "removal" or "going out of business" sale, unless a permit
therefor is first obtained from the office of the Town Clerk.
§ 189-2. Application for permit.
The application for such permit shall include a full disclosure, under oath,
of the following information:
A. Trade name or corporate name of business and street address thereof.
B. Name and residence address of owner, partners or associates, if
unincorporated, or of officers and directors if incorporated.
C. Inclusive dates of proposed sale, if any.
D. Date on which business will cease operation.
§ 189-3. Taxes and assessments to be paid prior to issuance of
permit.
All taxes or municipal assessments due the Town of Plainville, including
any possible jeopardy tax, shall be paid in full before such permit shall be
issued.
§ 189-4. Term and display of permit; fee.43
Such permit shall be valid for a period of 90 days from date of issue. The
fee therefor shall be as provided in Chapter 215, Fees. Such permit shall be
posted in the sales room, if any, or place of business from date of issue until
final closing of business.
§ 189-5. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who shall cease operation of a business, or conducting or being
responsible for any sale as set forth in § 189-1, without having first obtained
a permit therefor shall be liable to a fine of $100. Each day that such sale,
if any, is conducted contrary to the provisions of this article shall constitute
a separate violation thereof.
43.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 189-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189-6
1:117
§ 189-6. Exceptions.
This article shall not apply to sales conducted by sheriffs, constables or
other public or court officials or to any other person or persons acting under
the direction or authority of any state or federal court.
§ 189-6 PLAINVILLE CODE § 189-6
1:118
Chapter 205
ENTERTAINMENT, PUBLIC
§ 189-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189-6
1:119

ARTICLE I
Parades and Other Functions
[Adopted 8-1-1960]
§ 205-1. Permission required to use public streets or property.
Any person, group or organization desiring to use the public streets or Town
property in the Town of Plainville for a parade or for any other reason,
including the use of loudspeakers, shall request permission in writing of the
Director of Safety or his designated agent.
§ 205-2. Considerations for granting permission.
The Director of Safety, or his designated agent, shall satisfy himself as to the
safety and welfare of the general public before such permission is granted,
in writing, taking into consideration:
A. Routing of traffic;
B. Routing for emergency vehicles;
C. Adequate detours;
D. Adequate police protection; and
E. Date and time in question.
§ 205-3. Applicability.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to any Town property under
the jurisdiction of any department or commission having its own regulations
regarding these matters.
§ 205-4. Penalties for offenses.44
Any person, group or organization violating any provisions of this article
shall be fined no more than $99 for each violation.
44.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 205-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-4
1:121

ARTICLE II
Circuses, Carnivals and Tent Shows
[Adopted 3-20-1972]
§ 205-5. Permit required.45
No person, association, organization or corporation shall conduct any
circus, carnival or tent show in the Town of Plainville without first obtaining
a permit therefor from the Police Department of the Town of Plainville or its
designated agent.
§ 205-6. Application.46
An applicant for a permit hereunder must file with the Police Chief the
following information and material:
A. A written application, on a prepared form, providing the following data:
(1) Name and business address of firm originating entertainment.
(2) Name of principal or manager who will supervise while operating in
Plainville.
(3) Name of local person, firm, association or organization sponsoring
entertainment, if any.
(4) Name and residence address of principal or senior officer of such
sponsor.
(5) Inclusive dates for which permit is requested.
(6) Location at which entertainment will be conducted.
(7) Category of entertainment.
B. A certificate of insurance providing general liability coverage of not
less than $1,000,000 per occurrence and $2,000,000 aggregate. Said
application and certificate shall be provided at least 15 days prior to
date on which entertainment will commence. Larger shows, based on
estimated attendance, might require higher limits.
§ 205-7. Revocation of permit.47
Said permit may be revoked at any time by the Police Chief if it is
determined that such entertainment fails to comply with the requirements
of the Connecticut State Fire Marshal, the Plainville Fire Marshal, or the
Plainville Director of Health or if such entertainment is conducted in an
unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a menace to the
health, safety or general welfare of the public. Said permit may also be
revoked for fraud, misrepresentation or false statement in the application
therefor.
45.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
46.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
47.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 205-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-8
1:123
§ 205-8. Penalties for offenses.
Violation of any provision of this article shall result in a fine of $50 for each
such violation.
§ 205-8 PLAINVILLE CODE § 205-8
1:124
Chapter 210
EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 180. Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 225.
§ 210-1. Purpose and general provisions.
A. This chapter is adopted for the purpose of the following:
(1) To minimize or eliminate soil erosion and sedimentation that may
occur as the result of human activities, including but not limited to
residential, industrial or commercial development within the Town.
(2) To regulate land disturbing activities to control accelerated soil
erosion and sedimentation in order to prevent the pollution of water
resources, protect vegetation and embankments and promote
habitats for flora and fauna.
(3) To establish and enforce procedures through which soil erosion and
sedimentation are minimized.
B. Site-specific requirements and procedures shall be in conformance with
the Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control 2002
or any revisions thereafter. The requirements and procedures shall be
dependent upon best management practices considering factors such
as topography, amount of disturbed area, soil type, drainage patterns
and any other pertinent conditions which would directly or indirectly
influence the potential of or amount of soil erosion and sedimentation.
§ 210-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCELERATED EROSION — Any increase over the rate of natural erosion
as a result of human activity.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES — A technique or series of techniques
which are proven to be effective in controlling runoff, erosion and/or
sedimentation.
BORROW — Fill material which is required for on-site construction which is
obtained from other locations.
BUFFER AREA — The strip of land adjacent to a water body, wetland or
watercourse.
CERTIFICATION — A signed, written approval by the Planning and Zoning
Commission that the soil erosion and sediment control plan and notes
comply with the applicable requirements of these regulations.
CLEARING and GRUBBING — The cutting and removal of trees, shrubs,
bushes and turf, including stumps and roots.
§ 205-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-2
1:125
COMMISSION — The Planning and Zoning Commission of the Town of
Plainville, Connecticut.
DETENTION POND — A temporary or permanent natural or man-made
structure that provides for the temporary storage of stormwater runoff.
DEVELOPER — Any person, firm, corporation, sole proprietor, partnership,
state agency or political subdivision thereof engaged in a land disturbance.
DEVELOPMENT — Any construction or grading activities related to
residential, industrial or commercial activities.
DISCHARGE POINT — That point at which runoff leaves a tract of land.
DISTURBED AREA — Any area where the ground cover is destroyed or
removed leaving the land subject to accelerated erosion.
ENERGY DISSIPATER — A structure or a shaped channel section with
mechanical armoring placed at the discharge point of pipes or conduits to
receive and break down the energy from high-velocity flow.
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil, earth, sand and/or rock
by the action of water, wind, ice, gravity or any combination thereof.
EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN — A plan which includes a set
of best management practices or equivalent measures designed to control
surface runoff and erosion and to retain sediment on a particular site
during the period in which pre-construction and construction-related land
disturbances, fills, and soil storage occur and before final improvements are
completed.
EXCAVATION — The mechanical removal of earth material.
FILL — The deposit of soil or earth materials placed by artificial means.
GRADING — The altering of the existing earth's surface elevations by any
method.
GROUND COVER — Any natural vegetative growth or other material that
renders the soil surfaces stable against accelerated erosion.
INSPECTION — The periodic review of sediment and erosion control
measures as approved or directed by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
OUTFALL — The point of discharge to any water body, wetland or
watercourse from a public or private stormwater drainage system.
RETENTION POND — A temporary or permanent natural or man-made
structure that provides for the storage of stormwater runoff by means of a
pool of water.
RUNOFF — Rainfall, snowmelt or irrigation water which flows over the
earth's surface.
SEDIMENT — Soil or other sacrificial materials transported by surface
water, ice, wind, gravity or combination thereof.
SEDIMENTATION — The process or action of deposition of sediment that is
determined to have been caused by erosion.
§ 210-2 PLAINVILLE CODE § 210-2
1:126
SITE — The entire area of land on which the land disturbance activity is
proposed.
SITE PLAN — A plan or set of plans showing the details of any land
disturbance activity of a site, including but not limited to the construction of
structures, open and enclosed drainage facilities, stormwater management
facilities, parking lots, driveways, curbs, pavements, sidewalks, bike paths,
recreational facilities, and landscaping.
SLOPE — The incline of a ground surface expressed as a ratio of horizontal
distance to vertical distance.
STRIPPING — Any activity which removes or significantly disturbs the
vegetative surface cover, including clearing, grubbing of stumps and root
mat and topsoil removal.
TEN-YEAR STORM — The surface runoff resulting from a rainfall of an
intensity expected to be equaled or exceeded, on the average, once in 10
years, and of a duration which will produce the maximum peak rate of
runoff from the watershed of interest under average antecedent wetness
conditions.
TWENTY-YEAR STORM — The surface runoff resulting from a rainfall of
an intensity expected to be equaled or exceeded, on the average, once in
25 years, and of a duration which will produce the maximum peak rate of
runoff from the watershed of interest under average antecedent wetness
conditions.
VELOCITY — The average speed of flow through the cross section of the
main channel at the peak flow of the storm of interest.
WATERCOURSE — Any natural or improved stream, river, creek, ditch,
channel, canal, gully, or swale in which flow is either continuous or
intermittent.
WATERSHED — A region draining to a specific location, river, river system,
wetland, or body of water.
WETLAND — Any area as defined in the Town of Plainville Inland Wetland
and Watercourse Regulations or revisions thereof.
§ 210-3. Activities requiring erosion and sediment control plan.
A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan shall be submitted with any
permit application for development or site work when the disturbed area of
such development or activity is cumulatively more than 5,000 square feet or
within 100 feet of any water body, watercourse and/or wetland.
§ 210-4. Exemptions.
This chapter shall not apply to the following:
A. Land disturbance activities over which the State of Connecticut has
exclusive regulatory jurisdiction.
B. Construction activities essential to protect human life during a declared
emergency.
§ 210-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-5
1:127
§ 210-5. Erosion and sediment control plan.
A. A soil erosion and sediment control plan shall be developed using the
guidelines and best management practices outlined in the Connecticut
Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control 2002 as amended
and/or any other applicable soil erosion professional document. The
soil erosion and sediment control plan shall develop a construction
sequence and methods which minimize the potential for soil erosion
and sedimentation during and after any proposed construction activities,
including the mitigation of existing conditions. The Planning and Zoning
Commission during its review of any project's soil erosion and sediment
control plan may approve such plans that may be contrary to the
prescribed guidelines if technically sound reasoning is presented by the
applicant.
B. The soil erosion and sediment control plan needs to incorporate the
following principles:
(1) Plan the development to fit environmental conditions.
(a) Utilize the existing topography.
(b) Avoid excessive slopes, fills or cuts.
(c) Avoid development on steep slopes.
(d) Align development along existing contours.
(e) Utilize existing drainage features when applicable.
(f) Provide adequate setback separation between sensitive areas.
(2) Keep land disturbance to a minimum.
(a) Provide construction phasing.
(b) Cluster development areas where applicable.
(c) Limit clearing areas.
(d) Sequence construction activities to avoid seasonal conditions
(i.e., disturbing extensive areas during winter thaw and spring
rains).
(e) Stabilize cleared areas in a timely matter.
(3) Keep clean runoff separated.
(a) Divert site runoff away from sensitive areas.
(b) Construct sedimentation basins where applicable.
(4) Provide adequate erosion control measures and maintenance.
C. The soil erosion and sediment control plan shall include but not be
limited to the following and be presented in the following format:
(1) Narrative of construction activities and control measures.
(a) Discussion of site conditions (steep slopes, erodible soils, etc.).
(b) Description of construction schedule (starting date, length of
activities, phasing, etc.).
(c) Description of proposed construction sequence and methods
(clearing, grading, excavation, etc.).
(d) Review of design criteria implemented for control measures.
(e) Listing of proposed control measures.
(f) Identification of responsible party, address and emergency
telephone number.
(2) Support documents include engineering calculations if applicable.
(a) Drainage calculations (ten- and twenty-five-year storms).
(b) Wetland and/or sensitive area identification.
§ 210-5 PLAINVILLE CODE § 210-5
1:128
(c) Outlet/inlet stabilization control calculations.
(d) Maximum permissible stormwater velocity calculations.
(3) Site drawings.
(a) Site plan identifying the proposed activities and abutting area.
(b) Existing and proposed topographical features.
(c) Grading plan with proposed contours at no more than five-foot
intervals.
(d) Drainage and utility construction plans.
(e) Location and type of erosion control measures.
(4) Control measure details.
(a) Standard details for erosion control measures.
(b) Notes outlining specific installation and maintenance details for
erosion control measures.
D. The soil erosion and sediment control plan and any supporting
calculations shall be prepared and certified by a Connecticut
professional engineer. The professional engineer's certification may be
waived by the Planning and Zoning Commission if it is deemed the
proposed activities do not pose an erosion threat.
E. Applications associated with activities within 100 feet of any wetland
and/or watercourse shall be referred to the Inland Wetlands Commission
for its consideration, report or permit before the Planning and Zoning
Commission shall render a decision on the soil erosion and sediment
control plan.
F. The Planning and Zoning Commission may require the applicant of
any approved plan to post a bond in an amount determined by the
Commission to be equal to the cost of installing and maintaining the
erosion control measures or the estimated costs of mitigating any
impacts as the result of a failure, whichever is greater.
G. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall approve the proposed soil
erosion and sediment control plan as presented, modify and approve the
plan or reject the plan.
§ 210-6. Inspections and enforcement.
A. Inspections shall be made by the Commission or its designated agent
during construction to ensure compliance with the approved plan and
ensure the control measures are properly installed and maintained.
The Commission may also require the applicant to verify, in writing,
that the construction methods and erosion control measures have been
performed and/or installed in accordance with the approved plan and are
installed and maintained on a weekly basis and before and after each
storm event.
B. During such inspection, if activities are deemed inconsistent with the
approved plan, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall issue a notice
of violation or cease and desist order which shall be maintained until
such time the applicant prepares and is authorized to proceed with
corrective actions.
C. The applicant may request a hearing before the Planning and Zoning
Commission to demonstrate that his actions are in compliance with the
approved plan. Such hearing shall be requested within 10 business days
§ 210-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-6
1:129
of issuance of the notice or order. The hearing shall be held within 10
business days of such request. A final decision from the Commission
shall be rendered within 10 business days of the hearing.
Chapter 215
FEES
§ 215-1. Chapter 150, Alarms.
Section 150-16A, fee to reinstate revoked alarm permit: $25.
§ 215-2. Chapter 158, Animals.
A. Section 158-11, licensing and kennel fees:
(1) Unaltered dog: $19.
(2) Altered dog: $8.
(3) Kennel: $51 for 10 tags; $102 for 20 tags.
(4) Service dog: no fee.
(5) Penalty fee: $1 per month late.
(6) Transfer of ownership: $1.
(7) Change of residence: $0.50
(8) Replacement tag: $0.50.
B. Section 158-13B, fee for redemption of impounded animal: $15.
§ 215-3. Chapter 180, Building Construction.
Section 180-3, fee for appeal of denial of building permit: $135.
§ 215-4. Chapter 189, Businesses.
Section 189-4, fee for permit for going out of business: $1.
§ 215-5. Chapter 219, Fires and Fire Prevention.
Section 219-9D, fee for open burning permit: $10.
§ 215-6. Chapter 269, Massage Establishments.
A. Section 269-5, application fee for massage establishment permit: $500.
B. Section 269-8A, permit fee to operate massage establishment: $100.
§ 215-7. Chapter 292, Peddlers, Vendors and Solicitors.
Section 292-5C, license fee: $25.
§ 215-8. Chapter 314, Rental Property.
Section 314-11, inspection fees:
A. Initial inspection: no fee.
B. First reinspection: $5.
C. Subsequent reinspections: $10.
§ 210-6 PLAINVILLE CODE § 215-9
1:130
§ 215-9. Chapter 318, Restaurants.
A. Section 318-3, fee for restaurant license: $1.
B. Section 318-8, fee for outdoor dining area permit: $150; renewal: $150.
§ 215-10. Chapter 341, Solid Waste.
A. Section 341-5, transfer station fee schedule.
Description Fee
Bulky waste, trash and other
burnables
Cars $10 per load
Pickup trucks/vans $20 per base load or part thereof to a
maximum $40 per load*
Dump trucks/larger
vehicles
$30 per base load or part thereof to a
maximum $65 per load*
Trailers $10 per base load or part thereof to a
maximum $40 per load**
Miscellaneous metals
Cars $10 per load
Pickup trucks/vans $20 per base load or part thereof to
maximum $30 per load*
Dump trucks/larger
vehicles
$20 per base load or part thereof to a
maximum $30 per load*
Trailers $10 per base load or part thereof to a
maximum $30 per load**
White goods $10 per item (maximum 3 per load)
Tires $5 each (less than 8.00/20); $10 each
(greater than 8.00/20)
Brush
Cars $10 per load
Pickup trucks/vans $15 per base load or part thereof to a
maximum $30 per load*
Dump trucks/large
vehicles
$20 per base load or part thereof to a
maximum $40 per load*
Trailers $10 per base load or part thereof to a
maximum $40 per load**
Leaves No charge
Waste motor oil No charge
Antifreeze No charge
§ 215-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-10
1:131
For the purposes of this fee schedule, a load shall be defined as all
materials contained within or on the transporting vehicle and/or trailer
except for those specifically noted within the fee schedule.
* A base load shall be defined as the volume equivalent to a unit space
eight feet long by six feet wide by four feet high (standard pickup) or
any part thereof. The certified transfer station operator or attendant
shall estimate the number of equivalent base loads and charge a fee
accordingly.
** A base load for a trailer shall be defined as the volume equivalent
to a unit space six feet long by six feet wide by four feet high or
any part thereof. The certified transfer station operator or attendant
shall estimate the number of equivalent base loads and charge a fee
accordingly.
Vehicles containing materials towing a trailer shall be charged the
appropriate fee associated with both the vehicle and trailer.
B. Section 341-15, fees related to recycling and solid waste handling.
(1) Fee for collector's annual registration: $250.
(2) Fees for collection carts.
(a) Cart damage requiring replacement: $75.
(b) Additional cart, annual fee per cart, mixed residential waste: $100.
(c) Additional cart, annual fee per cart, recyclables: $50.
§ 215-11. Chapter 347, Streets, Sidewalks and Driveways.
A. Section 347-2, fee for street opening permit: $100.
B. Section 347-19, fee for permit to construct driveway, sidewalk or other
entrance to property: $50.
C. Section 347-27, fee for a new sidewalk or curb installation: $100.
§ 215-12. Chapter 355, Taxation.
Sections 355-50 and 355-53, administration fee for motor vehicle tax
delinquencies: $5.
Chapter 219
FIRES AND FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 38.
Alarms — See Ch. 150.
Housing Code — See Ch. 243.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 300.
§ 215-10 PLAINVILLE CODE § 215-12
1:132
ARTICLE I
Fire Lanes
[Adopted 6-20-1977; amended 1-8-1990; 8-4-2003]
§ 219-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FIRE LANE — Refers to any traffic area or other area adjacent to the
front, side or rear of any public building, or providing access from a public
highway to said building, which is designated for free passage of heavy fire
apparatus and other emergency equipment to all areas of such building in
all seasons and in all kinds of weather. No portion of any public highway
shall be deemed to be, or shall be designated as, a fire lane.
PUBLIC BUILDING — Refers to any structure owned by any governmental
unit and to any privately owned structure which has a capacity of 50 or
more persons and is used, or is intended to be used, by members of the
general public.
§ 219-2. Authority of Fire Marshal.
If, in the judgment of the Fire Marshal, the type, magnitude, location or
traffic pattern of any existing or proposed public building is such that the
reasonable safety of persons who might occupy such building requires the
establishment of a fire lane or lanes, he shall establish such fire lane and
the area it shall constitute by written order.
A. Existing building. The Fire Marshal shall cause a copy of such order to
be delivered to the owner or owners, or agent thereof, of such public
building and shall file one copy thereof with the Town Clerk, the Fire
Chief, and the Traffic Division of the Police Department.
B. Proposed building. The owner or owners, or agent thereof, shall file a
copy of the site plan for said building, and any subsequent revisions
thereto, with the Fire Marshal within 48 hours of the time said plan is
filed with the Town Planning and Zoning Commission. Within 10 days of
the receipt of said plan, the Fire Marshal shall issue either notice that
fire lanes are not required or an order for establishment of fire lanes.
Such notice or order shall be delivered to the owner or owners, or agent
thereof, of such proposed building, and one copy thereof shall be filed
with the Town Clerk, the Fire Chief, the Traffic Division of the Police
Department, the Planning and Zoning Commission, and the Building
Official.
§ 219-3. Signs and markings.
A. Upon establishment of a fire lane, the owner of such building shall
install, or cause to be installed, signs and markings in accordance with
the following specifications:
(1) Outer limits of fire lane, as designated by the Fire Marshal, shall be
lined in yellow traffic paint at least four inches wide.
§ 219-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 219-3
1:133
(2) The words "FIRE LANE" shall be painted within the established lane
area at intervals to be specified by the Fire Marshal. Said words shall
be painted in yellow traffic paint, with strokes of letters to be at least
three inches wide and letters to be at least 12 inches high.
(3) Metal, reflective, sheeting signs, 12 inches wide by 18 inches high,
containing the wording "NO PARKING - FIRE LANE - TOW ZONE"
shall be posted at such locations as are specified by the Fire Marshal.
(4) All fire lane signs, striping and lettering shall be kept in good repair
and clearly legible at all times.
B. In lieu thereof, the Traffic Division of the Police Department, at the
expense of the owner of said building, shall cause signs and markings to
be installed in accordance with the foregoing specifications.
§ 219-4. Unlawful parking in fire lanes.
No person shall park any motor vehicle, as defined by the Connecticut
General Statutes, or leave any motor vehicle unattended in a fire lane
established and identified as set forth above. The registered owner of any
motor vehicle shall be presumed to be the operator of such vehicle.
§ 219-5. Fire lanes and hydrants to be clear of ice and snow.
Fire lanes established and identified in the manner set forth above and all
fire hydrants situated on private property within the Town of Plainville shall
be kept free of ice and snow by the owner of the premises.
§ 219-6. Removal of vehicles.
Any motor vehicle found parked or standing unattended in a fire lane
established and identified as set forth above may be towed upon the
direction of any officer of the Plainville Police Department or of the
Plainville Fire Department to any public or private parking facility, and all
expenses of such towing and any storage charges shall be borne by the
registered owner thereof.
§ 219-7. Penalties for offenses.48
Violation of § 219-4 or 219-5 of this article shall be punishable by a fine not
to exceed $25. Notwithstanding the above, whenever a police officer shall
find a violation of § 219-4, he shall serve upon the owner or operator of such
vehicle, or place upon such vehicle, a notice directing the owner or operator
thereof to appear at the Police Department prior to a time specified in said
notice. If any person receiving said notice shall appear as directed and shall
pay a fine of $25, such payment shall bar a prosecution for violation of
§ 219-4 of this article.
48.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 219-3 PLAINVILLE CODE § 219-7
1:134
ARTICLE II
Open Burning
[Adopted 11-6-2006]
§ 219-8. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BONFIRE — Any fire that is larger than a recreational fire, with clean dry
wood, monitored by a standby fire suppression team.
BRUSH — Any twig, stick, or tree limb less than four inches in diameter.
FIRE MARSHAL — The legally designated Fire Marshal of the Town of
Plainville, or his or her designated assistant.
OPEN BURNING — The kindling of a fire in the open air without
containment or in simple outdoor structures that permit the products of
combustion to be emitted directly into the ambient air space.
OPEN BURNING OFFICIAL — Any person that is certified by the
Department of Energy and Environmental Protection to issue open burning
certificates and enforce laws related to open burning.49
PERSON — Any person who kindles or directs another to kindle a fire.
RECREATIONAL FIRE — The noncommercial burning of materials other
than rubbish for pleasure, religious, ceremonial, cooking, or similar
purposes in which the fuel burned is not contained in an incinerator, a
barbecue grill, or a barbecue pit, and the total fuel area is not exceeding
three feet (0.9 meter) in diameter and two feet (0.6 meter) in height.
SENIOR FIRE DEPARTMENT MEMBER — Any member with seniority in
good standing.
SENIOR FIRE OFFICER — Any Plainville Fire Department officer.
SIMPLE OUTDOOR STRUCTURES — Outdoor structures, fire pits,
receptacles, or other devices that are designed principally to contain the
material being burned or to minimize the risk of fire and which do not
provide effective control of the air pollutants generated.
§ 219-9. Permit requirements; revocation of permit.
A. No person shall initiate open burning in any public or private area
outside any building without first acquiring a permit from the Fire
Marshal or Open Burning Official.
B. Open burning permits are required for the following, among other
things:
(1) The burning of brush in the absence of municipal collection,
provided that the burning is restricted to the property where the
permittee resides.
49.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 219-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 219-9
1:135
(2) Bonfires for ceremonies, provided that Fire Department and
extinguishing equipment is on the premises of the activity.
C. Each permit shall be applicable only for the occasion or circumstances,
as the case may be, for which the application is approved; a new permit
shall be required for all contemplated open burning not sanctioned by an
existing permit.
D. Permits will be issued no earlier than 48 hours prior to the effective
permit hours. The permit fee will be as provided in Chapter 215, Fees.50
E. Permits may be revoked at any time by the Fire Marshal, Open Burning
Official, any senior Plainville fire officer, or the State Forest Fire Warden
because of one or more of the following conditions:
(1) High air pollution potential.
(2) The creation of a nuisance or hazard by the open burning in
question.
(3) An extreme or high forest fire danger exists.
F. Open burning initiated in violation of this article shall be promptly
extinguished by the individual or individuals responsible for the same
upon notice from the Fire Marshal, Open Burning Official, senior
Plainville fire officer, senior Fire Department member or State Forest
Fire Warden.51
§ 219-10. Conditions for refusal of permit; exceptions to permit
requirement.
A. Open burning permits shall not be issued if the Fire Marshal or Open
Burning Official determines that:
(1) A practical alternative method is available for the disposal of the
material to be burned.
(2) A hazardous health condition might be created by such burning.
(3) The purpose of the burning would be to dispose of automobiles
and accessories, scrap and waste materials derived from automobile
salvage.
(4) The purpose of the burning is for salvage operations (e.g., burning of
wire insulation to recover copper).
(5) Grass, garbage, leaves, metals, paper, painted materials, plastics,
rubber, or demolition or construction materials are to be burned.
(6) An advisory of an air pollution emergency episode is in effect
pursuant to § 22a-174-6 of the Regulations of Connecticut State
Agencies.
(7) Such open burning would interfere with or prevent the attainment or
maintenance of a relevant air quality standard.
(8) The forest fire danger, as determined by the State Forest Fire
Warden, is high or extreme.
(9) Burning is being conducted within a Town right-of-way.
B. Open burning may be conducted under the following circumstances
without first acquiring a permit as required by § 219-9, except as noted:
50.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
51.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 219-9 PLAINVILLE CODE § 219-10
1:136
(1) To abate an immediate fire hazard, provided that the abatement fire
is supervised by a responsible State Forest Fire Warden, Plainville
Fire Marshal, Open Burning Official or a senior Plainville fire officer.
(2) The cooking of food, provided that no smoke violation or other
nuisance is created.
(3) Construction purposes, such as open burning in salamanders or
other devices used by the workers for heating purposes and small
fires kindled by contractors essential to street installation or paving
activities, the repairing of utilities, or similar work, provided that no
smoke violation or other nuisance is created.
(4) Recreational fires, as defined, and clean, cut, and dry firewood is
used, provided that no smoke violation or other nuisance is created.
(5) In a chimenea or other similar patio containment device, provided
that the fire is contained solely within the device and clean, cut, and
dry firewood is used.
§ 219-11. Penalties for offenses.52
Failure to comply with this article shall be a violation punishable by fine of
$200.
52.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 219-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 219-11
1:137

ARTICLE III
Rapid Entry Key Lock Boxes
[Adopted 11-6-2006]
§ 219-12. Applicability.53
A. Any new industrial or commercial building, factory, store or warehouse,
or any apartment building, as defined by the Connecticut State Fire
Safety Code, with installed fire alarm systems and/or automatic fire
sprinkler systems shall install a rapid entry key lock box which shall
be specified on building plans prior to approval of those plans by the
Building Official and/or Fire Marshal.
B. Any existing industrial or commercial building, factory, store or
warehouse, or apartment building undergoing renovations shall have a
rapid entry lock box installed which shall be specified on building plans
prior to approval of those plans by the Building Official and/or Fire
Marshal.
§ 219-13. Contents of key lock box.
The key lock box shall contain a master key for entry and all appropriate
keys to mechanical rooms, electrical rooms, storage areas, offices and fire
alarm panels, or to key boxes for said rooms.
§ 219-14. Access to keys.
Only authorized officers of the Plainville Fire Department and the Plainville
Fire Marshal shall be permitted access to keys for the lock boxes.
§ 219-15. Penalties for offenses.
Failure to comply with this article shall be a violation punishable by a fine
of $50.
53.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 219-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 219-15
1:139
Chapter 225
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 180. Erosion and sediment control — See Ch. 210.
§ 219-15 PLAINVILLE CODE § 219-15
1:140
ARTICLE I
Authority, Findings, Purpose and Objectives
§ 225-1. Statutory authorization.
The Legislature of the State of Connecticut has in § 7-148(c)(7) of the
General Statutes delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to
adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety and general
welfare of its citizenry.
§ 225-2. Findings of fact.
A. The flood hazard areas of the Town of Plainville are subject to periodic
inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and
impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public
health, safety and general welfare.
B. These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions
in floodplains, causing increases in flood heights and velocities, and by
the occupancy in flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods or
hazardous to other lands which are inadequately elevated, floodproofed,
or otherwise unprotected from flood damages.54
§ 225-3. Statement of purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
A. Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and
property due to water or erosion hazards or which result in damaging
increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
B. Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
C. Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of
floodwaters;
D. Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may
increase erosion or flood damage; and
E. Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to
other lands.
§ 225-4. Objectives.
The objectives of this chapter are:
A. To protect human life and health;
54.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 225-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-4
1:141
B. To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood-control
projects;
C. To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
D. To minimize prolonged business interruptions;
E. To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges
located in floodplains;
F. To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of flood-prone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood
blight areas; and
G. To ensure that potential home buyers are notified that property is in a
flood area.
§ 225-4 PLAINVILLE CODE § 225-4
1:142
ARTICLE II
Word Usage and Definitions
§ 225-5. Word usage.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common
usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
§ 225-6. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADDITION (TO AN EXISTING BUILDING) — Any walled and roofed
expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected
by a common load-bearing wall other than a fire wall. Any walled and roofed
addition which is connected by a fire wall or is separated by independent
perimeter load-bearing walls is a new/separate structure.
APPEAL — A request for a review of the Town Engineer's interpretation of
any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain within a
community subject to one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given
year.
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) —
BASEMENT — That portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
BUILDING — Any structure built for support, shelter or enclosure for any
occupancy or storage.
COST — As related to substantial improvements, the costs of any
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, alteration, repair or other
improvement of a structure shall be established by a detailed written
contractor's estimate. The estimate shall include, but not be limited to, the
cost of materials (interior finishing components, structural components, and
utility and service equipment); sales tax on materials; building equipment
and fixtures, including heating and air conditioning and utility meters;
labor; built-in appliances; demolition and site preparation; repairs made to
damaged parts of the building worked on at the same time; contractor's
overhead; contractor's profit; and grand total. Items to be excluded include
cost of plans and specifications; survey costs; permit fees; and outside
A. The elevation of the crest of the base flood or one-hundred-year flood.
The height in relation to mean sea level expected to be reached by the
waters of the base flood at pertinent points in the floodplains of coastal
and riverine areas.
B.
§ 225-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-6
1:143
improvements such as septic systems, water supply wells, landscaping,
sidewalks, fences, yard lights, irrigation systems and detached structures
such as garages, sheds and gazebos.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, or storage
of equipment or materials.
ELEVATED BUILDING — A non-basement building built to have the lowest
floor elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation
perimeter walls, piling, columns (posts and piers), shear walls, or
breakaway walls.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are affixed
(including, as a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads)
is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management
regulations adopted by a community.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR
SUBDIVISION — The preparation of additional sites by the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY (FEMA) — The federal
agency that administers the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP).
FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP — An official map of a
community on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has
delineated the boundaries of the floodway.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — An official map of a community
on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both
the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to
the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY — The official report by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency. The report contains flood profiles as well
as the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map and the water surface elevation
of the base flood.
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
A. The overflow of inland water.
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface water from any
source.
B.
§ 225-6 PLAINVILLE CODE § 225-6
1:144
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one
foot.
FLOOR — The top surface of an enclosed area in a building (including
basement), i.e., top of slab in concrete slab construction or top of wood
flooring in wood frame construction. The term does not include the floor of
a garage used solely for parking vehicles.
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT FACILITY — A facility which cannot be used
for its intended purpose unless it is located in close proximity to water,
such as a docking or port facility necessary for the unloading of cargo
or passengers, shipbuilding, ship repair, or seafood processing facilities.
The term does not include long-term storage, manufacture, sales or service
facilities.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE (HAG) — The highest natural elevation of
the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a
structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage, is not considered a
building's lowest floor.
MARKET VALUE — The market value of the structure determined by an
independent appraisal by a professional appraiser.
MANUFACTURED (MOBILE) HOME — A structure, transportable in one
or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to
be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as
contributing to the historic significance of a registered historic district
or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a
registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
D.
§ 225-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-6
1:145
required utilities. The term also includes similar transportable structures
placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be
improved property.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel, or
contiguous parcels, of land divided into two or more manufactured home
lots for rent or sale.
MEAN SEA LEVEL (MSL) — The North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of
1988 or other datum to which base flood elevations shown on a community's
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) are referenced.
NATIONAL GEODETIC VERTICAL DATUM (NGVD) — As corrected in 1929,
a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations
within the floodplain.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after September 26, 2008, the effective date of the
floodplain management regulations, and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE (also known as park trailers, travel trailers,
camp trailers and similar transportable structures) — A vehicle which is:
SAND DUNES — Naturally occurring accumulations of sand in ridges or
mounds landward of the beach.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA) — The land in the floodplain
within a community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in
any given year. Special flood hazard areas are determined utilizing the base
flood elevations (BFE) provided on the flood profiles in the Flood Insurance
Study (FIS) for a community. Base flood elevations provided on a Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) are only approximate (rounded up or down) and
should be verified with the BFEs published in the FIS for a specific location.
Special flood hazard areas include, but are not necessarily limited to, the
land shown as Zones A, A1-30, AE, AO and AH and the coastal high-hazard
areas shown as Zones V, V1-30 and VE on a FIRM. The SFHA is also called
the "area of special flood hazard."
START OF CONSTRUCTION —
A. Built on a single chassis;
Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the longest
horizontal projection;
B.
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty
truck; and
C.
Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as a
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal
use.
D.
Includes substantial improvement and means the date the building
permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
A.
§ 225-6 PLAINVILLE CODE § 225-6
1:146
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building that is principally above
ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank, or other manmade
facilities or infrastructure.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a structure,
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its pre-damaged condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any combination of repairs,
reconstruction, alteration, or improvements to a structure taking place over
a ten-year period in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50% of
the market value of the structure. The market value of the structure should
be the appraised value of the structure using the cost approach to value
method prior to the start of initial repair or improvement or, in the case
of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. For
the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to
occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural
part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the
external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include
any project for improvement of a structure required to comply with existing
health, sanitary or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to
assure safe living conditions.
VARIANCE — A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which
permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this chapter
where specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship.
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management ordinance. A
structure or other development without required permits, lowest floor
elevation documentation, floodproofing certificates or required floodway
encroachment calculations is presumed to be in violation until such time as
that documentation is provided.
reconstruction or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date.
The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction
of a structure (including a manufactured home) on a site, such as
the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of
columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, or placement of
a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does
not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading or filling; nor
does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it
include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the
erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the
property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied
as dwelling units or not part of the main structure.
For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means
the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a
building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions
of the building.
B.
§ 225-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-6
1:147
WATER SURFACE ELEVATION — The height, in relation to the National
Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or other datum, where specified),
of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of
riverine areas.
§ 225-6 PLAINVILLE CODE § 225-6
1:148
ARTICLE III
General Provisions
§ 225-7. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the
jurisdiction of the Town of Plainville.
§ 225-8. Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard.55
The areas of special flood hazard are identified by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency in its Flood Insurance Study for the Town of Plainville,
effective September 26, 2008, which study, with accompanying Flood
Insurance Rate Maps dated September 26, 2008, and subsequent revisions
thereto, is adopted by reference and declared to be part of this chapter.
Since mapping is legally adopted by reference into this chapter it must take
precedence when more restrictive until such time as a map amendment or
map revision is obtained from FEMA.
§ 225-9. Development permit required.
A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions
of this chapter prior to the commencement of any development activities.
§ 225-10. Compliance required.
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or
structurally altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and other applicable regulations.
§ 225-11. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing
easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter
and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent
restrictions shall prevail.
§ 225-12. Interpretation.
In the interpretation and application of this chapter all provisions shall be:
A. Considered as minimum requirements;
B. Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
C. Deemed to neither limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state
statutes.
55.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 225-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-13
1:149
§ 225-13. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering consideration. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes.
This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood
hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or
flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Town
of Plainville or an officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that
result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully
made thereunder.
§ 225-13 PLAINVILLE CODE § 225-13
1:150
ARTICLE IV
Administration
§ 225-14. Designation of administrator.
The Town Engineer is hereby appointed to administer and implement the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 225-15. Permit procedures.
Application for a development permit shall be made to the Town Engineer
on forms furnished by him or her prior to any development activities and
may include, but not be limited to, the following: plans, in duplicate, drawn
to scale, showing the nature, location, dimensions and elevations of the
area in question, existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials,
drainage facilities, the location of the foregoing and the appropriate filing
fee. All submissions, including plans, maps, reports and other pertinent
data, shall have an area for the signature of appropriate Town of Plainville
officials and shall be certified by the appropriate professionals. The
following information is required for all applications:
A. Application stage.
(1) Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the proposed lowest floor
(including basement) of all structures. See § 225-19A.
(2) Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential
structure will be floodproofed. See § 225-19B(1).
(3) Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development.
(4) A statement as to whether or not the proposed alterations to an
existing structure meet the criteria of the "substantial improvement"
definition, § 225-6.
(5) A statement as to whether there will be dry access to the structure
during a one-hundred-year storm event. Where applicable the
following certifications by a registered engineer or architect are
required and must be provided to the Town Engineer: the design and
methods of construction must be certified to be in accordance with
accepted standards of practice and with the provisions of § 225-19.
(6) Nonresidential floodproofing must meet the provisions of
§ 225-19B(1).
(7) Enclosed areas below the base flood elevation. If the minimum
design criteria in § 225-19C(1) to (3) is not used then the design and
construction methods must be certified as explained in § 225-19C.
(8) No increase in flood heights may be allowed. Any development in a
floodway must meet the provisions of § 225-19D.
B. Construction stage. As-built drawings shall be certified A-2 standard
by a licensed surveyor. Upon completion of the applicable portion
(foundation) of construction the applicant shall provide as-built
verification to the Town Engineer of the following, as is applicable:
(1) As-built elevation data to be provided:
(a) For structures in A and A1-30 Zones, provide as-built elevation of
the top of the lowest floor (including basement).
§ 225-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-15
1:151
(b) For floodproofed structures, provide as-built elevation to which
the floodproofing is effective.
(c) Failure to comply with the provisions of this subsection shall
result in the revocation of the development permits issued
pursuant to this chapter.
(2) Deficiencies detected during the review of the post-construction
conditions and as-built records by the Town shall be corrected by
the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work
being permitted to proceed. Failure to comply in a timely manner
shall result in the issuance of a stop-work order for the entire
project.
§ 225-16. Duties of Town Engineer and Building Official.
A. Duties of the Town Engineer shall include but not be limited to the
following. The Town Engineer shall:
(1) Review all permit applications to determine whether proposed
building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding.
(2) Review all development permits to assure that the permit
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
(3) Advise permittee that additional federal or state permits may be
required, and if specific federal or state permit requirements are
known, require that copies of such permits be provided and
maintained on file with the development permit, possibly including
but not limited to Water Diversion, Dam Safety, Corps of Engineers
404.
(4) Notify the Regional Planning Agency and the affected municipality
at least 35 days prior to the public hearing if any change of
regulation or use of a flood zone will affect an area within 500 feet
of another municipality.
(5) Notify adjacent communities and the Department of Energy and
Environmental Protection prior to any alteration or relocation of a
watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency.56
(6) Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated
portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is
not diminished.
(7) Record the as-built elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of
the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially
improved structures in accordance with § 225-19A.
(8) Record the as-built elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to
which the new or substantially improved structures have been
floodproofed, in accordance with § 225-19B.
(9) Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of
boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where
there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and
actual field conditions), make the necessary interpretation. The
applicant may be required to provide survey and engineering
information where not provided through other sources. The person
§ 225-15 PLAINVILLE CODE § 225-16
1:152
contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable
opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this chapter.
(10) When base flood elevation data or floodway data has not been
provided in accordance with § 225-8, obtain, review and reasonably
administer any base flood elevation and floodway data available
from a federal, state or other source, including professionals
retained by the applicant, in order to administer the provisions of
this article.
B. Duties of the Building Official shall include but not be limited to the
following:
(1) When floodproofing is utilized for a particular structure, the Building
Official shall obtain certification from a registered professional
engineer or architect, in accordance with § 225-19B(1).
(2) All records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter shall be
maintained in the office of the Building Official.
56.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 225-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-16
1:153

ARTICLE V
Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
§ 225-17. General standards.
In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required:
A. New construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to
prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure;
B. New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed
with materials resistant to flood damage;
C. New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed by
methods and practices that minimize flood damage;
D. Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air-conditioning
equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located
so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during conditions of flooding;
E. New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
F. New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and
discharges from the system into floodwaters and shall be subject to
review and approval by the Superintendent of the Plainville Water
Pollution Control Authority;
G. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to
avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding
and shall be subject to review and approval by the Plainville Town
Sanitarian;
H. In any portion of a watercourse which is altered or relocated, the floodcarrying
capacity shall be maintained; and
I. A structure already in compliance with the provisions of this chapter
shall not be made noncompliant by any alteration, repair, reconstruction
or improvement to the structure.
§ 225-18. Determination of base flood elevations.
A. Base flood elevations for flood-prone areas without established
information shall be determined by using the scaling method. The
designated A Zone from the FIRM at the particular location shall be
transposed onto the Town's topographical map. The applicant may
supplement the Town's topographical map upon approval of the Town
Engineer. Any supplemental topographical information shall be certified
by a surveyor registered in the State of Connecticut.
B. The flood elevation shall be determined by the ground elevation of the
transposed A Zone area. The highest ground elevation between both
A Zone boundaries shall be the base flood elevation in the absence of
established information.
§ 225-19. Specific standards.
A. In all areas of special flood hazard, Zones A1-30, AE, and AH, where
base flood elevation data has been provided, as set forth in § 225-8 or
225-16A(10), the following provisions are required:
§ 225-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-19
1:155
(1) Residential construction. New construction or substantial
improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor,
including basement, elevated to two feet above the base flood
elevation. (See also § 225-21D.)
(2) Manufactured homes shall be elevated on a permanent foundation
such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to or
above the BFE and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored
foundation system. Manufactured homes placed or substantially
improved within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE shall meet one of the
following location criteria: outside of a manufactured home park or
subdivision; in a new manufactured home park or subdivision; in an
expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or
in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision in which a
manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as a result of a
flood.
B. Nonresidential construction.
(1) New construction or substantial improvement of any commercial,
industrial, or nonresidential structure located in Zones A1-30, AE
and AH shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to
two feet above the base flood elevation, or nonresidential structures
located in all A Zones may be floodproofed to two feet above base
flood elevation in lieu of the lowest as-built elevation being elevated
two feet above base flood elevation, provided that together with all
attendant utilities and sanitary facilities the areas of the structure
below the base flood elevation are watertight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water and use structural components
having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
loads and the effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer
or architect shall review and/or develop structural design,
specifications, and plans for the construction and shall certify that
the design and methods of construction are in accordance with
acceptable standards or practices for meeting the provisions of this
subsection. Such certification shall be provided to the official as set
forth in § 225-15A(5).
(2) All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved shall
be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood
damage. They shall also be elevated and anchored to resist flotation,
collapse and lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include,
but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties.
(3) Elevation construction standards shall include piling foundations
placed no more than 10 feet apart and the provision of reinforcement
for piers more than six feet above ground level. Adequate access and
drainage shall also be provided.
C. Enclosed areas below base flood elevation. New construction or
substantial improvements to buildings that include fully enclosed areas
formed by foundation and other exterior walls below the base flood
elevation shall be designed to allow for the entry and exit of floodwaters
to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls.
§ 225-19 PLAINVILLE CODE § 225-19
1:156
(1) Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified
by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following
minimum criteria:
(a) Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not
less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area
subject to flooding;
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above
grade; and
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other
coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of
floodwaters in both directions.
(2) Electrical, plumbing and other utility connections are prohibited
below the base flood elevation.
(3) Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to
allow for parking of vehicles (garage door) or limited storage of
maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises
(standard exterior door) or entry to the living area (stairway or
elevator).
D. Floodways. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in
§ 225-8 are areas designated as floodways on the community's Flood
Boundary and Floodway Map. Since the floodway is an extremely
hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris and
potential projectiles and have erosion potential, the following provisions
shall apply:
(1) Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements and other developments, unless certification (with
supporting technical data) by a registered professional engineer is
provided demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any
(0.00) increase in flood levels during occurrence of the base flood
discharge.
(2) In zones where base flood elevations have been determined, but
before a floodway is designated, no new construction, substantial
improvement or other development (including fill) shall be permitted
which will increase base flood elevations more than one foot at any
point along the watercourse when all anticipated development is
considered cumulatively with proposed development.
(3) The Town may request floodway data of an applicant for
watercourses without FEMA-published floodways. When such data
is provided by an applicant or whenever such data is available from
any other source in response to the Town's request or not, the Town
shall adopt a regulatory floodway based on the principle that the
floodway must be able to convey the waters of the base flood without
increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot at any
point along the watercourse.
(4) The water holding capacity of the floodplain, except those areas that
are tidally influenced, shall not be reduced. Any reduction caused
by filling, new construction, or substantial improvements involving
an increase in footprint to the structure shall be compensated for
by deepening and/or widening of the floodplain. Storage shall be
§ 225-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-19
1:157
provided on site, unless easements have been gained from adjacent
property owners; it shall be provided within the same hydraulic
reach and a volume not previously used for flood storage; it shall be
hydraulically comparable and incrementally equal to the theoretical
volume of floodwater at each elevation, up to and including the
one-hundred-year flood elevation, which would be displaced by the
proposed project. Such compensatory volume shall have an
unrestricted hydraulic connection to the same waterway or water
body. Compensatory storage can be provided off site if approved by
the municipality.57
(5) Within the floodplains, except those areas which are tidally
influenced, as designated on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)
for the community, encroachments resulting from filling, new
construction or substantial improvements involving an increase in
footprint of the structure are prohibited unless the applicant
provides certification by a registered professional engineer
demonstrating, with supporting hydrologic analyses performed in
accordance with standard engineering practice, that such
encroachment shall not result in any (0.00 foot) increase in flood
levels (base flood elevation). Work within the floodplain and land
adjacent to the floodplain, including work to provide compensatory
storage, shall not be constructed in such a way so as to cause an
increase in flood stage or flood velocity.
(6) Above-ground storage tanks (oil, propane, etc.) which are located
outside or inside of the structure must either be elevated above the
base flood elevation (BFE) on a concrete pad or be securely anchored
with tie-down straps to prevent flotation or lateral movement, have
the top of the fill pipe extended above the BFE, and have a screw fill
cap that does not allow for the infiltration of floodwater.
(7) If any portion of a structure lies within the special flood hazard area
(SFHA), the entire structure is considered to be in the SFHA. The
structure includes any attached additions, garages, decks, sunrooms
or any other structure attached to the main structure. (Decks or
porches that extend into a more restrictive zone will require the
entire structure to meet the requirements of the more restrictive
zone.)
(8) If a structure lies within two or more flood zones, the construction
standards of the most restrictive zone shall apply to the entire
structure (i.e., V Zone is more restrictive than A Zone; structure
must be built to the highest BFE). The structure includes any
attached additions, garages, decks, sunrooms, or any other structure
attached to the main structure. (Decks or porches that extend into
a more restrictive zone will require the entire structure to meet the
requirements of the more restrictive zone.)
(9) New construction, substantial improvements and repair to
structures that have sustained substantial damage cannot be
constructed or located entirely or partially over water.
57.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 225-19 PLAINVILLE CODE § 225-20
1:158
§ 225-20. Recreational vehicles.
All recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zone A1-30, AH or AE must
be either on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days and be fully
licensed and ready for highway use or meet the elevation and anchoring
requirements of a manufactured home.
§ 225-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-20
1:159

ARTICLE VI
Standards for Subdivision Proposals
§ 225-21. Requirements in special flood hazard areas.
In all special flood hazard areas the following requirements shall apply:
A. All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize
flood damage;
B. All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities, such
as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, located and constructed to
minimize flood damage;
C. All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to
reduce exposure to flood hazard; and
D. In Zone A, base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision
proposals and other proposed development (including manufactured
home parks and subdivisions) which are five acres or 50 lots, whichever
occurs first.
§ 225-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-21
1:161

ARTICLE VII
Variances and Appeals; Enforcement
§ 225-22. Zoning Board of Appeals.
A. The Zoning Board of Appeals as established by the Town of Plainville
shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the
requirements of this chapter.
B. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hear and decide appeals when it is
alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision or determination
made by the Town Engineer or Building Official in the enforcement or
administration of this chapter.
§ 225-23. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals or
any person owning land which abuts or is within a radius of 100 feet of
the land in question may appeal within 15 days after such decision to the
State Superior Court of the Judicial District of New Britain at New Britain,
as provided in § 8-8 of the General Statutes.
§ 225-24. Specific situation variances.
A. Buildings on historic register. Variances may be issued for the
reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the
National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic
Places without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder
of this article, except for § 225-25C(1) to (4), and provided that the
proposed reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration will not result in
the structure losing its historical character.
B. Preexisting small lot location. Variances may be issued by a community
for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on
a lot of 1/2 acre or less in size, contiguous to and surrounded by lots
with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, in
conformance with § 225-25C(1) to (4).
C. Functionally dependent uses. Variances may be issued for new
construction and substantial improvement and other development
necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided
that the structure or other development is protected by methods that
minimize flood damage, creates no additional threat to public safety and
meets the requirements of § 225-25C(1) to (4).
D. Floodway prohibition. Variances shall not be issued within any
designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood
discharge would result.
§ 225-25. Considerations for granting of variances.
A. In passing upon such applications, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall
consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards
specified in other sections of this chapter, and:
(1) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
§ 225-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-25
1:163
(2) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
(3) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
(4) The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community;
(5) The necessity of the facility to waterfront location, in the case of a
functionally dependent facility;
(6) The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or
erosion damage, for the proposed use;
(7) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
(8) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and
floodplain management program for that area;
(9) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
(10) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment
transport of floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site; and
(11) The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems and
streets and bridges.
B. Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this
chapter, the Zoning Board of Appeals may attach such conditions to the
granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of
this chapter.
C. Conditions for variances.
(1) Variances shall be issued only upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard,
to afford relief, and in the instance of a historical building, a
determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as to
not destroy the historic character and design of the building.
(2) Variances shall be issued only upon a showing of good and sufficient
cause, a determination that failure to grant the variance will result
in exceptional hardship, and a determination that the granting of a
variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats
to public safety, or extraordinary public expense, create a nuisance,
cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing
local laws or ordinances.
(3) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and
the elevation to which the structure is to be built and stating that the
cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk
resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation up to amounts as
high as $25 for $100 of insurance.
(4) The Building Official shall maintain the records of all appeal actions
and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management
Agency upon request.
§ 225-25 PLAINVILLE CODE § 225-26
1:164
§ 225-26. Penalties for offenses.
Violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with any of its
requirements, including violation of conditions and safeguards established
in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions, shall constitute
a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply
with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not
more than $250 per day if proven done willfully and $100 per day if not, or
imprisoned for not more than 10 days for each day of violation, or both, and,
in addition, shall pay all costs and reasonable legal fees involved in the case.
Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Town of Plainville from taking
such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
§ 225-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-26
1:165
Chapter 238
HISTORIC PRESERVATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 180.
§ 225-26 PLAINVILLE CODE § 225-26
1:166
ARTICLE I
Demolition Delay
[Adopted 3-7-2005]
§ 238-1. Scope.
Demolition shall mean any wrecking activity directed to disassembling,
dismantling, dismembering or razing any structure or building or part
thereof. Demolition shall not be construed to prevent the ordinary
maintenance or repair of any exterior architectural feature which does not
involve a change in the appearance or design thereof, nor to prevent the
alteration of any such feature which is required by public safety because of
a condition which is unsafe or dangerous due to deterioration.
§ 238-2. Demolition permit required.
With respect to any building, structure, or part thereof which is 300 square
feet in size or larger and at least 75 years old, or included on the Town of
Plainville's Historic Inventory list, or located within any locally or federally
designated historic district, or included on the National Historic Register,
no owner or occupant shall demolish such building, structure or part
thereof without first applying for and obtaining a demolition permit from
the local Building Official.
§ 238-3. Notice of application for permit.
With respect to any application to demolish such building, structure, or part
thereof as defined above in § 238-2, in addition to the applicant's complying
with the provisions of the Code of Ordinances of the Town of Plainville,
prior to the issuance of a demolition permit the local Building Official shall
publish a legal notice of the filing of an application for a demolition permit
in a daily newspaper having substantial circulation in the municipality.
The notice shall be published within 10 days following the filing of the
application. Such notice shall state the following: that an application for a
demolition permit has been filed; the date of the filing of such application;
the location of the property; the name of the owner of the property; and that
unless written objection stating the nature of the objection is filed with the
local Building Official within 15 days of the publication of the notice, the
permit may be issued after the expiration of such 15 days.
§ 238-4. Responsibilities of applicant.
With respect to any application to demolish such building, structure, or part
thereof, in addition to complying with the provisions of the State Building
Code and §§ 29-406 to 29-415 inclusive of the Connecticut General Statutes,
within 10 days following the filing of the application for a demolition permit
the applicant shall:
A. Give written notice of intent to demolish, on a form to be furnished
by the local Building Official, to each adjoining property owner at such
owner's last address according to the Assessor's records of the Town
§ 238-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-4
1:167
of Plainville, by certified mail, return receipt requested. Notice to a
condominium association alone shall be deemed notice to all owners
therein. The notice of intent to demolish shall state that an application
for a demolition permit has been filed; the date of the filing; the location
of the property; the name of the owner of the property; and that unless
written objection stating the nature of the objection is filed with the
local Building Official within 15 days of the publication of the notice, the
permit may be issued after the expiration of such 15 days. A copy of
all return certified mail receipts shall be submitted to the local Building
Official before the demolition permit application is considered complete.
B. Give the same written notice that an application for a demolition permit
has been filed, on a form to be furnished by the local Building Official, to
any individual, firm, corporation, organization or other entity concerned
with the preservation of structures within the Town of Plainville by
certified mail, return receipt requested. To be entitled to notification
under this provision any such individual, firm, corporation, organization
or other entity shall register with the local Building Official, indicating
a desire to be notified of such demolition permit applications, and such
registration must be renewed annually each January 1 following the
initial registration.
C. No later than the day following the filing of an application for a
demolition permit, post a "notice of intent to demolish" sign, which shall
be erected in a conspicuous place on the site, viewable from a public
street. The sign shall be at least four feet by four feet in size and shall
remain posted for 15 days. Said sign shall contain the telephone number
of the local Building Official.
D. Submit to the local Building Official an affidavit attesting to compliance
with the notice requirements and a list of persons and organizations
noticed.
E. Pay the cost of the legal notice in addition to the fees normally required
for a demolition permit not subject to this article.
§ 238-5. Issuance of permit.
If no written objection is filed with the local Building Official within 15
days following publication of the legal notice as required above, the local
Building Official may issue the demolition permit if all other requirements
have been complied with and all fees paid.
§ 238-6. Objections; delay in issuance of permit.
If a written objection stating the nature of the objection to the issuance of
the demolition permit and stating possible alternatives to the demolition is
filed with the local Building Official by any individual or party within 15
days following publication of the legal notice as required above, the local
Building Official shall delay issuance of the demolition permit for a period
of 90 days from the date of the filing of the application. In the event that all
objections are withdrawn before the expiration of 90 days, the permit shall
be issued forthwith.
§ 238-4 PLAINVILLE CODE § 238-7
1:168
§ 238-7. Exception.
No delay of demolition shall be imposed pursuant to this article on any
person who has been ordered to demolish a structure by the local Building
Official or local Director of Health once the period for the appeal of such
order has expired.
§ 238-8. Term of permit.
A permit issued pursuant to this article shall remain valid for one year from
the date of issuance.
§ 238-9. Penalties for offenses.58
Failure to abide by the provisions of this article shall subject violators to all
applicable penalties available under the law, including a fine of not more
than $250.
58.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 238-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-9
1:169
Chapter 243
HOUSING CODE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 180.
Fires and fire prevention — See Ch. 219.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 300.
Rental property — See Ch. 314.
Sewers — See Ch. 332.
Solid waste — See Ch. 341.
§ 243-1. General provisions.
The following general provisions shall apply to the interpretation and
enforcement of this chapter:
A. Purpose.
(1) It is hereby declared that the purpose of this chapter is to protect,
preserve, and promote the physical and mental health and social
well-being of the residents of this municipality; to investigate and
control the incidence of communicable diseases; to regulate
privately and publicly owned dwellings for the purpose of
maintaining adequate sanitation, housing and public health; and to
protect the safety of the people and to promote the general welfare.
This chapter shall be applicable to all dwellings now in existence or
hereafter constructed within this municipality.
(2) It is hereby further declared that for all of said dwellings this chapter
will establish minimum standards for:
(a) Basic equipment and facilities for light, ventilation, heating and
cooling.
(b) Basic equipment and facilities for safety from fire and accidents.
(c) The use and location and amount of space for human occupancy.
(d) Safe and sanitary maintenance.
(3) In addition, this chapter will determine the responsibilities of
owners, operators, and occupants of dwellings, and it will provide for
the administration and enforcement of all of the aforesaid standards
and responsibilities.
B. Legislative finding.
(1) It is hereby found that dwellings exist or may in the future exist
within the Town of Plainville, either occupied or unoccupied by
human beings, which are in a deteriorated condition, and such
dwellings are in said deteriorated condition because of improper
management or maintenance; because of faulty design or
construction; because of failure to keep said dwelling in a proper
state of repair; because said dwellings lack proper sanitary facilities,
adequate lighting or ventilation, or adequate equipment for proper
heating or cooling; or because of any combination of the aforesaid
factors. As a result said dwellings have, or could, become so
deteriorated, dilapidated, neglected, overcrowded, or unsanitary as
§ 238-9 PLAINVILLE CODE § 243-1
1:170
to jeopardize or be detrimental to the health, safety, morals, and
welfare of the occupants, the community and the people of the Town
of Plainville.
(2) It is hereby further found that such deteriorated dwellings or
conditions contribute to the growth of physical, mental, or social ill
health or disease, mortality, crime and juvenile delinquency within
this Town.
C. Citation. This chapter shall be known, and may be cited, as the "Housing
Code Ordinance of the Town of Plainville."
D. Applicability.
(1) Every portion of a building or its premises used or intended to
be used for the purpose of dwelling, living, eating, sleeping, or
cooking therein, or occupancy, shall comply with the provisions of
this chapter and with the rules and regulations adopted pursuant
thereto irrespective of when such building shall have been
constructed, altered, or repaired, and irrespective of any permits or
licenses which shall have been issued for the use or occupancy of the
dwelling and dwelling premises or structure, for the construction or
repair of the dwelling or structure or for the installation or repair of
dwelling equipment prior to the effective date of this chapter.
(2) This chapter establishes minimum standards for the initial and
continued occupancy of all dwellings and structures and does not
replace or modify standards otherwise established for the
construction, repair, or use of buildings or the installation of building
equipment.
E. Application of codes. Any alterations to buildings or changes of use
therein which may be caused directly or indirectly by enforcement of
this code shall be done in accordance with all applicable sections of the
Building Code, Health Code, Fire Code and Zoning Ordinance of the
Town of Plainville.
F. Travel trailers and mobile homes. All moveable units used for human
habitation and the areas, ground, or parcels on which they are located
shall comply with the requirements of this Housing Code except if the
definition of "temporary housing" in § 243-2 shall apply.
G. Application of zoning regulations. Nothing in this code shall permit the
establishment or conversion of a multifamily dwelling in any zone except
where permitted by the zoning regulations of the municipality, nor shall
this code permit continuation of such nonconforming use in any zone
except as provided in said zoning regulations.
§ 243-2. Definitions and word usage.
A. Whenever the words "dwelling," "dwelling unit," "rooming house,"
"rooming unit," "bed-and-breakfast house," "bed-and-breakfast unit,"
"premises" and "structure" are used in this chapter they shall be
construed as though they were followed by the words "or any part
thereof." Words used in the singular include the plural, and the plural the
singular. The masculine gender includes the feminine, and the feminine
the masculine.
§ 243-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 243-2
1:171
B. The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and
enforcement of this chapter. Chapter 2 of the Connecticut State Building
Code (International Building Code) shall apply by reference.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — A detached structure which is not used or
not intended to be used for living or sleeping by human occupants and
which is located on the same premises with a dwelling.
BASEMENT — That portion of a building that is partly or completely
below grade.
BED-AND-BREAKFAST HOUSE — Often referred to as a "B&B," any
family dwelling where guests can be accommodated at night in private
bedrooms (which may or may not be equipped with private baths) and
where breakfast is provided in the morning.
BED-AND-BREAKFAST UNIT — Any room or group of rooms forming a
single habitable unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping
but not for cooking purposes.
BUILDING OFFICIAL — The legally designated Building Official of the
Town of Plainville or his designated agent.
CENTRAL HEATING SYSTEM — A single system supplying heat to one
or more than one dwelling unit or more than one rooming unit or bedand-
breakfast unit.
DILAPIDATED — Fallen into partial ruin or decay.
DWELLING — Any enclosed space which is wholly or partly used or
intended to be used for living or sleeping by human occupants, provided
that temporary housing, as hereinafter defined, shall not be regarded as
a dwelling.
DWELLING UNIT — Any room or group of rooms located within a
dwelling and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are
used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating.
EXTERMINATION — The control, destruction, and elimination of insects,
rodents, or other pests by eliminating their harborages, by removing
or by making inaccessible materials that may serve as their food, and
by the use of poisoning, spraying, fumigating, trapping, or other pest
elimination methods approved by the Housing Code Enforcement Officer.
FAMILY — One adult person plus one or more persons who are legally
related to said person and residing in the same dwelling unit with said
person.
FIRE MARSHAL — The legally designated Fire Marshal of the Town of
Plainville, or his designated assistant.
GARBAGE — The animal or vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking, serving, and nonconsumption of food and shall also
mean combustible waste material.
GROSS FLOOR AREA — The total area of all habitable space in a
building or structure.
§ 243-2 PLAINVILLE CODE § 243-2
1:172
GROUND FAULT CIRCUIT INTERRUPTER (GFCI) — An electrical device
used to protect personnel from electrical shock by interrupting a
household circuit when there is a difference in the currents in the "hot"
and "neutral" wires. All installed GFCIs shall meet the Underwriters'
Laboratories (UL) requirement to trip when there is five mA of leakage
current.
GUEST — Any person who shares a dwelling unit in a nonpermanent
status for not more than 30 days.
HABITABLE SPACE — A space in a building used for living, sleeping,
cooking or eating purposes. Bathrooms, lavatories, water closet
compartments, laundries, furnace rooms, pantries, utility rooms, foyers
or communicating corridors, stairways, closets, storage space and
workshops and hobby and recreation areas in unsealed or uninsulated
parts of a structure below ground level or in attics are not considered
habitable spaces.
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL — Any material, including building material,
containing lead and/or toxic compound in concentrations dangerous to
the public health as deemed by the State Department of Public Health.
HOT WATER — Potable water heated to a temperature of not less than
or equal to 120° F. at the outlet.
HOUSEHOLD — A family and/or one or more unrelated persons,
including servants and not more occupants than two boarders, who
share the same dwelling and use some or all of its cooking, eating and
sleeping facilities.
HOUSING CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The official duly
appointed by the Town Manager charged with the administration and
enforcement of this chapter, or his authorized agents.
INFESTATION — The presence within or around a dwelling or other
structure of insects, rodents or other pests.
KITCHEN or KITCHENETTE — An area used or designated to be used
for the preparation of food.
KITCHEN SINK — A sink of a size and design adequate for the purpose
of washing eating and drinking utensils, located in a kitchen, properly
connected to a potable cold and hot water line and approved waste line.
LEAD PAINT — Any pigmented liquid substance applied to surfaces by
brush, roller or spray in which the total nonvolatile ingredient contains
more than 1% lead by weight, calculated as metallic lead.
MULTIPLE DWELLING — Any dwelling containing more than one
dwelling unit.
OCCUPANT — Any person living, sleeping, cooking, or eating in, or
actually having possession of, a dwelling unit or a rooming unit or bedand-
breakfast unit, except that in dwelling units a guest will not be
considered an occupant.
§ 243-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 243-2
1:173
OPERATOR — Any person who has charge, care or control of a building,
or part thereof, in which dwelling units or rooming units or bed-andbreakfast
units are let.
OWNER — Any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others:
PERMISSIBLE OCCUPANCY — The maximum number of persons
permitted as family or household to reside in a dwelling unit based on
the square footage per person in habitable rooms.
PERSON — Includes any individual, heirs, executors, administrators
or assigns, and also includes a firm, association, trust, corporation or
partnership, its successors or assigns, or the agent of any of the
aforesaid.
PLUMBING — Includes all of the following supplied facilities and
equipment: gas pipes, gas burning equipment, water pipes, garbage
disposal units, waste pipes, water closets, sinks, installed dishwashers,
lavatories, bathtubs, shower baths, installed clothes washing machines,
catch basins, drains, vents, and any other similar supplied fixtures,
together with all connections to water, sewer, septic tank systems or gas
lines.
PRIVACY — The ability of a person or persons to carry out an activity
commenced without interruption or interference, either by sight or
sound, by unwanted persons.
RODENT-PROOFING — A form of construction which will prevent the
ingress or egress of rodents to or from a given space, building, accessory
structure or surrounding, or their gaining access to food, water, or
harborage. It consists of the closing and keeping closed of every opening
in foundations, basements, cellars, roofs, and exterior and interior walls.
ROOMING HOUSE — Any dwelling or that part of any dwelling
containing one or more rooming units in which space is occupied by
three or more persons who are not members of a single family or
household, which units are not used for cooking purposes.
ROOMING UNIT — Any room or group of rooms forming a single
habitable unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping but not
for cooking purposes.
Shall have legal title to any dwelling, premises, or dwelling unit,
with or without accompanying actual possession thereof; or
(1)
Shall have charge, care, or control of any dwelling, premises, or
dwelling unit as owner or agent of the owner, or an executor,
administrator, trustee, or guardian of the estate of the owner. Any
such person thus representing the actual owner shall be bound to
comply with the provisions of this chapter as amended and of rules
and regulations adopted pursuant thereto to the same extent as if he
were the owner.
(2)
§ 243-2 PLAINVILLE CODE § 243-2
1:174
SAFETY — The condition of being free from danger and hazards which
may cause accidents or disease.
SEPTIC TANK OR SYSTEM — A receptacle, usually underground, to
which sewage is drained and retained to effect disintegration of the
organic matter by bacteria and as defined in applicable sections of the
Public Health Code of Connecticut, as amended.
SINK — A handwashing basin which is properly connected to both a hot
and cold water line and approved waste line and which is separate and
distinct from a kitchen sink.
SOLID WASTE — All putrescible and nonputrescible solids, including
rubbish, garbage, refuse, ashes, and dead animals under 60 pounds
in weight. The term shall also include but not be limited to paper,
rags, cartons, boxes, wood, leather, yard waste, and other combustible
material. Expended batteries, paints, used oils, tires and other
hazardous materials are not considered to be solid waste.
SPACE HEATER — A self-contained appliance of either the circulating
type or the radiant type.
SUPPLIED — Paid for, furnished, provided by, or under the control of the
owner or operator.
TEMPORARY HOUSING — Any tent, trailer, mobile home, or any other
structure used for human shelter which is designed to be transportable
and is not attached to the ground, to another structure, or to any utility
system on the premises for more than 30 consecutive days.
TOILET — A water closet, with a bowl and trap, which is of such shape,
form and design which holds a sufficient quantity of water or other
liquid under pressure or gravity so that no fecal matter will collect
on the surface of the bowl and which is equipped with flushing rims
which permit the bowl to be properly flushed and scoured when water is
discharged through the flushing rims.
TOWN ENGINEER — The legally designated Town Engineer of the Town
of Plainville, or his designated assistants.
VENTILATION — The process of supplying and removing air by natural
or mechanical means to or from any space to the outside atmosphere.
WATER CLOSET — A toilet bowl flushed with water under pressure with
a water-sealed trap above floor level.
WORKMANLIKE MANNER — A person is required to execute a degree
of skill possessed by one of ordinary skill, competency, and standing in
the business or a like profession or trade.
YARD WASTE — Grass clippings, cuttings, leaves, small branches and
twigs.
§ 243-3. Enforcement.
§ 243-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 243-3
1:175
A. Whenever the Housing Code Enforcement Officer determines that any
conditions exist which cause any dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit,
bed-and-breakfast unit or premises to fail to meet the minimum
standards provided for in this chapter, he shall issue notice of the
alleged violation setting forth the alleged failure or failures and
requiring that such failures be corrected. Such notice shall:
(1) Be in writing.
(2) Include a statement citing the violation.
(3) Provide a list of violations to be corrected.
(4) Allow a maximum time limit of 30 calendar days from date of service
of notice of violations contained therein for the start of required
corrections or, failing same, require the demolition or removal of
such items or structure. Said corrections shall be completed within
60 calendar days unless extended in writing by the Housing Code
Enforcement Officer. The Housing Code Enforcement Officer shall
record a notice on the land records of said violation.
(5) Be serviced upon the owner or his agent, or the occupant, as the
case may require, provided that such notice shall be deemed to be
properly serviced upon such owner or agent, or upon such occupant,
if a copy thereof is serviced upon him personally or if a copy thereof
is sent by certified mail to his last known address, or if a copy thereof
is posted in a conspicuous place in or about the dwelling or property
affected by the notice, or if he is serviced with such notice by any
other method.
B. After passage of the period of time allowed for the correction of any
violation described in such notice of violation, the Housing Code
Enforcement Officer shall reinspect the dwelling unit, rooming unit, bedand-
breakfast unit or premises described in the notice following the
procedures detailed in § 243-12.
C. In the event the Housing Code Enforcement Officer is denied access
for reinspection, and in the event that the Housing Code Enforcement
Officer has reasonable grounds to believe that a violation of any
provision of this chapter or any regulation pursuant thereto has
occurred or is occurring, the Housing Code Enforcement Officer shall
apply to a court of competent jurisdiction, describing the dwelling,
dwelling unit, or premises in question and stating the facts on which
the Housing Code Enforcement Officer has concluded that reasonable
grounds exist to form a belief that violation of any provision of this
chapter exists, for an order granting authority to enter, inspect,
examine, and survey the described dwelling, dwelling unit, or premises
for the purpose of determining whether there has been compliance with
the notice of violation.
D. There is hereby created a Housing Code Appeals Board which consists
of five members appointed by the Town Council for five-year terms;
provided, however, that of the five members appointed subsequent to
adoption of this chapter, one shall be appointed for a five-year term, one
for a four-year term, one for a three-year term, one for a two-year term,
and one for a one-year term.
§ 243-3 PLAINVILLE CODE § 243-3
1:176
(1) Any person aggrieved by any notice which has been issued in
connection with the enforcement of any provision of this chapter
may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before
the Housing Code Appeals Board, provided that such person shall
file in the office of the Chairperson of the Housing Code Appeals
Board a written petition requesting such hearing and setting forth
a brief statement of the grounds for such appeal within 10 calendar
days after the notice was serviced. Upon receipt of such petition the
Chairperson of the Housing Code Appeals Board shall set a time and
place for such hearing and shall give the petitioner at least five days'
written notice thereof.
(2) At such hearing the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to be
heard and to show why such notice should be modified, extended or
withdrawn or a variance granted.
(3) The hearing shall be scheduled for not later than 30 days after the
day on which the petition was filed.
E. Such hearing shall be had before at least three members, a quorum,
of the Housing Code Appeals Board. Said Board, by at least three
votes, shall sustain, modify or withdraw the notice; it may also grant an
extension or variance in accordance with the following conditions:
(1) The time for performance of any act required by the notice may
be extended for not more than three months subject to appropriate
conditions and where the Board makes specific findings of fact based
on evidence relating to the particular case that there are practical
difficulties or unnecessary hardships in the way of carrying out the
strict letter of any provisions of this chapter and such extension is
in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this chapter in
securing the public health, safety and general welfare. An extension
may be granted up to the time of change of ownership, except in
matters of nuisance, health and fire safety.
(2) A variance may be granted in a specific case and from a specific
provision of this chapter subject to appropriate conditions and
where the Board makes specific findings of fact based on evidence
relating to the particular case that:
(a) There are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships in the
way of carrying out the strict letter of the provision;
(b) The effect of the application of the provisions would be arbitrary
in the specific case;
(c) An extension would not constitute an appropriate remedy for
these practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships and this
arbitrary effect; and
(d) Such variance is in harmony with the general purpose and intent
of this chapter in securing the public health, safety and general
welfare.
F. If the notice is sustained, modified, or extended, it shall become an order
as so sustained, modified, or extended. Any notice served pursuant to
Subsection A of this section shall automatically become an order if a
written petition for a hearing is not filed in the office of the Chairperson
§ 243-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 243-3
1:177
of the Housing Code Appeals Board within 10 calendar days after such
notice is served.
G. The proceedings at such hearings, including the findings and decisions
of the Housing Code Appeals Board, shall be summarized, reduced to
writing, and entered as a matter of public record in the office of the
Town Clerk and open to reasonable public inspection. Such record shall
also include a copy of every notice or order issued in connection with
the matter. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Housing Code
Appeals Board may seek relief therefrom in any court of competent
jurisdiction, within 10 calendar days from the date of sending of notice
of the decision of the Housing Code Appeals Board, in accordance with
the provisions of the General Statutes of Connecticut as they relate to
the taking of appeals from a zoning commission and zoning board of
appeals.
H. Whenever, in the judgment of the Housing Code Enforcement Officer,
an emergency exists which requires immediate action to protect the
public health, welfare, or safety, the Housing Code Enforcement Officer
shall forthwith and without notice or hearing cause to be served either
verbally or in writing an order describing the violation(s) and reciting
the existence of the emergency. The Housing Code Enforcement Officer
may then take such action under the law as the Housing Code
Enforcement Officer deems necessary to eliminate and cure the
violation(s). Any person who is aggrieved by such notice of violation and
order shall comply with its directions at once. However, said aggrieved
person shall, upon written request within 10 calendar days after such
notice is served, be given a hearing by the Housing Code Appeals Board
within two business days of such request.
I. Failure to take an appeal from Subsections D, E, F, G and H of this
section shall bar any person from taking a direct appeal to any court of
competent jurisdiction.
J. All subsequent transferees of a dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit or
bed-and-breakfast unit shall be deemed to have notice of the continuing
existence of the violations alleged, and said transferees shall be liable to
all penalties and procedures provided by this chapter and by applicable
rules and regulations issued pursuant thereto to the same degree as was
their transferor.
K. All subsequent transferees of a condemned dwelling, dwelling unit,
rooming unit or bed-and-breakfast unit shall be deemed to have notice of
the continuing existence of the violations alleged, and said transferees
shall be liable to all penalties and procedures provided by this chapter
and by applicable rules and regulations issued pursuant thereto to the
same degree as was their transferor.
§ 243-4. Responsibilities of owners and occupants.
A. No owner or other person shall occupy, or let to another person, any
dwelling or dwelling unit unless said dwelling or dwelling unit and the
premises are clean, sanitary, fit for human occupancy, and comply with
all applicable legal requirements of the State of Connecticut and the
Town of Plainville.
§ 243-3 PLAINVILLE CODE § 243-4
1:178
B. Every owner of a dwelling containing two or more dwelling units shall
maintain in a clean and sanitary condition the shared or public areas of
the dwelling and premises thereof.
C. Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall maintain in a clean
and sanitary condition that part or those parts of the dwelling, dwelling
unit and premises thereof that he occupies and controls.
D. Every owner or occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall store and
dispose of all his refuse in a clean, sanitary and safe manner.
E. Every owner of a dwelling containing more than one dwelling unit shall
supply facilities or sufficient containers for the sanitary and safe storage
and/or disposal of rubbish and garbage by the occupant of said dwelling
unit. In the case of a single-family dwelling it shall be the responsibility
of the occupant to furnish such facilities or containers.
F. Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall store and discard in a clean,
sanitary and safe manner all rubbish, refuse, garbage and any other
organic waste which might provide food or harborage for rodents and
insects. If a container is used for storage pending collection it shall be
secure against entry by insects and rodents and shall be watertight and
properly protected from wind or erosion spread.
G. The owner of a dwelling or dwelling unit or structure shall be
responsible for providing and installing all screens, storm doors and
windows. However, once installed in any one season, they shall become
the responsibility of the occupant, provided that it is the same occupant
when they were initially or seasonally installed, except that in common
areas the owner shall have the responsibility for maintenance and
replacement.
H. Every occupant of a dwelling containing a single dwelling unit shall
be responsible for the extermination of any insects, rodents, or other
pests therein or on the premises. Every occupant of a dwelling unit in a
dwelling containing more than one dwelling unit shall be responsible for
such extermination whenever his dwelling unit is the only one infested.
Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this subsection, whenever
infestation is caused by failure of the owner to maintain a dwelling
in a rodent-proof or insect-proof condition, extermination shall be the
responsibility of the owner. Whenever infestation exists in two or more
dwelling units in any dwelling, or in the shared or common parts of any
dwelling containing two or more dwelling units, extermination thereof
shall be the responsibility of the owner.
I. Every occupant of a dwelling unit or structure shall keep all plumbing
fixtures and facilities therein clean, operable, and in sanitary condition
and shall be responsible for the exercise of reasonable care in the proper
use and operation thereof.
J. No owner or occupant of a dwelling, dwelling unit, or structure shall
accumulate refuse, rubbish, boxes, lumber, scrap metal, or any other
material in such a manner that may provide a rodent or insect harborage
or rodent or insect food source in or about any dwelling, dwelling unit,
structure, accessory structure or premises.
§ 243-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 243-5
1:179
§ 243-5. Minimum standards for basic equipment and supplied
facilities.
No person shall occupy as owner-occupant, or let to another for occupancy,
any dwelling or dwelling unit for the purpose of living, sleeping, cooking or
eating therein which does not comply with the requirements of this section.
A. Every dwelling unit shall have a room or portion of a room in which food
may be prepared and/or cooked and which shall be equipped with the
following:
(1) A kitchen sink in good working condition apart from the lavatory
sink required in Subsection C. Said kitchen sink shall be properly
connected to a water supply system which is approved by the
appropriate authority and at all times shall provide an adequate
amount of heated and unheated running water under pressure. Said
kitchen sink shall be connected to a sewer system or septic system
which is approved by the appropriate authority.
(2) Cabinets and/or shelves for the storage of eating and drinking and
cooking equipment and utensils and of food that does not, under
ordinary summer conditions, require refrigeration for safekeeping.
Said cabinets and/or shelves shall be adequate for the permissible
occupancy of the dwelling unit and shall be kept in proper repair and
of sound construction, with surfaces that are easily cleanable and
that will not impart any toxic or deleterious effect to food.
(3) A stove or similar device for cooking food and a refrigerator or
similar device for the safe storage of food at temperatures less than
45° F. but more than 32° F., under ordinary summer conditions.
Both said stove and refrigerator shall be properly installed with all
necessary connections for safe, sanitary and efficient operation. It
is provided, however, that such stove, refrigerator, and/or similar
devices need not be installed when the dwelling unit is not occupied
and when the occupant is expected to provide the same at time of
occupancy. In that case a safe and efficient connection and sufficient
space for the operation of said stove, refrigerator, and/or similar
device shall be provided.
B. Water closet. Within every dwelling unit there shall be a room affording
privacy to a person within said room. Said room shall be equipped with
a water closet in good working condition, and such water closet shall be
equipped with easily cleanable surfaces, shall be connected to a water
system that at all times provides an adequate amount of running water
under pressure so as to cause the water closet to be operated properly,
and it shall also be connected to a sewer system or septic system which
is approved by the appropriate authority.
C. Lavatory sink. Within every dwelling unit there shall be a room, affording
privacy to a person, which is equipped with a lavatory sink; said lavatory
sink may be either in the same room as the water closet or in an
adjacent room. The lavatory sink shall be in good working and sanitary
condition and properly connected in an approved water supply system,
which water supply system shall at all times provide an adequate amount
of heated and unheated water under pressure. Said lavatory sink shall
§ 243-5 PLAINVILLE CODE § 243-5
1:180
be connected to a sewer or septic system which is approved by the
appropriate authority.
D. Water-heating facilities. The water-heating facilities necessary to
provide the hot water required shall be properly installed and connected
to the hot water lines required, shall be maintained in safe and good
working condition, and shall be capable of heating water to such a
temperature as to permit at all times 15 gallons of hot water to be drawn
at every required kitchen sink, lavatory sink, basin, bathtub or shower
at a temperature of not less than 120° F. Such supplied water-heating
facilities shall be capable of meeting the requirements of this subsection
when the dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house, rooming unit, bed-andbreakfast
house, or bed-and-breakfast unit heating facilities required
under the provisions of § 243-7A, C, D and E are not in operation.
E. Bathtub or shower. Within every dwelling unit there shall be a room
which affords privacy to a person within said room and which is
equipped with a bathtub or shower in good working and sanitary
condition. Said bathtub or shower may be in the same room as the water
closet or lavatory sink or in another room. Said bathtub or shower shall
be properly connected to a water supply system which is approved by
the appropriate authority and which provides at all times an adequate
amount of heated and unheated running water under pressure. Said
bathtub or shower shall also be connected to a sewer system or septic
system which is approved by the appropriate authority.
F. All structures consisting of three dwelling units or fewer shall have one
or more approved means of egress from each unit, leading to safe and
open space at ground level, as required by the laws of this state and
the Town of Plainville. All structures consisting of four dwelling units or
more shall have two or more approved means of egress from each unit,
leading to safe and open space at ground level, as required by the laws
of this state and the Town of Plainville.
G. No person shall let to another for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling
unit unless all egress doors of the dwelling or dwelling unit are equipped
with safe, functioning locking devices.
§ 243-6. Minimum standards for light, ventilation and electrical
service.
No person shall occupy as owner-occupant, or let to another for occupancy,
any dwelling or dwelling unit, for the purpose of living therein, which does
not comply with the requirements of this section.
A. Every habitable room shall have at least one window or skylight facing
directly to the outdoors. The minimum total window area, measured
between stops, for every habitable room shall be not less than 10%
of the floor area of such room. Wherever walls or other portions of
any structure face a window of any such rooms, and where such lightobstructing
structure is located less than three feet from the window
and extends to a level above that of the middle of such window in any
room, such window shall not be deemed to face directly to the outdoors
and shall not be included as contributing to the required minimum total
window area. Wherever the only window in a room is a skylight-type
§ 243-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 243-6
1:181
window in the top of such room, the total window area of such skylight
shall equal at least 15% of the total floor area of such room. Each
window or skylight shall be not less than three square feet in area.
B. At least one window or skylight of every habitable room shall face
directly outdoors and shall be easily opened or the room shall be
equipped with such device as will adequately ventilate the room. If no
such ventilating device is furnished, the total of openable window area
in every habitable room shall be equal to at least 45% of the minimum
window area size, or minimum skylight-type window size, as required in
Subsection A of this section.
C. Every bathroom, water closet, tub or shower compartment shall comply
with the light and ventilation requirements for habitable rooms
contained in Subsections A and B, except that no window or skylight
shall be required in adequately ventilated bathrooms, water closets,
or tub or shower compartments equipped with a ventilation system in
working condition which is approved by the appropriate authority.
D. Every dwelling unit and all public and common areas shall be supplied
with electric service, wiring, outlets and fixtures which shall be properly
installed, shall be maintained in good and safe working condition, and
shall be connected to the source of electric power in a manner
prescribed by the ordinances, rules and regulations of the Town of
Plainville and the State of Connecticut.
(1) The capacity of the electrical service to any dwelling unit shall be a
minimum 100 amperes, except that a sixty-ampere service may be
permitted provided that the total ampere load of any dwelling unit as
calculated under the provisions of the National Electrical Code does
not exceed 48 amperes. Each structure shall have its own service
drop.
(2) All branch circuits shall be properly protected by a circuit breaker or
fuses. The Housing Code Enforcement Officer may, upon inspection,
require installation of Type S fuses to prevent overfusing of circuits
in dwellings that utilize fuse protection.
E. Every habitable room and pantry shall have sufficient electrical outlets
and/or lighting fixtures capable of providing at least three watts per
square foot of floor area and sufficient lumens and footcandles of light to
all habitable rooms and storage areas. Bare bulb lighting fixtures shall
be prohibited in closets.
F. All habitable rooms shall have at least one floor or wall type duplex
electric convenience outlet for each 60 square feet, or fraction thereof,
of floor area, and in no case fewer than two duplex outlets.
G. Every water closet compartment, bathroom, lavatory, kitchenette,
laundry room, furnace room, and public hall shall contain at least one
supplied ceiling or wall type electric light fixture capable of supplying
at least 60 watts and sufficient lumens and footcandles of light to all
areas. Every water closet compartment, bathroom, lavatory, kitchenette,
or laundry room shall contain at least one convenience duplex wall or
floor type electrical outlet.
H. Convenient switches for turning on one light in each room or
passageway shall be located so as to permit the area ahead to be lighted.
§ 243-6 PLAINVILLE CODE § 243-6
1:182
I. Every public hall and stairway in every dwelling shall be adequately
lighted by natural and/or electric light at all times so as to permit the
area ahead to be lighted. Every public hall and stairway in structures
containing not more than three dwelling units may be supplied with
conveniently located light switches controlling an adequate lighting
system which may be turned on when needed as an alternative to the
furnishing of full-time lighting.
J. All rooms or areas which are used or intended to be used for workshops,
hobby rooms, studios, or the like shall comply with all regulations for
habitable rooms contained in this section.
§ 243-7. Minimum thermal standards (heating and cooling).
No person shall occupy as owner-occupant, or let to another for occupancy,
any dwelling or dwelling unit, for the purpose of living therein, which does
not comply with the following requirements:
A. Every dwelling shall have heating facilities which shall be properly
installed and maintained in safe and working condition and which shall
be capable of safely and adequately heating all of the habitable rooms,
kitchenettes, bathrooms, and all water closet, tub and shower
compartments in every dwelling unit located therein. Such heating
facilities shall adequately heat these rooms to a temperature of at least
65° F. during all times of the year, the reading to be taken at a distance
18 inches above the floor level of each such room.
B. Unvented flame space heaters are prohibited. Such portable electric
heaters as are approved under the appropriate local or state electrical
and/or fire prevention code will be acceptable where they meet the
provisions of Subsection A.
C. No person shall install, use or allow to be used a space heater in any
building used in whole or in part as a place of human habitation as set
forth in Chapter 541, § 29-318, of the Connecticut General Statutes.
D. Every fuel-burning room heater and/or unit hot water facility shall:
(1) Not use gasoline or other highly volatile liquid or jelly as fuel unless
properly certified for such use.
(2) Not be of the portable type.
(3) If employing a flame, be connected to a flue or vent in the manner
required by the statutes, ordinances and regulations of the State of
Connecticut and the Town of Plainville.
(4) If employing solid or liquids, have a fire-resistant panel beneath it.
(5) Be located at least two feet away from any wall or be equipped
in an approved manner with insulation sufficient to prevent the
overheating of any wall, ceiling, floor or other combustible material.
(6) If employing gaseous fuel, be properly equipped with rigid piping up
to the accessible shutoff valve.
(7) If employing electricity, be connected to an electric circuit of
adequate capacity in an approved manner.
(8) Be free of any fuel leaks.
(9) Be installed and operated in the manner required by the statutes,
ordinances and regulations of the State of Connecticut and the Town
of Plainville.
§ 243-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 243-7
1:183
E. All wood- or coal-burning stoves used as a supplemental heating facility
and/or water heater must be installed in accordance with the ordinances
of the Town of Plainville and approved by the appropriate authority
within the Town.
F. Every central heating unit and/or central hot water heating unit shall:
(1) Have every heat duct, steam pipe and/or hot water pipe free of leaks
and functioning properly to provide an adequate amount of heat and/
or hot water to the intended place of delivery;
(2) Be provided with seals between sections of hot air furnaces to
prevent the escape of noxious gases into heat ducts;
(3) If employing electricity, be connected to an electric circuit of
adequate capacity in an approved manner;
(4) Be provided with automatic or safety devices and be installed and
operated in the manner required by the statutes, ordinances, and
regulations of the State of Connecticut and the Town of Plainville;
and
(5) Be free of any fuel leaks.
§ 243-8. General requirements for safe and sanitary maintenance.
No person shall occupy as owner-occupant, or let to another for occupancy,
any dwelling or dwelling unit, for the purpose of living therein, which does
not comply with the requirements of this section.
A. Every foundation, floor, roof, ceiling, exterior and interior wall, and
accessory structure shall be kept weathertight, watertight, and dampfree,
shall be kept in sound condition and good repair, and shall be
capable of affording privacy for the occupants. All exterior wood
surfaces shall be protected and properly maintained from the elements
and decay by paint or other protective covering or treatment. Toxic
paint and materials will not be used on such exterior surfaces as are
readily accessible to children.
B. Lead paint or potentially hazardous material on the interior surfaces of
any dwelling unit, rooming unit, bed-and-breakfast unit, rooming house
or bed-and-breakfast house or on any fixtures or other objects used,
installed or located in or upon any exposed surface in any such facility
is prohibited. Such interior surfaces include, but are not limited to,
windowsills, window frames, doors, door frames, walls, ceilings, stair
rails and spindles, and all other appurtenances of the interior portion of
the dwelling premises.
C. In each instance where conditions disclose loose, flaking, chipping, or
falling paint, plaster or paper, and there is reason to believe that the
presence of lead paint or toxic material exists as a potential hazard,
the Housing Code Enforcement Officer shall take samples in a manner
prescribed by the appropriate authority and shall submit samples for
analysis to said appropriate authority.
D. Every window, exterior door and basement hatchway and all similar
devices shall be kept insect- and rodent-proof and reasonably watertight
and weathertight and shall be kept in sound working condition and good
repair at all times.
§ 243-7 PLAINVILLE CODE § 243-8
1:184
E. All rainwater shall be so drained and conveyed from every roof so as not
to leak or cause dampness in the walls, ceilings or floors of any room or
of any part of the structure.
F. During that portion of the year when there is a need for protection
against mosquitoes, flies, and other insects, every door that is intended
to be used for ventilation that opens directly from a dwelling unit to
outside space shall be equipped with properly fitting screens having
not less than a 16 mesh and shall be operated by a self-closing device;
during said portion of the year every window or other device with
openings to outdoor space, used or intended to be used for ventilation,
shall also be supplied with such screen, except that no screens shall be
required for any dwelling unit located on any floor above the fifth floor.
G. Rodent-proofing.
(1) Every window located at or near ground level that is used or
intended to be used for ventilation, and every other opening
located at or near ground level which might provide an entry for
rodents, shall be supplied with adequate gauge screen or such
other device as will effectively prevent their entrance.
(2) Every dwelling or accessory structure, and the premises upon
which it is located, shall be rodent-proof and maintained so as to
prevent the harboring of rodents. Such premises shall be graded
and drained, kept free of standing water, and maintained in a
clean, sanitary, and safe condition.
(3) All openings in the exterior walls, foundations, basements, ground
or first floors, and roofs which have an opening that is a 1/2 inch or
more in diameter shall be rodent-proofed in an approved manner
if such openings may be reached by rodents from the ground by
climbing unguarded pipes, wires, cornices, stairs, roofs, and other
means such as trees or lines by burrowing.
(4) Skirting, lattice, or other non-rodent-proofed enclosure that can
create a harboring place for rodents under a porch or under any
other portions of a building shall be rodent-proofed at all locations
where a rodent could find, burrow, or gnaw an access opening.
(5) In the event that occupancy usages would result in the stacking
or piling of materials, the materials shall be so arranged as to
prohibit the creation of a harbor for insects or rodents. This can be
accomplished by orderly stacking and elevating such material so
that there will be an eighteen-inch opening between the material
and the ground level. No material shall be stacked or piled against
the exterior walls of any structure.
(6) All doors, including swinging, sliding and folding types, shall be
constructed so that the space between the lower edge of the
floor and the threshold shall not exceed 3/8 inch. It is provided
further that the space between sections of folding and sliding doors
when closed shall not exceed 3/8 inch. All exterior doors shall be
threshold stopped.
(7) Interior floors of basements, cellars, and other areas in contact
with the soil shall be paved with concrete or other materials
impervious to rodents.
§ 243-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 243-8
1:185
(8) Materials used for rodent control shall be those materials that are
acceptable to the appropriate authority.
(9) In areas of heavy rodent infestation, the Housing Code
Enforcement Officer shall require that every exterior door be
equipped with an automatic closing device or with a screen door
that is equipped with such a device and properly fitted and
maintained.
(10) All sewers, pipes, drains, conduits, roof ventilators, chimneys, pipe
vents, downspouts, openings, etc., permitting accessibility to
rodents shall be protected against entry by grilles, hardware cloth,
caps, expanded metal covers, or other rodent-proof material
acceptable to the appropriate authority.
(11) If the space between two buildings is too small to permit inspection
of the exterior walls of such building, such space shall be sealed so
as to prevent the entrance of rodents or other animals. Provisions
shall be made in the rodent-proofing in such cases that drainage is
not obstructed.
H. All fences provided by the owner or an occupant on the premises shall
be constructed of manufactured metal fencing material, wood, masonry,
or other inert material. Such fences shall be maintained in good
condition or shall be removed. Wood materials shall be protected
against decay by use of paint or other preservative. The permissible
height and other characteristics of all fences shall conform to the
appropriate statutes, ordinances, and regulations of the State of
Connecticut and the Town of Plainville. Wherever any egress from the
dwelling opens into the fenced area, the fence shall include a means of
egress from the premises to any public way adjacent thereto.
I. Accessory structures on the premises shall be structurally sound and
shall be maintained in good repair and free from insects and rodents
or such structures shall be removed from the premises. The exterior
of such structures shall be made weather-resistant through the use of
decay-resistant materials or the use of paint or other preservatives.
J. Every foundation, roof, floor, exterior and interior wall, ceiling, inside
and outside stair, every porch, gutter, leaders, and downspout, and
every appurtenance thereto, shall be safe to use and capable of
supporting the loads that normal use may cause to be placed thereon
and shall be kept in sound condition and good repair.
K. Every inside and outside stair or step shall have uniform risers and
treads, and stairways shall have handrails, structurally sound, of
required height and balustrades spaced as in Subsection L.
L. Porches, stairways, and/or balconies located more than three feet higher
than the adjacent area shall have structurally sound protective
handrails of the required height, and if unenclosed, balusters spaced
no less than six inches apart shall also be provided. Alternate systems
providing at least the same degree of protection, if approved by the
appropriate authority, shall be acceptable.
M. Every plumbing fixture, and water and waste pipe, shall be properly
installed and maintained in good sanitary working condition at all times.
§ 243-8 PLAINVILLE CODE § 243-8
1:186
N. Every water closet compartment shall be constructed and maintained
so as to be impervious to water. Every bathroom, water closet, tub or
shower compartment, and kitchen floor surface shall be so constructed
and maintained so as to be easily kept in clean and sanitary condition
and shall be reasonably impervious to water.
O. Every plumbing fixture and pipe, every chimney, flue and smoke pipe,
and every other facility, piece of equipment, utility, and heating
apparatus installed on the premises for the use of any dwelling unit or
which is otherwise required under this chapter shall be constructed and
installed in conformance with the applicable local or state codes and
shall be maintained in satisfactory working condition.
P. Neither the owner nor any occupant of any dwelling unit shall cause
any service, facility, equipment, or utility which is required under this
chapter to be removed from, or shut off from, or discontinued for
any premises containing an occupied dwelling or dwelling unit let or
occupied except for such temporary interruption as may be necessary
while actual repairs or alterations are in process, or during temporary
emergencies when discontinuance of service is approved by the
appropriate authority.
Q. All construction and materials, all ways and means of egress, and all
installation and use of equipment and facilities shall conform to
applicable state and local laws dealing with fire protection and shall be
installed and maintained in a workmanlike manner.
§ 243-9. Minimum space, use and location requirements.
No person shall occupy, or let to be occupied, any dwelling unit, for the
purpose of living therein, which does not comply with the requirements of
this section.
A. Every dwelling unit shall contain at least 150 square feet of floor space
for the first occupant thereof and at least 130 square feet of floor space
for every additional occupant thereof, the floor space to be calculated on
the basis of total habitable room space.
B. In every dwelling unit of two or more rooms, every room primarily used
for sleeping purposes shall contain at least 70 square feet of floor space
for the first occupant and at least 50 square feet of floor space for each
additional occupant thereof.
C. No dwelling or dwelling unit, containing two or more sleeping rooms,
shall have such room arrangement that access to a bathroom or water
closet, tub or shower compartment, intended for use by occupants of
more than one sleeping room, can be entered only by going through
another sleeping room or a bathroom or water closet, tub or shower
compartment, nor shall room arrangements be such that access to a
sleeping room can be entered only by going through another sleeping
room. Each room shall provide privacy. A bathroom or water closet, tub
or shower compartment shall not be used as the only passageway to any
hall, basement or cellar or to the exterior of a dwelling unit.
D. Every separate and detached dwelling unit shall contain a minimum
of 480 square feet of space, with any minimum dimension being 18
feet, and shall contain a kitchen, living room or family room, bedroom
§ 243-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 243-9
1:187
and bathroom. All other separate and detached structures, not existing
as dwelling units, shall conform to all the zoning, health and fire
regulations and building requirements in addition to this code.
E. All dwelling units constructed after the effective date of this amendment
shall have at least 75% of the floor area of every habitable room with a
clear ceiling height of no less than seven feet six inches in the basement
and seven feet four inches in all other stories. For dwellings in existence
prior to the effective date, a minimum ceiling height of six feet six inches
shall be required for 50% of the floor area of any habitable room. The
floor area of that part of any room where the ceiling height is less than
five feet shall not be considered as part of the floor area of the room
for the purpose of determining the maximum permissible occupancy
thereof. At least 50% of the floor area in the attic rooms shall have a
ceiling height of six feet six inches.
(1) There are no pipes, or other obstructions, less than six feet six
inches above the floor level which interfere with the normal use of
the room or area.
(2) The floor, and those portions of the walls below grade, are of
waterproof and damp-proof construction.
(3) The minimum window area, required in § 243-6A, is located entirely
above grade of the ground adjoining such window area or, if
windows are located wholly or partly below grade, it shall be
required that there be constructed a properly drained window well
whose ground area shall be equal to, or greater than, the area of
the window opening; the bottom of the window well shall be below
the top of the impervious masonry construction under this window;
the minimum horizontal projections of the bottom of the window well
shall be equal to, or greater than, the vertical dimension (depth) of
this window opening, as measured from the bottom of the masonry
opening, and no part of the window well, opposite this window, shall
protrude above a line projected at a forty-five-degree angle from the
bottom of the window opening at right angles to the outer wall.
(4) The total openable window area in each room is equal to at least the
minimum as required under § 243-6B of this chapter (except where
there is supplied some other device affording adequate ventilation
and approved by the appropriate authority).
F. Every dwelling unit shall have closet or storage space of at least four
square feet floor to ceiling height for the personal effects of each of the
permitted number of occupants of that dwelling unit. If such required
closet or storage space is lacking, an amount of space equal in square
footage to the deficiency shall be subtracted from the area of habitable
room space to be used in determining the number of occupants to be
permitted in the dwelling unit.
G. For the purpose of ensuring the safety of children in the residential
environment, each dwelling shall have a facility suitable for the safe
storage of medicines, toxic materials, and various poisonous household
substances as determined by the appropriate authority.
H. Limitation of dwelling unit access to commercial uses. No habitable
room, bathroom, or water closet compartment which is accessory to a
§ 243-9 PLAINVILLE CODE § 243-9
1:188
dwelling unit shall open directly into or shall be used in conjunction
with a food store, food service facility, barber or beauty shop, doctor's or
dentist's examination or treatment room, automobile repair garages or
shops, or any similar room used for public or private purposes.
§ 243-10. Rooming house or bed-and-breakfast house.
No person shall operate a rooming house or bed-and-breakfast house, or
shall occupy or let to another for occupancy any rooming house or bed-andbreakfast
house, except in compliance with the provisions of §§ 243-4, 243-5
and 243-6 of this chapter. No vacant rooming unit or bed-and-breakfast
unit shall be occupied or let unless it is clean, sanitary, and fit for human
occupancy and shall otherwise be in compliance with all applicable
requirements of the Town of Plainville and the State of Connecticut.
A. No person shall operate a rooming house or bed-and-breakfast house
unless he holds a valid permit issued by the Housing Code Enforcement
Officer, Fire Marshal, and Building Official, in the name of the operator
and for said dwelling or dwelling unit as specified in such permit. The
operator shall apply, on applications provided by the Housing Code
Enforcement Officer, for such permit, which shall be issued by the
Housing Code Enforcement Officer only after determining that said
rooming house or bed-and-breakfast house is in compliance with the
applicable provisions of this chapter and with any rules and regulations
adopted pursuant thereto. The permit shall be displayed in a
conspicuous place within the dwelling at all times. No such permit shall
be transferable. Application for such permit by the operator of said
rooming house or bed-and-breakfast house shall serve as authorization
by the operator for the Housing Code Enforcement Officer to make
any and all of such inspections or reinspections as the Housing Code
Enforcement Officer shall find to be necessary to determine the
condition of the rooming units or bed-and-breakfast units consistent
with the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. Such entry,
examination and survey shall be conducted during reasonable hours.
Every person holding such permit shall give notice in writing to the
Housing Code Enforcement Officer within 24 hours after having sold,
transferred, given away, or otherwise disposed of ownership of, interest
in, or control of any rooming house or bed-and-breakfast house. Such
written notice shall include the name and address of the person
succeeding to the ownership, interest in, or control of such rooming
house or bed-and-breakfast house. Every permit shall expire at the end
of the year following its date of issuance, unless it is earlier suspended
or revoked as hereinafter provided.
B. At least one water closet, lavatory sink, and bathtub or shower that
is properly connected to a potable water supply and sewer or septic
system, approved by the Housing Code Enforcement Officer, and in good
working condition, shall be supplied for each five persons, or fraction
thereof, residing within a rooming house or bed-and-breakfast house,
including members of the operator's family wherever they share the use
of said facilities. It is further provided that:
§ 243-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 243-10
1:189
(1) None of the above-mentioned facilities shall be located in a
basement, except by written approval of the Housing Code
Enforcement Officer.
(2) In a rooming house or bed-and-breakfast house where rooms are let
only to males, flush urinals may be substituted for not more than 1/2
the required number of water closets.
(3) Every lavatory sink and bathtub or shower shall be supplied with
heated and unheated water under pressure at all times.
(4) Cooking in a rooming unit or bed-and-breakfast unit shall be
prohibited.
(5) Communal cooking and dining facilities in a rooming house or bedand-
breakfast house shall be prohibited, except as approved by the
Housing Code Enforcement Officer in writing.
C. All rooming unit and bed-and-breakfast unit doors shall have operating
locks to ensure privacy.
D. The operator of every rooming house or bed-and-breakfast house shall
change supplied bed linen and towels therein at least once each week
and prior to the letting of any room to any occupant. The operator shall
be responsible for the clean and sanitary maintenance of all supplied
bedding.
E. Access to or egress from each rooming unit or bed-and-breakfast unit
shall be provided without passing through any other rooming unit, bedand-
breakfast unit or dwelling unit or any water closet, lavatory sink,
bathtub or shower compartment.
F. The operator of any rooming house or bed-and-breakfast house shall
post in every rooming unit or bed-and-breakfast unit a sign on which
shall be legibly written or printed in letters on durable stock, not less
than 3/8 inch in height, the following words: "No Cooking of Any Kind
Permitted in This Room," and such sign shall be posted and maintained
at all times the room is occupied.
G. Every rooming house and bed-and-breakfast house shall have two or
more safe, unobstructed means of egress leading to safe and open space
at ground level, as required by the laws of the State of Connecticut and
the ordinances of the Town of Plainville.
H. Every provision of this chapter which applies to rooming houses and
bed-and-breakfast houses shall also apply to hotels, motels, dormitories,
and clubs, except to the extent that any such provisions may be found
in conflict with the laws of the State of Connecticut or the ordinances of
the Town of Plainville.
§ 243-11. Suspension of permit for rooming house or bed-andbreakfast
house.
A. The Housing Code Enforcement Officer is hereby authorized to enter,
inspect, examine, and survey all rooming houses, rooming units, bedand-
breakfast houses and bed-and-breakfast units at all reasonable
hours. Whenever upon inspection of any rooming house, rooming unit,
bed-and-breakfast house or bed-and-breakfast unit the Housing Code
Enforcement Officer finds that conditions or practices exist which are
in violation of applicable state fire and building codes, any provisions of
§ 243-10 PLAINVILLE CODE § 243-11
1:190
this chapter, or of any applicable rule or regulation adopted pursuant
thereto, the Housing Code Enforcement Officer shall give a written
order to the operator of such dwelling that unless such conditions are
corrected within a period of time to be specified by the Housing Code
Enforcement Officer the operator's permit will be suspended. Such
period of time shall be of a reasonable length. At the end of said period
of time the Housing Code Enforcement Officer shall reinspect such
dwelling under the conditions of his first entry and inspection as set forth
above. If the Housing Code Enforcement Officer determines that such
conditions have not been corrected, he shall issue an order suspending
the operator's permit.
B. Any person whose permit to operate a rooming house or bed-andbreakfast
house has been suspended by order of the Housing Code
Enforcement Officer shall be granted the right to a hearing on the
suspension order by the Housing Code Appeals Board in the manner
prescribed by § 243-3D through H on hearings and appeals. If no such
petition for a hearing is received by the Housing Code Appeals Board
within 10 days following the day on which the permit suspension was
served, said permit shall be deemed revoked.
§ 243-12. Inspections.
A. The Housing Code Enforcement Officer is hereby authorized and
directed to make inspections, by and with the authorization of either
the owner, occupant, or person in charge, to determine the condition
of dwellings, dwelling units, and premises within the Town of Plainville
for the purpose of determining compliance with the provisions of this
chapter. For the purpose of making such inspections the Housing Code
Enforcement Officer, with authorization of either the owner, occupant or
person in charge, is hereby empowered to enter, examine and survey
all dwellings, dwelling units, rooming units, bed-and-breakfast units,
and premises at all reasonable hours. Such inspection, examination, and
survey shall be made in a manner that will cause the least amount of
inconvenience to said owner or occupant, consistent with an efficient
performance of the duties of the Housing Code Enforcement Officer. To
further ensure that the policy of this chapter is to achieve compliance
through cooperation of owners and occupants, and to ensure that such
policy will be successfully maintained, whenever practicable the
Housing Code Enforcement Officer will provide reasonable advance
notice to the owner, the person in charge, and/or the occupants of any
planned blanket inspection and any inspections of a routine nature,
excluding the investigation of complaints registered by any person,
identified or anonymous.
B. Denial of entry.
(1) Whenever an owner, occupant, or person in charge of a dwelling,
dwelling unit, or premises shall deny the Housing Code Enforcement
Officer right of entry for the purpose of inspection, investigation,
examinations or survey, the Housing Code Enforcement Officer shall
not so enter until he presents a duly granted authorization to enter
§ 243-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 243-12
1:191
for the purpose of inspection, investigations, examination, or survey
of such premises.
(2) Nothing in this section shall be construed to preclude the entry
of the Housing Code Enforcement Officer at any time when, in his
judgment, an emergency tending to create an immediate danger to
the public health, welfare, or safety exists or when such entry by the
Housing Code Enforcement Officer is requested by either the owner,
occupant, or person in charge of the dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming
unit, bed-and-breakfast unit or premises or when the Housing Code
Enforcement Officer presents a duly granted authorization to enter
for the purpose of inspection, investigations, examinations, or survey
of such premises for the purpose hereof.
(3) Any owner, occupant, or person in charge of a dwelling, dwelling
unit, rooming unit, bed-and-breakfast unit or premises refusing to
permit, or impeding, entry of and free access to any part of any
dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, bed-and-breakfast unit,
structure, or premises for the purposes of inspection, investigation,
examination, or survey under the provisions of this subsection and
Subsection A above shall, upon conviction, be fined not less than $50
nor more than $99 as provided in § 243-14 of this code.
C. The Housing Code Enforcement Officer shall keep confidential all
evidence which may be discovered or obtained in the course of an
inspection made pursuant to this section, except when in conflict with
applicable freedom of information statutes. Evidence so obtained shall
not be disclosed except as may be necessary in the judgment of the
Housing Code Enforcement Officer for the effective administration and
enforcement of the provisions of this chapter and rules and regulations
issued pursuant thereto.
D. Every owner or operator of a rooming house or bed-and-breakfast house
shall keep, or cause to be kept, records of all requests for repair and
compliance by tenants, which requests are related to the provisions of
this chapter and to any applicable rules and regulations, and records of
all corrections made in response to such requests and complaints. Such
records shall be made available by the owner or operator to the Housing
Code Enforcement Officer for inspection and copying upon request. Such
records shall be admissible in any administrative or judicial proceeding
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter as prima facie evidence of the
violation or the correction of violations of this chapter or of applicable
rules and regulations pursuant thereto.
§ 243-13. Rules and regulations.
The Town Manager/Housing Code Enforcement Officer is hereby authorized
to make, adopt, revise, and amend such rules and regulations as are deemed
necessary for the carrying out of the provisions of this chapter in
accordance with the procedures made, established, and provided by the
Town Charter and ordinances of the Town of Plainville.
§ 243-12 PLAINVILLE CODE § 243-14
1:192
§ 243-14. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this code or who shall willfully
refuse or fail to obey an order of the Housing Code Enforcement Officer or
the Housing Code Appeals Board to comply with this chapter, or of any rule
or regulation adopted hereunder, shall, upon conviction, be fined not less
than $50 nor more than $99, and each day's failure to comply with any such
provision shall constitute a separate violation.
§ 243-15. Designation of unfit dwellings; procedure for
condemnation.
A. The designation of any dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house, rooming
unit, bed-and-breakfast house or bed-and-breakfast unit as unfit for
human habitation, and the procedure for the condemnation and
placarding of such dwelling or dwelling unit, rooming house or rooming
unit, bed-and-breakfast house or bed-and-breakfast unit, shall be carried
out in compliance with the following requirements.
B. Any dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house, rooming unit, bed-andbreakfast
house or bed-and-breakfast unit which the Housing Code
Enforcement Officer shall find to have one or more of the following
defects shall be condemned as unfit for human habitation and shall be
so designated and placarded by the Housing Code Enforcement Officer.
Any dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house, rooming unit, bed-andbreakfast
house or bed-and-breakfast unit that:
(1) Is so damaged, decayed or dilapidated, unsanitary, unsafe, or
vermin-infested or potential vermin harborage that it creates a
hazard to the health or safety of the occupants or of the public.
(2) Lacks illumination, ventilation, or sanitation facilities adequate to
protect the health or safety of the occupants or of the public.
C. Any dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house, rooming unit, bed-andbreakfast
house or bed-and-breakfast unit that is condemned as unfit for
human habitation and so designated and placarded by the Housing Code
Enforcement Officer shall be vacated forthwith by all occupants thereof.
D. No dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house, rooming unit, bed-andbreakfast
house or bed-and-breakfast unit that has been condemned
and placarded as unfit for human habitation shall be used again for
human habitation until written approval is secured from the Housing
Code Enforcement Officer and until such placard is removed by express
permission of the Housing Code Enforcement Officer and said dwelling,
dwelling unit, rooming house, rooming unit, bed-and-breakfast house
or bed-and-breakfast unit is in compliance with all other appropriate
ordinances. The Housing Code Enforcement Officer shall permit removal
of such placard by the owner, occupant, or person in charge of the
dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house, rooming unit, bed-and-breakfast
house or bed-and-breakfast unit upon the elimination of such defect as
was found by the Housing Code Enforcement Officer as described in
Subsection B hereinabove.
E. No person shall willfully deface or remove the placard from any
dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house, rooming unit, bed-and-breakfast
house or bed-and-breakfast unit which has been condemned as unfit for
§ 243-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 243-15
1:193
human habitation and placarded as such, except when such action has
been authorized by the Housing Code Enforcement Officer as provided
for in Subsection D above. Whoever violates this provision shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $99.
F. Any person aggrieved by any order involving the condemnation and
placarding of a dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house, rooming unit,
bed-and-breakfast house or bed-and-breakfast unit shall be granted the
right to a hearing subject to the conditions specified in § 243-3 upon the
written request of such aggrieved person as provided therein.
G. In the event no substantial corrective action is taken by the owner,
occupant or person in charge of a dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming
house, rooming unit, bed-and-breakfast house or bed-and-breakfast unit
thus condemned as unfit for human occupancy within three months
following the date of the condemnation described above, provided that
no appeal is then pending, then the Housing Code Enforcement Officer
shall order the condemned structure to be demolished as soon as
practicable.
H. All subsequent transferees of a condemned dwelling, dwelling unit,
rooming house, rooming unit, bed-and-breakfast house or bed-andbreakfast
unit shall be deemed to have notice of the continuing existence
of the violations alleged, and said transferees shall be liable to all
penalties and procedures provided by this chapter and by applicable
rules and regulations issued pursuant thereto to the same degree as was
their transferor.
§ 243-16. Compliance required.
A. Each habitable room, dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house, rooming
unit, bed-and-breakfast house or bed-and-breakfast unit that does not
conform to this chapter and becomes vacated for any reason or length of
time shall conform to this chapter before it is deemed habitable again.
B. The owner of each dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house, rooming
unit, bed-and-breakfast house or bed-and-breakfast unit shall be held
responsible for compliance with this chapter in any instance where
such a dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house, rooming unit, bed-andbreakfast
house or bed-and-breakfast unit is considered noncomplying.
Such work as is necessary to bring each habitable room, dwelling,
dwelling unit, rooming house, rooming unit, bed-and-breakfast house
or bed-and-breakfast unit into compliance with the standards as noted
in this amendment shall be completed within two years of adoption
of the amendment, unless otherwise ordered by the Housing Code
Enforcement Officer.
§ 243-17. Permit to create certain units.
No dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house, rooming unit, bed-and-breakfast
house or bed-and-breakfast unit shall be created within an existing
structure or converted, remodeled or altered so as to create an additional
dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house, rooming unit, bed-and-breakfast
house or bed-and-breakfast unit unless the Building Official and Housing
Code Enforcement Officer have issued a written permit certifying that the
§ 243-15 PLAINVILLE CODE § 243-17
1:194
plans and specifications for such work indicate that the provisions of this
chapter will be complied with.
§ 243-18. Conflicts; personal liability.
A. In any case where a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict
with any existing code, ordinance, or regulation of the Town of Plainville
existing on the effective date of this chapter, the provision which
establishes the higher standard for the promotion and protection of the
health and safety of the people shall prevail.
B. The Housing Code Enforcement Officer and his assistants shall be free
from personal liability for acts done in good faith in the performance of
official duties. Any suit brought against any officer, agent, or employee
of the municipality as a result of any act required or permitted in the
discharge of his duties under this code shall be defended by the legal
representative of the municipality until the final determination of the
proceedings therein.
Chapter 257
LITTERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Solid waste — See Ch. 341.
§ 257-1. Littering prohibited.
Pursuant to the provisions of Connecticut General Statutes § 22a-250(a), as
amended, no person shall throw, scatter, spill or place, or cause to be blown,
scattered, spilled, thrown or placed, or otherwise dispose of any litter upon
any public property in the Town of Plainville or upon private property in the
Town of Plainville not owned by said person or in the waters of the Town
of Plainville, including but not limited to any public highway, public park,
beach, campground, forest land, recreational area, mobile or manufactured
home park, highway, road, street or alley, except:
A. When such property is designated by the state or the Town of Plainville
for the disposal of solid waste, recyclable solid waste, garbage or refuse,
and such person is authorized to use such property for such purpose.
B. Into a litter receptacle in such a manner that the litter will be prevented
from being carried away or deposited by the elements upon any part of
said private or public properties or waters.
§ 257-2. Placement of containers.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the placing of
approved containers which contain litter at curbside for scheduled
collection, as provided for in Chapter 341, Solid Waste, of this Code.
§ 243-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 257-3
1:195
§ 257-3. Penalties for offenses.
A. Pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes § 22a-226d(a), violation of this
chapter is punishable by a fine of up to $1,000 per violation. Each
separate activity pursuant to § 257-1 shall constitute a separate offense.
B. Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection A above, any person, other
than a collector, who dumps more than one cubic foot in volume of
solid waste at one time in a solid waste or refuse collection container
without the authorization of the owner of such container or dumps any
material into a recycling collection container used to collect another
type of material for purposes of disposal by a collector shall be subject
to a penalty of up to $1,000, pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes
§ 22a-226d(a)(4), as amended. Each day a violation persists shall
constitute a separate offense. This penalty shall be in addition to any civil
penalties applicable under Connecticut General Statutes § 22a-220a(i).
§ 257-4. Citations.
Pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes § 22a-226d(b), any police officer
and any other person so authorized by the chief executive officer may issue
a citation to any person who commits a violation under this chapter.
Chapter 261
LOITERING
§ 261-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate and control loitering on private
property in the Town of Plainville. No portion of this chapter shall be
construed to restrict the right of any persons to freely assemble for any
lawful purpose.
§ 261-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LOITER or LOITERING — Shall encompass one or more of the following
acts:
Standing, sitting, walking or idly milling about or sitting inside a motor
vehicle, with no lawful purpose.
A.
Obstructing of the free, unhampered passage of pedestrians or
vehicles.
B.
Obstructing, molesting, interfering with or using foul and abusive
language with or to any person lawfully upon any private property.
C.
D. Congregating in groups or singly upon the private property of another.
§ 257-3 PLAINVILLE CODE § 261-2
1:196
§ 261-3. Loitering on private property.
It shall be unlawful for persons to loiter upon the sidewalks, parking lots,
driveways, or other private property of another unless with the permission
or consent of the owner thereof. All persons so loitering and refusing to
disperse or move on when commanded to do so by a police officer may be
arrested and forthwith brought before the Circuit Court, or if it is not in
session such person or persons may be held in custody until the next day
upon which it shall be held, or may be released upon sufficient bond and
commanded to appear before such Court on said day, and upon conviction
each person shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $50.59
Chapter 269
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS
§ 269-1. Findings.
It is hereby declared that the business of operating massage establishments
as defined herein is a business affecting the public health, safety and
welfare.
§ 269-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
AUTHORIZED AGENT — A person designated by the Director of Health
to act for him in administering any state or local codes, regulations, or
ordinance pertaining to massage establishments or massage therapy.
CONNECTICUT-LICENSED MASSAGE THERAPIST — A person who has
been licensed to practice massage therapy under the provisions of
§§ 20-206a to 20-206c, inclusive, of the Connecticut General Statutes.
EMPLOYEE — Any and all persons other than the massage therapist who
render any service in a massage establishment who have no physical or aid
treatment contact with customers or clients.
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment having a fixed or mobile
business where any person, association, partnership, or corporation
engages in or carries on, or permits to be engaged in or carried on, any of
the activities pertaining to massage therapy.
Refusing to disperse or move on when so commanded by a police
officer, provided that such officer has exercised his discretion
reasonably under the circumstances in order to preserve or promote
public peace or order.
E.
59.Editor's Note: Original § 4, Parking on private property, which immediately followed this
section, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
See now Ch. 374, Vehicles and Traffic, § 374-8.
§ 261-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 269-2
1:197
MASSAGE THERAPY — The systematic and scientific manipulation and
treatment of the soft tissues of the body, by use of pressure, friction,
stroking, percussion, kneading, vibration by manual or mechanical means,
range of motion and nonspecific stretching. Massage therapy may include
the use of oil, ice, hot and cold packs, tub, shower, steam, dry heat, or
cabinet baths, for the purpose of, but not limited to, maintaining good health
and establishing and maintaining good physical and mental condition.
"Massage therapy" does not encompass diagnosis, the prescribing of drugs
or medicines, spinal or other joint manipulations, or any service or
procedure for which a license to practice medicine, chiropractic,
naturopathy, physical therapy, or podiatry is required by law.
§ 269-3. Location restricted.
No massage establishment, fixed or mobile, shall be located within a
distance of 500 feet of a public or private educational facility, public library,
structure or building used for conducting religious services, or any other
massage establishment.
§ 269-4. License and permit requirements.
A. The practice of massage therapy shall be limited to those persons who
fulfill all requirements enumerated in § 20-206a et seq. of the
Connecticut General Statutes.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a massage establishment
without a permit approved by the Director of Health or his authorized
agent.
§ 269-5. Application for permit; fee.
Each applicant wishing to maintain, operate or conduct a massage
establishment shall file a permit application on forms provided by the
Director of Health and pay a filing fee as provided in Chapter 215, Fees.
§ 269-6. Contents of application.
A. The permit application to operate a massage establishment shall set
forth the exact nature of the massage to be administered, proposed place
of business, fixed or mobile, and all facilities therein, and the name(s),
address(es) and telephone number(s) of each applicant, all its owners
and managers.
B. The application shall indicate the massage or similar business license
history of all applicants, managers and owners, including whether such
person has previously operated in this state or any other state under
license, has had any such license revoked or suspended, the reason
therefor and the business activities or occupations subsequent to such
action of suspension or revocation.
C. All applicants, managers and owners shall indicate any criminal
convictions incurred, except minor traffic violations, on their permit
application.
D. If the applicant is not a practitioner of massage, then the application
shall designate a licensed massage therapist to be the agent of the
§ 269-2 PLAINVILLE CODE § 269-6
1:198
principal owner(s) and operator(s) and to be in constant, direct and
personal supervision and responsible for said establishment.
E. Appropriate certificates showing proper compliance with all other
applicable rules, regulations, codes, ordinances and statutes, including
but not limited to planning, zoning, building, housing, fire and health
codes of the Town of Plainville and the State of Connecticut, shall be
provided a the time of application.
F. The Director of Health may require additional documented or
testimonial information to support the application.
§ 269-7. Action on application; denial, suspension or revocation of
permit.
A. The permit application to operate a massage establishment shall be
submitted to the Director of Health at least 30 days in advance of
the proposed opening for operation of the establishment. Any permit
issued under these regulations shall be valid until the next renewal date.
Upon denial of an application for an original or subsequent permit, the
Director of Health shall notify the applicant in writing of such denial by
mailing a notice via certified mail to him at the address shown on the
most recent application.
B. The Director of Health may suspend, revoke or refuse to issue or renew
any permit of any massage establishment regulated under this chapter
if the applicant does not properly comply with any requirement of this
chapter or is involved in any violations or adjudications, including but
not limited to the following:
(1) Is convicted of any offense involving moral turpitude, obscenity,
sexual misconduct, keeping or residing in a house of ill fame,
solicitation of a lewd or unlawful act, prostitution or pandering, the
record of conviction being conclusive evidence thereof.
(2) Is legally adjudicated insane or mentally incompetent, the record of
such adjudication being conclusive evidence thereof.
(3) Uses or permits to be used on the premises any narcotic or any
controlled drug, as defined in § 21a-240 of the Connecticut General
Statutes, to an extent or in a manner that such use impairs his/her
ability to direct the establishment and endangers any clients or other
personnel.
(4) Fails to maintain standards of this chapter or requirements
prescribed and published by the Director of Health.
(5) Furnishes or makes any misleading or any false statement of report
to the Director of Health or his authorized agents.
(6) Fails to provide, maintain, equip and keep in a safe and sanitary
condition the premises established for and used by clients pursuant
to minimum standards prescribed by the Director of Health or by
ordinances, statutes, codes, standards or regulations applicable to
the establishment.
(7) Willfully or deliberately violates any of the provisions of this chapter.
(8) Employs any unlicensed massage therapist.
§ 269-8. Renewal of permit.
§ 269-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 269-8
1:199
A. Applications for renewal of permits shall be made one year from date
of issuance and shall be accompanied by a permit fee as provided in
Chapter 215, Fees, to operate a massage establishment. This fee shall
not be refundable.
B. Application for annual renewal of permits is to be made on forms
supplied by the Director of Health. Each applicant for a permit shall
sign a statement on the renewal form that all information stated in
the original permit application continues to be correct. If there are
changes in the information, then these are to be detailed on the renewal
application.
§ 269-9. Permit and licenses to be posted.
The permit for the massage establishment shall be posted in a conspicuous
place in the establishment. Licenses of all massage therapists must also be
present and posted in a conspicuous place within the establishment. Failure
to so post any permit or license shall result in the presumption that the
establishment and/or its massage therapists are operating in violation of
this chapter.
§ 269-10. Facilities.
No permit to operate a massage establishment shall be issued unless an
inspection by the Director of Health, his agent or, if applicable, an agent
of the State Department of Public Health reveals that the establishment
complies with all of the following minimum requirements. On issuance of an
original or renewal permit, the Director of Health, his agent or, if applicable,
an agent of the State Department of Public Health shall review the premises
and establish that all sanitary facilities are in compliance with all provisions
of the Connecticut Public Health Code, state statutes, regulations, and local
ordinances, and that all food and beverage service areas are in compliance
with appropriate regulations, statutes, codes, standards, regulations and
ordinances.
A. Construction of rooms used for toilets, tubs, steam baths, whirlpools, and
showers shall be waterproofed with approved waterproof materials.
B. Toilet facilities shall be provided in convenient locations. When five or
more employees and/or patrons of different sexes are on the premises at
the same time, separate toilet facilities shall be provided for each sex.
A single water closet per section shall be provided for each 20 or more
employees and/or patrons or fraction thereof of that sex capable of being
on the premises at any one time. Urinals may be substituted in lieu of
every other water closet after one water closet has been provided for
males. Toilets shall be designated as to the sex to be accommodated and
meet all Public Health Code requirements.
C. A minimum of one lavatory or water basin shall be provided for every
20 or more employees and/or patrons with both hot and cold running
water supplied through a mixing valve installed in either the toilet room
or vestibule immediately located adjacent to toilet rooms. Lavatories or
washbasins shall be provided with soap in a proper dispenser and with
§ 269-8 PLAINVILLE CODE § 269-10
1:200
sanitary towels or adequate drying devices. No common toweling of any
kind will be allowed.
D. Water supplies and sewage and waste disposal systems shall be in
compliance with all regulations of the Connecticut Public Health Code
and applicable local ordinances, rules and regulations of the Town of
Plainville.
E. Refreshment facilities shall be separated from service facilities and shall
be in compliance with all regulations of the Town of Plainville and the
Connecticut Public Health Code regarding food and beverages.
§ 269-11. Construction and renovation.
No massage establishment shall modify the physical layout in any way
without first submitting plans to and receiving approval therefor from the
Director of Health and any other department of the Town when so required.
§ 269-12. Transfer of permit.
No permit for a massage establishment shall be transferable except by
written application to and approval by the Director of Health; provided,
however, that upon the death or incapacity of the authorized permittee
of an existing massage establishment, the establishment may continue in
business for 30 days after death or incapacity of the authorized permittee,
provided that a licensed massage therapist is on staff, to allow for an orderly
application process for a new permit.
§ 269-13. Advertising.
No massage establishment granted a permit under the provisions of this
chapter shall place, publish or distribute or cause to be placed, published
or distributed any advertising material that depicts any portion of the
human body that would reasonably suggest to prospective patrons that any
services are available other than those services described and authorized
under definitions and licensure in these regulations, or that employees or
massage therapists are dressed in such a manner or behave in such a
manner as to suggest that they or the establishment is engaged in keeping
or residing in a house of ill fame, soliciting of a lewd or unlawful act,
prostitution or pandering. Nor shall any massage establishment indicate in
the text of such advertising that any services are available other than those
described and authorized under approved licensure and definitions of this
chapter.
§ 269-14. Service rates to be posted.
A full schedule of service rates shall be posted in a prominent place within
the massage establishment in such a manner as to come to the attention
of all patrons before they receive any services. No charges other than
the specified rates for specified services are to be allowed without the
patron being notified of the full cost prior to the rendering of any service.
§ 269-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 269-14
1:201
Such rates shall be posted with the display of the permit for the massage
establishment and the licenses of the massage therapists.
§ 269-15. Designation of exempted persons and organizations.
These regulations shall not apply to any school, nonprofit private United
Way agency, hospital, nursing home or sanitarium, clinic or rehabilitation
facility operating in accordance with the laws of the State of Connecticut,
nor to any employee working under the direction of such facility, nor to
any person holding a valid, unrevoked certificate or license to practice the
healing arts or to practice podiatry, physical therapy, midwifery, nursing,
dentistry, dental hygiene or optometry nor the persons engaged in the
occupations of barber, hairdresser or cosmetician under the laws of the
State of Connecticut, provided that the activities of such person are
confined to those for which the certificate or license is granted, or persons
lawfully acting under their supervision or control, nor shall it prohibit the
furnishing of assistance in the case of emergency.
§ 269-16. Operating requirements and health standards.
A. Every portion of the massage establishment, including appliances and
apparatus, shall be clean and at all times properly maintained and
operated in a sanitary condition.
B. All employees shall be clean and wear clean outer garments whose
use is restricted to the massage establishment. Provisions for separate
dressing rooms for each sex must be available on the premises with
individual lockers for each employee. Doors to such dressing rooms
shall open inward and shall be self-closing and meet all minimum
requirements of the Connecticut Public Health Code and standards of
the Director of Health.
C. All employees and massage therapists must be modestly attired at all
times.
D. Individual sanitary sheetings shall be provided for each patron to lie
on during massage; moreover, the patron's body shall be covered
appropriately except for the portion thereof being subjected to massage.
E. All massage establishments shall provide separate clean laundered
sheets and towels in sufficient quantity and they shall be properly
laundered after each such use thereof and stored in an approved
sanitary manner.
F. Appropriate single-service disposal items may be utilized in lieu of
sheets and towels.
G. All wet and dry heat rooms, shower compartments, table or bench
facilities and toilet rooms shall be kept clean and so maintained each
day the business is in operation. All bathtubs shall be thoroughly
cleaned after each use.
H. Massage therapy as defined in this chapter must be carried on in one
cubical, room, booth or area within the permitted facility. No massage
therapy may be carried on in any other cubical, room, booth or area
except where such cubical, room, booth or area has unobstructed
transparent doors or walls so that all activity within a cubical, room,
booth or area is visible from outside the same.
§ 269-14 PLAINVILLE CODE § 269-16
1:202
I. A massage establishment shall not conduct business between the hours
of 11:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
J. No alcoholic beverage or other intoxicant shall be displayed, served,
ingested, brought to, or sold on the premises of said massage
establishment.
K. An adequate supply of hot and cold running water must be available
constantly during hours of operation.
L. Individual soap and towels must be available for each person's use.
M. Each massage therapist shall thoroughly cleanse his or her hands by
washing immediately before serving any patron.
N. Mechanical apparatus such as heat lamps, tanning lights, sun lamps, hot
and cold packs, tubs, special showers, cabinet baths, redwood baths,
steam or dry heat baths, and the like shall be utilized only by and
under the constant direct personal supervision of a licensed massage
therapist.
O. All equipment and materials utilized by practitioners of massage shall
be in safe and sanitary order and so maintained and operated as to
preclude any danger or hazard to patron or practitioner.
P. No part of a percussor, vibrator, or other device (mechanical or
otherwise) which cannot be appropriately sterilized or sanitized shall
be applied directly to the skin of a patron, but the part of the body
administered to shall be covered with clean towel or napkin or else the
device shall be covered in a similar manner.
Q. No patron who may be deemed to be possibly suffering from an
infectious, contagious, or communicable disease particularly of the body
surfaces shall be provided with any service unless such patron shall
have furnished a certificate from a licensed physician to the effect that
the disease or condition is not of transmissible nature.
R. Notice shall be given to the Director of Health by telephone and
confirmed within 48 hours in writing by the proprietor of a massage
establishment of any infectious, contagious or communicable disease
occurring amongst any employees or massage therapists. No employee
or massage therapist considered affected by such a disease shall
continue in work until approved by the local Director of Health and/
or the Connecticut State Department of Public Health. Each person so
reported shall at the discretion of the Director of Health submit to a
medical examination by a licensed physician and supply such specimens
of body fluids or discharge for examination as may be required.
S. Massage therapists shall not diagnose or treat classified diseases nor
practice spinal or other joint manipulation nor prescribe any medication
or drugs.
T. Heliotherapy may be administered only by a registered physical
therapist because of serious, severe and unpredictable hazards
associated therewith.
U. Appropriate monitoring and safety devices as well as emergency call
systems shall be available as deemed necessary by the Director of
Health in connection with special techniques utilized in a massage
establishment.
§ 269-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 269-16
1:203
V. Temperatures of water baths of any type shall not exceed 105° F. and
patrons shall not be subjected to exposure of more than 30 minutes.
W. Steam cabinet or room bath temperatures shall not exceed 110° F. and
patrons shall not be subjected to exposures exceeding 30 minutes.
X. Dry heat cabinet or room bath temperatures shall not exceed 165° F.
and patrons shall not be subjected to exposures exceeding 30 minutes.
Y. No person shall use for housing, sheltering or harboring of employees,
other persons or animals any massage establishment, or cause or permit
the same or any area directly connected thereto to be used as living or
sleeping quarters by any owners, managers, employees, clients or other
individuals.
§ 269-17. Penalties for offenses.
Every person, except persons who are specifically exempt by this chapter,
whether acting as individual, owner, agent or employee of the owner,
operator or employee of operator, or acting as a participant or worker in any
way, who provides massage therapy or conducts a massage establishment
without first obtaining a permit and paying a permit fee to the Town of
Plainville or shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine
not to exceed $250, and every day of any such continued violation shall
constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 285
PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 158.
Public entertainment — See Ch. 205.
Open burning — See Ch. 219, Art. II.
Littering — See Ch. 257.
§ 285-1. Applicability.60
This chapter shall apply to Norton Park, Paderewski Park, Governor
Trumbull Park, Veterans Memorial Park, Tomasso Nature Park, Hamlin Pond
and the land of the Town of Plainville adjacent thereto unless otherwise
specified herein.
§ 285-2. Hours of operation.61
All parks are open from 6:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. from April 1 through Labor
Day and from 6:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. from the day after Labor Day to
60.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
61.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 269-16 PLAINVILLE CODE § 285-2
1:204
March 31 of the following year. All parks are closed to the public other than
during these hours, and persons found within the parks when closed shall
be subject to arrest as provided by § 285-11C of this chapter.
§ 285-3. Motor vehicles and bicycles.
A. All motor vehicles of any kind, including automobiles, trucks,
motorcycles and scooters, may be driven or parked only in areas
established and designated and shall be in accordance with the posted
directions for such purpose, or upon instruction of any authorized
attendant, except Town of Plainville vehicles in service to the Town.
B. No commercial or industrial vehicle may be operated or parked in any
park, except in service to the Town.
C. No motor vehicle may be operated within any park at speeds in excess
of 15 miles per hour.
D. Parking for the purpose of cleaning any motor vehicle is prohibited.
E. Go-carts, minibikes, all-terrain vehicles and snowmobiles are prohibited
in all parks.
F. The riding of bicycles and the operation of motor vehicles of any kind,
including automobiles, trucks, motorcycles and scooters, are prohibited
on baseball diamonds, tennis courts, pool areas, walking tracks, walking
trails, and picnic areas.
G. No motor vehicle of any kind shall be double parked on any roadway
or driveway unless directed to do so by an authorized attendant, nor
shall any motor vehicle of any kind be parked to block any roadway or
driveway.
§ 285-4. Swimming.
Swimming shall be permitted only in those areas designated for that
purpose and only at such times as a lifeguard is on duty.
§ 285-5. Boating.
Boats shall be permitted on Paderewski Park Pond and Hamlin Pond, at the
risk of the users, under the following conditions:
A. Rowboats and sailboats may not exceed 14 feet in length, and canoes
may not exceed 16 feet in length.
B. A sailboat may be used only on Paderewski Park Pond. A sailboat must
provide level flotation in the event that it is filled with water.
C. The use of any motor of any kind is prohibited, except that on Hamlin
Pond and Paderewski Park Pond an electric outboard trolling motor may
be used on a boat.
D. Boats may be launched only from areas designated for such purpose.
E. The number of persons on board a boat or sailboat shall not exceed the
"persons" carrying capacity as indicated on the capacity label affixed
to the boat or sailboat by its manufacturer or exceed three persons,
whichever is the lesser amount.62
62.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 285-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-5
1:205
F. Each person must wear at all times when in a boat, sailboat or canoe a
personal flotation device of a type approved by the Coast Guard.63
G. Children below the age of 16 shall not be permitted into boats unless
accompanied by an adult.
H. A maximum of 15 boats shall be permitted on Paderewski Park Pond at
any one time, and a maximum of 25 boats shall be permitted on Hamlin
Pond at any one time.
I. Racing, or any other hazardous and/or dangerous conduct in a boat, or
by the user of any boat, is expressly prohibited.
§ 285-6. Fishing.
A. Fishing shall be permitted in Paderewski Park Pond and in Hamlin Pond,
from the shore or from a boat, within the provisions of this section
and §§ 285-2 and 285-11 of this chapter, and within the statutes and
regulations of the State of Connecticut pertaining to fishing.
B. Ice fishing is permitted at Paderewski Park Pond or Hamlin Pond.64
§ 285-7. Ice skating.65
Ice skating is not permitted at Paderewski Park Pond or Hamlin Pond.
§ 285-8. Feeding waterfowl or aquatic life prohibited.
A. No person shall feed waterfowl or aquatic life in any of the Town's parks.
B. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AQUATIC LIFE — Fish, turtles, frogs and other like water-breeding
vertebrates.
FEEDING — Providing edible substance to waterfowl or aquatic life
which may be consumed by them. Feeding shall include, but not be
limited to, hand feeding of waterfowl or placement of food on the ground
or in the water for consumption by waterfowl or aquatic life.
WATERFOWL — Aquatic birds such as Canada geese, ducks, swans and
other like birds.
§ 285-9. Town property and facilities.
The following shall be expressly prohibited in all parks:
A. To willfully mark, deface, injure, tamper with or displace or remove any
buildings, pools, bridges, tables, benches, fireplaces, railings, fences,
paving, waterlines or other public utilities or parts or appurtenances
thereof, signs, notices or placards, whether temporary or permanent,
monuments, stakes, posts or other boundary markers, or other
structures or equipment, facilities or park property or appurtenances
whatsoever, either real or personal.
63.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
64.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
65.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 285-5 PLAINVILLE CODE § 285-9
1:206
B. To willfully damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any tree or plant
or injure the bark of any tree, nor shall any person pick the flowers or
seeds of any plant in any area which is designated as being prohibited to
such action, nor shall any person dig in or otherwise disturb lawn areas
or walk upon planted areas which are designated as being prohibited to
foot travel.
C. To sell any article of any kind without a permit.
D. To light, kindle or use any fire, except in facilities provided therefor by
the Town of Plainville.
E. To injure, hunt, trap, snare, harass, torment or disturb any animal, or
any bird, and to disturb any bird's nest or eggs, within said park.
F. To discharge any fireworks or firearms within the parks without proper
permit.
G. To bring in or dump, deposit, leave or place any dirt, rubbish, waste,
garbage, refuse or other trash anywhere on the grounds of any park or
in any waters in or contiguous to any park.
H. To fail to place in proper receptacles where these are provided any
refuse, waste or trash generated while using the park. Where
receptacles are not provided, all such refuse or trash shall be carried
away from the park by the person responsible for its presence and
properly disposed of elsewhere.
I. To loiter in bathhouse or rest room facilities.
J. To play or practice golf.
K. To use, consume, dispense, sell, drink or have in one's possession beer,
wine, liquors or other alcoholic beverages.
L. To be under the influence of intoxicating liquor or drugs.
M. To ride or walk any horse or pony and to use a horse or pony to pull a
cart, carriage or other vehicle.
N. To have any pet which is not under control or in violation of any statutes
or ordinances.
O. To picnic or lunch in a place other than those designated for that
purpose and in accordance with such rules and regulations as may
be established or to leave a picnic area before a fire for which he is
responsible is completely extinguished and before all trash and refuse
for which he is responsible is disposed of properly as provided in
Subsection H of this section.
P. To use, operate, run or electronically control fuel- or self-powered model
aircraft, boats, rockets, vehicles and drones.66
§ 285-10. Waivers.
The Town Manager or his designated agent is authorized to waive the
provisions of this chapter, provided the waiver shall be in writing.
§ 285-11. Liability; penalties for offenses.
A. The Town of Plainville shall not be liable for the loss of property or the
damage to property of persons using the facilities of said parks.
66.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 285-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-11
1:207
B. Failure to abide by the rules and regulations of this chapter, or rules
established under § 285-12 of this chapter, shall subject the violator to
immediate removal from said park.
C. Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter, or who
shall aid, assist or encourage the violation thereof, shall be fined not
more than $50 for each offense. The violation of any section of this
chapter shall be considered a separate offense. Notwithstanding the
above, whenever a police officer shall find a violation of § 285-3 of this
chapter, he shall serve upon the owner or operator of such vehicle, or
place upon such vehicle, a notice directing the owner or operator thereof
to appear at the Police Department prior to a time specified in said
notice. If any person receiving said notice shall appear as directed and
shall pay a fine of $10, such payment shall bar further prosecution for
violation of § 285-3 of this chapter.
D. In accordance with the provisions of § 52-572 of the General Statutes
of the State of Connecticut, the parents or guardians of any minor
child who willfully or maliciously causes damage to any property or
appointments within said parks shall be liable for such damage.
§ 285-12. Director of Recreation and Parks.
In accordance with the Charter of the Town of Plainville, Chapter VI,
Section 5, the Director of Recreation and Parks, with the approval of the
Advisory Recreation and Park Board, may from time to time establish
further rules for the use of said parks and the facilities therein, which rules
shall be consistent with the ordinances of the Town and the statutes of the
state, and which rules shall have the force of law.
Chapter 292
PEDDLERS, VENDORS AND SOLICITORS
§ 292-1. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of peddler,
itinerant vendor, solicitor or canvasser as defined in § 292-2 of this chapter
within the corporate limits of the Town of Plainville without first obtaining a
license as prescribed herein.
§ 292-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CANVASSER or SOLICITOR — Any person, traveling by foot, animal or
vehicle from house to house in the Town of Plainville, taking or attempting
to take orders for the sale of goods, wares or merchandise for future
delivery, or for services to be performed in the future, whether or not
such solicited sales are by sample, and whether or not deposits or advance
payments are collected.
§ 285-11 PLAINVILLE CODE § 292-2
1:208
PEDDLER — Includes "hawker" and shall mean any person, as defined in
this section, who shall go from place to place in the Town of Plainville selling
or bartering, or carrying for sale or barter, or exposing therefor, any goods,
wares or merchandise, either on foot or from any animal or vehicle.67
PERSON — Any individual or group of individuals associated in any form,
whether principal or agent, unless specifically exempted by statute from the
provisions hereof.
VENDOR or ITINERANT VENDOR — Any person, whether principal or
agent, who engages in a temporary or transient business in the Town of
Plainville, either in one locality or in traveling from place to place, selling
goods, wares, merchandise or foodstuffs.
§ 292-3. Application for license.68
Applicants for a license hereunder must complete and file with the Chief of
Police of the Town of Plainville an annual license application form.
§ 292-4. Public health certificate.69
A. No person making application for a license to peddle or vend foodstuffs
shall be issued such license until he has provided to the Chief of Police of
the Town of Plainville a certificate signed by the Director of Health of the
Town of Plainville. Said certificate shall state that the Director of Health
has approved the methods and equipment utilized by the applicant as
being in accordance with § 19-13-B48 of the Public Health Code of the
State of Connecticut and any other applicable section therein. Prior to
issuance of said certificate, the applicant shall be required to furnish
to the Director of Health a statement of health, signed by a physician,
on the applicant and on any of the applicant's personnel engaged in the
handling of foodstuffs, together with the results of any medical tests
which the Director of Health may deem to be desirable to prevent the
spread of disease within the Town of Plainville.
B. The certificate required by Subsection A of this section may be revoked
at any time by the Director of Health for failure to comply with any
applicable provision of the Public Health Code of the State of
Connecticut. Expiration or revocation of said certificate shall be cause
for immediate revocation of the license issued under § 292-5 of this
chapter.
C. The Director of Health may waive the requirement for such certificate at
his discretion; such waiver shall be provided by him, in writing, to the
Chief of Police of the Town of Plainville.
D. Persons exempt from licensing under § 292-13A or B of this chapter, or
by state law, shall be exempt from the requirements of this section.
67.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
68.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
69.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 292-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 292-5
1:209
§ 292-5. Investigation of applicant; issuance or denial of license.
A. Upon receipt of the application required by § 292-3 of this chapter, the
Chief of Police of the Town of Plainville shall make such investigation as
in his judgment is required to establish the fitness of the applicant in the
interest of the public welfare.
B. If the applicant's fitness is found unsatisfactory, the Chief of Police of
the Town of Plainville shall endorse on such application the reasons for
disapproval and notify the applicant that no license will be issued.
C. If the applicant's fitness is found satisfactory, the Chief of Police of the
Town of Plainville shall approve the application and issue a license to
the applicant upon payment of the license fee as provided in Chapter
215, Fees. Such license shall contain the signature of the issuing officer,
the name and address of the applicant, a description of the nature of
the goods to be sold, the amount of fee paid, the date of issuance and
expiration date of the license, and identifying description of any vehicle
used in such peddling. Each licensee shall receive with his license a
badge or certificate bearing the name of the licensee and the words
"Licensed Peddler, Town of Plainville" or "Licensed Solicitor, Town of
Plainville," as the case may be, together with expiration date of the
license.70
D. No municipal license issued under this chapter shall be valid unless
the holder thereof also holds a valid state license, if such state license
shall be required under the provisions of Chapter 407 of the Connecticut
General Statutes.
§ 292-6. Identification.
A. Such badge shall be worn conspicuously on any outer garment of the
licensee while engaged in peddling, vending or soliciting, and the license
must be shown to any inhabitant of the Town upon request.
B. No such badge or license shall be worn or used by any person other than
the licensee to whom the same was issued.
§ 292-7. Conduct of operations.71
Any person soliciting, vending or peddling within the Town of Plainville,
whether or not required to obtain a license under the provisions of this
chapter, shall conform to the following regulations:
A. The solicitor, vendor or peddler shall conduct himself at all times in an
orderly and lawful manner.
B. The solicitor, vendor or peddler shall give a written receipt for all orders
taken within the Town of Plainville, which receipt shall be signed by the
solicitor, vendor or peddler and shall set forth a brief description of the
goods, wares or merchandise ordered, the total purchase price thereof,
and the amount of the down payment received by the solicitor, vendor or
peddler from the purchaser, if any.
70.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
71.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 292-5 PLAINVILLE CODE § 292-8
1:210
§ 292-8. Noise.72
No peddler, vendor or solicitor nor any person in his behalf shall shout,
make any cry out, blow a horn, ring a bell or use any sound device,
including any loudspeaking radio or sound-amplifying system, upon any of
the streets, alleys, parks or other public places of said Town or upon any
private premises in said Town where sound of sufficient volume is emitted or
produced therefrom to be capable of being plainly heard upon the streets,
avenues, alleys, parks or other public places, for the purpose of attracting
attention to any goods, wares or merchandise which such licensee proposes
to sell.
§ 292-9. Location.
No peddler, vendor or solicitor shall have any exclusive right to any location
in the public streets, nor shall any be permitted a stationary location,
nor shall any be permitted to operate in any congested area where his
operations might impede or inconvenience the public.
§ 292-10. Duty of police.
It shall be the duty of any police officer of the Town of Plainville to require
any person seen peddling, vending or soliciting, and who is not known
by such officer to be duly licensed, to produce his peddler's, vendor's or
solicitor's license and to enforce the provisions of this chapter against any
person found to be violating the same.
§ 292-11. Revocation of license.
A. Licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked by
the Council after notice of hearing for any of the following causes:73
(1) Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained in the
application for license.
(2) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of
carrying on his business as peddler, vendor or solicitor.
(3) Any violation of this chapter.
(4) Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude.
(5) Conducting the business of peddling, vending or soliciting in an
unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of
the peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety or general
welfare of the public.
B. Notice of the hearing for revocation of a license shall be given in writing,
setting forth specifically the grounds of complaint and the time and place
of hearing. Such notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the licensee
at his last known address at least five days prior to the date set for
hearing.
72.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
73.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 292-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 292-12
1:211
§ 292-12. Penalties for offenses.74
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not to exceed $199.
§ 292-13. Exceptions.75
A. This chapter shall not apply to sales by farmers and gardeners of the
produce of their farms, gardens and greenhouses, including fruit,
vegetables and flowers, or to the sale, distribution and delivery of milk,
teas, coffees, spices, groceries, newspapers, meats and bakery goods; to
sales on approval; to conditional sale of merchandise; or to the taking
of orders for merchandise for future delivery when full payment is not
required at the time of solicitation.
B. This chapter shall not apply to salesmen selling goods to retail or
wholesale stores for resale. Any person who has, and has had for the
preceding 12 months, a regular place of business within the Town of
Plainville, and any person employed by or soliciting for any person,
firm or corporation that has, and has had for the preceding 12 months,
a regular place of business within the Town of Plainville shall not be
required to obtain a license before soliciting orders, but all other
provisions of this chapter shall apply to such persons.
§ 292-14. Charitable and civic organizations.76
Charitable, philanthropic, ecclesiastical and civic organizations shall be
exempt from any fees associated with the provisions of this chapter,
provided that each person before peddling, vending or soliciting on behalf
of the same shall register with the Police Department the name and address
of the organization, the name and address of persons intending to peddle,
vend or solicit and the purpose or object therefor. A copy of such
registration shall be provided each registrant.
74.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
75.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
76.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 292-12 PLAINVILLE CODE § 292-14
1:212
Chapter 300
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 180.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 185.
Fires and fire prevention — See Ch. 219.
Historic preservation — See Ch. 238..
Housing Code — See Ch. 243.
Littering — See Ch. 257.
Solid waste — See Ch. 341.
Streets, sidewalks and driveways — See Ch.
347.
§ 300-1. Purpose.
A. This chapter is intended to protect, preserve and promote public health,
safety and welfare; to prevent and control the incidence of
communicable disease; and to reduce environmental hazards to health,
safety and welfare, insofar as they are affected by the maintenance of
residential and nonresidential structures, equipment and premises as
provided by this chapter. This chapter is further intended to provide
minimum standards governing the condition, occupancy and
maintenance of occupied and unoccupied premises and establish
reasonable safeguards for the health, safety and welfare of the
occupants and users of said premises, the community and the general
public. This chapter is intended to maintain and preserve the beauty of
the Town's neighborhoods and to allow for the remediation of blighted
premises as well as the reasonable and peaceful enjoyment of one's real
property pursuant to its zoning designation.
B. This chapter shall establish the minimum standards and responsibilities
for the maintenance of all premises and delegates administrative
responsibility and enforcement powers and creates enforcement
procedures.
C. This chapter is adopted in accordance with the provisions of Connecticut
General Statutes §§ 7-148(c)(7)(H)(xv), 7-148aa and 7-152c.
D. This chapter prohibits any owner, lessee or occupier, as defined herein,
from allowing, creating, maintaining, or causing to be created or
maintained a blighted premises within the Town.
§ 300-2. Scope.
A. This chapter shall apply uniformly throughout the Town to the
maintenance, use and occupancy of all premises now in existence or
hereafter constructed, maintained or modified and shall include:
(1) Dwellings or dwelling units, including one-family and two-family
dwellings and buildings with multiple-unit dwellings.
(2) Lots, plots or parcels of land whether vacant or occupied.
(3) Buildings of non-dwelling use, including commercial properties and
mixed-use properties that may include one or more dwelling units.
(4) Accessory structures to any building.
§ 292-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-2
1:213
(5) All apartments, boardinghouses, group homes, lodging houses,
rooming houses, tenement houses and unrelated family units.
B. Exclusions:
(1) All State of Connecticut and Town of Plainville owned properties.
§ 300-3. Definitions.
The following definitions apply to this chapter:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — A structure, the use of which is customarily
incidental and subordinate to that of the principal building, structure or use
on the same lot.
BLIGHTED PROPERTY or PROPERTY REQUIRING MAINTENANCE — Any
building or structure, or any part of a structure that is a separate unit,
or a parcel of land, or any accessory structure, or fence, where the Town
Manager and/or his/her designee determines that one or more of the
following conditions exists:
The existing conditions pose a serious threat to the health, safety and
welfare of Town citizenry;
A.
The building or structure, or any part of a structure that is a separate
unit, or a parcel of land, or any accessory structure, or fence (the
"premises"), is not being properly maintained, as evidenced by the
existence, to a significant degree, of one or more of the following
conditions:
(1) Missing, broken or boarded windows or doors;
Collapsing or deteriorating exterior walls, roofs, stairs, porches,
handrails, railings, basement hatchways, chimneys, flues, or floors;
(2)
Exterior walls which contain holes, breaks, or loose or rotting
materials or which are not properly surface coated to prevent
deterioration;
(3)
(4) Foundation walls which contain open cracks and breaks;
(5) Tarps and other types of plastic coverings.
Overhang extensions, including but not limited to canopies,
marquees, signs, awnings, stairways, fire escapes, standpipes and
exhaust ducts, which contain rust or other decay;
(6)
Chimneys and similar appurtenances which are in a state of
disrepair;
(7)
(8) Insect screens which contain tears or ragged edges;
Garbage or trash improperly stored or accumulated on the
premises or abandoned vehicles on the premises (unless the
premises is a junkyard licensed by the State of Connecticut);
(9)
B.
§ 300-2 PLAINVILLE CODE § 300-3
1:214
CITATION HEARING OFFICER — An individual(s) appointed by the Town
Manager to conduct hearings authorized by this chapter.
COMMUNITY STANDARD — The local norms regarding the condition,
upkeep, and maintenance of property by an owner or occupier, as
determined by the judgment of a similarly situated reasonable owner or
occupier or member of the same neighborhood.
CONNECTICUT GENERAL STATUTES — Includes any applicable
amendments.
INOPERABLE — Inherently incapable of performing the function for which
designed by virtue of parts missing or essential components broken or
severely damaged, and/or incapable of being registered or fit for the
intended use.
LEGAL OCCUPANCY — Occupancy in accordance with state building and
fire ordinances, local zoning regulations, local housing ordinances and all
other pertinent ordinances.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Includes automobiles, cars, trucks, camp trailers,
boat trailers, mobile homes, motorcycles, or any other wheeled vehicle
designed or used for highway use and required to be registered by the State
Department of Motor Vehicles.
NEIGHBORHOOD — An area of the Town comprised of all premises or
parcels of land, any part of which is within a radius of 1,000 feet of any part
of another parcel or lot within the Town.
(10)Overgrown grass or weeds at least 10 inches in height;
(11)Vermin infestations;
In the case of a fence, broken or rotted boards or an otherwise
dilapidated condition; or
(12)
Any other exterior condition reflecting a level of maintenance
which is not in keeping with community standards or which
constitutes a blighting factor for adjacent property owners or
occupiers or which is an element leading to the progressive
deterioration of the neighborhood;
(13)
The premises is attracting illegal activity as documented in Police
Department records;
C.
The premises is a fire hazard as determined by the Fire Marshal or as
documented in the Fire Department records; and/or
D.
The premises is a factor creating a substantial and unreasonable
interference with the use and enjoyment of other premises within the
surrounding area as documented by neighborhood complaints, police
reports, the cancellation of insurance on proximate properties, or
similar circumstances.
E.
§ 300-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-3
1:215
OWNER/OCCUPIER — Any person, institution, foundation, entity or
authority which owns, leases, rents, possesses, or is responsible for
property within the Town.
PROXIMATE PROPERTY — Any premises or parcel of land within 1,000 feet
of a blighted premises.
SOLID WASTE — Any solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous material,
including but not limited to demolition debris, trash, refuse, and the like.
UNSIGHTLY EQUIPMENT — Includes used or secondhand household,
construction, business or industrial equipment.
UNSIGHTLY MATERIALS — Includes parts of motor vehicles (parts of other
types of vehicles) or old iron, metal, glass, paper, cordage or other waste,
discarded or secondhand material.
VACANT — A period of 60 days or longer during which a building or
structure or part thereof is not legally occupied by human beings.
VACANT PARCEL — A parcel of land with no structure(s) thereon.
VISIBLE BLIGHT — Any condition defined herein as blighted property that
is visible from any public or private proximate land from any viewing angle
on such land.
§ 300-4. Signs, awnings and marquees.
A. Signs. All permanent signs and billboards exposed to public view
permitted by reason of other ordinances or laws shall be maintained in
good repair. Any signs which have excessively weathered or faded or
those upon which the paint has excessively peeled or cracked or whose
supporting members have deteriorated shall be removed forthwith or
put into a good state of repair by the owner of the sign.
B. Awnings and marquees. Any awning or marquee and its accompanying
structural member which extends over any street, sidewalk or other
portion of the premises shall be maintained in good repair and shall
not constitute a nuisance or a safety hazard. In the event that such
awnings or marquees are not properly maintained in accordance with
the foregoing, they shall, together with their supporting members, be
removed forthwith. In the event that said awnings or marquees are
made of cloth, plastic or of similar materials, said cloth or plastic where
exposed to public view shall be maintained in good condition and shall
not show evidence of excessive weathering, ripping, tearing or other
holes. Nothing herein shall be construed to authorize any encroachment
on streets, sidewalks or other parts of the public domain.
§ 300-5. Removal of weeds and similar vegetation.
A. Every owner/occupier of properties upon which a building exists, or who
is in possession of a vacant lot in an approved subdivision which fronts
on a paved public road and to which a public water and/or public sewer
lateral has been provided, shall cut, to a height of not more than 10
inches, all grass, weeds and similar vegetation not planted as a crop to
be harvested or for ornamental purposes.
§ 300-3 PLAINVILLE CODE § 300-5
1:216
B. Every owner/occupier of property shall keep his/her property free from
vegetation of any type which, in the opinion of the Town Manager or his/
her designee, is injurious to public health.
C. Any violation of Subsection A or B shall constitute a nuisance which
may be abated by the Town at the expense of the owner, lessee or any
other person in possession or any one or more of them to whom the
Town Manager or his/her designee has given not less than 10 days'
written notice of intention to abate such nuisance. Such expense may be
collected by the Town in a civil action against any one or more of the
above-named persons responsible therefor.
§ 300-6. Solid waste; storage of materials and equipment.
A. Accumulation restricted. It shall be unlawful for an owner/occupier to
allow solid waste to accumulate anywhere on premises in the Town
in such a manner as to create an offensive, unsightly or unsanitary
condition.
B. Storage requirements. Unless otherwise prohibited by the zoning
regulations of the Town of Plainville, property use resulting in the
stacking or piling of materials, including equipment, even if wanted and
useful, must be so arranged as to prohibit the creation of a blighting
factor to its neighbors. Furthermore, all useful, wanted material,
including equipment, stored out of doors shall be stored in an orderly
fashion and, to the extent reasonably feasible, shall be located in the rear
yard.
§ 300-7. Unsightly materials or equipment.
A. No unsightly materials or equipment shall be stored or kept out of
doors in any residential zone in the Town of Plainville for a period
exceeding five days unless such materials or equipment is intended
for bona fide construction for which a permit has been issued by the
Building Department.
B. No unsightly materials or equipment shall be stored or kept in any
industrial or commercial zone in the Town of Plainville for a period
exceeding five days unless such materials or equipment is intended
for bona fide construction for which a permit has been issued by the
Building Department or screened from public view by means of natural
or artificial screening.
§ 300-8. Inoperable motor vehicles.
A. No unregistered or inoperable motor vehicles shall be stored, parked or
kept out of doors in Plainville for a period exceeding five days.
B. Exceptions.
(1) Licensed garages, service stations, and new or used car lots are
outside the scope of this chapter and such uses shall continue to be
regulated by the provisions of the Plainville Zoning Regulations or by
the Connecticut General Statutes.
(2) This chapter shall not apply to mobile homes which are operable,
capable of being registered, and fit for occupancy.
§ 300-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-8
1:217
(3) This chapter shall not apply to operable unregistered motor vehicles
owned by persons serving in the Armed Forces of the United States
outside the State of Connecticut. Such persons shall be required to
submit evidence satisfactory to the Building Inspector to qualify for
the exception.
(4) In industrial and commercial zones, this chapter shall not apply
to operable commercial vehicles/equipment that may be seasonably
registered due to the nature of the business involved or to operable
commercial vehicles that are not customarily registered because of
the type of work for which they are used, provided they are screened
from public view by means of natural or artificial screening.
§ 300-9. Responsibility for compliance.
The owner or occupant of premises subject to this chapter, including the
agents thereof, shall be jointly and severally obligated to comply with the
provisions of this chapter. Whenever the person, as herein defined, is a
corporation or other legal entity, the statutorily required officers thereof
shall be jointly and severally responsible with that corporation or other legal
entity.
§ 300-10. Complaints; notice of violation.
A. Any individual, civic organization, municipal agency, or Town employee
affected by the action or inaction of an owner/occupier of property
subject to the provisions of this chapter may file a complaint of violation
of this chapter with the Town Manager or his/her designee.
B. The Town Manager or his/her designee, upon his or her determination
whether there is a violation of this chapter, may forward a notice of
violation warning letter to the owner/occupier.
C. Such a notice of violation warning letter from the Town Manager or his/
her designee shall be issued prior to issuing a citation, and the notice of
violation warning letter shall include:
(1) A description of the real estate sufficient for identification;
(2) A statement of the violation(s) alleged to exist and the remedial
action(s) required;
(3) A due date, within a reasonable time, for the performance of any
remedial action(s) required; and
(4) The amount of the fines, penalties, costs or fees that may be imposed
for noncompliance.
D. In addition, the Town Manager or his/her designee may send a copy of
the notice of violation warning letter to each individual or entity with
a recorded lien on the real property by first-class mail addressed to
the lienholder's last known address. However, lack of this notice to any
lienholder shall not relieve the owner/occupier from remediating the
violation(s) or from paying any fine(s).
E. The owner/occupier may not contest a notice of violation warning letter
before a citation hearing officer.
F. Delivery of a notice of violation warning letter or citation to the owner/
occupier shall be by one or more of the following methods:
§ 300-8 PLAINVILLE CODE § 300-10
1:218
(1) By personal delivery to the owner/occupier or by leaving the notice
of violation warning letter or citation at the usual place of abode of
the owner/occupier with a person of suitable age and discretion;
(2) By certified, registered or regular mail addressed to the owner/
occupier at his last known address, with postage prepaid thereon; or
(3) By posting and keeping posted for 24 hours a copy of the notice of
violation warning letter or citation in placard form in a conspicuous
place on the premises.
G. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Town Manager or his/her designee
may elect to first provide informal verbal notice to the owner or owner's
agent and the occupant of the property in an attempt to resolve this
matter prior to formal written notice being sent.
§ 300-11. Citations.
A. If the remedial action(s) specified in the notice of violation warning letter
is not timely performed, the Town Manager or his/her designee shall
issue a written citation to the owner/occupier.
B. A citation shall be in writing and include:
(1) A description of the real estate sufficient for identification;
(2) The violation(s) which is alleged to exist and the remedial action
required;
(3) Detailed information regarding the contents of the notice of violation
warning letter (which may be satisfied by enclosing a copy of such
issued notice of violation warning letter) and the failure of the
owner/occupier to timely perform the corrective actions specified
therein;
(4) The amount of the fines, penalties, costs or fees due for
noncompliance;
(5) A statement that the owner/occupier may contest his liability and
request a hearing before the citation hearing officer by delivering in
person or by mail written notice of objection within 10 days of the
date of receipt of the citation; and
(6) The statement that if the owner/occupier does not timely demand
such a hearing, an assessment and judgment shall be entered
against him without any further notice.
C. Delivery of the citation shall be accomplished in accordance with
§ 300-10F.
D. In addition, the Town Manager or his/her designee may send a copy of
such citation to each individual or entity with a recorded lien on the
real property by first-class mail addressed to the lienholder's last known
address. However, lack of this notice to any lienholder shall not relieve
the owner/occupier from remediating the violation(s) or from paying any
fine(s).
§ 300-12. Hearing.
A. An owner/occupier may request a hearing after receiving a citation. Said
owner/occupier must make his/her request for a hearing to the Town
Manager or his designee within 10 days of his/her receipt of the citation.
§ 300-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-12
1:219
B. The citation hearing officer is designated to conduct hearings in
accordance with Connecticut General Statutes § 7-152c when timely
requested by an owner/occupier who has been cited under this chapter.
C. If the person who is sent notice pursuant to § 300-10 of this chapter
wishes to admit liability for any alleged violation, he may, without
requesting a hearing, pay the full amount of the assessed fines,
penalties, costs or fees in person or by mail to the Town Manager.
Such payment shall be inadmissible in any proceeding, civil or criminal,
to establish the conduct of such person or other person making the
payment. Any person who does not deliver or mail written demand
for a hearing within 10 days of the date of receipt of the citation
shall be deemed to have admitted liability, and the Town Manager shall
certify such person's failure to respond to the citation hearing officer.
The citation hearing officer shall thereupon enter and affirm the fines,
penalties, costs or fees provided for by the applicable ordinances and
shall follow the procedures set forth in Connecticut General Statutes
§ 7-152c(f).
D. Any person who requests a hearing shall be given written notice of the
date, time and place for the hearing. Such hearing shall be held not less
than 15 days nor more than 30 days from the date of the mailing of
notice, provided the citation hearing officer shall grant upon good cause
shown any reasonable request by any interested party for postponement
or continuance. An original or certified copy of the initial notice of
violation issued by the Town Manager or his/her designee shall be filed
and retained by the Town and shall be deemed to be a business record
within the scope of Connecticut General Statutes § 52-180 and evidence
of the facts contained therein. The presence of the Town Manager and/
or his/her designee shall be required at the hearing if such person so
requests. A person wishing to contest his liability shall appear at the
hearing and may present evidence in his behalf. A designated Town
official, other than the citation hearing officer, may present evidence on
behalf of the Town. If such person fails to appear, the citation hearing
officer may enter an assessment by default against him upon a finding of
proper notice and liability under the applicable statutes or ordinances.
The citation hearing officer may accept from such person copies of police
reports, investigatory and citation reports, and other official documents
by mail and may determine thereby that the appearance of such person
is unnecessary. The citation hearing officer shall conduct the hearing in
the order and form and with such methods of proof as he deems fair
and appropriate. The rules regarding the admissibility of evidence shall
not be strictly applied, but all testimony shall be given under oath or
affirmation. The citation hearing officer shall announce his/her decision
at the end of the hearing. If the citation hearing officer determines
that the person is not liable, the citation hearing officer shall dismiss
the matter and enter his/her determination in writing accordingly. If
the citation hearing officer determines that the person is liable for the
violation, the citation hearing officer shall forthwith enter and assess the
fines, penalties, costs or fees against such person as provided by the
applicable ordinances of the Town.
§ 300-12 PLAINVILLE CODE § 300-12
1:220
E. Pending the hearing before the citation hearing officer, no further
enforcement activity as contemplated by § 300-14 shall occur until either
a hearing is held and the citation hearing officer assesses fines,
penalties, costs and/or fees or until the petitioner fails to appear for
a scheduled hearing and the citation hearing officer assesses fines,
penalties, costs and/or fees. This section shall not preclude the accrual of
fines during the period from the issuance of the citation until a hearing
is held.
F. The Town hereby specifically adopts the provisions of Connecticut
General Statutes § 7-152c for the establishment of an appeal and citation
hearing process for considering all appeals under this chapter.
§ 300-13. Appointment of citation hearing officers.
The Town Manager shall appoint, and the Town Council shall confirm, the
number of citation hearing officers he/she deems necessary. Each citation
hearing officer must be a Plainville resident.
§ 300-14. Enforcement; penalties for offenses; lien.
A. The owner/occupier of premises where a violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter shall exist or who shall maintain any building
or premises in which such violations exist may:
(1) Be fined not more than $100 for each violation. Each day that a
violation exists after a citation as described in § 300-11 is given to
the owner/occupier shall constitute a new violation and a fine may
be imposed for each such violation;
(2) Be required to abate the violation at the owner/occupier's expense;
and/or
(3) Be subject to the Town's remediation of the condition(s) and
assessing the costs of said remediation against the subject property
by levying a lien on the subject real estate.
B. A lien on real estate may be recorded by the Town Manager or his/her
designee where the fine for violation of the blighted premises provisions
of this chapter remains unpaid, and such recorded lien shall constitute
a lien upon the real estate against which the fine was imposed from
the date of such fine. Each such lien may be continued, recorded and
released in the manner provided by the general statutes for continuing,
recording and releasing property tax liens. Each such lien may be
enforced in the same manner as property tax liens, including foreclosure
of the real property.
C. Where the Town Manager determines that a blighted condition exists,
or any other violation of this chapter, which finding has become final
through the failure of the owner/occupier to timely seek a hearing to
contest liability before a hearing officer or due to the determination of
the owner/occupier's liability by a hearing officer, the Town Manager or
his/her designee may order the remediation of the condition and assess
the costs against the subject real estate in the form of a lien which
shall be recorded in the land records in the same manner as provided in
Subsection B above and/or Connecticut General Statutes § 12-169b.
§ 300-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-14
1:221
D. In addition to all other remedies and any fines imposed herein, the
provisions of this chapter may be enforced by injunctive proceedings in
the Superior Court. The Town may recover from such owner/occupier
or other responsible person any and all costs, fees, losses or damages,
including reasonable attorney's fees, expended by the Town in enforcing
the provisions of this chapter.
§ 300-15. Appeals; special consideration for elderly or disabled
individuals.
A. Any person aggrieved by any order, requirement or decision of the
citation hearing officer may take an appeal in accordance with
Connecticut General Statutes § 7-152c(g).
B. Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, special consideration
may be given to individuals who are elderly or disabled and who
demonstrate that the violation results from an inability to maintain
an owner-occupied residence and no person with that ability resides
therein. Such special consideration shall be limited to the reduction or
elimination of fines and/or an agreement that the Town or its agents may
perform the necessary work and place a lien against the premises for the
cost thereof in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 300-16. Terms and provisions.
A. Where terms are not specifically defined in this chapter, they shall have
their ordinarily accepted meaning or such meaning as the context may
imply.
B. The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to prevent the
enforcement of other ordinances or regulations of the Town of Plainville.
C. In any case where a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict
with a provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety or health ordinance,
regulation or other provision of the Charter and municipal ordinances of
the Town of Plainville or the State of Connecticut, the provision which
establishes the higher standard for the promotion and protection of the
health and safety of the people of the Town of Plainville shall prevail.
Chapter 314
RENTAL PROPERTY
§ 300-14 PLAINVILLE CODE § 300-16
1:222
ARTICLE I
Certificates of Compliance
[Adopted 12-15-1969; amended 6-7-1982]
§ 314-1. General provisions and definitions.
Provisions and definitions set forth in §§ 243-1 and 243-2 of the Housing
Code of the Town of Plainville are incorporated herein. For the purposes
of this article, "dwelling" shall include all dwellings or dwelling units, and
"Enforcement Officer" shall refer to the Housing Code Enforcement Officer,
or his designee, for the Town of Plainville.
§ 314-2. Inspections.
No owner or agent in charge of a dwelling offered for rent, other than in a
rooming house, motel or hotel, shall allow any person to occupy the same
as a tenant, lessee, or licensee, with or without valuable consideration,
unless said dwelling shall have been inspected subsequent to its most
recent occupancy and prior to any new occupancy and determined to be
in compliance with all the provisions of the Housing Code of the Town
of Plainville, as evidenced by a certificate of compliance issued by the
Enforcement Officer.
§ 314-3. Exceptions.77
Notwithstanding other provisions of this article, no owner or agent need
apply for inspection nor obtain a certificate of compliance covering any
dwelling in a building under five years of age. Notwithstanding other
provisions of this article, no owner or agent need apply for inspection
nor obtain a certificate of compliance covering the same dwelling more
frequently than once every one year.
§ 314-4. Conditions for issuance of certificate of compliance.78
Upon request of the owner or agent authorized to rent a dwelling
(hereinafter referred to as "applicant"), the Enforcement Officer will be
available at a reasonable appointed time within 48 hours, agreed upon by
himself and the applicant, or later, if the applicant requests, to inspect
such dwelling. If such inspection establishes that the dwelling complies with
the standards of the Housing Code, the Enforcement Officer shall issue a
certificate of compliance for said dwelling. Two copies of the certificate
of compliance shall be mailed or handed to the applicant; one copy shall
be posted by the owner or his agent inside the dwelling and shall not
be removed by or at the direction of anyone without the approval of the
Enforcement Officer; and a third copy shall be kept on file in the office of
the Department of Health of the Town of Plainville.
77.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
78.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 314-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 314-5
1:223
§ 314-5. Meaning of certificate of compliance.
Issuance of a certificate of compliance shall not constitute a waiver of any
requirements of the Housing Code of the Town of Plainville. The certificate
of compliance shall not be an admission of liability on the part of the
Enforcement Officer or the Town of Plainville as to the condition of the
dwelling.
§ 314-6. First reinspection.
If said dwelling or dwelling unit does not comply with the Housing Code,
the Enforcement Officer shall furnish the applicant with a written list of
the specific violations which would have to be corrected before a certificate
of compliance could be issued for the dwelling. Upon the representation
of the applicant that the listed violations have been corrected, and upon
the payment of the first reinspection fee, the Enforcement Officer shall
reinspect said dwelling and issue a certificate of compliance or present the
applicant with a further list of violations as above provided.
§ 314-7. Subsequent reinspections.
Whenever any subsequent reinspections are required for any reason
whatsoever, the fee listed for subsequent reinspections shall be paid for
each such reinspection before a certificate of compliance shall be issued.
§ 314-8. Temporary waivers.
Any applicant who is delayed in correcting violations necessary to entitle
him to a certificate of compliance, and who has a written contract for
the performance of the work necessary for compliance, may petition the
Enforcement Officer in writing for a temporary waiver of compliance. There
shall be no fee required for a temporary waiver. The petition shall contain
the information which is reasonably necessary for the Enforcement Officer
to make a decision and shall include a written and signed statement by
the person or corporation under contract specifying the dates of beginning
and completion of the work. If the Enforcement Officer shall find the delay
in the correction of the violation is reasonable, taking into consideration
the availability of persons to do the work and the current workload, and
the work can reasonably be undertaken and completed while the premises
is occupied (or that appropriate provision has been made for housing the
tenant elsewhere during the period when the dwelling will not be
habitable), the Enforcement Officer shall issue a temporary waiver of
compliance, expiring on the date when the corrections should be completed.
The applicant shall, on or before said date, request a reinspection and pay
the reinspection fee. The Enforcement Officer shall reinspect said dwelling
and issue the certificate of compliance or list any remaining violations as
above provided.
§ 314-5 PLAINVILLE CODE § 314-9
1:224
§ 314-9. Appeal.
Any applicant aggrieved by the decision or action of the Enforcement
Officer may appeal to the Housing Code Appeals Board, in accordance with
the provisions and procedures of § 243-3D, E, F, G, H and I of the Housing
Code of the Town of Plainville. The Housing Code Appeals Board shall have
the powers set forth in said subsections.
§ 314-10. Penalties for offenses.
Any owner or agent who shall let for occupancy any dwelling which has
become vacant without first securing a certificate of compliance from the
Enforcement Officer shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a
fine of not less than $50 nor more than $99. Each day that occupancy
continues without the owner or agent securing a certificate of compliance
shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 314-11. Inspection fees.79
Fees for inspections shall be as provided in Chapter 215, Fees.
79.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 314-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 314-11
1:225
Chapter 318
RESTAURANTS
§ 314-11 PLAINVILLE CODE § 314-11
1:226
ARTICLE I
Licensing of Restaurants
[Adopted 10-18-1971]
§ 318-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DIRECTOR OF HEALTH — The duly appointed Director of Health of the
Town of Plainville, or his designated agent.
PUBLIC HEALTH CODE — The Public Health Code of the State of
Connecticut, established pursuant to § 19a-36 of the Connecticut General
Statutes, as existing and periodically amended.80
RESTAURANT — Any establishment dispensing food or beverages for
consumption or preparing food or beverages for off-premises consumption.
§ 318-2. License required; application and issuance.
A. No restaurant shall be operated in the Town of Plainville unless licensed
by the Director of Health.
B. Any person or persons operating or proposing to operate a restaurant
in the Town of Plainville shall apply to the Director of Health for a
restaurant license.
C. Any restaurant already in operation on the date of adoption of this article
shall apply to the Director of Health for a license within 90 days of said
date.
D. Upon receiving application for a restaurant license, the Director of
Health shall inspect the designated premises, and if the premises is
maintained, equipped and operated in accordance with the Public Health
Code, shall issue such license forthwith.
§ 318-3. License renewal and fee.81
Such license shall be renewed annually. The fee for each original license,
and for renewal thereof, shall be as provided in Chapter 215, Fees.
§ 318-4. Annual inspection; suspension or revocation of license.
A. The Director of Health shall inspect all licensed premises from time to
time. If he finds that any restaurant is not being maintained, equipped
or operated in accordance with the Public Health Code, he shall issue
an order to the operator thereof to make such corrections as may be
necessary for compliance with said code within a specified period of
time.
B. If, in the opinion of the Director of Health, code violations are of
sufficiently serious degree, or if any restaurant has failed to comply with
80.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
81.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 318-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 318-4
1:227
a correction order within the specified time period, he may suspend
or revoke such license and prohibit operation of such restaurant until
corrections are made to his satisfaction.
§ 318-5. Penalties for offenses.
Failure to comply with any provision of this article shall result in a fine of
not more than $50.
§ 318-4 PLAINVILLE CODE § 318-5
1:228
ARTICLE II
Outdoor Dining
[Adopted 10-18-2004]
§ 318-6. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to permit the private use of public property for
outdoor restaurant and cafe seating in the Central Commercial Zone. It is
the belief that such activities in a safe and orderly manner will enhance the
vitality of the downtown area.
§ 318-7. Definitions.82
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CENTRAL COMMERCIAL ZONE — As defined and located by the Plainville
Planning and Zoning Regulations and Zoning Map.
OUTDOOR DINING AREA — An open air seating area on or within a public
right-of-way such as a sidewalk and provided by a restaurant located on
adjacent property where restaurant patrons can eat or drink in compliance
with all State Liquor Control Commission regulations.83
PUBLIC PROPERTY — Any portion of the Town's right-of-way not
specifically used for vehicle travel.
RESTAURANT — A public establishment operated primarily for the serving
of food to the general public. Such restaurant may serve liquor on public
property as long as the establishment complies with all applicable State
Liquor Control Commission regulations.
SERVING AISLE — That space assigned to permit passage within the
outdoor dining area.
§ 318-8. Permit procedure.
A. The applicant shall file with the Town Manager's office an application
including a sketch showing the proposed area to be used. Such sketch
shall show the limits of the dining area, remaining sidewalk, utility
structures and/or other sidewalk obstacles and curbing. The permit
application will be reviewed by the appropriate Town officials. A decision
shall be rendered by the Town Council within 45 days of such filing. Any
approval may be contingent upon site-specific conditions in addition to
the general requirements described below. A fee as provided in Chapter
215, Fees, will be assessed.84
B. The permit duration shall be from April 1 to October 31 of each calendar
year. Annual renewals may be submitted after January 15 of each year.
82.Editor's Note: The definition of "cafe" which appeared in this section was repealed time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
83.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
84.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 318-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 318-8
1:229
The annual renewal shall consist of a filing statement stating the
permittee will comply with the conditions of the previous year's
approval, submission of the proper insurance documents and a fee as
provided in Chapter 215, Fees.85
C. Permits may be revoked by the Town for noncompliance with the
conditions of the approval or general conditions described below.
D. Permits shall be nontransferable.
§ 318-9. General requirements.
A. The outdoor dining area shall not interfere with or create hazards or
impair visibility for pedestrians or motorists.
B. The operations and configurations of the outdoor dining area shall
conform to all applicable health, Liquor Commission, fire, and building
codes. Such Town and state governing agencies shall provide the Town
Manager a written sign-off prior to opening such dining area.86
C. The outdoor dining area shall be configured in such a manner that does
not restrict emergency access to the building.87
D. The hours of operation for the outdoor dining area shall be from 10:00
a.m. to 10:00 p.m. daily.88
E. Devices used for shading shall be a nonpermanent type and shall be
safely anchored. No advertising shall be placed on such shading devices.
F. The Town shall pre-approve all furniture, shading devices, barriers and
trash receptacles to be used and located in the outdoor dining area.89
G. No outside audio systems shall be permitted.
H. There shall be no food preparation or cooking within the outdoor dining
area.
I. The serving aisle shall be at least three feet in width.
J. The permittee shall maintain the dining area in a clean and orderly
fashion. All debris which may fall or be blown onto the sidewalk shall be
removed in a timely manner. Proper trash receptacles shall be provided
and maintained. The sidewalk area shall be cleaned on a daily basis.
Failure to clean and maintain the outdoor dining area and surrounding
vicinity shall be grounds to revoke the permit or reject future permit
applications.
K. A barrier or fence shall be placed between the dining area and sidewalk.
Such barrier or fence shall be made of sufficient material to protect the
pedestrian area from the dining space.
L. A minimum five-foot unobstructed pedestrian pass-way as measured
from the curb shall be maintained at all times. At locations where
fire hydrants, utility poles, street signs and the like are found, the
85.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
86.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
87.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
88.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
89.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 318-8 PLAINVILLE CODE § 318-9
1:230
pedestrian unobstructed width may be reduced to 42 inches for a
distance no greater than 10 linear feet. The Town will also consider the
relocation of street furniture if practical. Any costs associated with such
relocation shall be the responsibility of the permittee.90
M. All permit approvals shall be contingent upon the applicant submitting
to the Town Manager's office proof of the following insurance:
(1) A minimum general liability policy of $1,000,000 naming the Town
as an additional insured; and
(2) A liquor insurance policy or equivalent, in the minimum amount of
$1,000,000, naming the Town as an additional insured as required
for all establishments serving alcohol.
N. All tables, chairs, serving equipment, trash receptacles and temporary
barriers shall be removed from the public sidewalk when the outdoor
dining area is not in use.
90.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 318-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 318-9
1:231
Chapter 332
SEWERS
§ 318-9 PLAINVILLE CODE § 318-9
1:232
ARTICLE I
Sewer Use
[Adopted 6-1-1981; amended 3-15-1982]
§ 332-1. Purpose; applicability.
A. This article establishes the procedures for making connections to the
public sewer in the Town of Plainville sanitary sewer system. It also
establishes specific limits for pollutant discharges which by their nature
or by their interaction with sewage will be detrimental to the public
health, cause damage to the public sewer or the water pollution control
facility, pollute the waters of the state, or otherwise create a public
nuisance.
B. This article is intended to:
(1) Inform the public as to the technical and administrative procedures
to be followed in obtaining connection to the Town of Plainville
sanitary sewer system.
(2) Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the sanitary sewer system
which will interfere with the collection and/or treatment system.
(3) Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the treatment system
which will pass through the system, inadequately treated, into the
waters of the state, or the atmosphere, or otherwise be incompatible
with the system.
(4) Improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewaters and
sludges from the system.
C. This article shall apply to the Town of Plainville and to persons outside
the Town of Plainville who are users of the public sewer. Except as
otherwise provided herein, the duly authorized agent or representative
of the Water Pollution Control Authority of the Town of Plainville shall
otherwise implement and enforce the provisions of this article.
§ 332-2. Definitions and word usage.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated. "May" is permissive; "shall" is mandatory.
ACT or THE ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as
the "Clean Water Act," as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD) — The amount of oxygen
required by bacteria while stabilizing decomposable organic matter under
aerobic conditions for five days. The determination of BOD shall be
performed in accordance with the procedures prescribed in the latest
edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater.
BUILDING DRAIN — That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a building's
plumbing which receives the discharges from soil, waste, and other
drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building
sewer, beginning five feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the building
wall.
§ 332-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 332-2
1:233
BUILDING SEWER — The extension from the building drain to the public
sewer or other place of disposal; it may also be called a "house connection."
CATEGORICAL STANDARDS — National Categorical Pretreatment
Standards or pretreatment standards.
COMBINED SEWER — A sewer intended to receive both sewage and
stormwater or surface water.
COMMISSIONER — The Commissioner of the Department of Energy and
Environmental Protection for the State of Connecticut.91
COMPATIBLE POLLUTANT — Biochemical oxygen demand, suspended
solids, pH and fecal coliform bacteria, plus any additional pollutants
identified in the water pollution control facility's NPDES permit, where the
water pollution control facility is designed to treat such pollutants and,
in fact, does treat such pollutants to the degree required by the NPDES
permit.
COMPOSITE SAMPLE — A mixture of aliquot samples obtained at regular
intervals over a time period. The volume of each aliquot is proportional to
the discharge flow rate for the sampling interval. The minimum time period
for composite sampling shall be four hours.
COOLING WATER — Process water in general used for cooling purposes to
which the only pollutant added is heat and which has such characteristics
that it may be discharged to a natural outlet in accordance with federal and
state laws and regulations.
DOMESTIC SEWAGE — Sewage that consists of water and human
excretions or other waterborne wastes incidental to the occupancy of a
residential building or nonresidential building but not wastewater from
water-softening equipment, commercial laundry wastewater, and blowdown
from heating and cooling equipment.
FLOATABLE OIL — Oil, fat, or grease in a physical state such that it will
separate by gravity from sewage by treatment in an approved pretreatment
facility.
GARBAGE — The animal or vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking or serving of foods.
GRAB SAMPLE — A sample which is taken from a waste stream on a onetime
basis with no regard to the flow in the waste stream and without
consideration of time.
HOLDING TANK WASTE — Any waste from holding tanks such as vessels,
chemical toilets, campers, trailers and septage hauling trucks.
INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANT — All pollutants other than compatible
pollutants as defined in this section.
INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER — All wastewater from industrial processes,
trade, or business and is distinct from domestic sewage.
91.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 332-2 PLAINVILLE CODE § 332-2
1:234
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES)
PERMIT — A permit issued pursuant to Section 402 of the Act (33 U.S.C.
§ 1342).
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint-stock company, trust, estate, governmental
entity or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents, or
assigns. The masculine gender shall include the feminine and the singular
shall include the plural where indicated by the context.
pH — The logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen-ion concentration.
The concentration is the weight of hydrogen ions, in grams, per liter of
solution.
PRETREATMENT or TREATMENT — The reduction of the amount of
pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of
pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in
lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutant into a water
pollution control facility. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by
physical, chemical or biological processes, except as prohibited by 40 CFR
403.6(d).
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE — The wastes from the preparation,
cooking, and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree
that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally
prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than 1/2 inch (1.27
centimeters) in any dimension.
PUBLIC SEWER — A common sanitary sewer controlled by a governmental
agency or public utility.
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer which collects and conveys domestic sewage
from residences, public buildings, commercial establishments, industries,
and institutions. A sanitary sewer may also collect and convey permitted
industrial wastewater and unintentionally admitted groundwater,
stormwater, and surface water.
SEPTAGE — The liquids and solids which are removed from a tank used to
treat domestic sewage.
SEWAGE — Human and animal excretions and all domestic and such
manufacturing wastes as may tend to be detrimental to the public health.
SEWAGE COLLECTION SYSTEM — The structures and equipment required
to collect and convey sewage to the water pollution control facility.
SLUG — Any sudden or excessive discharge which exceeds permitted levels
either in terms of pollutant concentration or instantaneous flow rate in such
a manner as to adversely affect the sewage collection system and/or the
water pollution control facility.
SOLUBLE OIL — Oil which is of either mineral or vegetable origin and
disperses in water or sewage at temperatures between 0° C. and 65° C. For
the purposes of this article, emulsified oil shall be considered as soluble oil.
§ 332-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 332-2
1:235
STORM SEWER — A sewer which collects and conveys stormwater or
groundwater.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — The solid matter, measured in milligrams per liter,
which may be in suspension, floatable, or settleable and is removable by
laboratory filtering as prescribed in the latest edition of Standard Methods
for the Examination of Water and Wastewater.
TOXIC POLLUTANT — Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as
toxic in regulations promulgated by the Administrator of the Environmental
Protection Agency under the provisions of Section 307(a) of the Act or other
acts.
USER — Any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of
sewage into the Town of Plainville sewer system.
WATERCOURSE — A natural or artificial channel for the passage of water
either continuously or intermittently.
WATER POLLUTION CONTROL AUTHORITY or AUTHORITY — The Water
Pollution Control Authority of the Town of Plainville or any authorized agent
or representative.
WATER POLLUTION CONTROL FACILITY (WPCF) — An arrangement of
devices for the treatment of sewage and sludge.
§ 332-3. Use of public sewers.
A. The owner(s) of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes situated within
the Town of Plainville and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way
in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public
sanitary sewer of the Town of Plainville may, at the option of the Town
of Plainville and at the owner's expense, be required to install a building
sewer to connect his building drain to the public sewer in accordance
with the provisions of this article, within 90 days after date of official
notice to do so.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or repair any privy, privy
vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended for the disposal of
sewage if public sewers are available.
§ 332-4. Building sewers and connections.
A. No unauthorized person(s) shall uncover, make any connections with
or opening into, use, alter, repair, or disturb any public sewer or
appurtenance thereof.
B. Any person proposing a new discharge into the public sewer system
or a substantial change in the volume or character of pollutants that
are being discharged into the public sewer system shall notify the duly
authorized agent or representative of the Water Pollution Control
Authority of the Town of Plainville at least 45 days prior to the proposed
change or connection.
C. Permit procedure.
§ 332-2 PLAINVILLE CODE § 332-4
1:236
(1) A person intending to connect a building drain from his property to
the public sewer shall first obtain a permit to connect from the duly
authorized agent or representative of the Water Pollution Control
Authority of the Town of Plainville. The application shall be made
on forms provided by the duly authorized agent or representative of
the Water Pollution Control Authority of the Town of Plainville and
it shall be accompanied by a sketch or plan showing the proposed
installation in sufficient detail to enable the duly authorized agent or
representative of the Water Pollution Control Authority of the Town
of Plainville to determine that the proposed installation meets the
requirements of this regulation and other applicable specifications,
codes, and laws. The application shall be signed by the owner of the
premises to be served or his authorized agent and by the qualified
contractor (see Subsection L) who has been chosen to perform the
work of installing and connecting the building drain to the public
sewer. Upon approval of the application and plan, a permit shall
be issued to have the work performed by the stated contractor.
In the event the premises changes ownership before the work is
completed, or if another contractor is chosen to perform or finish the
work, the original permit becomes void, and a new permit must be
obtained by the new parties in interest.
(2) A connection to the public sewer will be made only after the
building's plumbing has been approved by the Town Building Official
in order to ensure that minimum standards are met for the
installation. No trench containing a building drain or connection
to the sanitary sewer shall be backfilled until the duly authorized
agent or representative of the Water Pollution Control Authority of
the Town of Plainville has completed an inspection of and approved
the work. The water level in the trench shall be maintained at a
level below the sewer connection before the cap is removed and
while the connection is being made and until such time as it has
been inspected, approved and backfilled. The contractor shall notify
the duly authorized agent or representative of the Water Pollution
Control Authority of the Town of Plainville 24 hours before starting
any work authorized under this permit.92
(3) Permits to connect to the public sewer may be revoked and annulled
by the duly authorized agent or representative of the Water Pollution
Control Authority of the Town of Plainville for such cause and at
such time as he may deem sufficient, and the Town of Plainville shall
be held harmless as a consequence of said revocation or the cause
thereof. All other parties in interest shall be held to have waived the
right to claim damages from the Town of Plainville or its agents on
account of such revocation.93
D. All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection of
the building sewer shall be borne by the owner(s). The owner(s) shall
92.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
93.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 332-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 332-4
1:237
indemnify the Town of Plainville from any loss or damage that may
directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building
sewer.
E. A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building, except that where one building stands at the rear of another
on an interior lot and no public sewer is available or can be constructed
to the rear building through an adjoining alley, courtyard, or driveway,
the building sewer that provides service for the building which fronts on
the public sewer may be extended to the rear building and the whole
considered as one building sewer, but the Town of Plainville does not and
will not assume any obligation or responsibility for damage caused by or
resulting from any such aforementioned connection.
F. Existing building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings
only when they are found, on examination and test by the duly
authorized agent or representative of the Water Pollution Control
Authority of the Town of Plainville, to meet all requirements of this
article.
G. The size, slope, alignment, and materials of construction of a building
sewer and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe,
jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench and connection of the
building sewer to the public sewer shall all conform to the requirements
of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and
regulations of the Town of Plainville. In the absence of code provisions
or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in
appropriate specifications of the ASTM and WEF Manual of Practice No.
9 shall apply.94
H. Whenever practicable, the building sewer shall be brought to the
building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in
which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public
sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by
an approved means and discharged to the building sewer. Duplex lift
systems shall be provided for commercial and industrial buildings.
I. No person(s) shall make connection of roof downspouts, foundation
drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or
groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is
connected directly or indirectly to a public sewer.
J. All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately
guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from
hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property
disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner
satisfactory to the Town of Plainville.
K. No building sewer shall be constructed within 25 feet of a water supply
well. If a building sewer is constructed within 25 to 75 feet of water
supply well, it shall be constructed in accordance with all applicable
guidelines promulgated by the Commissioner.
94.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 332-4 PLAINVILLE CODE § 332-4
1:238
L. All building sewers shall be installed by a drain layer who posses a valid
license issued under Chapter 393 of the Connecticut General Statutes as
amended.
§ 332-5. Discharge limitations.
A. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any unpolluted waters such
as stormwater, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, or cooling water
to any sanitary sewer.
B. Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such
sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers and
discharged to a watercourse in accordance with all applicable state and federal
laws and regulations.
C. No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed, directly or indirectly, any
pollutant or wastewater which will interfere with the operation or performance
of the WPCF. These general prohibitions apply to all such users of a WPCF
whether or not the user is subject to National Categorical Pretreatment
Standards or any other federal or state pretreatment standards or
requirements. A user shall not contribute the following substances to any
WPCF:
(1) Any liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their nature or quantity are,
or may be, sufficient either alone or by interaction with other substances to
cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the WPCF or to
the operation of the WPCF. At no time shall two successive readings on an
explosion hazard meter at the point of discharge into the sewage collection
system (or at any point in the system) be more than 5% nor any single
reading over 10% of the lower explosive limit (LEL) of the meter.
(2) Solids or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to the flow in
a sewer or other interference with the operation of the WPCF, including
substances such as, but not limited to, grease, garbage with particles
greater than 1/2 inch in any dimension, animal guts or tissues, paunch
manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers,
ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw,
shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, wastepaper, wood,
plastics, gas, tar, asphalt residues, residues from refining or processing of
fuel or lubricating oil, mud or glass grinding or polishing wastes.
(3) Any sewage having a pH lower than 5.5 or having any other corrosive
property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment,
and personnel of the WPCF. The upper limit of pH for any industrial
wastewater discharge shall be established under the discharger's state
discharge permit.
(4) Any sewage containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity, either singly
or by interaction with other pollutants, to injure or interfere with any
wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals
or plant life, create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the WPCF, or
exceed the limitations set forth in a categorical pretreatment standard. A
toxic pollutant shall include but not be limited to any pollutant identified
pursuant to Section 307(a) of the Act.
§ 332-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 332-5
1:239
(5) Any noxious or malodorous sewage, gases, or solids which either singly or
by interaction with other sewage are sufficient to prevent entry into the
public sewers for their maintenance and repair.
(6) Any sewage which, by interaction with other sewage in the public sewer,
releases obnoxious gases, forms suspended solids which interfere with
the collection system, or creates a condition which may be deleterious
to structures and treatment processes or which may cause the effluent
limitations of the WPCF's NPDES permit to be exceeded.
(7) Any substance which may cause the WPCF's effluent or any other product
of the WPCF, such as residues, sludges, or scums, to be unsuitable for the
reclamation process where the WPCF is pursuing a reuse and reclamation
program. In no case shall a substance discharged to the WPCF cause
the facility to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal criteria,
guidelines, or regulations developed under Section 405 of the Act or any
criteria, guidelines or regulations affecting sludge use or disposal
developed pursuant to the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, Clean
Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, or state criteria applicable to the
sludge management method being used.95
(8) Any substance which will cause a WPCF to violate its NPDES permit or the
receiving water quality standards.
(9) Sewage containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or
reduction by the wastewater treatment process employed, or are amenable
to treatment only to such degree that the water pollution control facility
effluent cannot meet the limits stipulated in the Town of Plainville's NPDES
permit.
D. The following described substances, materials, waters, or waste shall be limited
in discharges to public sewers to concentrations or quantities which will not
harm either the sewers or water pollution control facility, will not have an
adverse effect on the receiving stream, or will not otherwise endanger public
property or constitute a nuisance. The Commissioner may set lower limitations
if more severe limitations are necessary to meet the water quality standards
of the receiving stream. The limitations or restrictions on materials or
characteristics of sewage discharged to the public sewer are as follows:
(1) Sewage having a temperature higher than 150° F. (65° C.).
(2) Sewage containing fat, wax, grease, petroleum, or mineral oil, whether
emulsified or not, in excess of 100 milligrams per liter (mg/l) with floatable oil
not to exceed 20 mg/l or containing substances which may solidify or become
viscous at temperatures between 32° F. and 150° F. (0° C. and 65° C.).
(3) Any garbage that has not been properly shredded (see definition of "properly
shredded garbage" in § 332-2). Garbage grinders may be connected to sanitary
sewers from homes, hotels, institutions, restaurants, hospitals, catering
establishments, or similar places where garbage originates from the
preparation of food in kitchens for the purpose of consumption on the premises
or when served by caterers.
(4) Any sewage containing odor-producing substances exceeding limits which may
be established by the Commissioner.
95.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 332-5 PLAINVILLE CODE § 332-5
1:240
(5) Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may
exceed limits established by the Commissioner in compliance with all applicable
state and federal regulations.
(6) Materials which exert or cause:
(a) Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited
to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate).
(b) Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and
vegetable tanning solutions).
(c) Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand or chlorine demand in such
quantities as to constitute a significant load on the water pollution control
facility.
(d) Unusual volume of flow or concentrations of wastes constituting a slug as
defined in § 332-2.
(7) Overflow from holding tanks or other receptacles storing organic wastes.
(8) Sewage with a concentration of pollutants in excess of the following limits:96
Pollutant
Concentration: Parts/Million
(mg/l)
Arsenic as As 0.05
Barium as Ba 5.0
Boron as Bo 5.0
Cyanides as CN (amendable) 0.1
Fluoride as F 20
Chromium (Total) 1.0
Chromium (Cr +6) 0.1
Magnesium as Mg 100
Manganese as Mn 5.0
Copper as Cu 1.0
Zinc as Zn 1.0
Cadmium 0.1
Lead 0.1
Tin 2.0
Silver 0.1
Mercury 0.01
Nickel 1.0
Phosphorus 5.0
Note: All metals are to be measured as total metals.
E. Permit required.97
96.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 332-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 332-5
1:241
(1) In accordance with § 22a-430 of the Connecticut General Statutes as
amended, a permit from the Commissioner of the Department of Energy and
Environmental Protection is required prior to the initiation of a discharge of
any of the following wastewaters to a public sewer:
(a) Industrial wastewater of any quantity.
(b) Domestic sewage in excess of 5,000 gallons per day through any
individual building sewer to a public sewer.
(2) A potential discharger must submit a permit application to the Department
of Energy and Environmental Protection not later than 90 days prior to the
anticipated date of initiation of the proposed discharge.
F. Action by Commissioner.
(1) If any sewage is discharged or is proposed to be discharged to the public
sewers which contains the substances or possesses the characteristics
enumerated in Subsection D of this section, and which in the judgment
of the Commissioner may have a deleterious effect upon the wastewater
facilities, processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or which otherwise
may create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the
Commissioner may, in accordance with § 22a-430(b) of the Connecticut
General Statutes as amended:98
(a) Reject the discharge of the wastes.
(b) Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the
public sewers.
(c) Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge.
(2) If the Commissioner permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste
flows, the design and installation of the equipment shall be subject to the
review and approval of the Commissioner subject to the requirements of all
applicable codes, ordinances and laws.
G. The duly authorized agent or representative of the Water Pollution Control
Authority of the Town of Plainville shall have the right to reject the discharge
of any wastes or require more stringent effluent limitations than required by
the user's permit under § 22a-430 of the Connecticut General Statutes, the
decisions of the Commissioner notwithstanding.99
H. Grease, oil and gross particle separators shall be provided when, in the opinion
of the Commissioner, they are necessary for the proper handling of sewage
containing floatable grease in excessive amounts, as specified in Subsection
D(2), or any flammable wastes, sand, or other harmful substances, except that
such separators shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling
units. All separators shall be of a type and capacity approved by the
Commissioner and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for
cleaning and inspection. In the maintaining of these separators, the owner(s)
shall be responsible for the proper removal and disposal by appropriate means
of the captured material and shall maintain records of these dates and means
of disposal which are subject to review by the Commissioner. Any removal and
97.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
98.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
99.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 332-5 PLAINVILLE CODE § 332-5
1:242
hauling of the collected materials shall be performed by a waste disposal firm
which possesses a valid license from the State Department of Public Health
under § 20-341d of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.100
I. Where pretreatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided or required for
any sewage, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective
operation by the owner(s) at his expense.
J. When required by the Commissioner, the owner of any property serviced by
a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable structure
together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building
sewer to facilitate observations, sampling, and measurement of the wastes.
Such structure, when required, shall be accessible and safely located and
shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the Commissioner.
The sampling structure shall be located at a point along the industrial waste
stream where a representative sample of the industrial wastewater may be
obtained prior to its being diluted by domestic sewage in the building sewer.
The structure shall be installed by the owner at his expense and shall be
maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
K. All industries discharging into a public sewer shall perform such monitoring of
their discharge as required by the Commissioner in any state discharge permit
issued pursuant to § 22a-430 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended,
including but not limited to installation, use, and maintenance of monitoring
equipment, keeping records and reporting the results to the Commissioner.
Such records shall be made available upon request of the Commissioner or the
Authority.101
L. All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of sewage to which
reference is made in this article shall be determined in accordance with the
latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association. Sampling
methods, location, times, durations, and frequencies are to be determined on
an individual basis subject to the stipulations and general conditions of the
discharger's state discharge permit.
M. No statement contained in this article shall be construed as preventing any
special agreement or arrangement between the Town of Plainville Water
Pollution Control Authority and any industrial concern whereby an industrial
waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the Town of
Plainville Water Pollution Control Authority for treatment, provided that such
agreements do not contravene any requirements of existing state or federal
regulations and are compatible with any user charge in effect.
N. Upon the promulgation of the federal categorical pretreatment standard for a
particular industrial subcategory, the federal standard, if more stringent than
limitations imposed under this article for sources in that subcategory, shall
supersede the limitations imposed under this article.
O. No user shall increase the use of process water in an attempt to dilute a
discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve
compliance with the limitations contained in the federal categorical
100. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
101. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 332-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 332-5
1:243
pretreatment standards or in any specific pollutant limitations which may be
developed by the Commissioner.
P. Each user shall provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited
materials or other substances regulated by this article. Facilities to prevent
accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained
at the owner's or user's own cost and expense. The Commissioner may require
that plans showing facilities and operating procedures be submitted for review
and approval prior to construction of the facilities.
(1) Within five days following an accidental discharge, the user shall submit
to the Authority and the Commissioner a detailed written report describing
the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to
prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the
user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred
as a result of damage to the WPCF, fish kills, aquatic plants, or any other
damage to persons or property, nor shall such notification relieve the user
of any fines, civil penalties, or other liability which may be imposed by this
article or other applicable law.
(2) A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other
prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of a
dangerous discharge. Employers shall ensure that all employees are
advised of the emergency notification procedure.
§ 332-6. Protection from damage.
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break,
damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure,
appurtenance, or equipment which is a part of the sewage collection system
or water pollution control facility.
§ 332-7. Right of entry; powers and authority.
A. The duly authorized agent or representative of the Water Pollution
Control Authority of the Town of Plainville bearing proper credentials
and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the
purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and
testing in accordance with the provisions of this article.
B. While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to
in Subsection A, the duly authorized agent or representative of the Water
Pollution Control Authority or duly authorized employees of the Town
of Plainville shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises
established by the user. The user shall be held harmless for injury or
death to the Town of Plainville employees and the Town of Plainville
shall indemnify the user against loss or damage to its property by the
Town of Plainville employees and against liability claims and demands
for personal injury or property damage asserted against the user and
growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may
be caused by negligence or failure of the user to maintain safe conditions
as required in § 332-5J.102
102. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 332-5 PLAINVILLE CODE § 332-7
1:244
C. The duly authorized agent or representative of the Water Pollution
Control Authority of the Town of Plainville bearing proper credentials
and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties
through which the Town of Plainville holds a duly negotiated easement
for the purposes of repair and maintenance of any portion of the sewage
works lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any,
on said easement shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the
duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property.
§ 332-8. Penalties for offenses.
A. Any person found to be in violation of any provisions of this article,
except § 332-6, shall be served by the Town of Plainville with written
notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time
limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within
the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations.
B. Any person who continues any violation beyond the time limit provided
for in Subsection A shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and on conviction
thereof shall be fined in the amount not exceeding $100 for each
violation. Each day in which any such violation shall continue shall be
deemed a separate offense.
C. Any person who is found to be in violation of any of the provisions of this
article shall become liable to the Town of Plainville for any expense, loss
or damage occasioned the Town of Plainville by reason of such violation.
D. Any person who is found to be in violation of § 22a-430 of the
Connecticut General Statutes as amended shall be subject to a monetary
penalty or forfeiture under § 22a-438 of the statutes.103
103. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 332-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 332-8
1:245

ARTICLE II
Collection of Charges
[Adopted 11-15-1982]
§ 332-9. Designation of collector.104
Pursuant to § 7-258 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended, the
Town Council of the Town of Plainville hereby designates the Revenue
Collector of the Town of Plainville as the collector of sewage system
connection and use charges.
§ 332-10. Authority of collector.105
The Revenue Collector, as the collector of sewage system connection and
use charges, shall have the authority to collect such charges in accordance
with the provisions of the general statutes for the collection of property
taxes.
104. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
105. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 332-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 332-10
1:247

ARTICLE III
Installment Payments of Sewer User Charges
[Adopted 3-21-1994; amended 8-2-2004; 11-15-2004]
§ 332-11. Authority and findings.
Pursuant to § 7-255 of the Connecticut General Statutes, the Town Council
sitting as the Water Pollution Control Authority is authorized to provide for
the payment of sewer user charges in installments. The Town Council, after
investigation and study, finds it in the best interest of the Town to implement
installment payments of sewer charges.
§ 332-12. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BILLING PERIOD — The billing period of each account shall be from
the current calendar year's November 1 to the following calendar year's
October 31.
CONSUMPTION PERIOD — The previous winter quarter as determined by
the sewer user's water utility, Valley Water Systems or other water system.
MINIMUM CHARGE — A charge assessed to those accounts that water
consumption in the previous winter was less than or equal to 1,750 cubic
feet.
REGULAR SEWER USER ACCOUNTS — Accounts of those users classified
as residential, commercial, industrial, minimum charge or well user.
RESTRICTED OCCUPANCY SEWER USER CHARGE — The sewer user
charge assessed, by special agreement only, to those sewer users whose
occupancy is restricted by an owners' association's or other entity's bylaws.
Such bylaws must restrict occupancy of the properties to no greater than six
months per year. Such restricted occupancy sewer user charge will equal
75% of the minimum charge.
SEWER USER — An individual, firm, entity, or corporation, public, private
or municipal, which owns or is in legal possession of real estate that is built
upon and is served or benefits by its connection to the sewer system.
SEWER USER CHARGES — Charges levied on users of the sanitary sewer
system and treatment facility for the payment of debt service, operational
expenses and maintenance costs. Charges shall assure that each user of
the sewer system pays its proportional share of the cost of the services
provided.
SEWER WATER CONSUMPTION — The amount of water consumed during
the winter quarter multiplied times four or other negotiated consumption
rate.
SPECIAL SEWER USER ACCOUNTS — Accounts of those users that are
charged by special agreement due to unusual usage. The charges may
§ 332-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 332-12
1:249
be based on but not limited to per capita usage, seasonal usage or other
appropriate deemed method.
WELL CHARGE — A charge assessed to those accounts that are connected
to the sewer system and do not receive their domestic water from Valley
Water Systems or any other water utility.
§ 332-13. Billing procedure.
A. The Revenue Collector shall prepare and mail statements to all accounts
during November of each year. These statements represent charges for
the current billing period's sewer use.
B. The sewer user charge shall be paid semiannually, November 1 and
May 1. Each installment shall equal 1/2 of the total charge, except the
restricted occupancy charge, which shall be paid annually November
1. All bills shall be paid in full within 30 calendar days of those dates.
Delinquent accounts shall pay interest, shall be subject to liens upon
their real estate and shall be subject to penalties in the same manner as
property liens as provided by the Connecticut General Statutes.
C. The property owner, whether prior or new, shall be responsible for
payment of all sewer user fees attributed to the parcel of land, with
nonpayment making said realty subject to being liened.
D. Sewer user fees shall be assessed based upon the water consumption of
the previous winter quarter as provided by Valley Water Systems or any
other applicable water utility. Those accounts in which the winter water
consumption is less than 1,750 cubic feet shall be assessed the minimum
charge. Well users shall be assessed the well user charge.
E. Any user that believes its sewer user fee was improperly calculated
or was inequitable may petition to the Water Pollution Control
Superintendent for an adjustment within 60 calendar days of the due
date of such charges, first due date November. The Water Pollution
Control Authority shall appoint a committee of three individuals, the
Director of Technical Services, Revenue Collector and the Water
Pollution Control Superintendent. This committee shall review the
charges and recommend to the Authority whether any adjustment is
warranted. The Authority shall receive the committee's recommendation
within 45 days of the Water Pollution Control Superintendent receiving
the initial inquiry. The party requesting reconsideration of its user
charge shall be responsible for providing all reasonable information,
data and explanations why the charge should be adjusted. The
recommendation shall be based on the information provided.
§ 332-14. Construal with state or federal regulations.
This article shall not be construed to conflict with any state or federal
statute, rule or regulation.
§ 332-12 PLAINVILLE CODE § 332-14
1:250
Chapter 341
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Recycling and Solid Waste Commission — See
Ch. 14, Art. X.
Open burning — See Ch. 219, Art. II.
Littering — See Ch. 257.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 300.
§ 332-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 332-14
1:251

ARTICLE I
Transfer Station
[Adopted 1-3-2005]
§ 341-1. General provisions.
The Town of Plainville operates a transfer station on Granger Lane which is
open to all residents of the Town of Plainville for the purpose of transferring
acceptable burnable, nonburnable and recyclable wastes generated within
the Town of Plainville. No waste shall be accepted at the transfer station
which originated from any source outside the boundaries of Plainville or
transported in commercial vehicles unless prior written approval is granted
by the Town Council.
§ 341-2. Authority of operator and attendant.
The certified transfer station operator and/or attendant shall have the
authority to request each patron to provide identification demonstrating
residency in the Town of Plainville. Additionally, the transfer station
operator and/or attendant shall have the authority to inspect the materials
and reject any and all unacceptable items, direct patrons to the proper
disposal areas and determine the appropriate fee based on the materials to
be disposed and the estimated volume and/or weight of the materials.
§ 341-3. Acceptable and unacceptable materials.
A. The following materials will be accepted at the transfer station:
household waste, household appliances, furniture, mattresses/box
springs, brush (four feet maximum length, less than six inches in
diameter), leaves, miscellaneous metals (maximum length and width six
feet, barrels both ends removed and fluids cleaned), tires (maximum two
per load removed from rims), waste motor oil and antifreeze.
B. Items not accepted are the following: hazardous materials, building
materials, asphalt roof shingles, sheetrock and plaster, demolition
materials, stones, concrete, plumbing fixtures, ceramics, stumps, logs
(greater than six inches), and motor vehicle parts (including batteries).
C. Those items not specifically listed may be accepted or rejected at the
discretion of the certified transfer station operator and/or attendant.
D. A listing of acceptable and unacceptable items will also be posted at
the transfer station. The dumping of unacceptable items, including
hazardous, volatile, highly flammable or explosive items, shall not be
permitted. Violators shall be prosecuted to the fullest extent permitted
by law.
§ 341-4. Hours of operation.
The hours of operation for the transfer station shall be as determined by
the Town Council. However, the certified transfer station operator has the
discretion to close the transfer station during those times when weather
conditions or other circumstances create conditions that are deemed unsafe
for transfer station operations.
§ 341-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 341-5
1:253
§ 341-5. Fee schedule.106
Wastes will not be accepted at the transfer station except upon payment of a
fee. This fee will be based upon the total volume accepted, type of materials
and the means in which the material is transported to the transfer station.
The fee schedule shall be as provided in Chapter 215, Fees.
§ 341-6. Repealer.
Upon the effective date of this article, the former ordinance titled "Town
Transfer and Recycling Station Ordinance" adopted by the Town Council
February 22, 1988, will become null and void.
106. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 341-5 PLAINVILLE CODE § 341-6
1:254
ARTICLE II
Recycling and Solid Waste Handling
[Adopted 9-19-2011]
§ 341-7. Purpose.
This article is adopted by the Town of Plainville as part of a long-term plan
for safe and sanitary disposal of solid waste and to establish measures to
assure compliance of persons within the Town boundaries and of collectors
with the requirements of state statutes for separation, collection,
processing and marketing of municipal solid waste, recyclables, electronic
waste and household hazardous waste.
§ 341-8. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APARTMENT COMPLEX — A room or a group of related rooms, among
similar sets in one building, used for both residential and commercial
purposes.[Added 10-5-2015]
BULKY WASTE — Those materials as designated by the Town and posted
in the Town Clerk's office, excluding electronic waste, hazardous waste,
recyclable materials and unacceptable materials or other construction,
demolition and/or land clearing debris, whichever is more current.107
COMMERCIAL WASTE — Nonresidential waste; most current listing of
materials is posted in the Town Clerk's office.
CONDOMINIUM ASSOCIATION or ASSOCIATION — Any condominium
association of two or more residential condominium units located within
the Town; the term shall encompass both the association and its individual
members. Residential units which have not been granted a certificate of
occupancy and/or commercial units are excluded from the provisions of this
article.
CONTRACTOR — A person or firm engaged by the Town to collect,
transport or dispose of solid waste.
ELECTRONIC WASTE (E-WASTE) — Electronic equipment which any
governmental agency or unit having appropriate jurisdiction shall
determine from time to time is harmful, toxic or dangerous, or otherwise
ineligible for disposal. A complete up-to-date listing of material will be
posted in the Town Clerk's office.
EQUIPMENT — All containers used for the storage of waste material,
stationary compaction units, stationary bailing units, waste material loading
devices and such other on-site devices as may be required by the contractor.
107. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 341-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 341-8
1:255
HAZARDOUS WASTE — That portion of solid waste which, by reason of
its composition or characteristics, is hazardous waste as defined in the
Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 U.S.C. § 6901 et seq., and the regulations
thereunder, or in § 22a-209-1 of the Regulations of Connecticut State
Agencies, and any succeeding legislation or regulations or amendments to
the foregoing, or any other materials which any governmental agency or
unit having appropriate jurisdiction shall determine from time to time are
harmful, toxic or dangerous, or otherwise ineligible for disposal through
a resource recovery facility or other permitted facility for disposal of
residential waste.
MIXED-USE PROPERTY — A property consisting of multiple related rooms,
among similar sets in one building, used for both residential and
commercial purposes.[Added 10-5-2015]
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Segregated and separated from residential
waste; clean food and beverage containers; paper products, including
newspapers, magazines, catalogs, junk mail, office paper, and cereal boxes;
glass and metal food and beverage containers; plastics Nos. 1 through 7;
corrugated cardboard; or other materials as designated by the Town or any
governmental agency or unit having appropriate jurisdiction, whichever is
more current. A complete up-to-date listing of material will be posted in
the Town Clerk's office. Leaves, yard waste, storage batteries, waste oil and
scrap metal shall be disposed of at disposal sites designated by the Town
and posted in the Town Clerk's office.
RESIDENTIAL WASTE — The type of waste normally collected from
residential areas, including but not limited to garbage, trash, rubbish,
refuse, and offal, excepting however bulk waste, electronic waste,
hazardous waste, recyclable materials and unacceptable waste. A complete
up-to-date listing of material accepted for collection will be posted in the
Town Clerk's office.
TOWN — The Town of Plainville.
UNACCEPTABLE WASTE — That portion of mixed residential waste
excluding hazardous waste but including, without limitation, explosives,
pathological and biological waste, radioactive materials, ashes, foundry
sand, earth, sand, stones, sewage sludge (unless processed to permit
incineration), cesspool and other human waste, human remains and animal
carcasses, motor vehicles, including such major motor vehicle parts as
automobile transmissions, rear ends, springs and fenders, agricultural and
farm machinery and equipment, yard waste (branches, leaves, twigs, grass
and plant cuttings), marine vessels and major parts thereof, any other
large machinery or equipment (including white goods), liquid wastes, or
nonburnable construction materials and/or demolition debris that may
present a substantial endangerment to public health or safety, may cause
applicable air quality or water effluent standards to be violated by the
normal operation of a resource recovery facility, or has a reasonable
possibility of adversely affecting the operation, or as directed by the Town.
§ 341-8 PLAINVILLE CODE § 341-9
1:256
§ 341-9. Commercial collection and disposal of solid waste and
recycling.
A. Obligation to register.
(1) Any person who operates or wishes to operate as a solid waste
collector in the Town shall apply for registration as a solid waste
collector with the Town in the manner prescribed by this article
(pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes Chapter 446D,
§ 22a-220a). Any person operating as a solid waste collector within
the Town will be subject to the requirements and penalties provided
in this article.
(2) All persons desiring to register as solid waste collectors must apply
to the Town of Plainville Town Manager, or designee, on forms
provided by the Town. Those forms shall require the registrant to
furnish all information requested, including but not limited to:
(a) The name of the business;
(b) The names of all partners, officers or proprietors of the business;
(c) A listing and description of the vehicles to be used for solid waste
collecting and hauling in the Town;
(d) The names and addresses of all customers presently served, if
any, within the Town;
(e) The approximate tonnage of solid waste expected to be collected
each week;
(f) The names of all other communities serviced by the registrant;
and
(g) Evidence of insurance in the amount of at least $1,000,000 or
such other amounts as the Town Council shall determine.
(3) A registered solid waste collector shall update the information
required at least once yearly at the time the registration is renewed.
(4) Registration shall be effective until the following June 30 and shall be
renewed on an annual basis during the month of June of each year.
B. Annual registration. Collectors must register annually. Initial
registration and yearly renewal fees shall be as provided in this article.
The annual registration period shall be from July 1 to June 30 of the
following year, and registration fees shall not be prorated. The Town
Manager, or designee, shall mail written notice of the approval or denial
of an application for registration as a solid waste collector to the
applicant within 30 calendar days of receipt.
C. Prohibition on collection, transportation and disposal by unregistered
collectors. All unregistered solid waste collectors and all solid waste
collectors whose registration has been suspended or revoked are
prohibited from engaging in the business of collecting, transporting or
disposing of solid waste generated within the Town. Violations will be
determined on a per collection violation basis (not daily).
D. Location for disposal. Every solid waste collector and every other person
disposing of solid waste generated within the Town shall dispose of that
solid waste as follows:
(1) The designated location of disposal for solid waste is currently
Bristol Resource Recovery Facility, 170 Enterprise Drive, Bristol, CT
§ 341-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 341-9
1:257
06010. Recyclable materials are currently disposed of at Murphy
Road Recycling, 655 Christian Lane, Berlin, CT 06037.
(2) In cases of emergency the Town may direct registered collectors to
an alternative facility.
(3) Should the Town's designated facilities change, notice of said change
will be provided to collectors with 90 days prior to change.
(4) In addition to designating a disposal site for acceptable residential
waste, the Town may from time to time designate or identify
additional sites for disposal of unacceptable waste, e-waste,
hazardous waste, or acceptable solid waste in excess of the amount
to be disposed of at the primary designated site. Those sites may
include transfer stations for the convenience of residents, landfills,
or any other type of facility deemed appropriate by the Town. If any
person will be required to use a particular site, that site shall be
designated in the manner provided in Connecticut General Statutes
§ 22a-220a. If a location is not designated the collector should
dispose of said material at a site of its choosing, legally able to
accept such material.
(5) Usage of an undesignated facility will result in violation and fines
to be determined on a per collection violation basis (not daily) and
suspension of registration.
E. Enforcement. The Town Manager may refuse to grant registration to
any applicant, or may suspend the registration of any registered solid
waste collector, if that person violates any provision of this article, is
not insurable in accordance with this article, or is otherwise deemed
to be unsuitable. A denial or suspension of registration may not exceed
a period of 180 days for any one violation, provided that repeated
or willful violations of this article may result in permanent refusal or
revocation of registration. The following procedure dictates the process
of registration, denial of registration, and any appeals that arise therein:
(1) No denial, suspension or revocation notice is effective until the
person adversely affected has been notified in writing of that
decision and the reason for it and has been afforded a prompt
opportunity to appear at an informal hearing before the Plainville
Town Manager, or designee, for the purpose of responding to those
reasons.
(2) Any person aggrieved by an initial denial, suspension or revocation
of registration may appeal that decision to the Town Council by
filling a notice of appeal with the Town Clerk within 15 business days
after the informal hearing provided under Subsection E(1) of this
section is held and the decision affirmed by that official. The Clerk
shall immediately notify the Town Council of that appeal.
(3) A hearing shall be scheduled before the Town Council for a date not
more than 30 days after the notice of appeal is filed. The hearing
may be postponed or continued to a later date not more than one
time and the later date must be no more than two weeks after the
original date. Written notice of the hearing shall be given by the
Town Clerk to the person taking the appeal and to any person who
§ 341-9 PLAINVILLE CODE § 341-9
1:258
requests notice of the hearing. The hearing may be at a regular or
special meeting of the Town Council.
(4) At that hearing, the person aggrieved shall be permitted to present
evidence and witnesses. No formal rules of evidence shall apply, but
the Town Council may exclude irrelevant or duplicative evidence.
The Town Council shall make its decision within 45 days of the
date the notice of appeal is filed. The decision may uphold the
decision denying, suspending or revoking the registration, reverse
the decision and order the registration granted or reinstated, or
order the registration granted or reinstated with modifications. The
decision of the Town Council shall be final.
F. Penalty. Every person who violates any provision of this section shall
be guilty of a violation, as defined in Connecticut General Statutes
§ 53a-27(a), and shall be subject to maximum fine for each collection
or day that the violation continues. Fines for failure to register, failure
to utilize appropriate location of disposal, violation of prohibition and
registration and annual renewal shall be imposed by the Town Council of
up to $1,000.108
§ 341-10. Residential curbside collection.
A. Collection. Residents and owners of residential properties eligible for
Town collection of residential wastes shall put all waste and recyclable
materials in Town-provided collection carts and place such containers
near the street or curb locations of their respective property not sooner
than 12 hours before the pre-announced scheduled collection day for
their respective locations. Collection carts are to be placed at the curb
no later than 6:00 a.m. on the designated collection date. Collection
carts shall be promptly and properly removed from such locations within
12 hours after collection. The collector of solid waste shall not be
required to make collections except as specified herein.109
B. Eligible properties for Town collection of residential waste and
recyclable material.
(1) Eligible properties are:
(a) One- to four-family dwellings.
(b) Any multifamily dwelling which received Town collection of
residential waste and recyclable materials on or before
September 1, 2011.
(c) Churches except those which produce volume of waste greater
than that produced by dwellings in Subsection B(1)(a) above.
(d) Group homes.
(e) A food pantry and the Masonic Lodge.
(f) Mixed-use property where the ground floor may have a
professional or commercial use and the upper floors have
residential use not exceeding four dwellings.
(g) Plainville campgrounds.
108. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
109. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 341-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 341-10
1:259
(h) Mobile homes where collection carts are placed on a Town
street.
(i) Residential dwellings where the lot may be partially in the Town
and partially in a bordering town, provided that the structure is
located in the Town.
(2) The number of collection carts for residential waste and recyclable
materials provided without charge for each eligible property shall
be determined in the sole discretion of the Town Manager or his
designee. Eligible properties seeking additional collection carts, if
approved by the Town Manager or his designee, shall be charged a
fee as set forth in § 341-15.110
(3) The Town Council may, in its sole discretion, determine additional
eligible properties.
C. Collection carts. Carts for the collection of recyclable materials and
mixed residential waste will be provided by the Town in the following
manner:
(1) Each residential address will receive one collection cart for waste
and one collection cart for recyclable materials.
(2) Collection carts will be supplied by the Town of Plainville of a
size deemed appropriate. All other containers will be deemed
inappropriate and waste placed in them will not be collected.
(3) Collection carts are the property of the Town and shall not be
removed from their assigned property.
(4) Residents may not place any acidic, flammable, or hazardous wastes,
e-waste, or unacceptable wastes in collection carts or equipment.
(5) Collection carts shall not be marked, tagged, or otherwise
individually identified as property of a person (examples include
spray paint markings, stickers, address numbers, carved letters or
addresses, and the like).
(6) Collection carts shall not be destroyed, mangled, modified, or
altered in any form, including use for the incineration of material.
(7) Collection cart loss or damage is the responsibility of the property
owner. There shall be a fee, as determined by the Town Council,
for the replacement of collection carts should there be any loss or
damage as described above. The only instances where this is waived
are theft, contractor neglect or normal, reasonable wear and tear, as
determined by the Town Manager or his designee. Theft of collection
cart should be promptly reported to police. A copy of the police
report will be required before a new collection cart is obtained and
fee is waived.111
D. Collection cart placement. Carts shall be placed at curbside as described
by instructions prepared and distributed by the Town.
E. Materials collected. The Town will collect residential waste in a
collection cart identified for this purpose and recyclable materials in
another designated collection cart. Bulky waste will disposed of as
110. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
111. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 341-10 PLAINVILLE CODE § 341-10
1:260
described below. Materials collected shall be as defined in § 341-8,
Definitions. Only residential waste and recyclable material will be
collected. Any other products included, resulting in a contamination, will
result in penalties as provided in § 341-14 of this article.112
F. Collection. Collection shall occur in accordance with a schedule as
promulgated by the Town. The schedule shall be published in a
newspaper having a general circulation in the Town at least 30 calendar
days in advance.113
G. Bulky waste. There will be at least one opportunity a year for residents
to dispose of bulky waste. Specifics of disposal, including location, times,
and materials collected, will be published at least 30 calendar days in
advance in a newspaper having a general circulation in the Town.114
H. Additional collection cart. Each residence may request one additional
collection cart for recyclable materials. Each residence may also request
one additional collection cart for residential waste. There shall be an
additional yearly fee for each additional collection cart as determined by
the Town Council. Residential waste collection carts shall cost more than
recyclable materials collection carts. Distribution of additional collection
carts shall be in a manner as determined or directed by the Town.
I. Violations. Every person who violates any provision of this section or
any other applicable provision shall be subject to fines as annually
determined by the Town Council.
§ 341-11. Condominium collection.
A. Condominium association collection of recyclable materials and
residential waste.
(1) The Town intends to continue picking up residential waste and
recyclable materials from condominiums on a regular basis as began
on or about August 1, 1989.
(2) It is the intent of the Town to continue to engage an outside collector
or waste contractor to perform condominium waste collection for the
Town. If an outside collector or contractor is used for this service, the
Town will contribute an amount equal to that currently being spent
for residential waste collection toward the per annum condominium
waste collection fee charged by said collector or contractor. Each
condominium association shall be responsible for that sum which is
in excess of the amount contributed by the Town.
B. Condominium association duties and responsibilities.
(1) Each condominium association will hold harmless and indemnify the
collector or contractor against all claims, lawsuits and any other
liability for injury to persons or damage to property arising out of
the possession or use of the collector's or contractor's equipment
("equipment") by said association.
112. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
113. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
114. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 341-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 341-11
1:261
(2) Each condominium association shall be responsible for the
cleanliness and safekeeping of the equipment located on its
premises.
(3) All equipment furnished by the collector or contractor for use by any
association, which said association has not purchased, shall remain
the property of the collector or contractor and said association shall
have no right, title, or interest in it.
(4) No association shall make any alterations or improvements to the
equipment located on its premises without the prior written consent
of the collector or contractor.
(5) No association shall overload the equipment nor use it for
incineration purpose. Each association shall be liable to the collector
or contractor for any loss or damage in excess of normal, reasonable
wear and tear.
(6) No association shall place any acidic, flammable, or hazardous
wastes, e-waste, or unacceptable wastes in the equipment.
(7) Each association agrees that the contractor shall be the sole owner
of any and all refuse, waste material, or other material disposed
of, dumped and/or stored in any of the collector's or contractor's
equipment.
(8) Each association agrees that it will not in any way interfere with the
collector's or contractor's ownership of said waste material.
§ 341-12. Ineligible properties for Town collection of residential
waste and recyclable materials. [Added 10-5-2015]
A. Apartment complex/mixed-use property recycling collection.
(1) It shall be the responsibility of each owner of any apartment complex
consisting of six or more units, including mixed-use buildings
containing residential units of six or more, exclusive of those eligible
properties referenced in § 341-10B of this article, to provide for the
safe storage and disposal of recycling items to each occupant of
each unit in accordance with § 22a-241b of the Connecticut General
Statutes.
(2) The items to be recycled under this section are those contained in
the definition of "recyclable materials" in § 341-8 of this article.
(3) It shall be the responsibility of each owner of any apartment complex
consisting of six or more units, including mixed-use buildings
containing residential units of six or more, exclusive of those eligible
properties referenced in § 341-10B of this article, to provide for
the pickup of recycling items at least twice a month during each
calendar month of the year.
B. Violation and enforcement.
(1) Any owner who fails to provide for the recycling of items listed in
Subsection A of this section may be fined $99 for each violation,
which violation shall be determined in accordance with Subsection
A(3) of this section.
(2) Any unpaid fines for any violation of the provisions of this section of
this article shall be added to the particular sewer usage charge for
§ 341-11 PLAINVILLE CODE § 341-12
1:262
the property and the fine shall be required to be paid to the payment
of the sewer usage charges.
(3) This section of this article shall be enforced by the Town Manager or
his designee.
§ 341-13. Repealer; title.
On the effective date of this article, the "Ordinance On the Collection and
Disposal of Solid Waste Within the Town of Plainville" adopted by Town
Council August 2, 1985; "Ordinance Regarding Rubbish, Garbage, Refuse
and Other Wastes" adopted by Town Council April 6, 1987; "Ordinance
Regarding the Pickup of Rubbish, Garbage, Refuse and Other Wastes From
Condominiums" adopted by Town Council June 19, 1989; and "Ordinance
Implementing Recycling Within Town of Plainville" adopted by Town Council
November 19, 1990, amended April 19, 1999, are hereby repealed and
replaced with this article titled "Total Recycling and Solid Waste Handling
(T.R.A.S.H.) Ordinance of 2011."115
§ 341-14. Penalties for offenses.116
Except where otherwise provided, violations of this article shall be subject
to the following fines:
A. Section 341-9, Commercial collection and disposal of solid waste and
recycling.
(1) Section 341-9C, prohibition on collection, transportation and
disposal by unregistered collectors: $250 per occurrence.
(2) Section 341-9D, prohibited location for disposal: $250 per
occurrence.
B. Section 341-10, Residential curbside collection.
(1) Section 341-10E, materials collected.
(a) First violation: load tagged, left uncollected.
(b) Second violation: load tagged, left uncollected, plus fine of $25.
(c) Third violation: load tagged, left uncollected, plus fine of $50.
(2) Section 341-10G, bulky waste violation: $99 per occurrence.
§ 341-15. Fees117
Fees shall be as provided in Chapter 215, Fees.
115. Editor's Note: Former Schedule A, Fees, Fines and Penalties, which was an attachment to
this article, as amended 2-3-2014, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II). See now § 341-14, Penalties for offenses, and § 341-15, Fees.
116. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
117. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 341-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 341-15
1:263
Chapter 347
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND DRIVEWAYS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 185.
Parades and other functions — See Ch. 205.
Fire lanes — See Ch. 219, Art. I.
Littering — See Ch. 257.
Loitering — See Ch. 261.
Peddlers, vendors and solicitors — See Ch.
292.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 300.
Outdoor dining — See Ch. 318, Art. II.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 374.
§ 341-15 PLAINVILLE CODE § 341-15
1:264
ARTICLE I
Street Openings
[Adopted 8-20-1963; amended 2-16-1999]
§ 347-1. Permit required; work by Town; emergency repairs.
A. No person, firm, company, corporation or entity, including a utility
company, shall excavate, trench, install equipment, grade, repave or
otherwise alter any public right-of-way, public street, boulevard, highway
or alley within the Town of Plainville for any purpose whatsoever without
obtaining a permit as described hereinafter.
B. The foregoing shall not prevent any excavation, trenching, construction,
grading, repaving or alteration of the public right-of-way, public street,
boulevard, highway or public alley by the Town or its designated agent
in the construction or repair of sidewalks, curbing, pavement, drainage
facilities, sanitary sewers or similar activities. Also it shall not prevent
any person, firm, company, corporation or entity, including a utility
company, which has been granted by law or ordinance the right to install
gas or water mains or construct electrical and communication systems or
other similar services, when the necessity of such construction activities
is required, from performing immediate emergency repairs to public
utilities, such as a ruptured gas or water main, fallen wires or other
similar hazard. In the event an emergency repair is warranted, the
responsible person, firm, company, corporation or entity, including a
utility company, shall apply for and secure a permit within one business
day of commencing such activity. All the rules and regulations
hereinafter described shall apply to all emergency repair activities.
§ 347-2. General permit provisions.118
Before any person, firm, company, corporation or entity, including a utility
company, shall perform any regulated activity, it shall first obtain a permit
for such work from the Department of Technical Services. Such application
shall include a construction plan and other information deemed important
by the Department of Technical Services. The fee for such permit shall be
as provided in Chapter 215, Fees, payable when the permit is issued. The
permit shall be valid for a period of one year from the date of issuance, and
all work shall be fully complete before the permit expires.
§ 347-3. Application for permit.
A. The application for such permit shall be upon a form provided by the
Department of Technical Services and shall describe the location where
such activity will take place, approximate size of the activity, the purpose
and the time when the work will begin, hours of work and the estimated
start and completion dates for the project.
B. Application shall include an insurance certificate in which the applicant
will indemnify and hold harmless the Town of Plainville from any claims
of damages to persons or property arising from or in conjunction with
118. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 347-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 347-3
1:265
said work to be performed under such permit. All certificates shall be
from carriers authorized to conduct business in the State of Connecticut
having A.M. Best rating of A- or higher. The applicant agrees to hold
harmless, indemnify, protect and defend the Town of Plainville, its
agents, servants and employees from any liability for injuries and
damages to the contractor, its employees, agents, subcontractors,
guests, third parties and other incidents to or resulting from any and
all operations resulting from the contractor's activities. The limits of the
coverage shall be set by the Town's Insurance Commission. Insurance
coverage shall be maintained for a minimum period of one year after
the construction is completed. Coverage shall be extended until the
maintenance period expires.
C. A bond shall accompany the permit application. This bond may be in the
form of a certified check, passbook account, insurance surety or other
form of security deemed appropriate by the Department of Technical
Services. The bond shall be maintained for a minimum period of one
year after the construction is completed. Coverage shall be extended
until the maintenance period expires. All proposed bond formats shall
be approved by the Town Attorney. An insurance surety bond shall be
upon a bond form provided by the Department of Technical Services or a
format approved by the Town Attorney.
D. Public utility companies shall not be required to post a bond if contrary
to Department of Energy and Environmental Protection regulations.
Public utilities shall be billed directly for the actual cost of restoring any
surface subsequent to any such restoration which may be required due
to their failure to comply with these regulations. The limits of the bond
shall be as follows:119
(1) For the first 100 linear feet of roadway disturbed or any part thereof,
a bond in the sum of $10,000.
(2) For each additional 25 linear feet of roadway disturbed or any part
thereof, an additional bond in the amount of $1,000 will be required.
E. Construction activities related to the construction or repair of the
sanitary sewers shall conform to the requirements set forth in Chapter
332, Sewers, Article I, Sewer Use, of this Code. The provisions of this
article requiring a surety bond and insurance coverage shall not apply
when the applicant is a duly licensed and bonded plumber or drain layer.
§ 347-4. Maintenance and protection of traffic.
A. Any person, firm, company, corporation, or entity, including a utility
company, working under said permit shall provide, erect and maintain
suitable lighted barricades, warning lights, or warning devices as
needed or as directed in order to prevent damage or injury to persons,
vehicles and property and to minimize the inconvenience and danger to
the public by construction operations.
B. Barricades shall be of substantial construction and shall be white, having
reflective tape or panels to increase visibility. Suitable warning signs
shall be positioned and illuminated at night to identify in advance the
119. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 347-3 PLAINVILLE CODE § 347-4
1:266
work area. The type and location of signs and other traffic control
devices shall be in accordance with the most current Manual on Uniform
Traffic Control Devices as prepared by U.S. Department of
Transportation, Federal Highway Administration.
C. The applicant or agent shall arrange operations to provide access to
properties along the street, including temporary bridges to driveways,
and provide access to fire hydrants, gate valves, manholes or other
utilities. No road or street shall be closed to the public unless permission
is granted by the Plainville Police Department.
D. No overnight open excavations will be permitted. All construction
activities shall be backfilled to grade at the close of each workday or
properly covered with a steel plate.
§ 347-5. Backfill requirements.
A. All excavations shall be backfilled with acceptable materials. The reuse
of existing materials will be permitted only when they are deemed
acceptable. The use of saturated and unstable materials shall not be
permitted as backfill and shall be removed from the work site by the
applicant and replaced with an acceptable granular backfill material.
B. The backfill material shall be compacted in lifts not to exceed 12 inches.
Compaction shall continue until the density of the compacted material
achieves 95% of the theoretical dry density by mechanical means
appropriate for the type of operation. Any other methods of compaction
must be approved by the Department of Technical Services.
§ 347-6. Sidewalk restoration.
A. Whenever it is necessary to excavate or trench under or in the vicinity
of a public sidewalk, whether stone, bituminous concrete or concrete, a
temporary walkway shall be maintained. At the close of each workday,
the sidewalk shall be restored in such a manner as to render the walk
safe for public use. Upon the completion of the construction activities,
the applicant shall restore the disturbed sidewalk to its original
condition. All restoration activities shall comply with the applicable Town
regulations. The applicant shall be responsible for requesting
inspections of the restoration activities by the Department of Technical
Services at the required times. Failure to have required inspections may
result in rejection of the work activities.
B. The restoration activities shall be completed within 30 calendar days of
finishing the excavation. The sidewalk materials and installation method
shall be in accordance with the regulations of the Planning and Zoning
Commission.120
C. Permanent sidewalk restoration activities shall not be performed during
the period from November 15 to April 15 unless written permission is
granted by the Department of Technical Services. The thirty-day time
limit or any portion thereof will be suspended during such period and
will not resume until April 15.
120. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 347-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 347-7
1:267
§ 347-7. Curb restoration.121
Whenever it is necessary to disturb or remove the roadway curbing, the
applicant shall be required to replace or repair the curbing within 30
calendar days of finishing the excavation. The type of replacement curbing
shall be the same as the surrounding or adjoining curb. The curb materials
and installation methods shall be in accordance with the regulations of
the Planning and Zoning Commission. Installation of curbing shall not be
performed during the period from November 15 to April 15 unless written
permission is granted by the Department of Technical Services. The thirtyday
time limit or any portion thereof will be suspended during such period
and will not resume until April 15.
§ 347-8. Restoration of lawn areas.
A. Whenever it is necessary to disturb a lawn area within the right-of-way,
the applicant shall replant the disturbed area within 30 days of finishing
the excavation.
B. A smooth, uniform, friable seed bed shall be provided. Topsoil shall be
placed over impacted areas in such quantities as necessary to obtain
six inches in depth after natural settlement and compaction, shaped
and graded to conform to the adjacent areas, raked free of all material
unsuitable for or harmful to plant growth and compacted by means
of a light roller weighing not more than 65 pounds per foot width of
roller. Starter fertilizer specifically intended for use when establishing
a new lawn area shall be incorporated into the topsoil at a rate of 3/
4 pound per 100 square feet. A perennial seed mixture consisting of
Kentucky bluegrass, fescue and perennial rye shall be sown at a rate of
at least 3/4 pound per 100 square feet. The percentage of specific grass
seed varieties shall be as recommended by the Connecticut Agricultural
Experiment Station for local conditions.122
C. Restoration of lawn areas shall not be performed during the period
from November 15 to April 15 unless written permission is granted
by the Department of Technical Services. The thirty-day time limit or
any portion thereof will be suspended during such period and will not
resume until April 15.
§ 347-9. Temporary patch.
A. Whenever it is necessary to disturb the pavement in a roadway, the
applicant shall be required to maintain and repair a temporary roadway
surface patch during construction operations and/or until a permanent
restoration can be completed. All temporary patches shall be maintained
and any unsafe conditions shall be rendered safe within eight hours of
being notified of a problem. If such repairs are not made, the Town of
Plainville shall take whatever action is necessary and reasonable and bill
the applicant for the costs incurred.
121. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
122. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 347-7 PLAINVILLE CODE § 347-9
1:268
B. The temporary patch shall consist of a two-inch bituminous concrete
surface over a compacted six-inch processed aggregate base. A cold
patch bituminous concrete surface will only be permitted when hot
mix bituminous concrete is not locally available. The surface shall be
installed and graded even with the surrounding and adjoining existing
pavement.
C. The applicant shall be required to maintain a temporary roadway surface
patch during the period from November 15 to April 15 when a
permanent roadway restoration cannot be completed unless permission
is granted by the Department of Technical Services.
§ 347-10. Permanent restoration.
A. The permanent roadway patch subbase shall be constructed of the same
materials and depths as the surrounding or adjoining roadway or a
minimum of 12 inches of bank-run gravel topped with a base of four
inches of processed aggregate, or a total of 12 inches of processed
aggregate. All subbase and base materials shall conform to the
applicable specifications in the most current State of Connecticut
Department of Transportation Standard Specifications for Roads,
Bridges and Incidental Construction.
B. The subbase and base shall be compacted in material lifts not exceeding
six inches by mechanical means appropriate for the application.
Compaction shall continue until the density of the compacted material
achieves 95% of the theoretical dry density. After compaction, any low
or uneven portions of the roadbed shall be adjusted to the satisfaction of
the Department of Technical Services.
§ 347-11. Roadway preparation.
Before the permanent pavement is installed, the existing pavement, at the
limits of the excavation, shall be cut back a minimum of 12 inches parallel
and perpendicular to the edge of the road. The joint between the patch and
the existing pavement shall have no jagged edges. An emulsified asphalt
tack coat shall be applied at a rate of 0.05 to 0.15 gallon per square yard of
exposed surface to all cut edges prior to installing the new pavement.
§ 347-12. Permanent pavement.
A. A permanent roadway surface patch shall consist of a two-course hot
mix bituminous concrete surface of a thickness equal to the existing
pavement depth or three inches, whatever is greater. The surface course
shall not be less than one inch in depth. The bituminous concrete shall be
manufactured and installed in conformance with the most current State
of Connecticut Department of Transportation Standard Specifications for
Roads, Bridges and Incidental Construction and the regulations of the
Planning and Zoning Commission. The surface course shall be shaped
and compacted to conform to the existing crown of the roadway.
Compaction shall continue until the density of the pavement achieves
95% of the theoretical dry density.123
§ 347-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 347-12
1:269
B. The installation of a permanent roadway surface path shall be completed
within 30 calendar days of completing the excavation. The applicant
shall be required to receive permission from the Department of
Technical Services in order to install any permanent roadway surface
patch during the period which extends from November 15 to April 15.
§ 347-13. Sealing joints.
The joints between the existing pavement and a bituminous concrete patch
shall be sealed with liquid asphalt sealant. The sealant materials and
installation methods shall be in conformance with the most current State
of Connecticut Department of Transportation Standard Specifications for
Roads, Bridges, and Incidental Construction. Dry sand or cement shall be
sprinkled over the sealant to prevent tracking by traffic.
§ 347-14. Exceptions to restoration requirements.
Listed below are exceptions to the above-noted restoration requirements:
A. The Department of Technical Services may waive the provisions or part
thereof of this article if the permitted work is being done in conjunction
with future Town roadway reconstruction activities.
B. The applicant shall be required to overlay the entire roadway width
with 1 1/2 inches of bituminous concrete after installing the permanent
roadway patch if the area of the patch exceeds 1/3 of the total area of the
impacted roadway. The bituminous concrete overlay shall be installed in
accordance with the State of Connecticut Department of Transportation
Standard Specifications for Roads, Bridges and Incidental Construction
and the regulations of the Planning and Zoning Commission.124
C. The applicant shall be required to incorporate the patch into the existing
pavement by means of reheating the existing pavement and blending it
into the patch material if the age of the existing surface is eight years or
less. The equipment and methods to be utilized shall be approved by the
Department of Technical Services.
§ 347-15. Maintenance period.
A. The permit applicant shall be responsible to maintain or repair any
permanent restoration for a period of one year after the Town's final
inspection and approval. It is the applicant's responsibility to request a
final inspection when the restorations are completed. The inspector shall
provide the applicant an inspection report. This report shall identify any
observed deficiencies requiring correction or initiate the maintenance
period.
B. Any deficiencies arising from the permanent restoration activities during
the one-year maintenance period deemed unsafe by the Town of
Plainville shall be rendered safe for public use within eight hours of
123. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
124. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 347-12 PLAINVILLE CODE § 347-15
1:270
notification. If the deficiencies are not made safe within eight hours, the
Town of Plainville shall take whatever action is necessary and reasonable
to make the patch safe and bill the applicant for costs incurred. Any
other deficiency which does not impact the safety of the community shall
be repaired within 30 calendar days, unless the notification is made
during the period from November 15 to April 15, then the permanent
repairs shall be made within 30 calendar days after April 15.125
C. The repair activities shall be reinspected. The applicant is responsible
to request a reinspection. The inspector shall provide the applicant
a second report identifying the deficiencies requiring correction or a
revised maintenance period expiration date. The one-year maintenance
period shall be extended for a period of 90 calendar days for each repair.
§ 347-16. Penalties for offenses.
A. Any person, firm, company, corporation, or entity, including a utility
company, or the member of any firm or officer of any corporation
violating any provision of this article shall be barred from performing
activities in any public right-of-way, public street, boulevard, highway or
public alley as follows:
(1) For the first violation, the applicant shall receive a written warning
that future rights to perform activities may be suspended.
(2) For the second violation, the applicant shall be barred from
performing activities for a period of three months from the date of
the notice of violation letter.
(3) For the third violation, the applicant shall be barred from performing
activities for a period of six months from the date of the notice of
violation letter.
(4) For the fourth and subsequent violations, the applicant shall be
barred from performing activities for a period of one year from the
date of the notice of violation letter.
B. In the event the applicant performs activities while his right is
suspended, he shall be subject to a fine of $100 per day for each date he
conducted such illegal activity.
C. If the applicant has had no violations for a three-year period from the
last violation, then he shall be considered as having no prior violations.
D. If the applicant wishes to contest a notice of violation letter received
from the Department of Technical Services, he shall give written notice
to the Director of Technical Services within five days of the date of the
letter of his intent to contest. Within 10 days of the date of receipt of
the applicant's letter, the Director shall notify the applicant of a date and
time for the applicant to meet with the Director. The applicant, at such
meeting, shall have an opportunity to present evidence to the Director
as to why the suspension shall not go into effect. The Director shall be
the sole and final determiner of whether or not the suspension should be
lifted. The suspension shall be held in abeyance until the Director has
issued his written decision.
125. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 347-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 347-17
1:271
§ 347-17. Authority of Director of Technical Services.
The Director of Technical Services may delegate to any servant, agent or
employee of the Town of Plainville any or all of the duties and functions
imposed upon the Department of Technical Services by this article and may
authorize such person or persons to carry out such duties and functions
as he may from time to time assign. Wherever the words "Department
of Technical Services" are used in this article, they shall be construed to
include such Director and such servants, employees or agents designated.
§ 347-17 PLAINVILLE CODE § 347-17
1:272
ARTICLE II
Sidewalks and Driveways
[Adopted 9-3-1963]
§ 347-18. Permit required; application for permit.
A. No person, firm or corporation shall hereafter construct, build, establish
or maintain any driveway, sidewalk or other entrance to any property
adjoining a public highway or right-of-way without first having obtained
a written permit to do so from the Town Engineer. No such permit
shall be issued for construction or establishment of any such driveway,
sidewalk or other entrance except in accordance with the provisions
herein contained.
B. Application for permit must be made in writing upon forms furnished
by the Town. Said application shall contain the name and address of
the person, firm or corporation making the application, the name of the
contractor or person who is to construct said driveway, sidewalk or other
entrance, and the proposed location and dimensions of such driveway,
sidewalk or other entrance.126
C. Application for permit shall be made by the contractor who shall be a
paving contractor approved by the Director of Technical Services or his
agent. Complete plans and specifications shall be submitted to the Town
Engineer at least three days before the permit shall be issued.127
§ 347-19. Permit fee.128
Before the granting of any permit a fee as provided in Chapter 215, Fees,
shall be paid by the applicant.
§ 347-20. Inspection.129
All work shall be done under the jurisdiction of the Director of Technical
Services or his agent and in accordance with the ordinances of the Town
and shall be inspected upon completion by the Director of Technical
Services or his agent.
§ 347-21. Plans and specifications.
All plans and specifications must conform to the following minimum
requirements before a permit for construction or reconstruction shall be
permitted:
126. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
127. Editor's Note: Throughout this chapter, all references to the Department of Public Works
or Public Works Department were amended to the Department of Technical Services and
all references to the Director of Public Works were amended to the Director of Technical
Services at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
128. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
129. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 347-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 347-21
1:273
A. Any driveway, sidewalk or other entrance shall be installed at an
elevation or grade at the street line on any fifty-foot right-of-way, seven
inches above the gutter elevation or grade, or two inches above the
grade or elevation of the center line of the street.
B. In any case where these base elevations or grades are undetermined or
indeterminate a street line elevation or grade shall be furnished by the
Town Engineer.
C. The width of the driveway, sidewalk or other entrance shall be as
determined from time to time by the Director of Technical Services.
D. Combined curb and gutter and separate curbing shall be entirely
removed for the full width of the driveway opening at curbline. If an
existing joint in said curb is within five feet of the end of the driveway
opening, remove the existing curbing, etc., to said joint; otherwise cut
said combined curb and gutter or separate curbing, making a neat edge
truly at right angles to the edge of the pavement and truly vertical.
Integral curbing, which is that type placed with the pavement and
molded as an integral part of it, must be removed for the full depth from
the top of curb to the bottom of the pavement. The edge must be cut as
above described. No combined curb and gutter, straight curb or integral
curb shall be removed within five feet of a public crosswalk.
E. Where driveways cross open ditches in the parkways, culverts shall be
installed. Said culverts shall be of such size and shall be constructed of
such material as determined by the Department of Technical Services,
depending on the conditions existing. In no instance shall the size of
the opening be less than that obtained by a twelve-inch diameter pipe.
The length of culvert shall be determined by the following method: for
ditch of two feet or less the culvert shall extend not less than five feet
beyond both edges of the driveway where it crosses the ditch. For each
additional foot depth of ditch add two feet to the above figure, except
that no culvert shall be less than 20 feet long and except that where
headwalls are constructed at the ends of the culvert the length shall be
as determined by the Department of Technical Services.
F. Where a change in existing drainage installations must be made or trees
removed in order to comply with this article, the cost for such change
shall be borne solely by the applicant, and the determination of the
change necessary and the work done shall be under the direction and
supervision of the Department of Technical Services.
G. All driveways constructed or reconstructed over, across or upon any
public street or public parkway in the Town shall be kept and maintained
at all times in accordance with the provisions hereof by the persons
so constructing, reconstructing or using the same as an adjunct or
appurtenance to lands or properties immediately adjacent thereto.
§ 347-22. Property abutting unaccepted or private road.
Any person, firm or corporation who or which shall hereafter construct,
build, establish or maintain any driveway, sidewalk or other entrance to any
property abutting an unaccepted or private road without obtaining a permit
shall do so at his or its own risk, and thereafter if said unaccepted road or
private way shall be accepted by the Town anyone abutting thereon shall be
§ 347-21 PLAINVILLE CODE § 347-22
1:274
subject to compliance with these regulations and may be so compelled by
the Town, and the Town shall be released of any responsibility whatsoever
to said property owner or its assigns.
§ 347-23. Correction of defects.
Any installation made illegally or incorrectly shall be subject to correction
as per the instruction of the Director of Technical Services, and if such
defect is not corrected within a reasonable time as determined by the
Director of Technical Services said defect shall be corrected by the
Department of Technical Services or its agents, and the cost for such
corrections shall be borne solely by the property owner and shall be a lien
on the property in the same manner as real property taxes and shall be
placed by the Director of Technical Services on the land records thereof
within 60 days from the date of completion by the Department of Technical
Services or its agents.
§ 347-24. Variance.
The Director of Technical Services may vary any of the requirements of this
article for proper cause, but such variance shall be so noted on the permit
and signed by the Director of Technical Services or his authorized agent.
§ 347-25. Bonds.
Accompanying the application the contractor shall file with the Department
of Technical Services the following bonds:
A. A performance bond in the sum of $2,000 or more.
B. A surety bond issued by a regular indemnity or surety company
authorized to do business in the State of Connecticut conditioned
substantially that the applicant shall indemnify and save harmless the
Town of Plainville or any of its officers from all suits and action of every
name and description brought against said Town or any officer of said
Town for or on account of any injury or damage received or sustained
by any person in consequence of or resulting from any work performed
or negligence by said applicant, his servants or agents or of or from any
negligence in guarding such work.
§ 347-26. Penalties for offenses.130
Whoever shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction, be fined not more than $100 for each offense.
130. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 347-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 347-26
1:275

ARTICLE III
Sidewalk or Curb Installation
[Adopted 6-16-1969; amended in its entirety at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
§ 347-27. Permit for new sidewalk or curb installation.
The fee for new sidewalk or curb installation shall be as provided in Chapter
215, Fees. No permit fee shall be required for repair or replacement of
broken or damaged walks, except that a permit application shall be properly
executed and placed on file with the Building Department before start of
repair or replacement.
§ 347-28. Performance bond.
Before any sidewalk or curb installation permit is granted, a performance
bond in an amount not less than $10,000 naming the Town of Plainville as
obligee shall be placed on file in the Engineering Office. The performance
bond amount shall be determined in the following manner: $10,000 for up
to the first 100 linear feet of sidewalk or curbing and $1,000 for each 25
feet or part thereof thereafter.
§ 347-29. Penalties for offenses.
Whoever shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction, be fined not more than $100 for each offense.
§ 347-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 347-29
1:277

ARTICLE IV
Snow and Ice Removal
[Adopted 3-21-1983]
§ 347-30. Snow and ice on sidewalks.
The owner and the tenant of any premises adjacent to a sidewalk shall
remove or cause to be removed any snow from said sidewalk, to make
the same safe for use by the general public, within 24 hours of snowfall
and shall remove any ice or fully cover any ice with sand, ashes or similar
substance within 24 hours of formation. Violation of this section of this
article shall be punishable by a fine of $25. Each twenty-four-hour period
in which said owner or tenant fails to remove said snow or ice, after notice
of violation, shall constitute a separate offense. If said owner, tenant or
occupant of any premises adjacent to a sidewalk fails or neglects to remove,
or have removed, any snow or ice from said sidewalk, the municipality may
remove, or have removed, said snow or ice for reasons of public safety, and
the expense of the same shall be borne by said owner, tenant or occupant.
The municipality shall have the right to lien said premises adjoining said
sidewalk by causing a certificate of lien to be recorded in the Town Clerk's
office within 60 days from completion of such snow or ice removal.
§ 347-31. Plowing and throwing snow and ice into street.
No owner, tenant, occupant or his or its agent shall plow, throw, put, or
cause to be thrown or put any snow or ice from any private property, from
any area in the rear of said private property, from any legally laid out
sidewalk, or from the area between a private dwelling house or structure
and the legally laid out sidewalk into any public highway, street or traveled
roadway in the Town. Violation of this section of this article shall be deemed
an infraction as defined in the Connecticut General Statutes and punishable
by a fine of $25.
§ 347-32. Municipal liability for ice and snow removal. [Added
12-15-2014]
A. The provisions of § 7-163a of the Connecticut General Statutes are
hereby adopted and are set forth in Subsections B, C, and D hereof.
B. Notwithstanding the provisions of § 13a-149 of the Connecticut General
Statutes or any other general or special act, the municipality shall not be
liable to any person for injury to person or property due to the presence
of ice or snow on a public sidewalk unless the municipality is the owner
or person in possession and control of land abutting such sidewalk, other
than land used as a highway or street, provided that the municipality
shall be liable for its affirmative acts with respect to any such sidewalk
under its possession and control.
C. The owner or person in possession and control of land abutting a public
sidewalk shall have the same duty of care with respect to the presence of
ice or snow on such sidewalk toward the portion of the sidewalk abutting
his property as the municipality had prior to the effective date of this
§ 347-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 347-32
1:279
section and shall be liable to persons injured in person or property where
a breach of said duty is the proximate cause of said injury.
D. No action to recover damages for injury to person or property caused by
the presence of ice or snow on a public sidewalk against a person who
owns or is in possession and control of land abutting a public sidewalk
shall be brought but within two years from the date when the injury is
first sustained.
§ 347-32 PLAINVILLE CODE § 347-32
1:280
Chapter 355
TAXATION
§ 347-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 347-32
1:281

ARTICLE I
Veterans' Exemption
[Adopted 4-18-1983; amended 8-1-2005]
§ 355-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to assist veterans and surviving spouses of
veterans with their real or personal property taxes. Pursuant to § 12-81f of
the Connecticut General Statutes, the Town grants an additional veteran's
benefit to eligible residents of the Town on the terms and conditions
hereinafter provided.
§ 355-2. Effective date of assessment credit.
The assessment credit shall commence with the taxes due on the Grand List
of October 1, 2006, and thereafter until this article shall be repealed by
action of the Town Council.
§ 355-3. Eligibility.
The following criteria shall be met to be eligible for the exemption:
A. In accordance with the provisions of Connecticut General Statutes
§ 12-81f, any veteran or surviving spouse of a veteran entitled to an
exemption from property tax in accordance with § 12-81(19) of the
Connecticut General Statutes shall be entitled to an additional
exemption, provided that such veteran's qualifying income does not
exceed the maximum amount as provided under § 12-81l.
B. Applicants who have applied for and would be eligible for exemption
under § 12-81l of the Connecticut General Statutes, except for the
applicant's income levels, may qualify for exemption under this article if
their income shall not exceed $35,000 for a single person and $39,000
for a married couple. Said income shall adjust annually as indicated in
Connecticut General Statutes § 12-170aa(b)(2).
§ 355-4. Applications.
A. Applicants shall provide to the Assessor for the Town such information
required to determine eligibility, including but not limited to most recent
federal tax returns or other proof of income, and complete such
applications as provided by the Assessor.
B. Initial applications, together with such information required to
determine eligibility for exemption, shall be presented to the Assessor
each year between February 1 and September 30. Thereafter, applicants
shall file biennially for tax credits under this article.
§ 355-5. Determination of exemption and exemption allowed.
A. The Assessor shall review applications and information provided by
applicants seeking exemption under this article.
B. Applicants who are determined eligible for exemption under this article
shall receive an exemption in the amount of $6,000 of assessed
valuation, provided that such exemption shall be in conjunction with
§ 355-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 355-5
1:283
property tax relief under § 12-81 of the Connecticut General Statutes
and shall not exceed in the aggregate the total amount of tax laid against
the taxpayer.
C. In the event the property of a qualified applicant is sold, assigned,
granted or conveyed during the assessment year when a credit is
applicable, regardless of whether such transfer, assignment, grant or
conveyance was voluntary or involuntary, the amount of the exemption
shall be prorated by a fraction, the numerator of which shall be the
number of full months from the first day of October to the date of
conveyance and the denominator of which shall be 12. The grantee shall
be required within a period not exceeding 10 days immediately following
the date of such conveyance to notify the Assessor, or in the absence of
such notice, upon determination by the Assessor that such conveyance
has occurred, the Assessor shall determine the prorated amount and
notify the Revenue Collector of the reduced amount. Upon receipt of
such notice from the Assessor, the Revenue Collector shall, within 10
days thereafter, mail or hand a bill to the grantee stating the additional
amount of tax due. Such tax shall be due and payable and collectible
as other property taxes and subject to the same liens and principles of
collection, provided that such tax shall be due and payable in an initial
or single installment within 30 days after the date of the bill.131
§ 355-6. Construal with state statutes.
This article shall not be construed to conflict with any state statute, rule or
regulation.
131. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 355-5 PLAINVILLE CODE § 355-6
1:284
ARTICLE II
Additional Exemption for Blind Persons
[Adopted 8-26-1985; amended 9-17-2007]
§ 355-7. Exemption granted.
In accordance with the provisions of § 12-81j of the Connecticut General
Statutes, as amended, any person entitled to the exemption from property
tax applicable to the assessed value of property up to the amount of $3,000,
as provided under § 12-81(17) of the Connecticut General Statutes, shall
be entitled to an additional exemption from such tax in an amount up to
$2,000 of such assessed value, provided that such person qualifies under
the provisions of said § 12-81j.
§ 355-8. Application for exemption.
Any person submitting a claim for the additional exemption as provided in
said § 12-81j shall file an application, on a form prepared for such purpose
by the Assessor, not later than the date of the assessment list with respect
to which such additional exemption is claimed. Each such application shall
include such documentation as required by said § 12-81j and such evidence
as may be required by the Assessor relating to income.
§ 355-9. Levels of qualifying income.
The levels of qualifying income for the tax credits under this article shall be
those set out in §§ 12-81l and 12-170aa of the Connecticut General Statutes,
adjusted annually as provided for in said General Statutes.
§ 355-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 355-9
1:285

ARTICLE III
Enterprise Zone
[Adopted 4-5-1999]
§ 355-10. Purpose.
Public Act No. 98-146 provides for municipalities that are contiguous to
targeted investment communities to request the Commissioner of Economic
and Community Development to approve the designation of properties
located in a contiguous census tract as being located in an enterprise
zone. The Town of Plainville has received the Commissioner's approval of
such designation following the Town Council of the Town of Southington
approving the Town of Plainville's contiguous census tract as an enterprise
zone. Section 32-71(a) of the Connecticut General Statutes requires an
ordinance for the fixing of assessments of real property in such zone.
§ 355-11. Definition of zone area.
The area delineated on the Enterprise Zone Boundary Map as submitted
to and approved by the Commissioner of the Department of Economic and
Community Development is designated as an enterprise zone. Such area
is a continuation of the Town of Southington's census tract 4306.01 as
defined by the 1990 census and shall include any changes to said map
hereinafter approved by the Commissioner of the Department of Economic
and Community Development.
§ 355-12. Benefits.
A. Fixed assessment.
(1) All real property in the enterprise zone which is improved during the period
when such area is designated as an enterprise zone shall have its real property
assessment fixed. Such fixed assessment shall be for a period of seven years
from the time of such improvement and shall defer any increase in assessment
attributable to such improvements according to the following schedule:132
Year Percentage of Increase Deferred
First 100%
Second 100%
Third 50%
Fourth 40%
Fifth 30%
Sixth 20%
Seventh 10%
(2) Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, the Town may negotiate the
fixing of assessments on the portion of improvements, by a taxpayer, which
exceed a value of $80,000,000 to real property which is to be used for
commercial or retail purposes.
B. Any fixed assessment on any residential property shall cease if:
§ 355-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 355-12
1:287
(1) For any residential rental property, any dwelling unit in such property is
rented to any person whose income exceeds 200% of the median family
income of the Town; or
(2) For any conversion condominium declared after the designation of the
enterprise zone, any unit is sold to any person whose income exceeds 200%
of the median family income of the Town.
C. In the event of a general revaluation by the Town in the year in which such
improvement is completed, resulting in any increase in the assessment on such
property, only that portion of the increase resulting from such improvements
shall be deferred.
D. In the event of a general revaluation in any year after the year in which such
improvement is completed, such deferred assessment shall be increased or
decreased in proportion to the increase or decrease in the total assessment on
such property as a result of such revaluation.
E. No improvements of any real property which qualifies as a manufacturing
facility under Subsection (d) of § 32-9p of the Connecticut General Statutes
shall be eligible for any fixed assessment pursuant to this article. The fixing
of assessment for such manufacturing property shall be in accordance with
Subsection (d) of § 32-9p of the Connecticut General Statutes.
F. The Town acting through its Town Council may provide any additional tax
abatements or deferrals as it deems necessary for any property located in the
enterprise zone.
§ 355-13. Administration.133
The Director of Planning and Economic Development shall administer the
enterprise zone program in the Town.
132. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
133. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 355-12 PLAINVILLE CODE § 355-13
1:288
ARTICLE IV
Relief for Certain Elderly or Disabled Homeowners
[Adopted 4-4-2000; amended 9-17-2007; 2-4-2008]
§ 355-14. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to assist elderly or disabled homeowners with
their real property taxes. Pursuant to § 12-129n of the Connecticut General
Statutes, the Town grants a tax credit for eligible residents of the Town on
the terms and conditions hereinafter provided.
§ 355-15. Effective date of tax credit.
The tax credit shall commence with the taxes due on the Grand List of
October 1, 2000, and thereafter until this article shall be repealed by action
of the Town Council.
§ 355-16. Eligibility.
The following criteria shall be met to be eligible for the tax credit:
A. Applicants are:
(1) Sixty-five years of age or over at the close of the preceding calendar
year, or whose spouses living with them are 65 years of age or over
at the close of the preceding calendar year or 60 years of age or over
and the surviving spouse of a taxpayer qualified under this article at
the time of his or her death, with respect to real property on which
such applicants or their spouses are liable for taxes under § 12-48 of
the Connecticut General Statutes; or
(2) Under age 65 and eligible in accordance with applicable federal
regulations to receive permanent total disability benefits under
social security, or have not been engaged in employment covered
by social security and accordingly have not qualified for benefits
thereunder, but have become qualified for permanent total disability
benefits under any federal, state or local government retirement
or disability plan, including the Railroad Retirement Act and any
government-related teachers' retirement plan, in which
requirements with respect to qualifications for such permanent total
disability benefits are comparable to such requirements under social
security.
B. Applicants have been taxpayers of the Town for one year immediately
preceding their receipt of tax credits under this article.
C. The levels of qualifying income for the tax credits under this article shall
be those set out in § 12-81l and 12-170aa of the Connecticut General
Statutes, adjusted annually as provided for in said General Statutes.
D. Applicants use the real property as their principal residence, which is
defined as having used the residence for not less than 184 days during
each calendar year.
§ 355-17. Applications.
§ 355-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 355-17
1:289
A. Applicants shall provide to the Assessor for the Town such information
required to determine eligibility, including but not limited to most recent
federal tax returns or other proof of income, and complete such
applications as provided by the Assessor.
B. Initial applications, together with such information required to
determine eligibility for tax relief, shall be presented to the Assessor
each year between February 1 and May 15. Thereafter, applicants shall
file biennially for tax credits under this article.
§ 355-18. Determination of tax relief and relief allowed.
A. The Assessor shall review applications and information provided by
applicants seeking tax credits under this article. The Assessor shall
determine eligibility of applicants no later than June 1 of each year and
notify the Revenue Collector of the amount of tax credit.
B. Applicants who are determined eligible for tax credits under this article
shall receive a credit of $200, provided that such credit shall be in
conjunction with property tax relief under §§ 12-129b to 12-129d,
inclusive, and § 12-170aa of the Connecticut General Statutes and shall
not exceed in the aggregate the total amount of tax laid against the
taxpayer.134
C. The intent of this article is to provide for a maximum tax credit of
$200 per residential property, and the credit provided for in this article
shall be prorated to reflect the fractional share of such applicant or
spouse and any other person or persons who are titled owners of the
residential property. If such property is a multiple-family dwelling, such
relief shall also be limited to $200 for the residential property and may
be prorated to reflect the fractional portion of such property occupied by
the applicant.
D. In the event the real property of a qualified applicant is sold, assigned,
granted or conveyed during the fiscal year when a credit is applicable,
regardless of whether such transfer, assignment, grant or conveyance
was voluntary or involuntary, the amount of the tax credit shall be
prorated by a fraction, the numerator of which shall be the number of
full months from the first day of July to the date of conveyance and
the denominator of which shall be 12. The grantee shall be required
within a period not exceeding 10 days immediately following the date of
such conveyance to notify the Assessor, or in the absence of such notice,
upon determination by the Assessor that such conveyance has occurred,
determine the prorated amount and notify the Revenue Collector of the
reduced amount. Upon receipt of such notice from the Assessor, the
Revenue Collector shall, within 10 days thereafter, mail or hand a bill to
the grantee stating the additional amount of tax due. Such tax shall be
due and payable and collectible as other property taxes and subject to
the same liens and principles of collection, provided that such tax shall
be due and payable in an initial or single installment within 30 days after
the date of the bill.
134. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 355-17 PLAINVILLE CODE § 355-19
1:290
§ 355-19. Lien rights.135
In the event the tax credit provided by this article in combination with
any tax relief for which such applicant may be eligible in accordance
with Connecticut General Statutes §§ 12-129b to 12-129d, inclusive, or
§ 12-170aa exceeds in the aggregate 75% of the property tax for which such
applicant would be liable but for the benefits under this article and the
sections mentioned, the Town shall be required to establish a lien on such
property in the amount of the total tax relief granted, plus interest at a rate
of 10%. Such lien shall have a priority in the settlement of the applicant's
estate.
§ 355-20. Construal with state statutes.
This article shall not be construed to conflict with any state statute, rule or
regulation.
135. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 355-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 355-20
1:291

ARTICLE V
Uniform Valuation of Personal Property
[Adopted 12-4-2000]
§ 355-21. Purpose.
The Plainville Town Council, to facilitate the uniform valuation of personal
property, hereby adopts the depreciation schedules set forth hereinafter,
pursuant to Public Act. No. 99-290136 of the Connecticut General Assembly,
and any modifications or amendments thereto enacted by the Connecticut
General Assembly, and on the conditions set forth hereinafter. The provision
of this article shall be applicable for the assessment year commencing
October 1, 2000, and for each assessment year thereafter.
§ 355-22. Electronic data processing equipment (EDP).137
The following schedule of depreciation shall be applicable with respect to
electronic data processing equipment:
A. Group 1. Computer and peripheral hardware, including but not limited to
personal computers, work stations, terminals, storage devices, printers,
scanners, computer peripherals and networking equipment:
Assessment Year Following
Acquisition
Depreciated Value as Percentage of
Acquisition Cost Basis
First year 70%
Second year 40%
Third year 20%
Fourth year and thereafter 10%
B. Group 2. Other hardware, including but not limited to mini-frame and mainframe
systems with an acquisition cost of more than $25,000:
Assessment Year Following
Acquisition
Depreciated Value as Percentage of
Acquisition Cost Basis
First year 90%
Second year 60%
Third year 40%
Fourth year 20%
Fifth year and thereafter 10%
136. Editor's Note: See § 12-63 of the Connecticut General Statutes.
137. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 355-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 355-23
1:293
§ 355-23. Other technologically advanced equipment.138
The following schedule of depreciation shall be applicable with respect to
copiers, facsimile machines, medical testing equipment, and any similar
type of equipment that is not specifically defined as electronic data
processing equipment but is considered by the Assessor to be
technologically advanced:
Assessment Year Following
Acquisition
Depreciated Value as Percentage of
Acquisition Cost Basis
First year 95%
Second year 80%
Third year 60%
Fourth year 40%
Fifth year and thereafter 20%
§ 355-24. Machinery and equipment used in the manufacturing
process.139
The following schedule of depreciation shall be applicable with respect to
machinery and equipment used in the manufacturing process:
Assessment Year Following
Acquisition
Depreciated Value as Percentage of
Acquisition Cost Basis
First year 90%
Second year 80%
Third year 70%
Fourth year 60%
Fifth year 50%
Sixth year 40%
Seventh year 30%
Eighth year and thereafter 20%
§ 355-25. Other personal property.140
The following schedule of depreciation shall be applicable with respect to all
tangible personal property other than that described in §§ 355-22 to 355-24,
inclusive, of this article:
138. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
139. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
140. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 355-23 PLAINVILLE CODE § 355-25
1:294
Assessment Year Following
Acquisition
Depreciated Value as Percentage of
Acquisition Cost Basis
First year 95%
Second year 90%
Third year 80%
Fourth year 70%
Fifth year 60%
Sixth year 50%
Seventh year 40%
Eighth year and thereafter 30%
§ 355-26. Applicability.141
The schedules of depreciation set forth in §§ 355-22 to 355-25, inclusive,
of this article shall not be used with respect to videotapes, horses or other
taxable livestock or electric cogenerating equipment.
§ 355-27. Assessor authorized to adjust values.
The Assessor may still adjust values produced by application of the
appropriate schedules if the resulting values do not accurately reflect the
present true and actual value of the property.
§ 355-28. Appeal of assessment.
This article shall not prevent a taxpayer from appealing an assessment,
pursuant to Connecticut statute, if such assessment does not accurately
reflect the true and actual value of any item of such taxpayer's personal
property.
141. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 355-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 355-28
1:295

ARTICLE VI
Exemption for Motor Vehicle Owned by Disabled Individual
[Adopted 5-15-2006]
§ 355-29. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DISABLED INDIVIDUAL — An individual whose licensed physician has
attested in writing that the individual requires a specially equipped and/
or modified motor vehicle as herein defined as a result of the individual's
medical incapacitation and/or disability.
MOTOR VEHICLE — A vehicle which is modified, equipped and/or fitted
with special equipment to accommodate a disabled individual who is
incapable of operation of a motor vehicle on his or her own, to use or
operate the same for transportation and/or to transport a person with
disabilities as herein defined. By way of example, special equipment shall
be, but not limited to, hand controls, lifts, ramps, special seating, braking
or acceleration mechanisms for manual operation, or physical alterations
to accommodate medical equipment, i.e., oxygen tanks and mechanical
respirators.
RESIDENT — An individual who owns a motor vehicle as hereinbefore
defined and has been a resident of the Town of Plainville for at least six
months and one day immediately prior to the assessment date for which the
application is to be filed.
§ 355-30. Eligibility for exemption.
Any individual who is a resident of the Town of Plainville with disabilities
who owns a motor vehicle as described herein or is a resident of the Town
of Plainville and the parent or guardian of a person with disabilities and
owns a motor vehicle described herein shall be eligible for exemption of the
personal property taxes for one said motor vehicle.
§ 355-31. Application for exemption.
A. The owner of such a motor vehicle described herein may apply to the
Assessor of the Town of Plainville on a form prepared by the Assessor for
personal property tax exemption for one motor vehicle.
B. At the time the owner makes application to the Assessor, the owner
must provide proof in the form of documentation that the motor vehicle
has been equipped or adapted for use by a disabled individual as
hereinbefore defined.
C. At the time that the owner makes application to the Assessor, the owner
shall provide proof of disability of the individual as hereinbefore defined
by way of a licensed physician attesting in writing to the individual's
need for a specially equipped and/or modified motor vehicle as
hereinbefore defined. Proof of the individual's disability through a
§ 355-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 355-31
1:297
physician's written attestation shall be valid for a period of three years,
after which a new physician's written attestation must be submitted.
D. Applications for such exemptions shall be filed annually from October 1
up through and including January 31 following the assessment date with
respect to which such exemption is claimed, except that applications for
motor vehicles on the Grand List of October 1, 2005, shall be filed by
September 1, 2006.
§ 355-32. Effective date.
The effective date for the exemption shall be motor vehicles on the Grand
List of October 1, 2005, and thereafter.
§ 355-33. Motor vehicles operated for profit not eligible for
exemption.
The exemption shall not apply to motor vehicles operated for profit.
§ 355-34. Expiration of exemption.
The exemption shall expire when the motor vehicle ceases to be used by the
disabled owner or parent or guardian of a person with disabilities. Also, the
exemption shall expire when the vehicle is sold or transferred and not used
for the use intended.
§ 355-31 PLAINVILLE CODE § 355-34
1:298
ARTICLE VII
Delinquent Taxpayers
[Adopted 11-6-2006]
§ 355-35. Purpose and authority.
A. The Town of Plainville has several taxpayers who are delinquent in
paying their municipal taxes, sewer user charges, assessments, penalties
and/or fines, and the Town wishes to decrease the number of taxpayers
who are so delinquent.
B. Connecticut General Statutes § 7-148(c)(2)(B) provides, inter alia, that
a municipality shall have the power to establish a procedure for
withholding of approval of building applications where municipal taxes,
sewer user charges, assessments, penalties and/or fines imposed by the
municipality are delinquent for the property for which the application
was made.
C. The Town of Plainville wishes to prohibit the granting of building
permits, certificates of occupancy and/or construction permits for
improvements or changes in real property to persons who are delinquent
on their municipal taxes, sewer user charges, assessments, penalties
and/or fines.
D. Connecticut General Statutes § 12-146a provides, inter alia, that a
municipality may withhold or revoke any license or permit to operate a
business enterprise if any taxes levied against personal property used in
such business enterprise are delinquent, and have been so delinquent
for a period of not less than one year, and the municipality wishes to
prohibit the granting of licenses or take action to revoke any license or
permit while such personal property taxes are delinquent.
§ 355-36. Withholding of licenses and permits.
A. No building permit, certificate of occupancy, and/or other construction
permit for improvements or changes in real property shall be issued for
any real property for which there are delinquent municipal taxes, sewer
user charges, assessments, penalties and/or fines.
B. Any license or permit for a business enterprise may be revoked, and no
license or permit to operate a business enterprise shall be issued, if any
taxes levied by the Town against personal property used in such business
are delinquent and have been so delinquent for a period of not less than
one year.
§ 355-37. Administration.
The following procedure is hereby established in implementing this article:
A. The Revenue Collector of the Town of Plainville shall maintain a list of
all properties and property owners who are delinquent under the terms
of this article in the municipal taxes, sewer user charges, assessments,
penalties and/or fines.
B. Before approving or renewing any building application for property
which appears on the Revenue Collector's delinquency list, the Building
Official shall require the applicant to obtain written certification from
§ 355-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 355-37
1:299
the Revenue Collector that the delinquent municipal taxes, sewer user
charges, assessments, penalties and/or fines have been paid in full,
including all statutory interest and lien fees.
C. Upon written request of the applicant to the Town Manager setting
out just cause therefor and the submission of such other information
as the Town Manager may require, the Town Manager may waive the
requirements of Subsection B above when he determines that the
interests of public health, safety or welfare are better served by allowing
the proposed improvements to or demolition upon the real property
concerned. Upon the issuance of such waiver, the Building Official may
grant a building application without the payment of all the delinquent
municipal taxes, sewer user charges, assessments, penalties and/or
fines.
D. Before approving or renewing any license or permit to operate a
business enterprise for property which appears on the Revenue
Collector's last filed delinquency list, the Health Department shall
require the applicant to obtain written certification from the Revenue
Collector that delinquent personal property taxes have been paid in full,
including all statutory interest.
§ 355-37 PLAINVILLE CODE § 355-37
1:300
ARTICLE VIII
Additional Exemption for Totally Disabled Persons
[Adopted 9-17-2007]
§ 355-38. Authority; exemption granted.
In accordance with the provisions of § 12-81i of the Connecticut General
Statutes, any person entitled to the exemption from property tax applicable
to the assessed value of property up to the amount of $1,000 as provided
under Subdivision (55) of § 12-81 of the Connecticut General Statutes shall
be entitled to an additional exemption from such tax in the amount up to
$1,000 of such assessed value provided such person qualifies under the
provisions of said statutes.
§ 355-39. Application.
Any person submitting a claim for an additional exemption as provided in
said § 12-81i of the Connecticut General Statutes shall file an application
on a form prepared for such purpose by the Assessor not later than the
date of the assessment list with respect to which such additional exemption
is claimed. Each such application shall include such documentation as
required by said § 12-81i and such evidence as may be required by the
Assessor relating to income.
§ 355-40. Levels of qualifying income.
The levels of qualifying income for the tax credits under this article shall be
those set out in §§ 12-81l and 12-170aa of the Connecticut General Statutes,
adjusted annually as provided for in said General Statutes.
§ 355-41. When effective.
This article shall take effect upon passage and publication and shall be
applicable to the assessment year commencing October 1, 2007, and each
assessment year thereafter.
§ 355-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 355-41
1:301

ARTICLE IX
Tax Stabilization for Elderly Homeowners
[Adopted 10-15-2007; amended 9-19-2011]
§ 355-42. Purpose.
The Town of Plainville hereby enacts tax stabilization for the elderly
pursuant to §§ 12-170v and 12-170w of the Connecticut General Statutes for
an owner of real property or any tenant for life or for a term of years liable
for property taxes under § 12-48 of the Connecticut General Statutes who
meets the qualifications set forth hereinafter.
§ 355-43. Eligibility.
To qualify for the tax relief, a taxpayer shall meet all the following
requirements:
A. On December 31 of the calendar year preceding the year in which a
claim is filed, be:
(1) Seventy years of age or over;
(2) The spouse of a person 70 years of age or over, provided such spouse
is domiciled with such person; or
(3) Sixty-two years of age or over and the surviving spouse of a taxpayer
who at the time of such taxpayer's death had qualified and was
entitled to the relief under this article.
B. Occupy such real property as his or her home.
C. Either spouse shall have resided within the Town of Plainville for at least
one year before filing the claim under this article.
D. The taxable and nontaxable income of such taxpayer, the total of which
shall hereinafter be called "qualifying income," in the tax year of such
homeowner ending immediately preceding the date of application for
benefits was not in excess of limits set forth in § 12-170aa of the
Connecticut General Statutes, as adjusted annually, evidence of which
income shall be submitted to the Assessor in such form and manner as
the Assessor prescribes. The amount of any Medicaid payments made
on behalf of such homeowner or spouse of the homeowner shall not
constitute income. The income of the spouse of the homeowner shall not
be included in the qualifying income of such homeowner for purposes
of determining eligibility for tax relief, if such spouse is a resident of a
health care or nursing facility in Connecticut, and such facility receives
payment related to such spouse under Title XIX.142
E. The net value of the homeowner's assets does not exceed $250,000.
F. After the initial qualification the taxpayer shall file biennially thereafter
on forms prepared by the Assessor.
§ 355-44. Tax benefit.
A. A homeowner who meets the qualifications stated above shall be entitled
to pay the tax levied on the property calculated below for the first year
the claim for tax relief is filed and approved and shall be entitled to
142. Editor's Note: Reference is to Title XIX of the Social Security Act (Medicaid).
§ 355-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 355-44
1:303
continue to pay the amount of such tax or such lesser amount as may be
levied in any year during each subsequent year that such person meets
the qualifications, and the surviving spouse or any owner or tenant
possessing a joint interest in such property at the time of the owner's
death and qualified at such time shall be entitled to pay the amount
of such tax as long as the surviving spouse, joint tenant or joint owner
continues to be qualified.143
B. The tax for which benefits are claimed shall be the lower of the tax due
for the assessment year commencing October 1 of the year immediately
preceding the initial claim for tax relief or the tax due for any subsequent
assessment year. If title to the real property is recorded in the name
of the person or spouse making a claim and qualifying and any other
person(s), the claimant shall be entitled to pay the claimant's functional
share of the tax on such property and such other person(s) shall pay
the person's functional share of the tax without regard for this article. A
mobile manufactured home shall be deemed to be real property.
§ 355-45. Transfer of property.
If a person to whom a claim for tax relief has been approved for any
assessment year transfers, assigns, grants or otherwise conveys,
subsequent to the first day of October but prior to the first day of August
in such assessment year, the interest in real property to which such claim
for tax relief is related, regardless of whether such transfer, assignment,
grant or conveyance is voluntary or involuntary, the amount of such tax
relief benefit, determined as the amount by which the tax payable without
benefit of this article exceeds the tax payable under the provisions of this
article, shall be a pro rata portion of the amount otherwise applicable in
such assessment year to be determined by a fraction the numerator of
which shall be the number of full months from the first day of October in
such assessment year to the date of such conveyance and the denominator
of which shall be 12. If such conveyance occurs in the month of October
the grantor shall be disqualified for such tax relief in such assessment
year. The grantee shall be required within a period not exceeding 10 days
immediately following the date of such conveyance to notify the Assessor,
or in the absence of such notice, upon determination by the Assessor
that such transfer, assignment, grant or conveyance has occurred, the
Assessor shall determine the amount of tax relief benefit to which the
grantor is entitled for such assessment year with respect to the interest
in real property conveyed and notify the Revenue Collector of the reduced
amount of such benefit. Upon receipt of such notice from the Assessor, the
Revenue Collector shall, if such notice is received after the tax due date
in the municipality, no later than 10 days thereafter mail or hand a bill
to the grantee stating the additional amount of tax due as determined by
the Assessor. Such tax shall be due and payable and collectible as other
property taxes and subject to the same liens and processes of collection,
provided such tax shall be due and payable in an initial or single installment
143. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 355-44 PLAINVILLE CODE § 355-45
1:304
not sooner than 30 days after the date such bill is mailed or handed to the
grantee and in equal amounts in any remaining, regular installments as the
same are due and payable.
§ 355-46. Application.
A. No claim shall be accepted unless the taxpayer or authorized agent of
such taxpayer files an application with the Assessor in such form and
manner as the Assessor may prescribe, during the period from February
1 to and including May 15 of any year in which benefits are first claimed,
including such information as is necessary to substantiate such claim
in accordance with requirements in such application. A taxpayer may
make application to the Assessor prior to August 15 of the claim year
for an extension of the application period. The Assessor may grant such
extension in the case of extenuating circumstance due to illness or
incapacitation as evidenced by a physician's certificate to that extent, or
if the Assessor determines there is good cause for doing so. The taxpayer
shall present to the Assessor a copy of such taxpayer's federal income
tax return and the federal income tax return of such taxpayer's spouse,
if filed separately, for such taxpayer's taxable year ending immediately
prior to the submission of the taxpayer's application, or, if not required to
file a federal income tax return, such other evidence of qualifying income
in respect to such taxable year as the Assessor may require.
(1) Each such application, together with the federal income tax return
and any other information submitted in relation thereto, shall be
examined by the Assessor and a determination shall be made as
to whether the application is approved. Upon determination by the
Assessor that the applying homeowner is entitled to tax relief, the
Assessor shall notify the homeowner and the Revenue Collector
of the approval of such application. The Revenue Collector shall
determine the maximum amount of the tax due with respect to such
homeowner's residence, and thereafter the property tax with respect
to such homeowner's residence shall not exceed such amount.
(2) After a taxpayer's claim for the first year has been filed and approved
such taxpayer shall file such an application biennially. In respect
to such application required after the filing and approval for the
first year the Assessor shall notify each such taxpayer concerning
application requirements by regular mail not later than February 1
of the assessment year in which such taxpayer is required to reapply,
enclosing a copy of the required application form. Such taxpayer
may submit such application to the Assessor by mail provided it is
received by the Assessor not later than March 15 in the assessment
year with respect to which such tax relief is claimed. Not later than
April 1 of such year the Assessor shall notify, by certified mail, any
such taxpayer for whom such application was not received by said
March 15 concerning application requirements and such taxpayer
shall submit not later than May 15 such application personally or, for
reasonable cause, by a person acting in behalf of such taxpayer as
approved by the Assessor.144
§ 355-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 355-46
1:305
B. Any person knowingly making a false application for the purpose of
claiming property tax relief shall be fined not more than $500. Any
person who fails to disclose all matters relating thereto or with intent to
defraud makes a false statement shall refund to the municipality all tax
relief improperly taken.
§ 355-47. Lien.
A. The Town shall have a lien on the property in the amount of the total
tax relief granted, plus interest applicable to the total of unpaid taxes
represented by such tax relief. Such lien shall have a priority in the
settlement of the taxpayer's estate.
B. The interest rate shall be simple interest at the rate of 2% (not
compounded). The lien together with interest shall be due and payable
upon termination of the program for the taxpayer.
§ 355-48. Construal with state statutes.
This article shall not be construed to conflict with any state statute or
regulation.
144. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 355-46 PLAINVILLE CODE § 355-48
1:306
ARTICLE X
Motor Vehicle Tax Delinquencies
[Adopted 7-18-2011]
§ 355-49. Reporting of delinquencies.
Section 14-33 of the Connecticut General Statutes provides that if any
property tax or any installment thereof laid by the Town upon a registered
motor vehicle or snowmobile remains unpaid, the Revenue Collector shall
notify the Commissioner of Motor Vehicles of such delinquency on a form
prescribed and furnished by the Commissioner. The Commissioner shall
not issue registration for such motor vehicle or snowmobile for the next
registration period until a receipt evidencing the payment of such tax
or certificate of abatement or other satisfactory evidence that the tax
obligation has been legally discharged has been presented to the
Commissioner.
§ 355-50. Administration costs.145
The reporting of motor vehicle or snowmobile tax delinquency to the
Commissioner and, thereafter, reporting payment on the account to the
Commissioner pursuant to § 14-33 of the Connecticut General Statutes
involves staff time, equipment use, and other incidental expenses. The
administration of § 14-33 of the Connecticut General Statutes has a cost to
the Town reasonably determined to be a fee as provided in Chapter 215,
Fees, for each such delinquency.
§ 355-51. Inclusion of interest, penalties and fees.
Section 12-166 of the Connecticut General Statutes authorizes the Revenue
Collector to include with the property tax and each installment and part
thereof due to the Town such tax as may have been increased by interest,
penalties, fees, and charges of collection.
§ 355-52. Cost of collection.
The fee as set forth in § 355-50 above is a cost of collection pursuant to
§ 12-166 of the Connecticut General Statutes.
§ 355-53. Duty of Revenue Collector.146
The Revenue Collector shall collect from each taxpayer whose motor vehicle
or snowmobile tax was delinquent and reported to the Commissioner
pursuant to § 14-33 of the Connecticut General Statutes the delinquent
tax and all interest, penalties, fees and charges thereon, including the
145. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
146. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 355-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 355-53
1:307
administration fee as provided in Chapter 215, Fees, for such reporting to
the Commissioner.
§ 355-53 PLAINVILLE CODE § 355-53
1:308
ARTICLE XI
Abatement for Persons of Limited Income
[Adopted 10-17-2011]
§ 355-54. Abatement authorized.
Pursuant to the authority of Connecticut General Statutes § 12-124a, as
amended, property taxes due for any tax year with respect to any residential
dwelling occupied by the owner or owners and for whom such dwelling
is the primary place of residence may be abated to the extent that such
property taxes exceed 8% of the total income from any source, adjusted for
self-employed persons to reflect the allowance for expenses in determining
adjusted gross income, of such owner or owners, and any other person for
whom such dwelling is the primary place of residence, for the calendar year
immediately preceding the beginning of the tax year for which such taxes
are due.
§ 355-55. Definitions.
For purposes of this article, "total income from any source" shall have the
same meaning as "gross income" as defined in Regulations of Connecticut
State Agencies § 46b-215a-1(11), as the same may from time to time
hereafter be amended.
§ 355-56. Application for abatement.147
Applications for abatement under this article signed by all of the owners
of the property shall be filed in the Assessor's office by not later than May
31 in the tax year for which such abatement is sought, provided that if
the amount of taxes due with respect to the residence has not by then
been determined, then such application shall be filed not later than 10 days
following the determination of the amount of such taxes. Applications shall
be accompanied by such affidavits, tax returns and other evidence of total
income as the Assessor may reasonably require.
§ 355-57. Agreement.148
Upon a determination that an applicant or applicants, as the case may
be, are eligible for abatement of taxes under this article by the Assessor's
office, the applicant or applicants, as the case may be, shall execute and
acknowledge an agreement, on a form which shall contain a legal
description of the real property with respect to which such abatement is
approved, shall be executed, witnessed and acknowledged in the form and
manner required for the transfer of an interest in real property, and shall
grant a lien to the Town, creating and securing an obligation to reimburse
the Town in the amount of the taxes abated, with interest at the rate per
147. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
148. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 355-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 355-57
1:309
annum applicable to each fiscal year as determined in accordance with
§ 355-58 of this article by not later than the date of sale or transfer of
such real property or upon the earlier death of the last surviving owner.
Additionally, the applicant or applicants shall pay to the Town the cost of
recording said lien in the office of the Town Clerk. Such agreement shall
be delivered to the Revenue Collector by not later than July 10 in the tax
year for which such abatement is granted, provided that if the amount
of taxes has not by then been determined, then not later than 10 days
following the date on which such taxes, as finally determined, become due
and payable. Such agreement shall be recorded upon the land records and
shall constitute a lien upon such real property which shall remain valid until
paid. Upon payment, the Revenue Collector shall furnish a release of the
lien to be recorded in the office of the Town Clerk.
§ 355-58. Interest.
The interest on the obligation to reimburse the Town under § 355-57 of this
article, for the fiscal year beginning July 1, 2012, and for each fiscal year
thereafter until changed by the Town Council, shall be 5% per annum (not
compounded). The Town Council may by resolution adopted by May 1 in any
year thereafter alter the interest to be paid on such obligation for the next
ensuing fiscal year until further altered in accordance herewith.
§ 355-59. Construal with state statutes.
This article shall not be construed to conflict with any state statute or
regulation.
§ 355-57 PLAINVILLE CODE § 355-59
1:310
Chapter 374
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
§ 355-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 355-59
1:311

ARTICLE I
All-Night Parking
[Adopted by Town Meeting 2-27-1959; amended by Town Council
6-19-1978]
§ 374-1. Parking prohibited.
It shall be unlawful from December 1 to April 1 for the owner or operator of
a motor vehicle to allow such vehicle to stand on any street in the Town of
Plainville for more than one hour between the hours of 12:00 midnight and
6:00 a.m. on any given day.
§ 374-2. Removal of vehicles.149
The Director of Physical Services, or his designated agent, may direct the
removal of any vehicle parked in violation of § 374-1 of this article.
§ 374-3. Penalties for offenses.
Any violator of this article shall be fined $50 for each offense and, in
addition, shall pay for the towing, moving, parking and storage of any
vehicle removed in accordance with this article.
149. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 374-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 374-3
1:313

ARTICLE II
Parking Regulations
[Adopted by Town Council 12-27-1978; amended 8-4-2003;
10-20-2008; 5-2-2011]
§ 374-4. Authority.150
The Town Manager of the Town of Plainville, in his capacity as Traffic
Authority arising out of Chapter VI, Section 3, of the Charter of the Town
of Plainville and § 14-297 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended,
does hereby promulgate, pursuant to § 14-307 of the Connecticut General
Statutes, the following regulations for parking on public highways within
the Town of Plainville.
§ 374-5. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
OFFENDER — Refers to the registered owner of any motor vehicle found in
violation of § 374-6 or 374-7 of these regulations.
PARK — To permit a motor vehicle to remain stationary upon the public
highway, whether occupied or not, other than temporarily for the purpose
of, and while actually engaged in, receiving or discharging passengers
or loading or unloading merchandise or goods, or in obedience to traffic
regulations or traffic signs or signals.
§ 374-6. Parking regulated.
It is not permitted to park a motor vehicle within the public way in the Town
of Plainville:
A. Overtime. For a longer period of time than permitted and noticed by a
sign signifying the maximum length of time permitted, for violation of
which the offender shall be fined $25.
B. More than 12 inches from curb. Unless it is parked so that its right-hand
wheels are no more than 12 inches from the curb or right-hand edge
of the paved portion of the highway, for violation of which the offender
shall be fined $25.
C. Wrong side of street. Except upon the right-hand side of the highway in
the direction in which said vehicle is headed, for violation of which the
offender shall be fined $25.
D. Blocking driveway. In such manner as to block safe access to a driveway,
for violation of which the offender shall be fined $25.
E. Within 25 feet of intersection. Within 25 feet of an intersection, for
violation of which the offender shall be fined $25.
150. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 374-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 374-6
1:315
F. Within 25 feet of stop sign. Within 25 feet of a stop sign caused to be
erected by a state or local traffic authority, for violation of which the
offender shall be fined $25.
G. Blocking crosswalk. So as to block or invade a marked crosswalk, for
violation of which the offender shall be fined $25.
H. On sidewalk. So that any portion of the wheels of said vehicle remain
stationary upon a sidewalk, for violation of which the offender shall be
fined $25.
I. Double parking. In such manner as to constitute a traffic hazard or
obstruct the free movement of traffic upon the highways, for violation of
which the offender shall be fined $25.
J. Restricted parking. Alongside any curbing which has been painted
yellow, signifying "restricted area - no parking," or alongside any portion
of the public highway upon which a state or local traffic authority has
caused to be erected a "no parking" sign or other sign which restricts
parking to emergency vehicles, for violation of which the offender shall
be fined $25.
§ 374-7. Fire hydrants.
No vehicle shall be parked or permitted to remain stationary for any
purpose within 10 feet of any fire hydrant. For violations of this section the
offender shall be fined $50.
§ 374-8. Parking on private property.151
It shall be unlawful for any person without right to park any motor vehicle
upon the premises of another after having been forbidden to do so by
the owner, either directly or by clear and legitimate signs posted thereon.
Any person so parking any motor vehicle and refusing to move the vehicle
when commanded by a police officer shall be fined not more than $50.
Notwithstanding the above, whenever a police officer shall be requested
to act concerning such motor vehicle which has been so parked and left
unattended, he shall place upon such vehicle a notice directing the owner
or operator thereof to appear at the Police Department prior to a time
specified in said notice. If any person receiving said notice shall appear
as directed and shall pay a fine of $10, such payment shall bar further
prosecution for violation of this section.
§ 374-9. Notice of violation.
The Plainville Police Department shall cause notice of violation to be placed
on offending vehicles with the fine for the offense stated thereon.
151. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 374-6 PLAINVILLE CODE § 374-10
1:316
§ 374-10. Payment of fines.152
All fines are to be paid at the Plainville Police Department, 19 Neal Court,
Plainville, within 30 days of the offense. If the fine remains unpaid for more
than 30 days after the offense it shall double. If a fine remains unpaid more
than 60 days, a warrant shall be issued.
§ 374-11. Removal of motor vehicle.
In addition to the payment of fines as provided in §§ 374-6 and 374-7 herein
for motor vehicles illegally parked, any motor vehicle parked in violation
of these regulations shall be subject to removal from any public highway
within the municipality by order of the Plainville Police Department, and
the offender shall pay for the towing, moving, parking and storage of said
vehicle.
152. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 374-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 374-11
1:317

ARTICLE III
Handicapped Parking
[Adopted by Town Council 12-17-1984; amended 4-17-1989;
8-4-2003]
§ 374-12. Applicability.
This article shall apply to all new and existing nonresidential sites that have
a parking area for 20 or more vehicles, including but not limited to shopping
centers, office buildings, commercial buildings, mercantile buildings,
warehouses, storage buildings, manufacturing buildings, convalescent
homes, schools and public buildings.
§ 374-13. Use of specially designated spaces.
After establishment of specially marked parking spaces for handicapped
persons, no person shall park a motor vehicle in such space unless a
handicapped person is either a passenger or occupant of the vehicle and
the vehicle contains a designation issued by the Commissioner of Motor
Vehicles, pursuant to the Connecticut General Statutes, which designation
shall be visible as per the Connecticut General Statutes, or an official
handicapped designation issued by any other state, district or territory
subject to the laws of the United States of America shall be recognized as
acceptable identification in the Town of Plainville.
§ 374-14. Number of spaces to be provided; location.
A. On each site having parking spaces for at least 20 but not more than 25
vehicles, at least one space shall be specially designated and reserved for
handicapped parking. Additional spaces for handicapped parking shall be in
accordance with the following table:
Total Parking on Site
Required Number of Handicapped
Parking Spaces
26 to 50 2
51 to 75 3
76 to 100 4
101 to 150 5
151 to 200 6
201 to 300 7
301 to 400 8
401 to 500 9
501 to 1,000 2% of total
Over 1,000 20 plus 1 for each 100 over 1,000
B. Parking spaces for the handicapped shall be located as close as possible
to elevators, ramps, walkways and entrances, and so located that the
handicapped person is not compelled to wheel or walk behind parked
§ 374-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 374-14
1:319
vehicles to reach entrances, ramps, walkways and elevators. Also, parking
spaces shall be adjacent to curb cuts or other unobstructed methods
permitting sidewalk access to a handicapped person.
§ 374-15. Marking of spaces.
Each such space designated for handicapped parking shall be as near as
possible to a building entrance or walkway and shall be not less than 15 feet
in width, including three feet of cross hatch, unless the same would create
a nonconforming condition, in which event the existing parking stall width
shall be permitted or shall be parallel to the sidewalk. Each space shall
be designated by an above-grade sign with white lettering against a blue
background and shall bear the words "HANDICAPPED PARKING STATE
PERMIT REQUIRED" and "VIOLATORS WILL BE FINED." Such sign shall
also bear the international symbol of access. Such signs shall be erected,
installed and maintained by and at the expense of the owner, operator,
lessee, or tenant of said site. If the sign and markings called for herein are
not installed within 30 days after written request by the Town Council or
its designee, the Town my proceed to install the same and impose the costs
thereof against the owner of the site.
§ 374-16. Penalties for offenses.153
Whenever any vehicle shall be found parked in violation of this article, any
Plainville police officer may issue a ticket for such violation, which ticket
shall provide for a fine payable to the Town of Plainville and remitted to the
Plainville Police Department within 15 days of the ticket date. If any fine
is not paid within 15 days, a penalty in an amount equal to the fine shall
immediately become due and payable in addition to the original fine and a
warrant may be issued for the arrest of the violator. Any person who violates
any provision of this article for which a penalty or fine is not otherwise
provided shall, for a first violation, be subject to a fine of $150 and, for a
subsequent violation, shall be subject to a fine of $250.
§ 374-17. Owner's responsibility for violations.
The registered owner of any vehicle parked in violation of this article shall
be presumed to be the operator at the time of the violation.
§ 374-18. Enforcement.
A. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article, tickets may
be issued by any persons authorized to issue tickets, summons or
infractions under the authority of the Connecticut General Statutes or
the Charter of the Town of Plainville.
B. The adoption of this article shall not preclude the enforcement, by
properly authorized officials, of like provisions of the Connecticut
General Statutes.
153. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 374-14 PLAINVILLE CODE § 374-18
1:320
ARTICLE IV
Operation of Vehicles on Town Land
[Adopted by Town Council 8-12-1991]
§ 374-19. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MOTORCYCLE — That type of vehicle as defined by § 14-1(55) of the
Connecticut General Statutes.154
MOTOR VEHICLE — That type of vehicle as defined by § 14-1(54) of the
Connecticut General Statutes.155
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — Motor bikes, mopeds, dirt bikes,
snowmobiles, minibikes, all-terrain vehicles or any other motorized
recreational vehicle.
TOWN LAND — Any land owned or leased by the Town, including but not
limited to parks, school sites, easements, and any other properties wherein
the Town has any rights to the usage of the same.
§ 374-20. Operation of recreational vehicles.
No owner or operator of a recreational vehicle shall operate or shall allow
the operation of said vehicle on Town land.
§ 374-21. Operation of motor vehicles or motorcycles.
A motor vehicle or motorcycle shall only be operated on Town land
designated roadways or parking areas, unless the owner/operator has
received written permission from the Director of Safety exempting said
vehicle from this article.
§ 374-22. Penalties for offenses.
Any violation of this article shall be punishable by a fine of $99.
154. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
155. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 374-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 374-22
1:321

ZONING REGULATIONS 

Effective – December 1, 2010 
Revised to March 22, 2018 – See !ppendix “B” 
As provided in Subsection 8.04.1: 
Any use of land, buildings or structures not expressly permitted by these Regulations in the various zoning 
......... .. .......... . 
. 	.. ... ..... .. ........... .. .. ....... . ... .. 

permitted, the Commission shall be responsible for interpreting these Regulations. 

This regulation, effective December 1, 2010 was revised in part through a grant from the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection through the Farmington River Enhancement Grant Program. 
The intent of the grant is to: 
• 	
review existing municipal regulations and ordinances, and 

• 	
draft recommended changes to remove barriers to low impact development (LID) and create opportunity for low impact development practices to be employed in Plainville. 

• 	
.......... ... ....’. ...... ........... .. accommodate low impact development. 



Table of Contents 

Article 1. RESIDENTIAL ZONES ..........................................................1 

Section 1.01 Purpose ........................................................................................................................ 1 
Section 1.02 Permitted Uses & Structures......................................................................................... 1 

A. Permitted Principal Uses and Structures................................................2 

B. Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures..............................................4 

Section 1.03 Dimensional Standards ................................................................................................. 6 

A. Minimum Lot Requirements...................................................................6 

B. Minimum Yard Requirements ................................................................7 

C. Maximum Building Limitations...............................................................8 

D. Required Floor Area................................................................................8 

Section 1.04 Use Regulations ............................................................................................................ 9 

A. Rear Lots.................................................................................................9 

B. Open Space Development ....................................................................10 

C. Non-Profit and/or Governmentally Assisted Housing Zone .................12 

D. Common Interest Communities and Multi-Family Dwellings...............13 

E. Farming.................................................................................................23 

F. Accessory Apartments..........................................................................24 

G. Trailers, Campers, Luxury Motor Coaches and Recreational Vehicles .26 
H. Commercial Vehicle Storage in Residential Zones................................27 

I. Home Occupations ...............................................................................29 

Article 2. BUSINESS ZONES .............................................................32 

Section 2.01 Purposes ..................................................................................................................... 32 
Section 2.02 Permitted Uses & Structures....................................................................................... 32 

A. Permitted Principal Uses and Structures..............................................33 

B. Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures............................................38 

Section 2.03 Dimensional Standards ............................................................................................... 39 

A. Minimum Lot Requirements.................................................................39 

B. Minimum Yard Requirements ..............................................................40 

C. Maximum Building Limitations.............................................................41 

Section 2.04 Use Regulations .......................................................................................................... 42 

A. Drive Through Windows .......................................................................42 

B. Adaptive Reuse.....................................................................................42 

C. Residential / Mixed Use........................................................................43 

D. Ancillary Restaurant / Retail Uses ........................................................43 

E. Quarrying, Processing and Removal Of Stone ......................................44 

F. Self-Storage Facility ..............................................................................44 

G. Multiple Structures (Business)..............................................................44 

H. Adult Uses.............................................................................................45 

I. Storage Trailers.....................................................................................45 

J. Automotive / Recreational Vehicle / Trailer Uses ................................46 

K. Heavy Traffic Generators......................................................................46 

L. Luxury Motor Coach Sales and Service.................................................47 

M. Dog and Cat Care Facilities ...................................................................48 

N. Medical Marijuana Dispensing and Growing Facilities .........................49 

O. Recycling Facility or Salvage Facility .....................................................50 

P. Redevelopment Design District ............................................................51 

Article 3. SPECIAL ZONES................................................................63 

Section 3.01 Floodplain Zone .......................................................................................................... 63 
Section 3.02 Aquifer Protection Overlay Zone................................................................................. 65 
Section 3.03 Ridgeline Protection Overlay Zone.............................................................................. 66 
Section 3.04 Airport Approach Overlay Zone .................................................................................. 68 

Article 4. BASIC STANDARDS ..........................................................69 

Section 4.01 Off-Street Parking and Loading ................................................................................... 69 

A. Off-Street Parking.................................................................................69 

B. Off-Street Loading ................................................................................74 

C. Sidewalks – Alternative Transportation Access....................................75 

Section 4.02 Traffic Circulation and Parking .................................................................................... 76 
Section 4.03 Signs ........................................................................................................................... 77 
Section 4.04 Landscaping and Screening ......................................................................................... 81 
Section 4.05 Waste Removal and Recycling .................................................................................... 83 
Section 4.06 Removal and Deposition of Earth Material ................................................................. 84 
Section 4.07 Fences......................................................................................................................... 89 
Section 4.08 Obstructions on Corner Lots (Corner Visibility) ........................................................... 91 
Section 4.09 Projections into Required Yards..................................................................................91 
Section 4.10 Water and Sewer ........................................................................................................ 92 
Section 4.11 Commercial Lighting ................................................................................................... 92 
Section 4.12 Soil Erosion and Sediment Control ..............................................................................93 
Section 4.13 Stormwater Management........................................................................................... 93 

Article 5. FORM STANDARDS..........................................................94 

Section 5.01 Design Standards ........................................................................................................ 94 

Article 6. SPECIAL STANDARDS .......................................................96 

Section 6.01 Non-Conforming Lots.................................................................................................. 96 
Section 6.02 Non-Conforming Structures and Uses ......................................................................... 96 
Section 6.03 Outdoor Wood Burning Furnaces................................................................................ 97 
Section 6.04 Wireless Telecommunication Facilities ....................................................................... 98 
Section 6.05 Solar Energy Regulations .......................................................................................... 101 

Article 7. PROCEDURES ................................................................103 

Section 7.01 Zoning Certificate of Compliance .............................................................................. 103 

A. Application Requirements ................................................................. 103 

B. Proceedings ....................................................................................... 103 

C. Notice Provisions ............................................................................... 104 

D. As-Built Plan Required ....................................................................... 104 

E. Zoning Certificate Expiration ............................................................. 104 

F. Certificate not a Permit ..................................................................... 104 

Section 7.02 Site Plan Application .................................................................................................105 

A. Application Requirements ................................................................. 105 

B. Proceedings ....................................................................................... 106 

C. Decision Considerations .................................................................... 107 

D. Action Documentation ...................................................................... 108 

E. Following Approval ............................................................................ 108 

F. Expiration and Completion................................................................ 109 

Section 7.03 Special Exception Application ................................................................................... 110 

A. Application Requirements ................................................................. 110 

B. Proceedings ....................................................................................... 111 

C. Decision Considerations .................................................................... 112 

D. Special Exception Criteria .................................................................. 113 

E. Action Documentation ...................................................................... 115 

F. Following Approval ............................................................................ 115 

Section 7.04 Regulation Amendment Application ......................................................................... 116 

A. Application Requirements ................................................................. 116 

B. Proceedings ....................................................................................... 117 

C. Decision Considerations .................................................................... 118 

D. Action Documentation ...................................................................... 119 

E. Following Approval ............................................................................ 119 

Section 7.05 Zone Change Application .......................................................................................... 120 

A. Application Requirements ................................................................. 120 

B. Proceedings ....................................................................................... 121 

C. Decision Considerations .................................................................... 122 

D. Action Documentation ...................................................................... 123 

E. Following Approval ............................................................................ 123 

Section 7.06 Change in Use ........................................................................................................... 124 
Section 7.07 Concept Plan Submission .......................................................................................... 124 

Section 7.08 General Procedures .................................................................................................. 125 

A. Application Submittal Requirements................................................. 125 

B. Date of Receipt .................................................................................. 125 

C. Incomplete Applications.................................................................... 125 

D. Sequence of Hearings ........................................................................ 125 

E. Consultations..................................................................................... 126 

F. Notice by Newspaper ........................................................................ 126 

G. Public Notification ............................................................................. 126 

H. Notification of Abutting Municipalities ............................................. 127 

I. Notification of Water Companies...................................................... 127 

J. Beneficiaries of a Trust ...................................................................... 127 

Article 8. ADMINISTRATION .........................................................129 

Section 8.01 Authority .................................................................................................................. 129 
Section 8.02 Purposes ................................................................................................................... 129 
Section 8.03 Zoning Districts ......................................................................................................... 130 
Section 8.04 Application ............................................................................................................... 131 
Section 8.05 Enforcement and Penalties ....................................................................................... 131 
Section 8.06 Board of Appeals ...................................................................................................... 132 
Section 8.07 Validity ..................................................................................................................... 132 
Section 8.08 Repeal and Effective Date ......................................................................................... 132 

Article 9. DEFINITIONS .................................................................133 

Section 9.01 Use of Terms.............................................................................................................133 
Section 9.02 Definitions ................................................................................................................ 133 

Article 10. APPENDICES ..................................................................145 

Section 10.01 Appendix A – Site Plan Checklist ............................................................................... 145 
Section 10.02 Appendix B – Text Amendments by Date..................................................................147 
Section 10.03 Appendix C – BY LAWS..............................................................................................150 

Section 1.01 


Article 1. RESIDENTIAL ZONES 

Section 1.01 Purpose 
The various residential districts are intended to provide for suitable areas for residential use and development appropriate to the environmental characteristics of the land and the character of the neighborhood. The differentiation among the residential districts is intended to provide for variety in the density of residential neighborhoods and a diversity of housing opportunities after consideration of soil types, terrain, and infrastructure capacity. The residential districts may allow for certain non-residential uses (such as schools, churches, etc.) when it can be demonstrated that they are compatible with nearby residential uses and preserve neighborhood character and property values. 
Section 1.02 Permitted Uses & Structures 
ZONING DISTRICT LEGEND 
R-40  Single Family Residence  
R-20  Single Family Residence  
R-15  Single Family Residence  
R-12  Multi-Family / Single Family Residence  
R-11  Multi-Family / Single Family Residence  
R-10  Multi-Family / Single Family Residence  
R  Multi-Family / Single Family Residence  
NPH/ GAR  Non-Profit Housing / Government Assisted Residence  
FP*  Flood Plain Zone  

*See Section 3.01 

CODE LEGEND 
A  
ZP  
SP  
SE  


Allowed – no permit required for the use, building or structure 
Allowed -Zoning Permit required for the use, building or structure 
Allowed -Site Plan approval required by the Planning and Zoning Commission for the use, building or structure 
Conditional -The use, building or structure may be allowed by the Planning and Zoning Commission upon approval of a Special Exception application 
Not permitted 
Any use not listed is prohibited. 
1 Buildings and land may be used and buildings may be altered or erected to be used for the following principal uses: 

1. Residential Uses  R 40  R 20  R 15  R 12  R 11  R 10  R  NPH/ GAR  

1.1. Dwellings for one family.  ZP  ZP  ZP  ZP  ZP  ZP  ZP  
1.2. Rear lots in accordance with Subsection 1.04. A  SE  SE  SE  SE  SE  SE  
1.3. Open Space Development in accordance with Subsection 1.04. B  SE  SE  
1.4. Non-profit and/or governmentally assisted housing in accordance with Subsection 1.04. C  SP  
1.5. Condominium and multi-family developments in accordance with Subsection 1.04. D  SE  SE  SE  SE  
1.6. Age restricted condominium and multi-family developments in accordance with Subsection 1.04. D  SE  SE  SE  SE  SE  SE  

2. Agricultural / Open Space Uses  R 40  R 20  R 15  R 12  R 11  R 10  R  NPH/ GAR  

2.1. Farming, raising poultry, forestry, truck or nursery gardening in accordance with Subsection 1.04. E  A  A  A  A  A  A  A  
2.2. Passive open space with no structural improvements.  A  A  A  A  A  A  A  A  
2.3. Park or playground operated by: • A community association. • A non-profit corporation located in the Town of Plainville. • An employing corporation for the benefit of its employees. • A governmental unit.  SE  SE  SE  SE  SE  SE  SE  SE  

(continued on next page) 
2 

Section 1.02 
(continued from previous page) 
3. Institutional Uses  R 40  R 20  R 15  R 12  R 11  R 10  R  NPH/ GAR  

3.1. Church  SE  SE  SE  SE  SE  SE  SE  SE  
3.2. Public or private school  SE  SE  SE  SE  SE  SE  SE  SE  
3.3. Library / Public Museum  SE  SE  SE  SE  SE  SE  SE  SE  
3.4. Public or private convalescent home  SE  SE  SE  SE  SE  SE  SE  SE  
3.5. Hospital or clinic  SE  SE  SE  SE  SE  SE  SE  SE  
3.6. Town Hall, Police Station or Firehouse  SE  SE  SE  SE  SE  SE  SE  SE  
3.7. Any other similar educational, religious, or governmental use.  SE  SE  SE  SE  SE  SE  SE  SE  

4. Other Uses  R 40  R 20  R 15  R 12  R 11  R 10  R  NPH/ GAR  

4.1. Public or private cemetery  SE  SE  SE  SE  SE  SE  SE  SE  
4.2. Public utility, building or facility with the exception of a wireless telecommunication facility  SE  SE  SE  SE  SE  SE  SE  SE  
4.3. Telecommunication facility in accordance with the provisions of Section 6.03  A/SP  A/SP  A/SP  A/SP  A/SP  A/SP  A/SP  A/SP  
4.4. Heavy Traffic Generator creating 100 peak hour vehicle trips in accordance with Subsection 2.04. K  SE  SE  SE  SE  SE  SE  SE  SE  

3 

The following uses and/or structures, including signs in accordance with Section 4.03, may be permitted as accessory uses and/or structures in accordance with the provisions of these Regulations provided: 
• 	
No accessory structure shall be constructed or located on any lot prior to the time of construction of the principal building to which it is accessory. 

• 	
No such accessory use or structure shall be permitted in a common interest or multi-family community unless approved by the Commission. 

• 	
It is accessory and clearly subordinate to the principal use. 


1. Home Based Business  R 40  R 20  R 15  R 12  R 11  R 10  R  NPH/ GAR  

1.1. Low Impact Home Occupation in accordance with section 1.04. I.1  A  A  A  A  A  A  A  
1.2. Moderate Impact Home Occupations in accordance with Section 1.04. I.2  SE  SE  SE  SE  SE  SE  SE  

2. Accessory Apartment  R 40  R 20  R 15  R 12  R 11  R 10  R  NPH/ GAR  

2.1. Accessory apartments when accessory to a single-family dwelling and when in accordance with Subsection 1.04. F except that no accessory building may be used as a residence.  SP  SP  SP  SP  SP  SP  SP  

3. Commercial Vehicle Storage  R 40  R 20  R 15  R 12  R 11  R 10  R  NPH/ GAR  

3.1. One commercial vehicle in compliance with Section 1.04. H may be stored in a private garage or driveway when accessory to a single-family dwelling.  A  A  A  A  A  A  A  

(continued on next page) 
4 

Section 1.02 
(continued from previous page) 
4. Other Accessory Uses  R 40  R 20  R 15  R 12  R 11  R 10  R  NPH/ GAR  

4.1. Other accessory uses that are customary and incidental to a permitted use as determined by the Commission.  A  A  A  A  A  A  A  A  
4.2. Day Care Center, Family  A  A  A  A  A  A  A  
4.3. Farming, raising poultry, forestry, truck or nursery gardening accessory to a permitted use in accordance with Subsection 1.04. E  A  A  A  A  A  A  
4.4. Storage and repair of trailers and recreational vehicles in accordance with Subsection 1.04.G  A  A  A  A  A  A  A  
4.5. Roof or Ground Mounted Solar Energy Systems in accordance with Section 6.05  A  A  A  A  A  A  A  A  

5 


Section 1.03 Dimensional Standards 
All buildings or structures or uses of land, erected or altered after the enactment of these Regulations shall conform to the requirements specified for the zone in which the building or structure or use of land is located, as shown in the following subsections. 

ZONE  Minimum Lot Area Per Dwelling Unit (1) (S.F.)  Minimum Frontage (2) (Ft.)  
R-40  40,000  150  
R-20  20,000  100  
R-15  15,000  100  
R-12  12,000  100  
R-11  11,000  90  
R-10  10,000  80  
R  8,750  70  
NPH / GAR  In accordance with Subsection 1.04. C  - 
Open Space Development  In accordance with Subsection 1.04. B  In accordance with Subsection 1.04. B.  

(1) 	
Designated wetlands and flood plain areas shall not be permitted as a part of minimum lot area requirements and areas shall be deemed the minimum required per dwelling unit. 

(2)	
 On an irregular shaped lot having sufficient area to meet the requirements of the zone in which it is located and the mean width is equal to or exceeds the minimum frontage specified for the lots in the zone, a permit for erection of buildings thereon may be granted if the width of the lot at the street line is eighty (80) percent or more of the width of that part of the lot back from the street line a distance equal to the specified minimum frontage of the lots in that zone. 


6 
Section 1.03 

ZONE  Minimum Front Yd. (1) (2) (4) (Feet)  Minimum Side Yd. (3) (Feet)  Minimum Rear Yd. (3) (4) (Feet)  
R-40  50  20 each  30  
R-20  24  15 each  30  
R-15  24  15 each  30  
R-12  24  15 each  30  
R-11  24  10 each  30  
R-10  24  10 each  20  
R  24  10 each  20  
NPH / GAR  In accordance with Subsection 1.04. C  In accordance with Subsection 1.04. C  In accordance with Subsection 1.04. C  
Open Space Development  In accordance with Subsection 1.04. B  In accordance with Subsection 1.04. B  In accordance with Subsection 1.04. B  

(1) 	
The minimum front yard shall be provided when no building line has been established by the Planning and Zoning Commission. 

(2) 	
The minimum front yard for property in any zone may be established at a dimension different than that prescribed in Section 1.03 by the initiative and action of the Commission in the administration of Section 7.02 if the Commission determines that a change in the front yard dimension will (1) effect better placement of structures, parking, and other site features related to new development or substantial redevelopment of a parcel and (2) advance a public interest in maintaining or improving the relationship between public and private spaces along the street on which the property fronts. 

(3) 	
Detached accessory structures not more than twelve (12) feet in height, not used for human habitation or for the housing of animals, may be located in the required rear yard provided that they are located not less than five (5) feet from any side or rear lot line, and provided further that they occupy, in the aggregate, not more than 700 square feet. Swimming pools and decks shall not be considered a part of the allowable structure area in required rear yards.  In an effort to reduce the profusion of structures having a commercial appearance in residential zones, sheds, pool houses, garages and other similar detached accessory structures shall be of a construction that reasonably matches that of the primary structure and/or the residential character of the neighborhood. Metallic sheds up to 100 square feet are permitted.  

(4) 	
Attached garages and/or storage space not exceeding 700 square feet or 35% of the heated, habitable square footage of the primary dwelling, whichever is greater, but never to exceed 1,350 square feet, are permitted in accordance with bulk requirements established for the zone, except that no attached structure shall exceed the height or elevation of the primary structure.  To a feasible extent, any such attached garage shall be constructed using like or similar material and color to match or compliment the primary structure. Any other permissible second story space shall not count towards the maximum square footage. 

(5) 	
Swimming pools and decks shall comply with the following standards: 

a. 	
If attached to the primary structure, swimming pools and associated decks shall meet the minimum setback required for the zone. A swimming pool that is integral to an attached deck shall be considered an attached structure for the purpose of this section. Integral shall mean having direct access to the pool from the dwelling over an attached deck. 

b. 	
If detached from the primary structure, swimming pools and associated and non-associated decks in excess of an average of 18 inches in height shall be located not less than 10 feet from the permitted property line. 

c. 	
Swimming pools and at grade decks of less than an average of 18 inches in height may be located in a required rear or side yard provided they are not less than five (5) feet from any side or rear lot line.  



(6) 	
Greenhouses and barns may be exempted from the accessory structure area limitation of 700 square feet provided that: 

a. 	
The lot is two (2) acres or more in area. 

b. 	
The land is used for commercial farming, forestry, truck or nursery gardening or education. 

c. 	
Location of the greenhouse or barn otherwise complies with these regulations and receives site plan approval by the Commission. 

d. 	
A plan is filed with the Planning Department showing the location of all structures on the land. 

e. 	
Appropriate construction permits are obtained. 




7 

ZONE  Maximum Height (Feet)  Maximum Stories  Maximum Coverage (Percent)  
R-40  30  2  - 
R-20  30  2  - 
R-15  30  2  - 
R-12  30  2  - 
R-11  30  2  - 
R-10  30  2  - 
R  30  2  - 
NPH / GAR  30 feet or 2.5 stories, whichever is less  25 percent  
Open Space Development  30  2  - 


1. 	
All structures hereafter erected, structurally altered or enlarged for use in whole or in part as dwellings shall have the following minimum requirements for living quarters per dwelling unit: 

2. 	
R-40, R-20 and R-15 Zones:  a minimum of 1000 square feet. 

3. 	
R-12, R-11, R-10, R Zones, a single family dwelling shall contain a minimum of 768 square feet. 

4. 	
Multi-family unit size in commercial zones shall conform to applicable requirements for the respective zone and type of unit in accordance with Section 2.04. C. 


8 
Section 1.04 


Section 1.04 Use Regulations 


1. 	
The provisions of this section are intended to permit, as a special exception, the utilization of land for uses permitted in the residential zone in which it may be located, which has been landlocked or deprived of the required minimum frontage on a street or, in the case of a subdivision, where the topography or unusual shape of the property lends itself to the use of a rear lot to accomplish the best use of the land. 

2. 	
In the case of subdivision, the Commission shall not approve rear lots unless it finds that such lots provide the best development of the land because of the topography and shape of the land. 

3. 	
For R-40, R-20 and R-15 Zones, the area of the lot shall be at least fifty (50) percent greater than the lot area requirement for the zone in which it is located. For R-12, R-11 and R-10 Zones all the requirements of an R-15 Zone shall be met. Permitted uses shall be limited to a single-family dwelling. 

4. 	
For R-40, R-20 and R-15 Zones, the lot line from which the right of access leads shall be deemed the front lot line of the rear lot and the lot width for the rear lot shall be at least fifty (50) percent greater than the frontage requirement for the zone in which the lot is located. For R-12, R-11 and R-10 Zones all the requirements of an R-15 Zone shall be met. 

5. 	
The front lot line of the rear lot shall be parallel to the street line or not greater than ten degrees (10°) from parallel to the street line or to the chord drawn from the intersection of the side lot lines of the rear lot with the arc of a curvilinear street line. 

6. 	
No building to be used in whole or in part as a dwelling shall be erected on any rear lot unless: 


a. 	
Said rear lot abuts on an accepted street or highway paved with bituminous concrete hard surface. 

b. 	
Said rear lot shall have unobstructed right of access to the street or highway over a segment of the lot intended for that purpose having a minimum width of twenty (20) feet, containing a driveway constructed and maintained by the owner(s). 

c. 	
Where two or more access ways to rear lots adjoin, a common driveway may be provided within them. 

d. 	
Maximum dwellings served with a common driveway shall not exceed three (3). 


7. 	
The applicant shall be responsible to prepare and record an access and maintenance agreement identifying perpetual access and maintenance rights and responsibilities for future lot owners prior to the sale of any lots. 

8. 	
The Commission shall require a site plan sealed by a registered land surveyor, licensed by the State of Connecticut, prepared to Class A-2 accuracy and drawn to a scale not less than 40 feet to the inch and which shall show: property lines and adjacent public streets or highways; site grading; proposed landscaping and any other features considered necessary by the Commission for the adequate protection of abutting property owners and the study of the proposed rear lot. 


9 

1. 	Purpose -The purpose of this section is to provide, through a Special Exception process, for flexibility in residential development patterns in order to encourage the: 
• 	
Preservation of open space and interconnection of open space areas. 

• 	
Protection of important natural and scenic resources. 

• 	
Provision for public access. 


2. 	
As part of the Special Exception for the Open Space Development, the Commission may, in its sole discretion, allow the application of the following requirements on any lot(s) within the proposed Open Space Development in the zone indicated. 

3. 	
The area dedicated for open space or other public purposes in the development shall be in a location, shape, topography, and character approved by the Commission. 

4. 	
The Commission may modify any application so as to designate open space in locations other than those proposed if such modification will conserve noteworthy natural or cultural features and/or contribute to creation of greenways or connection to neighboring open space. 

5. 	
Not more than fifty (50) percent of the designated open space shall contain wetlands, watercourses, and slopes in excess of twenty (20) percent. Open space shall not contain storm water detention basins or other constructed drainage features unless designed as a functioning equivalent to a naturally occurring water resource and deemed appropriate by the Commission. 

6. 	
Regardless of any reduction of dimensional standard which may be permitted by the Commission, each lot within a subdivision shall conform to the requirements of the Health Code. 


10 
Section 1.04 
R-40 Zone  Open Space Set-Aside  
Less than  25% to  35% to  45% to  55% to  66% or  
25%  34.99%  44.99%  54.99%  64.99%  greater  
Minimum Lot Area (square feet)  40,000  36,000  32,000  28,000  24,000  20,000  
Minimum Frontage (feet) provided  
the lot has the required frontage on  
and obtains access from a new road  150  135  120  105  90  75  
to be built as part of the  
development (otherwise 150 feet)  
Minimum Front Yard (feet) provided  
the lot has the required frontage on  
and obtains access from a new road  50  45  40  35  30  25  
to be built as part of the  
development (otherwise 50 feet)  
Minimum Side Yard (feet)  20  18  16  14  12  10  
Minimum Rear Yard (feet)  30  27  24  21  18  15  

R-20 Zone  Open Space Set-Aside  
Less than  25% to  35% to  45% to  55% to  66% or  
25%  34.99%  44.99%  54.99%  64.99%  greater  
Minimum Lot Area (square feet)  20,000  18,000  16,000  14,000  12,000  10,000  
Minimum Frontage (feet) provided  
the lot has the required frontage on  
and obtains access from a new road  100  90  80  70  60  50  
to be built as part of the  
development (otherwise 100 feet)  
Minimum Front Yard (feet) provided  
the lot has the required frontage on  
and obtains access from a new road  24  22  20  18  16  15  
to be built as part of the develop  
(otherwise 24 feet)  
Minimum Side Yard (feet)  15  13.5  12  10.5  9  8  
Minimum Rear Yard (feet)  30  27  24  21  18  15  

11 

1. 	
Non-profit and/or Governmentally Assisted Housing Zones may be established in order to help meet the housing needs of Plainville residents. 

2. 	
Establishment of Zone -A request to establish a Non-Profit and/or Governmentally Assisted Housing Zone may only be submitted by: 


a. 	
The Plainville Housing Authority. 

b. 	
A non-profit and/or local, state or federal financially-assisted housing group designated as a Community Housing Development Corporation by the Plainville Town Council. 

c. 	
Establishment of the Zone shall comply with both state statutes and local regulations. 


3. 	Evidence Required -Any request to establish a Non-Profit and/or Governmentally Assisted Housing Zone must be accompanied by evidence which shows: 
a. 	
The need in Plainville for such housing. 

b. 	
Reasons for selecting the area requested for zone change. 

c. 	
That a feasibility determination has been made by the Federal, State or Local Agency from which financial assistance is required to complete the project. 


4. 	
Permitted Uses -Single, duplex or multi-unit residence, parking, recreation and home-making areas intended and designed for the use of residents. 

5. 	
Area and Dimensional Requirements 

6. 	
Standards 


Building Coverage  •  Not to exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the land area of the parcel.  
Building Height  •  Not to exceed two and one-half (2-1/2) stories or thirty (30) feet, whichever is less.  
Maximum Density  • • •  Single family dwellings – one dwelling unit per 7,000 square feet of land area. Two family dwellings -one dwelling unit per 5,000 square feet of land area. Multi-family dwellings -one dwelling unit per 3,000 square feet of land area.  
Yard Setbacks  •  At least fifty (50) feet from any street or property line unless unusual topography, natural feature or specific design criteria warrants a waiver by the Planning and Zoning Commission.  
Dwelling Unit Size  • • • •  Single family units shall contain at least 768 square feet per dwelling unit. A two family unit shall contain at least 768 square feet per family unit.  Each dwelling unit in a multi-unit structure of more than two units shall consist of at least 400 square feet of floor space for a two room apartment (in addition to a bathroom and a hall) and each additional room shall contain a minimum of 120 square feet.  If housing for the elderly is provided under the State of Connecticut or Federal programs, then the applicable State or Federal requirements shall prevail.  

a. 	
Parking 

1. 	
Condominium and multi-family dwellings: two (2) spaces per unit. 

2. 	
For three (3) bedroom units:  three (3) spaces per unit. 

3. 	
Visitor parking shall be twenty (20) percent of the required project parking. 



b. 	
Landscaping for Multi-Unit Dwellings -At least twenty (20) percent of the parcel or site shall be in landscaped area. 

c. 	
Utilities -Public sewer and water must be provided; stormwater must be managed in accordance with the 


....’. .ID ..O....G..... 
12 
Section 1.04 

1. 	Purpose: Common Interest Communities (condominiums) and multi-family dwellings are hereby permitted after approval of a special exception and site plan application. These regulations are intended: 
a. 	
to establish innovative housing that constitutes well-planned, functional, and aesthetically pleasing residential environments, which by design are compatible with adjacent zones and uses; 

b. 	
to expand the choice of housing in Plainville from individual lots and structures to the planning and development of larger areas with groups of structures erected as a coordinated entity for rental or 


......... ............. ..... ..........’. .GG.. I....... ......... !... 
c. 	
to preserve and make available open space for conservation, preservation of natural resources, farmland, recreation and wildlife habitat, while maintaining and enhancing the small town charm of Plainville, both for the residents of the proposed development and the community at large; and, 

d. 	
to create unique communities with unifying features and amenities that distinguish and define the community. 


2. 	Objectives: In addition to the considerations and standards required for approval of a special exception, the following criteria must be met before a Special Exception may be approved: 
a. 	
The applicant shall provide a creative approach to the development of residential land. The term creative is viewed as more than merely ... “........” .. . ..... I. ..... .. ..G... .... .... ..O....G.... ... proposal must present significant deviation from a standard high-density development. Examples include: 

1. 	
Overall community design that embodies traditional New England styles. 

2. 	
Unique street design and geometry. 

3. 	
Added features such as period lighting and central meeting places. 

4. 	
Innovative housing design, taking into consideration the storage needs of the target occupants. 

5. 	
Alternate types of housing by design. 

6. 	
Recreational facilities geared toward the target occupants. 

7. 	
.... ..... .... .. ..G...G...... ... .......... .. ... .......G...’. ...... .......... 

8. 	
If applicable, well drafted community by-laws geared toward the preservation of the development as approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission. 

9. 	
An emphasis on landscaping elements that utilize existing site characteristics and native species. 

10. 	
An emphasis on solar orientation and other passive energy conservation techniques. 



b. 	
The development shall provide a more desirable environment than would be possible through the strict application of the minimum requirements of the Zoning and Subdivision Regulations. 

c. 	
The development will be an efficient use of land resulting in smaller networks of utilities and streets. 

d. 	
The development shall be capable of existing in harmony with surrounding uses of property and shall not significantly alter the character of adjacent properties. 


3. 	Permitted Uses: The following uses shall be permitted after the approval of special exception and site plan applications within the R, R-10, R-11, R-12, GC, and CC zones, subject to the requirements of these regulations: 
a. 	One-family, two-family, and multi-family detached and attached rental or common interest community (condominium) dwelling units in principal buildings in compliance with the required standards of this section. 
1. 	
Single family detached multifamily developments approved as condominium units with unit boundaries encompassing land area in addition to the dwelling shall be deemed a home site, the boundaries of which must be defined on the site plan accompanying the application. 

2. 	
For the purposes of this section, a home site is not an approved lot, but a portion owned in fee of the overall property that comprises the subject development. 

3. 	
Home site boundaries shall act as property lines when determining structural setback requirements for this specific type of development. 


13 
4. 	Accessory Uses: Accessory uses to dwellings as determined appropriate and approved by the Commission and which are intended and designed for the enjoyment, maintenance and/or operation of the development, limited to the following: 
a. 	
Private attached garages as shown on an approved site plan. 

b. 	
Community maintenance and utility buildings for the upkeep and repair of buildings, landscaping, structures and equipment on the site. 

c. 	
Community recreation facilities limited to the common use of residents living in an approved development including playgrounds and associated equipment, swimming pools, sporting courts, trail systems and community centers. 

d. 	
Private swimming pools limited to a quantity of one pool per home site of at least 5,000 square feet. 

e. 	
.......’. ....... 

f. 	
Temporary Sales Office. 

g. 	
Community fences and unit boundary fences. Home site boundary fences as shown on the approved plan may be constructed by the home site owner at any time with an appropriate zoning certificate of compliance and/or building permit. 

h. 	
Storage sheds for home sites where lawn maintenance is required of the end user not to exceed 80 square feet. Individual storage sheds as shown on the approved plan may be constructed by the home site owner at any time with an appropriate zoning certificate of compliance and/or building permit. 

i. 	
Decks shall be permitted in a size and style only as shown on the approved site plan. Individual decks shown on the approved plan may be constructed by the unit owner at any time with an appropriate zoning certificate of compliance and/or building permit. 


1. 	For the purposes of this section: 
i. 	Accessory structures shall comply with the standard required setback for accessory structures in the underlying zones. 
ii. 	Accessory structures shall comply with the underlying bulk regulations for the zone in which they are located. 
iii. 	If all land area within the development is owned in common, the standards governing maximum allowable square footage for accessory structures shall apply to the entire site. 
iv. 	If the land area is divided into home sites that are owned in fee, the standards governing maximum allowable square footage for accessory structures shall apply to each home site. 
5. 	
Conflict:  The provisions of this Section, in their entirety, are applicable to all land within Common Interest and Multi-Family Developments, regardless of ownership, and supersede any contradictory land use rights granted in any lease, public offering statement, covenant, ownership declaration or association by-laws. Where any requirement of this regulation, in its entirety, is in conflict with any requirement of this section governing multi-family development, the stricter of the two shall govern. 

6. 	
Special Exception and Site Plan Approvals: No building permit shall be issued, no building or structure shall be erected and no primary or accessory land use or land development activity shall be undertaken until a Special 


E........ ... .... .... .... .... ........ .. ... .GG...... ... ..... .. ... .... ....’. ...... .. 
accordance with these regulations. 
a. 	
A site plan shall be submitted in compliance with the minimum standards required under these regulations. 

b. 	
Sufficient information allowing the Commission to render a determination of appropriateness in accordance with the considerations and standards for special exception approval must be submitted with the application. 

c. 	
In addition to the site plan submission requirements, all special exception applications under this section shall include 

1. 	
Typical floor plans for dwelling units and accessory buildings. 

2. 	
Architectural elevations including a description of the exterior building materials to be used. 

3. 	
Outdoor lighting plans. 

4. 	
Detailed landscaping plans. 




14 
Section 1.04 
7. 	Development Standards: The following standards and requirements shall apply to any regulated development: 
a. 	
Density: Except as provided below, the density of the development shall not exceed that permitted in the zone by applying the minimum lot area per dwelling unit. Designated inland wetlands, watercourses, and flood plains are excluded from the calculation of density. A map and table shall be provided, which clearly shows each of the above attributes with tabulated calculations. In a central or general commercial zone, density shall not exceed that allowed in the R residence zone. 

b. 	
Water and Sewer: The parcel shall be serviced by sanitary sewers and public water supply. 

c. 	
Dimensional Requirements: 

1. 	
Building Height: No structure shall exceed thirty (30) feet in height, nor shall any building contain more than two (2) stories.  A basement shall not count as an additional story. 

2. 	
Lot Coverage: Maximum lot coverage with buildings, parking lots, and other impervious surfaces shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the site area exclusive of land set aside and designated as open space. 

3. 	
Minimum Setbacks: Minimum setbacks at the perimeter of the site shall be as prescribed for the underlying zone for the front, side, and rear yards. 

4. 	
Minimum Frontage: Minimum frontage requirements of the site shall be as prescribed for the underlying zone. 

5. 	
Minimum Building Separation: Minimum separation between any building containing dwelling units and any other building containing dwelling units shall be fifteen (15) feet at the closest point. Minimum separation between primary and accessory buildings shall be consistent with function and aesthetics, as well as provide for emergency access, as approved by the Commission. 




8. 	Design Standards: The architectural design, scale and mass of buildings and other structures, including, among other elements: the exterior building material, color, roofline, and building elevations shall be residential in character so as to harmonize and be compatible with the neighborhood. Designs shall endeavor to protect property values in the neighborhood and preserve and improve the appearance and beauty of the community. 
a. 	
Architectural Drawings: Architectural drawings shall be provided to the Commission depicting the elevations of various unit styles and floor plans, including attached garages, accessory structures, exterior porches, pools, decks and patios, both common and private. Units shall be permitted and constructed only as approved by the Commission. The Commission will allow deck expansion only to the extent of those documented options originally offered and made part of the record by the developer. Accessory structures will be allowed only to the extent of those structures as shown on the approved site plan. 

b. 	
Site Design: Buildings shall be designed and located on the site so as to retain the existing topography and natural features of the land to the greatest extent possible. Increases in elevation shall be avoided in order to control stormwater runoff more effectively on site. 

c. 	
Facades: Dwelling unit facades shall be designed to avoid a barracks or dormitory appearance. Staggered or offset unit facades and/or varied unit facade materials shall be considered. Staggered or offset unit fronts shall not be less than 3 feet in depth. 

d. 	
Number of Dwelling Units Per Building: No more than four (4) dwelling units shall be housed within a single building unless otherwise permitted. 

e. 	
Roof Design: The roof of each building shall have a pitch of not less than 1:12. 

f. 	
Roof-top mechanical equipment: Other than solar energy panels, roof-top mechanical equipment shall be concealed from all sides. 

g. 	
Noise Control: Each common wall, floor and ceiling between dwelling units and corridors, lobbies and other public areas, and an exterior wall of a dwelling unit, shall be designed and constructed to minimize the transmission of noise. 

h. 	
Shock Mounting: Any permanent mechanical equipment such as a motor, compressor, pump or compactor, which may be a potential source of structural vibration or structure borne noise, shall be shock-mounted in a manner approved by the Building Official. 

i. 	
Bus Shelters: The Commission may require that a bus shelter be provided by the developer on-site or within the public right-of-way on which the site fronts at a location convenient to the residents and is 


15 
....... ........... .. ... .......G...’. G.....G.... 
1. 	
The design and material composition of a shelter shall be approved by the Commission. 

2. 	
A shelter area contained within a building accessible and convenient to all residents of the development such as a community building may be substituted for a free standing structure if approved by the Commission. 

3. 	
The Commission may require an adequate bus shelter for school age children in non-age restricted developments. 

4. 	
The Commission may require an adequate bus shelter for commuter use if the development is located on an existing bus line. 


j. 	
Handicapped Access: Provisions for the physically handicapped, including wheelchair access, curb cuts and curb inclines for sidewalks, dwelling units expressly designed for the handicapped, accessory building access, parking space location and signage, and other architectural treatments, shall be in accordance with the State of Connecticut Basic Building Code, and other applicable laws including the Americans with Disabilities Act. The Commission may modify the application and plans to ensure that special needs of handicapped residents are met. 

k. 	
Storage: All residential buildings are encouraged to incorporate an area equal to at least l0% of the total habitable floor area as separate storage space, exclusive of utility rooms. This storage space may be closets. Additional storage for individual lawn maintenance equipment, if applicable, may be provided in individual unit garages or other areas designed into the footprint of the proposed units. Such storage areas shall not be distinguishable from the primary structure. This technique is preferable to detached sheds. 

l. 	
Community Recreation Facilities: Swimming pools, tennis courts, playgrounds and community centers and other recreational facilities shall be as centrally located as possible and if required by the Commission, protected with a suitable and safe fence located at least 30 feet from any dwelling unit and shall not be located within any of the required setbacks. 

m. 	
Solar Orientation: Applicants shall demonstrate to the Commission that they have considered, in developing the plan, using passive solar energy techniques which would not significantly increase the cost of the housing to the buyer, after tax credits, subsidies and exemptions. Passive solar energy techniques mean site design techniques which maximize solar heat gain, minimize heat loss and provide thermal storage within a building during the heating season and minimize heat gain and provide for natural ventilation during the cooling season. The passive solar energy site design techniques shall include, but not be limited to: 

1. 	
House orientation; 

2. 	
Street and lot layout; 

3. 	
Vegetation; 

4. 	
Natural and man-made topographical features; 

5. 	
Protection of solar access within the development. 




9. 	Improvements 
a. 	Off Site Improvements: Where, in the judgment of the Commission, off-site improvements to the 
G...........’. .............. .......... ... ... ..G.... ... ........ .......... ....G ........ ........... 
sanitary sewer or other systems are required in order to minimize the adverse impacts of the development on the infrastructure, or to ensure the development will function adequately, the Commission may require the applicant to make such off-site improvements at the expense of the applicant. 
b. 	Streets: All streets and access ways within the development shall be constructed by the applicant in accordance with these regulations; all such streets and access ways shall be owned and maintained by the owners of the development. 
1. 	Internal access ways shall be the property of the management association and the Town of Plainville will not maintain such access ways within a private development. 
16 

Section 1.04 
2. 	
Primary access ways, if to be deeded to and maintained by the Town of Plainville, shall be constructed in accordance with town specifications for the constructions of a new road. 

3. 	
The Commission may require and set a reasonable bond as estimated by the applicant and approved by the Town Engineer to guarantee any improvements slated for public acceptance. 

4. 	
Street or internal access way pavement shall be installed no closer than fifteen (15) feet from any external property line. 

5. 	
Centerlines for all streets shall be shown on the site plan. 

6. 	
The Commission may require more than one point of ingress/egress for safety purposes. 

7. 	
Points of vehicular ingress and egress into and within the development shall be consistent with public safety and welfare, and shall provide no undue hindrance to the safety conditions of existing or proposed streets. 

8. 	
Two-way streets shall have a minimum width of twenty-six (26) feet. One-way streets and access ways shall have a minimum width of sixteen (16) feet, except greater widths may be required to accommodate vehicular movements where parking is provided contiguous to access ways. 

9. 	
Internal private streets and access ways shall be constructed with a minimum pavement thickness of 2-½" and a minimum compacted base of 6 inches. Alternate designs, if proposed, shall be submitted with engineering certification in the form of signed and sealed drawings prepared by a CT Licensed Professional Engineer. 

10. 	
Cul-de-sac design shall take into consideration emergency vehicle access and may employ design features such as mountable curbs and reinforced shoulders where deemed necessary to provide adequate turning radii for emergency vehicles. 

11. 	
Snow removal shall be taken into consideration when designing street and unit layout to minimize adverse impacts to landscaping and prevent access concerns for residents. 


c. 	Parking: the following standards shall supersede other parking standards found elsewhere in these regulations. 
1. 	
At least two (2) off-street parking spaces shall be provided for each dwelling unit; however, the Commission reserves the right to require up to 2.5 spaces per dwelling unit. Detached garage space shall not be counted toward meeting this requirement. 

2. 	
Dwelling units shall be located at a distance from such off-street parking as determined by the Commission; however, no dwelling unit shall be located more than two hundred (200) feet from the parking spaces serving said unit. 

3. 	
Except for parking areas expressly designated for the physically handicapped, minimum setback shall be twenty-five (25) feet between any unenclosed parking space and the centerline of the principal street in front of the dwelling unit; the centerline for a cul-de-sac shall be tangent to the centerline of the street serving the cul-de-sac. 

4. 	
Except for parking areas expressly designated for the physically handicapped, minimum setback shall be fifty (50) feet between any unenclosed parking space and any property line. 

5. 	
In addition to the parking lot landscaping standards found elsewhere in these regulations, parking lot areas shall be divided into sections containing not more than twenty-five (25) parking spaces by means of landscaped strips/areas planted with noninvasive trees and shrubs. Such landscaped areas shall be designed to preclude vehicles from damaging said trees and shrubs. 

6. 	
Where shared parking is employed, handicap accessible spaces shall be provided in compliance with ADA requirements in a manner that places such parking spaces in closest proximity to dwelling units. 

7. 	
Elevations at all corners and control points of all parking facilities shall be shown on the topographic map. 

8. 	
The width, location and arrangement of access ways and parking shall be consistent with public safety and welfare and shall provide no undue hindrance to fire or other emergency apparatus, or to the safety of existing or proposed ways. 

9. 	
Minimum width of one-way traffic access ways, i.e., or shared driveways, with parking on one or more sides of and contiguous to said access ways, shall be sixteen (16) feet with 45-degree parking on one side, eighteen (18) feet with 60-degree parking on one side, and twenty-six (26) feet with 90­degree parking on one side or with parking (at any angle) on both sides. All two-way traffic streets or access ways, including those between parking spaces and in parking lots, shall be twenty-six (26) feet 


17 
in width. All required widths of access ways, streets, and driveways set forth above, are in addition to required parking spaces. Parking shall be prohibited within the minimum required widths of streets, access ways or shared driveways. 
10. 	
Required parking spaces shall be not less than nine (9) feet by eighteen (18) feet where such parking is outdoors and no less than two hundred (200) square feet where in a garage. All parking spaces shall be paved with bituminous concrete, concrete, or other suitable surface material as approved by the Commission.  Pervious paving materials are encouraged. 

11. 	
Care shall be taken to provide adequate off-street visitor parking without compromising traffic circulation and safety. Any community not designed specifically for an aging clientele shall take into consideration the additional parking required for communities with youth of driving age. 


d. 	
Fire Hydrants: Fire hydrants shall be installed in accordance with requirements established by the Fire Marshal. 

e. 	
Utilities: All such developments shall be serviced by operating public sewer and public water systems. All utilities shall be placed underground. Underground installation may be waived in part by the Commission due to documented site constraints that present insurmountable engineering challenges, but not for financial reasons. 

f. 	
Solid Waste Disposal and Recycling: Solid waste removal and recycling services shall be provided by the owners of the development, with all costs thereof incurred by same. If used, solid waste and recycling stations (dumpsters) shall be appropriately screened, maintained, and shall be shown on the site development plan. 

g. 	
Mail Delivery: The placement of mail receptacles shall be designed to minimize crowding in the streets. Mail receptacles should be approved by the local U.S. Postal Service prior to Commission approval. 

h. 	
Outdoor Illumination: Outdoor lighting shall be provided, to ensure proper illumination of streets, parking areas, appropriate recreational facilities, and walkways, in locations and type as approved by the Commission. Such lighting shall be full cutoff, shielded, and directed so that no light shall fall outside the development and shall not cause a nuisance from glare to anyone internal or external to the site. 

i. 	
Pedestrian/Bicyclist Circulation: The Commission deems the provision of alternate transportation services paramount and may require that pedestrian and bicyclist circulation be provided to safely interlink facilities within the development, and to provide linkage with nearby sidewalk and trail networks, residential areas, shopping, service, educational, institutional and governmental facilities and/or to provide linkage to adjacent open space or recreational areas. The Commission shall determine the composition and location of sidewalks and/or trails. 


10. 	Storm Water Management: A storm water management system shall be designed in accordance with the following guidelines: 
a. 	
It shall comply with the Plainville Low Impact Development and Stormwater Management Design Manual. 

b. 	
It shall consider the total environmental impact of stormwater generated by the proposed development. 

c. 	
It shall consider stormwater quality as well as stormwater volume. 

d. 	
It shall be consistent with the Plainville Plan of Conservation and Development and any existing watershed management plan(s). 

e. 	
It shall be coordinated with erosion control measures and aquifer protection regulations where applicable. 

f. 	
It shall minimize disturbance of natural grades and vegetation and use existing topography for natural drainage systems. 

g. 	
It shall preserve natural vegetated buffers along water resources. 

h. 	
It shall minimize impervious surfaces and maximize infiltration of runoff to appropriate soils. 

i. 	
It shall direct runoff to minimize off-site volume. 

j. 	
It shall reduce peak flow to minimize the likelihood of soil erosion, stream channel instability, flooding, and habitat destruction. 

k. 	
It shall use wetlands and water bodies to receive or treat runoff only when it is assured that these natural systems will not be overloaded or degraded, and only after sufficient pre-treatment of the stormwater. 

l. 	
It shall provide a maintenance schedule for management practices, including designation of maintenance responsibilities. 


18 

Section 1.04 
11. 	Open Space/Recreation: It is the express intent of this regulation to cluster dwellings in closer proximity to minimize infrastructure costs and environmental impacts. In order to conserve sensitive or exceptional 
........ .. ... .... ... .. ....... ...O.... ....... .. ...... ............ .......... ... ... .......G...’. 
residents, the site development plan shall set aside and designate protected open space in the form of conservation areas and/or recreational areas and facilities which provide passive and active recreational opportunities. 
a.  At least twenty (20) percent of the total site area shall be set aside as open space. This required open  
space shall not include applicable front, rear, and side yard setback requirements of these regulations;  
any required buffers at the perimeter of the site; areas designated for exclusive use of unit occupants; or  
landscaping/lawn areas associated with units, parking, streets, and driveways. Not more than fifty (50)  
percent of the designated open space shall contain wetlands, watercourses, and slopes in excess of  
twenty (20) percent. Open space shall not contain storm water detention basins or other constructed  
drainage features unless designed as a functioning equivalent to a naturally occurring water resource and  
deemed appropriate by the Commission.  
b.  A map highlighting the areas and specific features used in calculating the open space shall be provided by  
the applicant. Areas shall also be indicated in tabulated form on the open space plan.  
c.  Open space may also contain such facilities as pedestrian paths; garden plots; child playgrounds or tot  
lots; gently sloping sports fields of sufficient size to accommodate active sports such as softball; courts for  
tennis or basketball; and swimming pools, but shall be generally accessible by residents of the proposed  
community. Enclosed structures, regardless of use, shall not be counted toward the minimum required  
open space.  
d.  Conservation areas may include stream belts, waterbodies and watercourses, wetlands, steep slopes,  
woodlands, flood plains, and other sensitive or exceptional natural features of the site.  
e.  If the open space consists entirely of conservation area, including passive recreation such as hiking trails,  
the Developer shall record an instrument granting such restrictions in perpetuity.  
f.  The location of conservation and open space land, as well as the constitution of recreation facilities, shall  
be determined by the Commission for the entire site notwithstanding phasing of construction. The  
Commission may require the posting of performance bonds to secure the allocation and/or improvement  
of conservation and open space land in future phases. The boundaries of conservation and open space  
lands shall be identified in a conspicuous manner by fencing and/or markers, which are available in the  
Planning Department.  
g.  At the discretion of the Commission, all open space shall be dedicated to an appropriate entity under  
terms acceptable to the Commission; established legally as part of a common interest community; deeded  
to a duly formed non-profit land trust; or owned and maintained by the owner of the property with duly  
recorded restrictions.  
h.  The applicant shall declare the disposition and management of all open space in a plan approved by the  
Commission as part of the development application.  
i.  In recognition of the unique character of the Central Commercial Zone and the desire to foster multifamily  
residential and common interest community development therein, the foregoing open space  
requirements shall not be applicable in the Central Commercial Zone.  
j.  Open Space Threshold: The Commission recognizes that slight open space/conservation areas associated  
with small multifamily developments within densely settled areas do not serve the purposes generally  
thought of as having a positive impact in terms of recreation and habitat protection. In addition, the  
Commission does not wish to restrict or prohibit the development of smaller multifamily developments  
through the imposition of an open space requirement. In light of these findings, the Commission shall not  
require development proposals on lots of less than two (2) acres, exclusive of wetlands, slopes in excess  
of 20%, and flood plain areas, to meet the 20% open space requirement.  

19 
12. 	Landscaping: The applicant shall furnish the Commission with a detailed landscaping plan, including a schedule for completion of all landscaping elements, the type, size, and maturity at installation of all trees and shrubs, and type and density of all ground cover. 
a. 	
Landscaping Plan: The landscaping plan shall show vegetative or other physical controls which will serve to restrict motorists from traveling on landscaped areas and further restrict vehicular parking to designated parking areas. The Commission may modify the landscaping plan in order to ensure a functional and aesthetically pleasing environment. Large trees and clusters of large trees are to remain undisturbed where practicable. All trees to remain undisturbed shall be tagged prior to initiation of site work. 

1. 	
An overall landscaping plan shall be required. 

2. 	
A typical unit landscaping plan shall be required. 

3. 	
Both plans shall provide detail for the location and description of all existing species, species to be saved and proposed species. 



b. 	
Street Trees: The following are minimum street tree requirements: 

1. 	
Street trees shall be deciduous and shall be planted on both sides of the street, no less than 15 feet or more than 25 feet from the curb line or edge of pavement to accommodate the required underground utilities. 

2. 	
One specimen shall be required on each side of any existing or proposed street or access way at a rate of one specimen for every 60 linear feet of road/access way. 

i. 	Street trees shall be situated to maximize solar access to the proposed units and may vary in location to accommodate driveways, street corners, utilities and planting conditions. 

3. 	
Street trees shall have at least a 2.5-inch caliper at breast height and shall have a minimum height of 10 feet. 

4. 	
Species selected should be native, non-invasive and chosen to accommodate particular physical site conditions such as sun, shade, slope and soil type. 

5. 	
Existing trees may be used in place of new trees where approved by the Commission. 



c. 	
Buffers: Buffers shall be established along the perimeters of the site except where road, utility, drainage, or other improvements may be designed. 

1. 	
Buffers shall consist of natural vegetation supplemented by suitable noninvasive landscape material and/or open vistas where undevelopable natural areas exist to provide visual relief along the boundaries of adjoining properties. 

2. 	
Buffers shall have a minimum width of ten (10) feet and may be placed within the requisite setbacks. 

3. 	
Buffer variety shall consist of a mix of native deciduous and evergreen trees and shrubs specifically chosen for screening or accent. 

4. 	
Minimum height at the time of planting shall be 10 feet for deciduous trees and 6 feet for evergreens trees where solid buffers are required. 

5. 	
Additional buffering may be required by the Commission to meet the purposes and intentions of this section. Existing development on abutting property shall not be deemed as automatically requiring additional buffering; however, where conditions warrant, in order to maintain community character and protect the privacy of abutting property owners and residents of the proposed development, the Commission may require additional landscape buffer. 

6. 	
The landscape buffer, if not consisting of pre-existing natural vegetation, shall be planted with native, non-invasive species chosen to accommodate particular physical site conditions such as sun, shade, slope and soil type. Where deemed necessary, the Commission may require pre-existing natural buffer areas to be augmented with additional plantings. 

7. 	
Final landscaping elements shall conform to the approved plan. 




13. 	Signs: Signage shall conform to the requirements of these regulations.  Additional internal signs for directional purposes and for the identification of individual buildings/facilities and warning and traffic control may be required. All signs shall be located on the site development plan, and shall be described as to area, dimensions, height, materials and purpose. 
20 

Section 1.04 
14. 	Community Association and Management: At the time of application for any Special Exception for a multi­family residential development or common interest community, the applicant shall submit to the Commission a written certification of the following, as applicable: 
a. 	
If a common interest community, that the applicant or his assigns, shall comply with Chapter 828 of the Connecticut General Statutes, i.e., the Common Interest Ownership Act; 

b. 	
If retained under single ownership, that the applicant or his assigns, shall establish the management structure to direct and oversee the operations and maintenance of the development. 

c. 	
In all cases, that no land use rights granted in any lease, public offering statement, sales and/or lease agreements, covenant or ownership declaration or association by-laws, supersede or contradict the requirements of this section and the entirety of the Plainville Zoning Regulations. 


15. 	Active Adult Housing Communities: Notwithstanding the lot area requirement per unit as set forth in above, an Active Adult Housing Community shall be permitted under the standards otherwise set forth in this subsection subject to the following requirements: 
a. 	
In R, R-10, R-11 R-12, CC and GC Zones, each community shall contain a minimum of two (2) acres of land; however, the area of inland wetlands or watercourses or easements with above-ground structures on the subject site shall not be computed in the required lot area per unit. 

1. 	
The density of an active Adult Housing Community in the R, R-10, R-11, R-12, CC and GC Zones shall be 5,000 square feet per dwelling unit. 

2. 	
There shall be no more than four (4) dwelling units per building. 



b. 	
In R-15 and R-20 Zones, each community shall contain a minimum of five (5) acres of land; however, the area of inland wetlands or watercourses or easements with above-ground structures on the subject site shall not be computed in the required lot area per unit. 

1. 	
The density of an Active Adult Housing Community in the R-15 Zone shall be 8,000 square feet per dwelling unit. 

2. 	
The density of an Active Adult Housing Community in the R-20 Zone shall be 10,600 square feet per dwelling unit. 

3. 	
There shall be no more than one (1) dwelling unit per building. 



c. 	
Each unit shall be occupied by: 

1. 	
Persons who are at least age 55 years; 

2. 	
A spouse of an occupant in (1) above; 

3. 	
An occupant from (2) above who survives his or her spouse or whose spouse has entered a long-term continuing care facility; 

4. 	
A bona fide personal care attendant for a qualified occupant provided that the personal care attendant is age 21 or older and has been recommended by a physician for the occupant. 

5. 	
One child age twenty-one (21) years or older may reside with an otherwise qualified occupant. 



d. 	
An Active Adult Housing Community shall be a common interest ownership community established pursuant to Chapter 828, Sections 47-200 of the Connecticut General Statutes as amended. 

e. 	
The rear yard shall be a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet and the side yards shall be a minimum of fifteen 

(15) feet each. 

f. 	
Each unit shall have at least two parking spaces, one (1) of which shall be within an attached, enclosed garage which is directly accessible from the dwelling area. Visitor parking in the amount of 20% shall be provided in a manner equally accessible from all dwelling units. 

g. 	
Separate buildings/garages shall be at least twenty (20) feet apart. 

h. 	
The first floor of living space of a unit shall be designed with a bedroom and full bathroom. The first floor of living space shall be no more than three steps above the elevation outside the front door and shall be designed and built to accommodate a ramp from the driveway. 

i. 	
A unit shall be owned only by a qualified occupant as provided in this section or by a relative of an occupant pursuant to subsection c. above. 


21 
16. 	Nonconforming Uses: On December 18, 2004, this multifamily regulation (then§540) was introduced in response to concerns over poorly planned multi-family developments. As a result, significant amounts of pre­existing multi-family developments were made nonconforming. To counter the effects of this change, these regulations provide that any multi-family development duly approved or with pre-existing nonconforming status prior to December 18, 2004 shall be considered existing nonconforming and shall not be subject to certain requirements under this section as detailed below. 
a. 	
Modifications to existing multifamily developments approved after December 18, 2004: 

1. 	
Any addition of new dwelling units shall comply with these regulations in their entirety. 

2. 	
Addition of dwelling space within existing units shall require site plan approval and the proposal shall be required to comply with the underlying bulk regulations. 

3. 	
The addition of any type of accessory structure to a development approved after December 18, 2004, but prior to June 20, 2014 may receive administrative approval and the proposal shall otherwise be required to comply with the underlying bulk regulations and this subsection in its entirety. 

4. 	
The addition of any type of accessory structure to a development approved after June 20, 2014 shall require site plan modification approval and the proposal shall otherwise be required to comply with these regulations in their entirety 

5. 	
The Commission may waive the requirement for an A-2 survey for the required site plan modification application. 


i. 	An accurate and detailed scale sketch shall be required at a minimum. 
ii. 	When available, a valid copy of an as-built location survey shall be used for the proposed accessory structure in relation to required setbacks and bulk requirements. 

b. 	
Modifications to existing multifamily developments previously approved and/or having existing nonconforming status before December 18, 2004 shall adhere to the following standards: 

1. 	
Any addition of new dwelling units shall comply with these regulations in their entirety. 

2. 	
Addition of dwelling space within existing units may receive administrative approval and the proposal shall otherwise be required to comply with the underlying bulk regulations. 

3. 	
The addition of any type of accessory structure may receive administrative approval and the proposal shall otherwise be required to comply with the underlying bulk regulations. 




22 
Section 1.04 

1. 	Farming where allowed by these Regulations provided that: 
a. 	
With the exception of residential gardening for food production for consumption by residents of the premises, no farming or agricultural activity shall occur on any lot of less than two acres. 

b. 	
In no case shall rosters be permitted on any premises. 

c. 	
The commercial raising of fur bearing animals and the commercial raising of pigs are prohibited. 

d. 	
The keeping of greater than four (4) rabbits shall be considered farming and shall meet all the full requirements of this regulation. 

e. 	
All housing of farm animals and storage of manure or other animal refuse shall be located not less than 100 feet from any street line or property line. 

f. 	
All accessory buildings not used for the housing of animals or storage of manure or other animal refuse shall comply with setbacks established for primary structures in the zone. 

g. 	
One accessory greenhouse and/or barn used solely for a farming operation of no more than 700 square feet each in area may be located on any lot of two or more acres, or as provided under Subsection 1.03.B (footnote 6). 

h. 	
The number of animals kept per acre shall meet the guidelines established by Natural Resources Conservation Service and the United State Department of Agriculture. 


2. 	The display of products, produce and nursery stock, other than livestock, raised on the premises is permitted and for this purpose, one roadside stand not over 100 square feet in area may be located within the required front yard, but not nearer to the side lot lines than the required side yard and not less than ten (10) feet from the street line. Appropriate provisions for the safe and efficient management of consumer traffic must be provided. 
23 

The requirements set forth herein are adjudged to be the standards necessary and reasonably related to the purpose of permitting the introduction of accessory apartments within single family dwellings in a manner that promotes housing opportunity without detriment to health, safety, and general welfare of the community. To maintain these standards and promote community health, safety, and general welfare, the requirements of this section shall not be varied by the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
1. 	Accessory apartments may be established within single family dwellings upon issuance of a site plan modification approval by the Commission. 
a. 	
The requirement to file an A-2 survey may be waived by the Commission where no site improvements are proposed, or where the Commission determines one is not necessary due to the limited nature of the activity. 

b. 	
... ......... ..... ... .. ..O..... .. .... . ..... .. ... ........ .... .. ... .... ....’s Office. 


2. 	
A detailed scale drawing of existing and proposed floor plans shall be provided by the applicant to allow an accurate review of these requirements. 

3. 	
If the A-2 Survey is waived, a site plan, drawn to scale, and based on the best available information at the time of the application, shall be required to illustrate compliance with applicable zoning requirements. 

4. 	
Accessory apartments are permitted only in single family dwellings in all residential zones. 

5. 	
Accessory apartments shall not be permitted in any accessory and/or detached structure. 

6. 	
Not more than one accessory apartment may be established in a single-family dwelling; a single family dwelling containing an accessory apartment shall not be considered a multi-family dwelling under this zoning regulation. 

7. 	
The principal dwelling and accessory apartment shall remain under common ownership; the owner of the property shall reside in the principal dwelling or in the accessory apartment so long as the accessory apartment is maintained. 

8. 	
An accessory apartment and the principal dwelling shall meet all applicable housing, building, and life safety codes and shall be inspected by the Building Official prior to its first-time occupancy. 

9. 	
An accessory apartment shall be at all times subordinate to the principal dwelling. 

10. 	
The permitted floor area of an accessory apartment shall contain a minimum of 400 square feet, but shall not contain more than thirty percent (35%) of the floor area of the entire structure or 800 square feet, whichever is smaller. 


a. 	
For the purposes of this section, floor area shall be defined as interior, finished, habitable space. 

b. 	
Addition of interior finished, habitable space, proposed as part of an application for an accessory apartment, may also be counted as habitable floor area. 

c. 	
Conversion of existing interior uninhabitable space such as an attached garage, proposed as part of an application for an accessory apartment, may also be counted as habitable floor area. 

d. 	
No such converted area shall be counted as floor area for the purposes of determining permitted square footage of an accessory apartment unless it is demonstrated that such areas may be legally converted to interior, finished, and habitable space meeting all applicable codes. 

e. 	
Any common areas used by both units shall count towards the allowable size of the accessory unit at one half square foot per square foot of common area. 


24 

Section 1.04 
11. 	
Entry to the accessory apartment shall be provided and maintained at all times through the principal dwelling. This entryway may be kept locked or unlocked. At least one exterior doorway shall be provided for the primary dwelling and accessory apartment. Any new door openings shall be allowed only on the side or rear of the structure. 

12. 	
The entire structure shall be maintained in appearance as a single-family dwelling. 


a. 	
An addition may be made to the structure for use in total or in part as an accessory apartment. 

b. 	
The Commission may request photographs of existing conditions and an architectural rendering of any proposed exterior improvements, including elevation drawings and material specifications, in order to confirm compliance with this section. 

c. 	
The accessory apartment shall be equipped with its own sleeping, kitchen and bath facilities. 

d. 	
The accessory apartment may share utilities in common with the principal dwelling or may have separate metering devices. 

e. 	
The construction and layout of the accessory apartment shall be completed in such a manner so as to provide for ease of decommissioning should present or future owners wish to remove the facilities. 

f. 	
Off-street parking for two motor vehicles shall be provided for the accessory apartment in addition to the required off-street parking for the principal dwelling. Additional driveways are discouraged, but must be shown on a site plan if requested. 


13. 	Accessory Healthcare Apartments – Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, in response to a growing need to accommodate mentally or physically impaired persons in a non-institutional setting, the Planning and Zoning Commission has adopted the following standards to alleviate barriers to the provision of housing opportunities for this demographic group. Understanding that institutional care is not universally available and that in-home care offers greater opportunities for independent living, the Planning and Zoning Commission views the following standards as the minimum required to accommodate this need, while maintaining the health, safety, and general welfare of the community. 
a. 	
Accessory healthcare apartments may be established within single family dwellings upon issuance of an administrative approval issued by the Planning Department only after the standards contained within section 1.04 F are satisfied in full. 

b. 	
For the purposes of this section, mentally or physically impaired person means a person who requires assistance, as certified in writing by a licensed physician, with two or more activities of daily living, including, but not limited to, bathing, dressing, grooming, eating, meal preparation, shopping, housekeeping, transfers, bowel and bladder care, laundry, communication, self-administration of medication and ambulation. 

c. 	
Mental or physical impairment as defined above shall be documented by a physician, in writing, on the physicians practice letterhead, stating that there is a need for such accommodation; however, for reasons of privacy, it is not required of the physician to state specifically what condition may exist, only that two or more of the above conditions do exist and that such conditions are likely to be chronic. 

d. 	
Such certification shall be presented when requested by the Planning Department throughout the life of any permit issued hereunder until such time as the owner petitions for approval to convert the accessory healthcare unit to a standard accessory apartment. 

e. 	
Residency for mentally or physically impaired persons shall be restricted to the accessory health care unit. Residents occupying the primary unit shall be considered the primary health care support resident(s).  

f. 	
Primary health care support residents may offer nonprofessional assistance for those residing in the accessory health care apartment, but in no case shall access to home services offered by outside agencies and/or medical facilities be restricted by this regulation. 


14. 	Prior to the issuance of a building permit for renovations and/or a building addition to accommodate an approved accessory, or accessory healthcare apartment, the owner shall cause a Declaration to be filed on the 
25 
land records providing notice of the right to establish an accessory apartment in accordance with the provisions of the Plainville Zoning Regulations. 
a. 	Said Declaration shall state that approval of an accessory apartment may transfer to a new owner of the premises provided that the new owner must submit a notarized affidavit to the Planning Office indicating they are aware of the regulations governing such use and will continue to abide by such regulations until such time as they, or the current owner, as the case may be, seek to decommission the accessory apartment through a valid permit process, or vacate said premises in favor of a new owner. A copy of the recorded Declaration shall be returned to the Planning Department by the applicant on the date that it is recorded. Failure to record the Declaration within 90 days of the approval shall render the approval null and void. 
15. 	
Accessory apartments approved after March 22, 2018 shall comply with these regulations in full.  

16. 	
Accessory apartments approved on or after October 15, 2006, but prior to March 22, 2018, shall be required to comply with the provisions of the regulations in effect at the time of approval. 

17. 	
Accessory apartments established prior to October 15, 2006 by valid building permit shall hereafter be considered an existing [legal] nonconforming use. 

18. 	
Accessory apartments established prior to October 15, 2006 without the benefit of a valid building permit shall be considered a zoning violation. 



1. 	
In any residential zone, a hauling trailer, luxury motor coach or recreational vehicle shall be garaged, parked or stored in any side or rear yard provided that such storage may not project beyond the front line of the building or structure on the parcel where such storage is proposed. Parking and/or storage of these regulated items and any associated equipment is not permitted on any public street. 

2. 	
In the case of a corner lot, only interior rear and interior side yard storage shall be allowed unless the regulated item(s) can be completely screened from view with a conforming fence or landscaping buffer. 

3. 	
Not more than two (2) luxury motor homes, campers, hauling trailers, or recreational vehicles, or any combination thereof shall be allowed on any one residential lot, whether single family or multi-family residential. In the case of such combination, at least one of the items shall be stored within a garage. 

4. 	
No hauling trailer, camper, luxury motor coach or recreational vehicle shall be used as living quarters. 

5. 	
No hauling trailer shall be used to store, haul or sell for commercial purposes including, but not limited to, ..........’. .O...G... .. G............ G....... ... ........ of any kind. 

6. 	
Repair of a hauling trailer, luxury motor coach, camper, or recreational vehicle, or any combination thereof is permitted provided that: 


a. 	
Such repair is undertaken by the owner or occupant of the property. 

b. 	
All such repairs shall be undertaken in an enclosed accessory structure on the property except that such repair may be conducted in a side or rear yard, or in the case of a corner lot, an interior side or rear yard, provided that such repair can be completed in the same day in which said repair is begun. 


7. 	This section shall not be construed to allow repair or storage of luxury motor coaches, campers, hauling trailers, recreational vehicles or any other motor vehicle or combination thereof for profit, hobby or business. 
26 
Section 1.04 

The following standards for the storage of commercial vehicles are found to be necessary to minimize the impact from commercial vehicles in residential zones, protect property values and the reasonable use and enjoyment of residential properties. 
1. 	The parking or garaging of commercial vehicles may be permitted in any residential district as an accessory use only in compliance with and subject to the following restriction: 
a. 	Only one commercial vehicle not exceeding 14,000 pounds gross vehicle weight (GVW) may be parked or garaged provided it also does not exceed ten (10) feet in height from the base of the wheel to the top (including any cargo) or ten (10) feet in cargo (box) length. For the purposes of this section, gross vehicle weight rating is the maximum operating weight/mass of a vehicle as specified by the manufacturer, including the vehicle's chassis, body, engine, engine fluids, fuel, accessories, driver, passengers and cargo but excluding that of any trailers. 
2. 	All commercial vehicles, regardless of GVW, shall meet the following standards: 
a. 	
No vehicle shall have more than two (2) axles. 

b. 	
No vehicle shall be parked so as to obstruct the view of traffic from adjacent driveways or streets. 

c. 	
No vehicle containing hazardous materials or waste may be parked on a residential lot. 

d. 	
No construction equipment, including but not limited to backhoes, bobcats, bucket loaders, track vehicles, or similar machinery, self-propelled or not, shall be permitted. 

e. 	
No tanker trucks or similar type vehicles used for hauling liquids including but not limited to, oil trucks, septic cleanout trucks, etc., shall be allowed. 

f. 	
All commercial vehicles shall be parked on the driveway of the occupied residential lot, provided no commercial vehicle shall be parked closer than five (5) feet from any adjacent property line unless appropriately screened by a fully opaque fence or vegetation of at least six (6) feet in height. 

g. 	
The commercial vehicle shall be owned or operated by the permanent resident of the property on which it is to be parked. 

h. 	
No maintenance or repair of a commercial vehicle shall be allowed on the residential property. 

i. 	
There shall be no loading or unloading of commercial contents. 

j. 	
No garbage hauling, dump trucks, or any other trucks that haul cargo that emits objectionable odors shall be permitted to park in a residential zone. 

k. 	
No tractor and/or trailer shall be parked in a residential district at any time except in connection with a moving or delivery operation. 

l. 	
No idling of diesel engines or operation of refrigeration equipment shall be permitted at any time the vehicle is stored on a residential lot. 


3. 	
Nothing herein shall be construed to permit a home occupation that is not otherwise permitted under the regulations. Any home occupation that is conducted in conjunction with the parking of a commercial vehicle must meet the applicable requirements. 

4. 	
Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit commercial vehicles parked temporarily while engaged in providing products or services to the owner or occupant of the property. 

5. 	
Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit commercial vehicles that are used as part of the following: 


a. 	
Approved construction projects 

b. 	
A permitted agriculture, farming, forestry, or nursery gardening use 

c. 	
A permitted earth excavation (removal or deposition) activity 

d. 	
Use of a facility operated by the Town of Plainville, a Fire Department, the State of Connecticut, or the Federal Government 

e. 	
A maintenance facility in support of a multiple dwelling project on the lot, and/or in support of any Special Exception use, if authorized under such Special Exception. 


27 
6. 	No equipment associated with a commercial vehicle shall be allowed as outside storage on any residential property including, but not limited to, landscaping or construction trailers or equipment, construction supplies, snow plows, sanders or any visible product associated with the commercial vehicle, with the exception of those commercial supplies that fit into the bed of the vehicle or on a rack system without violating the height and length provisions of this section. 
28 
Section 1.04 

1. 	Low Impact Home Occupations: In order to support telecommuting, and to legitimize a growing population of home occupations, the Commission finds that minor home office operations used to support a home occupation, or to provide telecommuting opportunities, and which are otherwise unnoticeable from adjacent properties, is permitted by right in any residential zone provided the following criteria are met: 
a. 	
The office is situated in a principal single family dwelling unit and shall occupy no more than 10% of the total living area of the dwelling unit, including storage areas for goods and materials. No home occupation, or storage related thereto is permitted in accessory structures. 

b. 	
Only those residing in the dwelling may engage in the home office use. 

c. 	
No clients, customers, or outside employees may visit, receive services or work from the premises in which the home office is located. 

d. 	
No business shall be conducted from the premises except by phone, computer, facsimile machine, email or standard mail. 

e. 	
The premises must maintain the appearance of a residential dwelling at all times. 

f. 	
Goods, materials or supplies of any kind related to the home office may be delivered to or from the premises by passenger automobile and delivery vehicles such as a UPS or Federal Express van, but not by tractor trailer. 

g. 	
No goods, materials or supplies of any kind related to the home office may be stored outside of the premises containing the home office. 

h. 	
Home offices that exceed the requirements of this section may be permitted as medium impact home occupations by special exception under section 1.04.H. 2. 

i. 	
One sign may be installed in accordance with Section 4.03 of these regulations. 


2. 	Moderate Impact Home Occupations: Moderate impact home occupations may reduce commuting traffic and improve economic conditions as well provide an effective incubator for small business. Recognizing that they may also have potential for negative impacts on surrounding residential properties, regulatory oversight is indicated. Moderate home occupations exceeding the requirements of Section 1.04.H.1 may be permitted in single family residential dwellings in zones R, R-10, R-11, R-12, R-15, R-20 and R-40 by special exception in accordance with Section 7.02 of these regulations, provided the following criteria are met: 
a. 	
The home occupation is situated in a principal single family dwelling unit and shall occupy no more than 20% of the total living area of the dwelling unit.  No home occupations are permitted in accessory structures. 

b. 	
In addition to those residing in the dwelling, not more than one outside employee may engage in the home occupation. 

c. 	
No sale of items shall be permitted from the premises; this provision does not apply to items sold by catalog and shipped from an alternate address directly to the consumer. 

d. 	
The premises must maintain the appearance of a residential dwelling at all times. 

e. 	
No display of articles in connection with the home occupation shall be visible from outside of the 
premises at any time. 


f. 	
No goods, materials or supplies of any kind related to the home occupation may be stored outside of the premises at any time. 

g. 	
The applicant for special exception shall present a site plan, including sufficient information for the Commission to make a determination that such use will have adequate parking for the intended use. 


3. 	Because the granting of a Special Exception is tied to the property, and not the applicant, the Commission shall use the highest discretion in granting an approval under this section. 
29 
a. 	
The Commission may apply reasonable conditions to a special exception approval to avoid adverse impacts to neighboring properties, including, but not limited to: 

1. 	
Hours of operation. 

2. 	
Days of operation. 

3. 	
Buffer and screening requirements. 

4. 	
The manner in which the items related to the Moderate Impact Home Occupation may be delivered to and from the premises. 

5. 	
Site plan revisions deemed necessary to accommodate the proposed use. 



b. 	
One sign may be installed in accordance with Section 4.05 of these regulations. 


4. 	Home occupations, including those listed below, exceed the requirements of this section and are not permitted: 
a. 	
.........’. ........ .. ... .... ...... . ..G. ...... .. ...G..... .. ....... 1.04.H. 1. 

b. 	
Classes, school or instruction where greater than one student at a time will be instructed. 

c. 	
Retail use of any kind. 

d. 	
Any equipment, process or instruction which can be reasonably determined to create noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical interference discernible from the property line of the home occupation. 

e. 	
For any uses not mentioned, the Commission may make a determination on a case by case basis. 


5. 	Failure to comply with the conditions of approval shall subject the Special Exception to revocation by the Commission after due process. 
30 

Section 1.04 
This page intentionally left blank 
31 



Article 2. BUSINESS ZONES 

Section 2.01 Purposes 
The purpose of the various commercial, industrial, and other business zones is to permit such development along the major thoroughfares and collector streets and other locations in Town where such development may be appropriate. 
Section 2.02 Permitted Uses & Structures 
ZONING DISTRICT LEGEND 
CC  Central Commercial  
GC  General Commercial  
RI  Restricted Industrial  
GI  General Industrial  
TP  Technology Park  
QI  Quarry Industrial  
FP*  Flood Plain Zone  

*See Section 3.01 

CODE LEGEND 
A  
ZP  
SP  
SE  


Allowed – no permit required for the use, building or structure 
Allowed -Zoning Permit required for the use, building or structure 
Allowed -Site Plan approval required by the Planning and Zoning Commission for the use, building or structure 
Conditional -The use, building or structure may be allowed upon approval of a Special Exception application by the Planning and Zoning Commission subject to special requirements and/or conditions 
Not permitted – Any use not listed is prohibited. 
32 
Section 2.02 

Buildings and land may be used and buildings may be altered or erected to be used for the following purposes: 
1. RETAIL TYPE USES  CC  GC  TP  RI  GI  QI  

1.1. Commercial or retail establishment  SP  SP  
1.2. Commercial or retail establishment as adaptive reuse of an existing building in accordance with the provisions of Subsection 2.04. B of the Regulations  SP  SP  

2. SERVICE TYPE USES  CC  GC  TP  RI  GI  QI  

2.1. Bank and/or financial institution  SP  SP  SP  SP  SP  SP  
2.2. Personal service establishment  SP  SP  
2.3. Personal service establishment as adaptive reuse of an existing building in accordance with the provisions of Subsection 2.04. B of the Regulations  SP  SP  
2.4. Sample room  SP  SP  
2.5. Funeral home  SP  SP  
2.6. Day care center for children or adults  SP  SP  SP  SP  SP  SP  
2.7. Printing / publishing establishment  SP  SP  SP  SP  SP  SP  
2.8. Studios, arts and broadcasting  SP  SP  SP  SP  SP  SP  
2.9. Dog and Cat Care Facility in accordance with the provisions of section 2.04. M  SE  SP  SP  SP  

3. OFFICE TYPE USES  CC  GC  TP  RI  GI  QI  

3.1. Business, professional, medical, semi-public, utility, or government office  SP  SP  SP  SP  SP  SP  
3.2. Data processing facility  SP  SP  SP  SP  SP  
3.3. Research and/or development  SP  SP  SP  SP  
3.4. Any office use as adaptive reuse of an existing building in accordance with the provisions of subsection 2.04. B of the Regulations  SP  

(continued on next page) 
33 
(continued from previous page) 
4. HOSPITALITY USES  CC  GC  TP  RI  GI  QI  

4.1. Restaurant or food service establishment for consumption of food on or off the premises where no alcohol is served, and as adaptive reuse of an existing building in the GI zone in accordance with the provisions of Subsection 2.04. B of the Regulations  SP  SP  SP  
4.2. Restaurants, taverns, cafes and other food service establishments for the consumption of food and alcohol on the premises, and as adaptive reuse of an existing building in the GI zone in accordance with the provisions of Subsection 2.04. B of the Regulations  SE  SE  SE  
4.3. Hotel / Motel  SE  SP  SE  SE  SE  
4.4. Conference/banquet centers and related facilities  SP  SP  SE  SE  SE  

5. ENTERTAINMENT / RECREATION TYPE USES  CC  GC  TP  RI  GI  QI  

5.1. Indoor theater  SP  SP  
5.2. Indoor recreation center  SE  SE  SE  SE  
5.3. Health Fitness Club  SP  SP  SP  SE  SP  
5.4. Other amusement use except arcades or electronic game establishments, amusement parks, pool halls, roller skating rinks and race tracks of any kind  SP  SP  SE  SP  
5.5. Accessory amusement machines or games not to exceed one per 1,000 square feet of approved establishment area  A  A  A  A  

6. HEALTH AND MEDICAL TYPE USES  CC  GC  TP  RI  GI  QI  

6.1. Public or private hospital  SE  SE  SE  SE  SE  SE  
6.2. Public or private convalescent home or assisted living facility  SE  SE  SE  SE  SE  SE  
6.3. Clinic  SE  SE  SE  SE  SE  SE  
6.4. Veterinary clinic  SE  SE  SE  SE  SE  
6.5. Medical Marijuana dispensary facility in accordance with the provisions of Subsection 2.04.N of these regulations and Sections 21a-408-1 to 21a-408-70 of the CT General Statutes as may be amended  SE  
6.6. Medical Marijuana production facility in accordance with the provisions of Subsection 2.04.N of these regulations and Sections 21a-408-1 to 21a-408-70 of the CT General Statutes as may be amended  SE  SE  

(continued on next page) (continued from previous page) 
34 
Section 2.02 
7. INDUSTRIAL TYPE USES  CC  GC  TP  RI  GI  QI  

7.1. Industrial park  SP  SP  SP  
7.2. Assembling, fabricating, manufacturing, and/or processing of components or goods  SP  SP  SP  
7.3. Small scale assembly, processing or fabrication (such uses as: baker, caterer, decorator, laundry, dry cleaners not located in a primary Aquifer Protection Area, photographer, printer, shoe repair, or upholsterer provided that such activity shall take place only for immediate sale or direct service to customers from the premises and provided further that no noise, odor, dust, vibration or disorder is experienced beyond the lot lines of said business  SP  SP  
7.4. Contractor's primary business establishment including trades, construction, rigging and staging. Storage and .O...G... ..... ... . ..........’. ...G... ........ establishment may be permitted as an accessory use only if properly screened, but not in the GC Zone  SP  SP  SP  SP  
7.5. Earth material stockpiles associated with an approved ..........’. ....... .... ....... .. ...... ..G....... and visual screening as deemed necessary to protect the privacy of adjacent properties.  SE  SP  SP  
7.6. Painting, woodworking and sheet metal shops  SP  SP  SP  
7.7. Industrial launderers, not located in a primary aquifer recharge area  SP  SP  SP  
7.8. Recycling Facility or Salvage Facility, subject to the requirements of Subsection 2.04. O  SE  

8. WAREHOUSE / STORAGE USES  CC  GC  TP  RI  GI  QI  

8.1. Warehousing and wholesale trade  SP  SP  SP  
8.2. Distribution and/or fulfillment center  SE  SP  SP  
8.3. Self-storage facility in accordance with Subsection 2.04. F of the Regulations  SE  
8.4. Self-storage facility  SP  SP  

9. QUARRYING USES  CC  GC  TP  RI  GI  QI  

9.1. The quarrying, processing and removal of stone, subject to the requirements of Subsection 2.04. E  SP  

(continued on next page) 
35 
(continued from previous page) 
10. INSTITUTIONAL TYPE USES  CC  GC  TP  RI  GI  QI  

10.1. Town Hall, Police Station or Firehouse  SE  SE  SE  SE  SE  SE  
10.2. Public or private school  SE  SE  SE  SE  SE  SE  
10.3. Public or private library  SE  SE  SE  SE  SE  SE  
10.4. Public museum  SE  SE  SE  SE  SE  SE  
10.5. Park or playground operated by a community association, non-profit corporation located in the Town of Plainville, employing corporation for the benefit of its employees or by a governmental unit  SE  SE  SE  SE  SE  SE  
10.6. Churches / places of worship  SE  SE  SE  SE  SE  SE  
10.7. Community centers  SE  SE  SE  
10.8. Clubs, public or private as adaptive reuse of an existing building in accordance with the provisions of Subsection 2.04. B of the Regulations  SE  SE  
10.9. Postal facilities  SE  SE  SE  
10.10. Any other similar educational, religious, philanthropic, charitable, fraternal or governmental use  SE  SE  SE  SE  SE  SE  

11. TRANSPORTATION / UTILITY TYPE USES  CC  GC  TP  RI  GI  QI  

11.1. Public utility, building or facility with the exception of a wireless telecommunication facility  SE  SE  SE  SE  SE  SE  
11.2. Telecommunication facility in accordance with the provisions of Section 6.03  A/SP  A/SP  A/SP  A/SP  A/SP  A/SP  
11.3. Utilities, public and private  SE  SE  SE  SE  SE  SE  
11.4. Wastewater treatment plants  SE  SE  SE  
11.5. Park and ride facilities and commuter parking lots  SE  SE  SE  SE  
11.6. Railroad stations and yards  SE  SE  SE  SE  
11.7. Airports  SE  

(continued on next page) 
36 
Section 2.02 
(continued from previous page) 
12. AUTOMOTIVE TYPE USES  CC  GC  TP  RI  GI  QI  

12.1. Gasoline service station in accordance with the provisions of Subsection 2.04. J  SE  
12.2. Motor vehicles sales, rental, repair, and/or service in accordance with the provisions of Subsection 2.04. J  SE  SE  
12.3. Expansion of automobile repair and sales facilities which existed prior to July 31, 1996  SE  
12.4. Open storage and sale of personal and commercial hauling trailers, but not tractor trailers, in accordance with the provisions of Subsection 2.04.J and 2.04. I  SE  
12.5. Open storage and sale of recreational vehicles in accordance with the provisions of Subsection 2.04. J  SE  
12.6. Luxury Motor Coach Sales and Service in accordance with the provisions of Section 2.04. L  SE  

13. MIXED USE COMMERCIAL / RESIDENTIAL USES  CC  GC  TP  RI  GI  QI  

13.1. Efficiency dwelling units not to exceed 15% of the total residential units per property in accordance with the provisions of Subsection 2.04.C  SP  
13.2. One and two-bedroom dwelling units in accordance with the provisions of Subsection 2.04. C  SP  SP  
13.3. Condominium and multi-family developments in accordance with Subsection 1.04. D  SE  SE  
13.4. Redevelopment Design District in accordance with the provisions of subsection 2.04. P  SE*  SE*  SE  SE  

*Primary industrial parcel required. 
14. OTHER USES  CC  GC  TP  RI  GI  QI  

14.1. Multiple buildings and structures on a single lot in  SP /  SP /  SP /  
accordance with the provisions of Subsection 2.04. G  SE  SE  SE  
of the Regulations  
14.2. Public or private cemetery  SE  SE  SE  SE  SE  SE  
14.3. Adult uses in accordance with the provisions of Subsection 2.04. H  SE  
14.4. Heavy traffic generator creating 100 peak hour vehicle trips in accordance with Subsection 2.04. K  SE  SE  SE  SE  SE  SE  

37 

The following uses and/or structures, including signs in accordance with Section 4.03, may be permitted as accessory uses and/or structures in accordance with the provisions of these Regulations provided they are accessory and clearly subordinate to the principal use. 
1. DRIVE THROUGH SERVICE  CC  GC  TP  RI  GI  QI  

1.1. Drive through windows for banks and financial institutions in accordance with the requirements of Subsection 2.04. A  SE  SE  SE  SE  
1.2. Drive through windows for retail stores and restaurants in accordance with the requirements of Subsection 2.04. A  SE  SE  

2. RESIDENTIAL USES  CC  GC  TP  RI  GI  QI  

2.1. A dwelling unit or living quarters for one watchman or caretaker of the immediate premises  A  A  A  A  

3. BUSINESS / SERVICE USES  CC  GC  TP  RI  GI  QI  

3.1. An ancillary restaurant, retail, or commercial use for employees in accordance with the provisions of Subsection 2.04. D of the Regulations  SP  SP  
3.2. An ancillary retail use that is clearly accessory and complementary to the primary permitted use, not to exceed 20% of the floor area of the building, and provided all other requirements of this regulation are met  SP  SP  
3.3. Adult and child care centers for employees.  These adult and child centers must be located in the same building as the primary use  SP  SP  SP  SP  

4. INDUSTRIAL / TRANSPORTATION USES  CC  GC  TP  RI  GI  QI  

4.1. Electroplating as an accessory use to the primary manufacturing, processing and/or fabricating process, not located in a primary aquifer recharge area  SE  
4.2. Heliports  SE  SE  

5. OTHER ACCESSORY USES  CC  GC  TP  RI  GI  QI  

5.1. Accessory use customary to a permitted use (requires  ZP /  ZP /  ZP /  ZP /  ZP /  ZP /  
same level of approval as the principal use)  SP /  SP /  SP /  SP /  SP /  SP /  
SE  SE  SE  SE  SE  SE  
5.2. Roof or Ground Mounted Solar Energy Systems in accordance with Section 6.05  A  A  A  A  A  A  

38 
Section 2.03 
Section 2.03 Dimensional Standards 
All buildings or structures or uses of land, erected or altered after the enactment of these Regulations shall conform to the requirements specified for the zone in which the building or structure or use of land is located, as shown in the following subsections. 

ZONE  Minimum Lot Area (1) (S.F.)  Minimum Frontage (2) (Ft.)  
Central Commercial  No requirement  No Requirement  
General Commercial  No requirement  No requirement  
Technology Park  80,000  200  
Restricted Industrial  No requirement  No requirement  
General Industrial  No requirement  No requirement  
Quarry Industrial  No requirement  No requirement  

(1) 	
Designated wetlands and flood plain areas shall not be permitted as a part of minimum lot area requirements. 

(2)	
 On an irregular shaped lot having sufficient area to meet the requirements of the zone in which it is located and the mean width is equal to or exceeds the minimum frontage specified for the lots in the zone, a permit for erection of buildings thereon may be granted if the width of the lot at the street line is eighty (80) percent or more of the width of that part of the lot back from the street line a distance equal to the specified minimum frontage of the lots in that zone. 

(3) 
With regard to a regional shopping mall with anchor stores under separate ownership, the frontage requirements shall not be applicable to any lots that might be created through a subsequent subdivision or resubdivision of a regional shopping mall site. However, the regional shopping mall site as a whole shall meet the frontage requirements for the respective zone(s), and each lot so subdivided shall have access to a paved street either directly or via easement or license. 


39 

ZONE  Minimum Front Yd. (1) (2) (3)  Minimum Side Yd. (4)  Minimum Rear Yd. (3) (4)  
Central Commercial  12 feet  one yard of 15 feet  10 feet  
General Commercial (5)  24 feet  1 of 15 feet / total of 20 feet  10 feet  
Technology Park  50 feet  20 feet (30 feet if abutting a residential zone)  20 feet (35 feet if abutting a residential zone)  
Restricted Industrial  35 feet  1 of 20 feet total of 50 feet  50 feet  
General Industrial (3) (5)  20 feet (35 feet if abutting a residential zone)  20 feet (30 feet if abutting a residential zone)  20 feet (35 feet if abutting a residential zone)  
Quarry Industrial  20 feet (50 feet if abutting a residential zone)  20 feet (50 feet if abutting a residential zone)  20 feet (50 feet if abutting a residential zone)  

(1) 	
The minimum front yard shall be provided when no building line has been established by the Planning and Zoning Commission. 

(2) 	
The minimum front yard for property in any zone may be established at a dimension different than that prescribed in Section 2.03 by the initiative and action of the Commission in the administration of Section 7.02 if the Commission determines that a change in the front yard dimension will (1) effect better placement of structures, parking, and other site features related to new development or substantial redevelopment of a parcel and (2) advance a public interest in maintaining or improving the relationship between public and private spaces along the street on which the property fronts. 

(3) 
Except where otherwise provided for in these regulations, no building to be used as a dwelling, shall be constructed or altered in the rear yard of, or moved to the rear yard of a dwelling situated on the same lot.  No building shall be constructed in front of or moved to the front of a dwelling situated on the same lot. 

(4) 	
In the case of corner lots, the side and rear yards may be five feet (5') by permission of the Commission. 

(5) 
With regard to a regional shopping mall with anchor stores under separate ownership, the yard requirements shall not be applicable to any lots that might be created through a subsequent subdivision or resubdivision of a regional shopping mall site.  However, the regional shopping mall site as a whole shall meet the yard requirements for the respective zone(s), and each lot so subdivided shall have access to a paved street either directly or via easement or license.  


40 
Section 2.03 

ZONE  Maximum Height (Feet)  Maximum Stories  Maximum Coverage (Percent)  
Central Commercial  60  - - 
General Commercial (1)  30  (2)  50  
Technology Park  60  (3)  30  
Restricted Industrial  40  - 50  
General Industrial  60  - - 
Quarry Industrial  - - - 

(1) 	
With regard to a regional shopping mall with anchor stores under separate ownership, the percent coverage requirements shall not be applicable to any lots that might be created through a subsequent subdivision or resubdivision of a regional shopping mall site.  However, the regional shopping mall site as a whole shall meet the percent coverage requirements for the respective zone(s), and each lot so subdivided shall have access to a paved street either directly or via easement or license.  

(2) 	
The maximum height permitted in a regional shopping mall shall not exceed 75'. 

(3) 
Office building -six (6) stories Industrial use -1 story 


41 


Section 2.04 Use Regulations 

1. 	
Drive through windows may be permitted by Special Exception for retail establishments, restaurants and financial institutions only in a manner and district specifically permitted by these regulations. 

2. 	
A traffic impact analysis/report shall be required for any restaurant use but may be required for any other use if deemed necessary by the Commission. 

3. 	
The drive through window shall be accessory to the primary use and require a Special Exception in accordance with the provisions of Section 7.03 of the Regulations. 

4. 	
Each stacking lane for the drive through window shall be separated from pedestrian traffic and other vehicular traffic circulation lanes. Parking areas shall be identified with appropriate pavement markings, internal walkways, speed bumps, directional signs and the like. 

5. 	
Each stacking lane for retail and financial institutions shall provide a minimum stacking area for five vehicles. 

6. 	
Each stacking lane for restaurants shall provide a minimum stacking area for 10 vehicles. 

7. 	
The Commission may require additional stacking area for restaurant drive through windows if it determines that a longer stacking lane is necessary to ensure the safety and welfare of vehicular and pedestrian traffic on the site and on adjacent streets. 

8. 	
Each vehicle space shall be measured as follows: ten feet by twenty feet (10’ . 20’) ... ........ 

9. 	
Exits and entrances for stacking lanes shall be located at a safe distance from any street intersection and shall not impair the flow of vehicular and pedestrian traffic on or off the subject site. 



1. 	In order to promote flexibility and the environmentally friendly use of land within the certain zones, particularly in areas designated as Aquifer Protection Areas, the Commission may, by Site Plan or Special Exception, as indicated in the use tables, allow for the adaptive reuse of an existing building or buildings under the following conditions: 
a. 	
The building in which said adaptive reuse is proposed must be at least 50 years old at the time of the application. 

b. 	
The Commission must find that the proposed use does not: 

1. 
Impair the character of the building, site or surrounding properties. 

2. 
Interfere or create conflict with any remaining industrial use or uses on the premises. 



c. 	
The Commission shall require a site plan detailing how the applicant proposes to upgrade or improve site access, landscaping, parking lot layout and design and external illumination in accordance with the provisions of Section 7.02 of the Regulations. 

d. 	
Where a proposed adaptive reuse also requires approval of a special exception by the Commission, the considerations and criteria under Section 7.03 of these regulations shall be weighed carefully to insure that the proposed reuse does not conflict with adjacent uses or neighborhood character. 


42 
Section 2.04 

1. 	Except as hereinafter provided in this subsection, residential dwelling units may be permitted as part of a mixed use building in Central Commercial and General Commercial Zones provided that one hundred percent (100%) of the first floor level of the building is used for retail or office use. Two (2) residential dwelling units may be constructed on the first floor level to comply with disability accessibility requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 as incorporated into the Connecticut State Building Code. If additional accessible units are required to comply with State Code and the ADA, they must be located on upper floors. The following standards shall be met: 
a. 	
Efficiency dwelling units located above the required first floor commercial space shall be permitted in a General Commercial (GC) Zone subject to the following: 

1. 	
Each efficiency dwelling unit shall contain a minimum of four hundred (400) square feet and a maximum of 500 square feet of gross floor area. 

2. 	
There shall not be more than one efficiency unit per 2,000 square feet of lot area and the number of efficiency dwelling units shall not exceed 15% of the total number of residential dwelling units per lot. 

3. 	
Adequate provision for parking, water and sewerage shall be made for the proposed site. 



b. 	
One and two-bedroom dwelling units located above the required first floor commercial space shall be permitted in the Central Commercial (CC) and General Commercial (GC) Zones subject to the following: 

1. 	
A one-bedroom dwelling unit shall contain a minimum of 550 square feet of gross floor area at a density not to exceed one unit per 3,000 square feet of lot area. 

2. 	
A two-bedroom dwelling unit shall contain a minimum of 750 square feet of gross floor area at a density not to exceed one unit per 4,000 square feet of lot area. 

3. 	
Kitchen, dining and/or living room areas may be arranged in any manner to meet the requirements of this section. 

4. 	
Adequate provision for parking, water and sewerage shall be made for the proposed site. 





1. 	
Within the Restricted Industrial and Technology Park Zones, the Commission may, by Site Plan Approval, allow a commercial and/or retail use and/or a restaurant where such services are provided on the premises for employees of the primary use and authorized visitors only provided such use occupies less than 20% of the total floor area of the primary building or 10,000 square feet, which ever amount is less. 

2. 	
The Commission must find that the proposed restaurant, commercial or retail use is clearly subordinate and related to the primary use and does not impair the character of the building, site or surrounding properties. 

3. 	
Nothing herein shall be construed as granting permission to construct or apply for permission to construct residential units. 

4. 	
Ancillary retail is also permitted in Restricted Industrial Zones for offsite consumers in accordance with Section 


2.02. B.3.2. 
43 

1. 	The Planning and Zoning Commission may approve a site plan for the quarrying, processing and removal of stone provided the following conditions are met: 
a. 	
Adequate provision is made for drainage of the site during and at the conclusion of operations. 

b. 	
Any finished quarry face or bank, where further operations are not contemplated, shall be left at an angle not to exceed 45 degrees, or in a series of stepped cliff faces, the total of which shall not exceed an angle of 45 degrees. 

c. 	
Any finished quarry face or bank shall be permanently fenced at the top so as to prevent accidents. 

d. 	
During operations, temporary fences and/or warning signs shall be placed at the top of any quarry face or bank. 

e. 	
Any completed bank not composed of ledge rock or stone shall be covered with at least four inches of topsoil and seeded with suitable cover crop. 

f. 	
Lateral support shall be maintained for all adjacent properties. 


2. 	The Commission shall require the submission of a revised plan of operations once each calendar year to facilitate its review of operations. 

1. 	In the RI Zone, a self-storage facility may be permitted by Special Exception provided the following requirements are met: 
a. 	
No individual storage unit shall exceed three-hundred (300) square feet. 

b. 	
No electrical outlets, plumbing facilities or floor drains shall be allowed within the units. 

c. 	
No Self-Storage Facility shall be less than three (3) acres in size. 

d. 	
No Self-Storage Facility shall be located within 1000 feet of another Self-Storage Facility within the same zone. 

e. 	
With the exception of the driveway, each self-storage facility shall have a minimum of a twenty-four (24) foot wide landscaped border along the entire front yard(s). The landscaped border shall be designed and constructed to provide visual breaks of the mass of the building(s). 

f. 	
A self-storage facility shall require a six (6) foot high fence around the perimeter of all the buildings. A decorative fence shall be provided along the road frontage and a solid fence shall be provided along any abutting residential zones or properties utilized for residential purposes. 

g. 	
A self-storage facility shall include an on-site office and provide an on-site manager. 

h. 	
A self-storage facility shall provide a minimum of three (3) parking spaces and an additional 1 space for every 100 units or portion thereof. 

i. 	
No building that fronts on a public street shall have a length greater than 200 feet; multiple buildings fronting on a public street shall have a minimum separation of ten (10) feet; the space between such fronting buildings shall be fully landscaped, except for the paved driveway. 

j. 	
Interior buildings that exceed a height from grade of eight feet -... ...... (8’ -6”) shall have architectural treatment to resemble a habitable commercial building for the portion of the buildings facing the public street(s) that exceed the specified height; interior buildings shall not exceed a length of 300 feet. 

a. 	
Multiple permitted structures may be erected in Central Commercial, General Commercial, Restricted Industrial, Technology Park, General Industrial Quarry Industrial Zones without subdivision requirement, provided that within the Central Commercial Zone, multiple principal structures shall not be permitted on a lot occupied by a one or two-family dwelling. 



44 
Section 2.04 

1. 	
Purpose: The purpose of this regulation is to prevent a concentration of adult entertainment uses and/or establishments which may adversely affect existing and potential neighborhoods, property values, retail, wholesale and industrial trade, public and private schools, libraries, public parks, places of public assembly and places of worship. 

2. 	
Regulated Uses: Adult entertainment uses and establishments shall include adult cabarets, adult book stores and video stores, adult mini-motion picture theaters and adult motion picture theaters, in which specified anatomical areas are exposed or specified sexual activities are depicted. 

3. 	
Required Permit: Adult entertainment uses and establishments shall require the granting of a Special Exception in compliance with Section 7.03 of these regulations. 

4. 	
Separating Distances:  No adult entertainment use and/or establishment shall be located within one-thousand (1,000) feet of a residential zone, within one-thousand (1,000) feet of an another existing adult use and/or establishment located within the Town of Plainville and/or within 1, one-thousand (1,000) feet of public and private schools, libraries, public parks, places of public assembly and places of worship. The distance shall be measured in a direct line between lots on which these uses are located. 

5. 	
Alcoholic Beverages -The sale and/or consumption of alcoholic beverages is prohibited in and/or at an adult entertainment use or establishment as defined in these Regulations. 

6. 	
Signs and Exterior Displays 


a. 	
Signs advertising an adult entertainment use and/or establishment shall not depict any material which depicts, describes or relates to specified anatomical areas and/or specified sexual activities. 

b. 	
Exterior displays associated with an adult entertainment use and/or establishment, including but not limited to displays, windows, decorations or other openings which may be observed from a public street or right of way, shall not permit the observation of material which depicts, includes, describes or relates to specified anatomical areas and/or specified sexual activities. 



1. 	In any Commercial or Industrial Zone, no box trailer or open hauling trailer, whether registered or not, may be used for items or materials to be stored or offered for sale except if: 
a. 	
Approved by the Commission and located in an Industrial Zone 

b. 	
Located at the site of a bona-fide construction site during construction activity. 

c. 	
An integral part of an existing non-conforming use in the zone in which they are located. 


2. 	
This section shall not be construed to allow repair or storage of trailers, recreational or any other motor vehicle, luxury motor coach or combination thereof for profit, business or hobby unless specifically approved by the Commission. 

3. 	
No hauling trailer or recreational vehicle shall be used as living quarters. 


45 

1. 	For automotive Uses: 
a. 	
All repairs, except for emergency repairs, shall take place within a building. 

b. 	
Storage of motor vehicles, recreational vehicles, luxury motor coaches or trailers that are unregistered or unfit for repair is prohibited. 

c. 	
Storage of vehicle stock shall occur only in display areas approved by the Commission. The size of such display spaces may be smaller than allowed for standard parking spaces, but such spaces shall be delineated on a site plan. 

d. 	
Storage areas shall be reasonably screened from view to the street and abutting properties. 

e. 	
Sales areas in the front yard are discouraged, but may be permitted by the Planning and Zoning Commission only when it can be determined that no alternatives are available, and appropriate mitigating measures such as landscaping and screening are incorporated into the approved plan. 

f. 	
Automotive uses regulated under Sections 22a-354a through 22a-354bb of the Connecticut General 


......... .. .G...... ..... ... .. ...G..... .. ..... .......... .. ..... “!” !O..... .......... !..... 

1. 	Any development generating 100 peak hour vehicle trips may be permitted by Special Exception in any business/commercial/industrial/residential zone and shall require submittal of a Traffic Impact Study using the standards set forth in the most recent edition of the Institute of Transportation Engineers, Trip Generation, or a more accurate source, if available, subject to the following: 
a. 	
The study shall contain present roadway conditions, existing roadway capacity, existing and projected traffic volumes (ADT, Peak A.M. and Peak P.M.), existing and projected capacity analyses to include volume/capacity ratios and levels of service, available sight distances along with sight distance requirements for the posted speed limit and speeds of ten miles per hour greater than the speed limit (per CTDOT requirements), site generated trips, traffic distribution, and traffic accident experience, all in accordance with standard and accepted traffic engineering practices. 

b. 	
A Traffic Impact Study will also be required for an expansion to an existing use, which presently or with the expansion, will generate 100 peak hour trips. 

c. 	
I. ... ..... .. ..... ... .GG...... ..... .... . .... ...... .. ... .........’. ....... IG.... Study is warranted, the applicant shall be required to reimburse the Town for the cost of the peer review in accordance with Section 7.08.E. of these regulations. 


2. 	A onetime exemption from the requirements of this section for parking expansions on existing sites of no greater than 25% of the total existing parking may be permitted by the Commission if in its judgment the expansion will not significantly increase congestion in the streets or create any unsafe conditions. Any such exempted expansion is otherwise subject to the requirements of the regulations in their entirety. Applicants are encouraged to seek input from the Commission in advance of a formal application. 
46 
Section 2.04 

1. 	Sales and service (accessory modification) of luxury motor coaches meeting the definition found under Section 
9.02 of these regulations is deemed to be a unique use requiring sufficient land area to maneuver and store such vehicles and may be permitted only after the issuance of a Special Exception in accordance with the considerations and criteria set forth in Section 7.03 and the following standards: 
a. 	
A minimum lot size of three (3) acres is required. Wetlands, steep slopes exceeding 15% and floodplain shall not be included in the minimum lot size calculations. 

b. 	
All repairs, except for emergency repairs, shall take place within the facility. 

c. 	
Storage of luxury motor coaches or any motor vehicles that are unregistered or unfit for repair is prohibited. 

d. 	
Repair and modification to accommodate tow or dory vehicles (standard motor vehicles) directly related to a luxury motor coach are also permitted and considered to be accessory to the permitted use. 

e. 	
Storage for repairs shall occur only in areas approved by the Commission. 

f. 	
Repair storage areas shall be reasonably screened from view to abutting properties. Landscaping a minimum of five feet in height at the time of planting with a height at maturity of no less than six feet or opaque fencing, six (6) feet in height shall be required. 

g. 	
Gated openings facing the street may be constructed of ornate fencing to enhance the appearance of the facility. If not fully opaque, storage shall be arranged in a manner so that repair vehicles are not readily visible from the street. 

h. 	
Sales areas in the front yard are discouraged, but may be permitted by the Planning and Zoning Commission only when it can be determined that no alternatives are available and appropriate mitigating measures are provided such as site elements that discourage display within the required landscaped areas. 

i. 	
Uses regulated under Sections 22a-354a through 22a-354bb of the Connecticut General Statutes, as 


.G...... ..... ... .. ...G..... .. ..... .......... .. ..... “!” !O..... .......... !..... 
j. 	
Ancillary service of motor vehicles may be conducted as a condition of the Special Exception within the facility in an area not exceeding 25% of the service floor area, or 3,500 square feet, whichever is less. 

k. 	
Ancillary sales of motor vehicles may be conducted as a condition of the Special Exception. 

l. 	
Display spaces for ancillary motor vehicle sales are discouraged, but may be permitted in an amount not to exceed four (4) spaces per establishment. In no instance shall display spaces be permitted within the required front yard setback. 

m. 	
Other than the permitted sign, no banners, flags, balloons, or other methods or devices of customer attraction shall be permitted on the site. 

n. 	
Failure on the part of the applicant to adhere to the above standards and any conditions of an approved special exception shall result in the revocation of any approval under this section. The Commission shall cause a notice to be filed on the Land Records revoking such approval and shall seek enforcement in accordance with Connecticut General Statutes Section 8-12. Approval revocation may be reversed only if the applicant seeks and receives approval for a new special exception certificate. 


47 

1. 	
Dog and cat care facilities are permitted after site plan approval by the Commission in General Commercial, Restricted Industrial and General Industrial Zones. 

2. 	
Dog and cat care facilities are permitted after special exception and site plan review and approval by the Commission in Central Commercial Zones. 

3. 	
A site plan shall be submitted with each application showing drop off and pick up areas, staff and customer parking.  

4. 	
Each facility approved under this section shall provide a minimum of seventy (70) square feet of floor area for each dog, exclusive of office and support areas, and in no case shall there be more than thirty (30) dogs and/or cats permitted in any facility at any one time. 

5. 	
No unlicensed dogs shall be accepted into the facility. 

6. 	
Overnight boarding of dogs and/or cats may be permitted by special exception in any facility approved under this Section only in compliance with the standards contained in the following subsections a through j. 


a. 	
No more than (8) dogs and/or cats will remain on property between 8pm & 6am. 

b. 	
No such dog(s) shall be brought outdoors in numbers greater than one (1) between the hours of 8pm & 6am. 

c. 	
No dog or cat will be left unattended more than 10 consecutive hours. 

d. 	
Audio & Visual Monitoring will be required for all overnight guests. 

e. 	
No such dog and/or cat shall be boarded unless enrolled in the facilities existing day care or grooming program, and have passed a temperament evaluation. 

f. 	
All pets must be kenneled between 8pm & 6am.  No cage free boarding permitted. 

g. 	
Nightly on call staff & emergency preparedness plan must be in place. 

h. 	
No dog and/or cat shall be permitted for extended stays exceeding 14 days. 

i. 	
No facility shall be used for the quarantine of animals. 

j. 	
No such use shall occupy more than twenty five percent (25%) of approved facility area. 


7. 	
All dogs and or/cats are to be housed indoors. 

8. 	
Hours of operation are limited to 6:00 A.M. to 8:00 P.M. 

9. 	
The dog and/or cat care facility must meet requirements set forth by The State of Connecticut Department of Agriculture, which is the licensing authority. 

10. 	
A detailed waste management plan shall be submitted with the application. Such plan shall take into consideration the disposal of solid waste and storm water impacts. 

11. 	
The facility will not breed or sell any dogs or cats. 

12. 	
The facility may permit indoor training, overnight boarding and grooming as additional services. 


48 
Section 2.04 

1. 	
Purpose: The purpose of this regulation is to prevent a concentration of regulated medical marijuana dispensing and production facilities or establishments (regulated facilities) which may adversely affect existing and potential neighborhoods, property values, retail, wholesale and industrial trade, schools, public buildings, public parks, public and private recreation areas and places of worship. 

2. 	
Required Permit: Regulated facilities shall require the granting of a Special Exception in compliance with Section 7.03 of these regulations. Site plan approval in compliance with Section 7.02 is also required. Regulated facilities shall be required to comply with applicable State and local fire, health and building codes. 

3. 	
State Compliance: Any regulated facility shall, prior to operation, provide a copy of a License to operate issued under the authority of the Commissioner of the Department of Consumer Protection. 

4. 	
Separating Distances: 


a. 	
Production facilities shall not be located within two hundred (200) feet of a residentially zoned property, within one hundred (100) feet of a property containing a residential use, within one-thousand (1,000) feet of an another existing dispensary or production facility located within the Town of Plainville and/or within five hundred (500) feet of schools, public buildings, public parks, public and private recreation areas and places of worship. 

b. 	
Dispensing facilities shall not be located within two hundred (200) feet of a residentially zoned property, within one hundred (100) feet of a property containing a residential use, within one-thousand (1,000) feet of an another existing dispensary or production facility located within the Town of Plainville and/or within five hundred (500) feet of schools, public buildings, public parks, public and private recreation areas and places of worship. 

c. 	
For the purposes of this section: 

1. 	
School means any public, private or parochial educational facility including, but not limited to, child day care facilities, nursery schools, preschools, kindergartens, elementary schools, middle schools, junior high schools, high schools, vocational schools, secondary schools, continuation schools, special education schools, alternative schools, junior colleges, colleges and universities. School includes the school grounds, but does not include any facility used primarily for another purpose and only incidentally as a school. 

2. 	
Public Building means any building owned, leased or otherwise held by the United States, the state, the town, any other town, any fire district, any school district, or any other agency or political subdivision of the United States or the state, which building is used for governmental purposes. 

3. 	
Public Park and Recreation Area means public land that has been designated for park or recreational activities including, but not limited to, a park, playground, nature trails, swimming pool, reservoir, athletic field, golf course, basketball or tennis courts, pedestrian or bicycle paths, open space, wilderness areas, or similar public land within the town that is under the control, operation, or management of the town, any other town, or the state. 

4. 	
Private Recreation Area means any private business, whether for-profit or not-for-profit, intended to serve or attract clients, customers, or users under 18 years of age, for the purpose of engaging in indoor or outdoor youth-oriented programs or activities, including but not limited to sports or fitness centers, martial arts, dance, gymnastics, music or art studios, indoor open or guided play areas, camps, and the like. 

5. 	
Place of Worship means a building or place that by design is intended for conducting organized religious services and may be referred to more commonly as a church. 

6. 	
Separation Distance means a straight measurement taken from the nearest lot line of the proposed use to the nearest lot line of the protected use. 




49 

1. 	Purpose: The Commission may, by special exception, allow a recycling facility or a salvage facility in the General Industrial (GI) zone provided the following requirements are met: 
a. 	
The lot upon which the facility is located shall be at least seven (7) acres in size and shall be at least 300’ from any residential, General Commercial or Central Commercial zone(s). 

b. 	
A front, side or rear yard may be reduced to 0 feet for a structure within a facility that utilizes a rail line for incoming or outgoing deliveries where such rail enters the structure. 

c. 	
The Commission may restrict such operation to transactions only with contract customers and it may restrict or prohibit transactions with the general public. 

d. 	
Except for off-loading of deliveries or on-loading of end products, the recycling salvage facility operations shall occur within an enclosed building and no exterior storage of either incoming materials or end products shall be allowed. 

e. 	
An application for such use shall include a narrative of the traffic generated by the operation including the time and number of trips and the types of vehicles used to enable the Commission to attach conditions for such permit to protect surrounding neighborhoods, if necessary. 


50 
Section 2.04 

1. 	Purpose and Intent – The Redevelopment Design District (RDD) was developed to foster high-quality redevelopment of old industrial sites that have outlived their useful life or have been adversely affected by perceived or actual environmental contamination. The intent of a Redevelopment Design District is to permit principal buildings and uses or groups of principal buildings and uses as a unified development on a single parcel or across contiguous parcels that have been combined for this purpose. The regulation strives to permit flexibility from underlying zoning requirements with an emphasis on design standards to assure that all projects reflect a quality aesthetic while enhancing the character of the town/neighborhood. Redevelopment Design Districts shall inspire a more harmonious relationship between the development, the parcel(s), and the surrounding area than is possible using underlying zoning regulations. The RDD shall promote access to services and transportation while protecting the character of the community and abutting parcels through thoughtful site design. In addition, it is the purpose of this regulation to: 
a. 	
Revitalize targeted parcels with mixed-use development that will provide for a variety of housing and business opportunities. 

b. 	
Invigorate industrial parcels into distinctive retail/service/residential environment. 

c. 	
Encourage smart growth and low-impact development. 

d. 	
Promote the development of human-scale neighborhoods in walking distance of public transit. 

e. 	
Assist the Town of Plainville to comply with the State Zoning Enabling Act, Connecticut General Statutes § 8-2, by adopting zoning regulations that promote economic diversity and housing choice. 

f. 	
Ensure high quality site planning, architecture, and landscape design that is consistent with the surrounding neighborhoods and the distinct visual character of the historic structures in Plainville. 

g. 	
Establish development standards that ensure context-sensitive design and creative site planning in the reuse of existing buildings and construction of new buildings. 

h. 	
Notwithstanding approval of a Redevelopment Design District, the requirements of the underlying zone shall continue to apply if a project approved as a Redevelopment Design District is not constructed within statutory timeframes. 


2. 	
General Concepts – The RDD is an optional development that may be permitted in lieu of a standard development under the requirements of the underlying zone via special exception and site plan approval. The RDD regulations pay careful attention to the design and aesthetics of buildings and site development features with special consideration given to insure that surrounding areas and neighborhoods are not negatively impacted. The establishment of a mixed land use pattern must accomplish the stated purpose of the regulation and the successful applicant will present a planned community with features and amenities that are supportive of and complimentary to the proposed uses. It is the express intent of these regulations to provide a framework for development proposals by indicating use and design requirements while offering the applicant flexibility to fit market demand and existing site conditions. 

3. 	
Required Primary Parcel Characteristics – The RDD must be located on parcels designated as brownfields, grayfields, or vacant and/or underutilized parcels and shall contain either: 1) vacant or underutilized industrial buildings or groupings of buildings, or 2) vacant parcels that have previously contained vacant or underutilized commercial or industrial buildings or groupings of buildings that have been demolished, or 3) vacant parcels that have otherwise been used for industrial quarry activity. The primary RDD parcel may not be used to develop greenfields, open space, or any other area that has not been previously developed or used for commercial or industrial purposes. The primary parcel, whether or not combined with other parcels, must exhibit one or more of the aforementioned characteristics. For the purposes of this regulation, underutilized shall mean that the facility is less than 50% occupied at the time of the application. 


The primary parcel(s) shall: 
51 
a. 	
contain no less than 40% of the required minimum acreage before approval, 

b. 	
have the required parcel characteristics making it eligible under this section, and 

c. 	
be located in a General or Quarry Industrial Zone. 


4. 	
Pre-Application Discussion – Applicants are encouraged to participate in a pre-application meeting with town staff or with the Commission as provided for in accordance with Section 7.07 of these regulations to discuss the conceptual design and physical attributes of a proposed development. Applicants are also encouraged to engage the State Department of Transportation and/or the Office of the State Transportation Administration in the early stages of the development process where a State Traffic Certificate will be required. 

5. 	
Where Permitted – The RDD shall be permitted in the General Industrial, Quarry Industrial, General Commercial and Central Commercial Zones. Limited consolidation with parcels in the General and Central Commercial Zones may only be permitted as specified below. 


a. 	Parcel Consolidation – The consolidation of contiguous parcels may be necessary to meet the minimum area requirements of the regulations. 
1. 	It shall be acceptable to consolidate adjacent parcels in order to provide the minimum required parcel size and/or to accommodate a larger cohesive development. There shall be established one primary parcel that qualifies as having the desired parcel characteristics within a qualifying zone (GI 
.. .I).  .... ...... ..... .. ...G.. ... “...G... ......” ... ... ........ .. .............. 
2. 	
Secondary parcels used in combination with the primary parcel may have any property history including residential, but may be located in general commercial and central commercial zones only. 

3. 	
Any such secondary parcel used in combination with the primary parcel shall be combined in fee to insure a cohesive development. 


6. 	Permitted Uses 
a. 	
Primary Uses – The following uses shall be permitted in the Redevelopment Design District. 

1. 	
Commercial uses in accordance with Subsection 2.04. O.16. 

2. 	
Residential uses in accordance with Subsection 2.04. O.17. 



b. 	
Accessory Uses – In addition to the primary structures, accessory structures designed in accordance with these regulations may be permitted as follows only if shown on the approved site plan: 

1. 	
Storage buildings necessary for the maintenance of the facility 

2. 	
Fences 

3. 	
Residential decks 

4. 	
Outdoor dining and gathering areas 

5. 	
Community amenities such as swimming pools and game courts 

6. 	
Parking structures meeting the requirements of this section 




7. 	Bulk Requirements – The following bulk requirements are deemed to be the minimum allowable in the Redevelopment Design District. 
a. 	
Minimum district size shall be three (3) acres and may include one or more approved parcels. 

b. 	
Minimum street frontage shall be 100 feet total, and may include two access points with the smaller of the two not being less than 40 feet wide. 

c. 	
Maximum building coverage shall be 30%; however, that may be increased to 40% if structured parking is used that provides at least 40% of the required on-site parking spaces, or 50% if structured parking is used that provides at least 50% of the required on-site parking spaces. 

d. 	
Total site coverage including structures, parking and circulation aisles, sidewalks, equipment platforms, courtyard areas, utility platforms and patios, weather permeable or not, shall not exceed 70% of the total site area. Permeable pavement, sidewalks and common surfaces may be utilized to meet Low Impact Development requirements. 

e. 	
Landscaped areas shall otherwise comprise at least 30% of the site and may be used to satisfy the requirements of LID standards. 


52 
Section 2.04 
f. 	
Minimum front yard setback shall be 24 feet; however, the Commission may approve and/or require a reduction in the amount of the minimum front yard setbacks in accordance with Subsection (2) of Section 

2.03.B with due consideration to streetscape design, pedestrian circulation and safety. Vegetation within the required front yard may count towards required landscape area. 

g. 	
Minimum side yard setbacks, if utilized as a vegetated buffer, may count towards the required landscape area. The following shall be required: 

1. 	
25 feet where abutting a residential zone or use. 

2. 	
20 feet where abutting a commercial or industrial use or zone. 

3. 	
10 feet where abutting an active rail line. 

4. 	
The Commission, with due consideration to the abutting use and/or uses, shall require a buffer in the form of landscaping, fencing, landscaped berm or any combination thereof. 



h. 	
Minimum rear yard setback, if utilized as a vegetated buffer, may count towards the required landscape area. The following shall be required: 

1. 	
25 feet where abutting a residential zone or use. 

2. 	
20 feet where abutting a commercial or industrial use or zone. 

3. 	
10 feet where abutting an active rail line. 

4. 	
The Commission, with due consideration to the abutting use and/or uses, shall require a buffer in the form of landscaping, fencing, landscaped berm or any combination thereof. 



i. 	
Maximum building height shall be as permitted in the underlying zone, except that building height in the General Commercial zone may be increased to 45 feet. 

j. 	
Maximum building height may be superseded by the airport approach zone height requirements if applicable. 

k. 	
Maximum residential unit density shall first be determined by the limiting factors of this regulation such as required parking, landscaping, buffers, and compliance with Low Impact Development standards. In addition, residential density must also comply with permitted residential to commercial floor area ratio but shall in no case exceed 20 units per acre, except as provided under subsection 8 of this regulation. 

l. 	
Commercial density shall be determined by the minimum permitted commercial to residential floor area ratio. 

m. 	
Notwithstanding the bulk requirements contained herein, where questions arise as to interpretation, the more restrictive shall apply. 


8. 	Workforce Housing Residential unit density may be increased to 25 units per acre if at least 20% of the units are designed as Workforce Housing and are available only to individuals and families whose household income is at or below 80% of the median income level for the Town of Plainville as determined and reported by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) in accordance with the following: 
a. 	
Workforce Deed restriction The following shall be inserted in each deed for a Workforce Housing Unit and may not be removed until the expiration of the period specified herein. 

b. 	
Definitions 

1. 	
Eligible Household — a household whose annual income is at or below eighty percent (80%) of the median income for a household of the same size in the Town of Plainville. 

2. 	
Obligation — the binding commitment the owner is obliged to uphold under the conditions of this regulation when utilizing the density bonus permitted herein. 

3. 	
Owner – is construed to include applicant, developer, landlord, manager, project owner, individual unit owner and lessor and includes all heirs, successors and assigns of any category mentioned herein. 

4. 	
Workforce Housing Deed Restriction — a deed restriction constitutes a binding obligation with respect to the restrictions on household income, sale or resale price, lease and rental and housing costs. This definition shall also be construed to include the term covenant. 

5. 	
Workforce Housing Administrator – a party or entity appointed by the owner to administer ongoing eligibility requirements for the duration of any deed restrictions/covenants required by this regulation. The Workforce Housing Administrator shall be responsible to provide a written annual report to the Planning and Zoning Commission.  Such report shall be subject to legal review. 

6. 	
Workforce Housing Unit — a dwelling unit within a Workforce Housing Development that is subject to a Workforce Housing Deed Restriction. 



c. 	
Deed Restrictions -identify address and unit numbers 

1. 	
Preamble The property conveyed/leased/rented hereby is a Workforce Housing Unit, subject to a Workforce Housing Deed Restriction as defined herein. Strict enforcement of the Workforce Housing Deed Restriction is required and any owner hereby obligates themselves to do so in compliance with the authorizing Plainville Zoning Regulation known as the Redevelopment Design District adopted on May 22, 2015. 

2. 	
Stipulations 

i. 	For a period of thirty (30) years from the date of initial residential occupancy, the Workforce Housing Unit may only be sold, transferred, leased, or rented to households whose annual income is less than or equal to eighty percent (80%) of the median income based on household size in the Town of Plainville as calculated by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, for no more than a price or rate that, inclusive of utility and maintenance costs as necessary and applicable, shall not impose gross housing costs that exceed thirty percent (30%) of the buyer/lessee/renter income at the time of sale, transfer, lease or rental. 
ii. 	Maximum income and maximum sale price shall be calculated upon property sale or transfer. 
iii. 	Maximum annual income and maximum lease (henceforth defined to include rental) rate shall be calculated upon new lease. For renewals or extensions of existing lease arrangements, recalculation of maximum annual income is not necessary, but recalculation of maximum lease rate may be undertaken at the discretion of the owner or landlord (henceforth lessor). For leased units without a written lease agreement, maximum lease rate may be recalculated on an annual basis. 
iv. 	Any such Workforce Housing Deed Restriction shall be noted within a declaration filed in the Land Records of the Plainville Town Clerk and any subsequent deeds and/or leases shall refer to the declaration by its location in the land records. 

3. 	
Sale and transfer 




53 
i. 	For the duration of the Workforce Housing Restriction, the owner of said Workforce Housing Unit shall sell or transfer said Workforce Housing Unit only to an Eligible Household. Determination of buyer eligibility shall be made by the Workforce Housing Administrator as specified below. 
ii. 	In the event said owner desires to make said property available for sale, said owner shall notify the Workforce Housing Administrator in writing. Said owner shall inform any potential buyer of the Workforce Housing Restriction before any purchase and sale agreement is executed by furnishing the potential buyer with a copy of this Deed Restriction. The purchase and sale agreement shall contain a provision that the sale is contingent upon determination by the Workforce Housing Administrator that the buyer meets the eligibility criteria set forth herein. 
iii. 	Once the purchase and sale agreement is executed by said owner and the buyer, the latter shall immediately notify the Administrator in writing. The Administrator shall have thirty (30) days from receipt of such notice to determine the eligibility of the buyer. The Administrator shall notify said owner and buyer of its determination of eligibility in writing within said thirty (30) day period. 
If the Administrator determines that the buyer is not eligible, the purchase and sale agreement shall be void, and said owner may solicit other potential buyers. If the Incentive Housing Administrator determines that the buyer is eligible, the Administrator shall provide the said owner and buyer with a signed certification, executed in recordable form, to the effect that the 
54 

Section 2.04 
sale of the particular Workforce Housing Unit has complied with the provisions herein. The owner shall bear the cost of recording said certification. 
4. 	Lease (including “rental”) 
iv. 	For the duration of the Workforce Housing Restriction, the lessor of said Workforce Housing Unit may lease said Workforce Housing Unit only to an Eligible Household. Determination of lessee 
(.......... ....... .. ..... ... ...G “......”) ........... ..... .. G... .. ... ......... 
Housing Administrator for the Workforce Housing Development specified below. 
v. 	In the event said lessor desires to make said property available for lease, said lessor shall notify the Incentive Housing Administrator in writing. Said lessor shall inform any potential lessee of the Workforce Housing Restriction before any lease agreement is executed by furnishing the potential lessee with a copy of this Deed Restriction. The lease agreement shall contain a provision that the lease is contingent upon determination by the Workforce Housing Administrator that the lessee meet the eligibility criteria set forth herein. 
vi. 	Once the lease agreement is executed by said lessor and the lessee, the latter shall immediately notify the Administrator in writing. The Administrator shall have thirty (30) days from receipt of such notice to determine the eligibility of the lessee. The Administrator shall notify said lessor and lessee of its determination of eligibility in writing within said thirty (30) day period. If the Administrator determines that the lessee is not eligible, the lease agreement shall be void, and said lessor may solicit other potential lessees. If the Workforce Housing Administrator determines that the lessee is eligible, the Administrator shall provide the said lessor and lessee with signed certification to the effect that the lease of the particular Workforce Housing Unit has complied with the provisions herein. 
d. 	Sublease Subleases of more than ninety (90) days shall be treated as leases and comply with the conditions applicable to leases in this Deed Restriction, with the exception that maximum annual income and maximum lease rate shall be recalculated upon renewal or extension of an existing sublease. Subleases of ninety days or less are exempt from the requirements of this Deed Restriction. Nothing in this paragraph 
shall be construed to affect the lease agreement between the lessor and lessee, including, if specified, the permissibility or prohibition of sublease. 
e. 	Yearly notification The Workforce Housing Administrator shall file a report with the Plainville Planning and Zoning Commission or alternate body as designated by the Commission on an annual basis to certify compliance 
with the Workforce Housing Deed Restriction. Such reports shall also include name, address and contact information of the Workforce Housing Administrator. 
f. 	Monitoring and enforcement Violation of the Workforce Housing Restriction shall not result in a forfeiture of title, but the Plainville Planning and Zoning Commission or its designated agent shall otherwise retain all enforcement powers granted by the Connecticut General Statutes, including § 8-12, which powers include, but are not limited to, the authority, at any reasonable time, to inspect said property and to examine the books and records 
of the Administrator to determine compliance of said property with the regulations named above and with this Workforce Deed Restriction. 
g. 	Succession Plan The owner, its heirs, successors and assigns are hereby obligated to institute the provisions of workforce housing compliance and to insure that in the event of a transfer of ownership, public or private, that the provisions of this regulation are fulfilled for the entire time period required herein. 
9. 	Application Procedure/Approvals Required – Within the RDD, a project may be proposed in a permitted zone on a parcel or a consolidation of parcels meeting the prescribed parcel characteristics. The minimum standards for submittals are as follows: 
55 
a. 	
Special Exception/Concept Plan – A concept plan (10 copies) shall be required for approval of a special exception in accordance with Section 7.03 of these regulations. The concept plan will demonstrate the viability of the redevelopment project without a full investment in engineered site details. The applicant may choose to obtain approval of a special exception prior to applying for site plan approval, or both approvals may be sought concurrently. The concept plan shall graphically illustrate the spatial and physical layout of the proposed redevelopment. At a minimum, the concept plan shall include: 

1. 	A concept plan showing such features as: 
i. 	Existing features such as buildings, parking, landscaping, topography and utilities 
ii. 	Proposed building location(s) 
iii. 	Landscaping elements including proposed buffers 
iv. 	
LID features – proposed location and type 

v. 	
Public spaces 


vi. 	Parking and lighting 
2. 	Elevation drawings of key features including: 
i. 	Building façades 
ii. 	Public spaces 
iii. 	Key building and site design elements 
iv. 	At least one perspective rendering from a prominent viewing angle 
3. 	Project narrative to include: 
i. 	Financing plan 
ii. 	Project management team 
iii. 	Zoning data including, but not limited to: 
a. 	
Existing historical and/or natural features 

b. 	
Zoning compliance statement for proposed development 

c. 	
Proposed tenant mix by type, area and use designations in tabular form 

d. 	
Parking compliance statement in tabular form 

e. 	
Phasing plans if applicable 

f. 	
Estimated project duration 



b. 	
Site Development Plan/Site Plan – The site plan approval process shall comply with all the requirements of Section 7.02 of these regulations and shall meet the standards found in Appen... “!” (Site Plan Checklist) of the regulations. 


1. 	The site plan shall be an accurate reflection of the conditions presented on the approved concept plan. Minor deviations from the concept plan may be approved administratively. Minor deviations may include: 
i. 	Movement of a structure in any direction in an amount equivalent to 10% of structure width or length relative to the direction of movement so long as required yard and buffer regulations are not violated, and parking, landscaping, and/or LID requirements are not adversely impacted. 
ii. 	Reduction in the size of a structure that does not affect any required use ratios. 
iii. 	Increase in the amount of commercial space built that does not increase impervious surface area. 
iv. 	
In all other instances, or where site circulation, aesthetics and overall design are concerned, the Commission shall be the sole authority as to whether any plan deviation is minor or significant. If deemed minor, the Commission may permit administrative approval. 

v. 	
If deemed significant, the applicant may be required to seek a site plan modification and/or re-approval of the concept plan via special exception. 


10. 	General Development Standards – Careful site planning is an essential element of the RDD. It is the express intent of these regulations to garner projects that do not result in conventional commercial or residential development. Rather, the regulations will require that development plans take into consideration the following factors: 
56 

Section 2.04 
a. 	
The project design shall incorporate a village theme into responsible, sustainable mixed-use development. 

b. 	
Site design shall comply with the Design Requirements (subsection 11) and take into consideration the functionality and importance of pedestrian and transit-friendly amenities as well as guiding building and site design. 

c. 	
Project design shall incorporate interior and/or exterior plaza or court features to serve as central gathering, dining and/or vendor spaces. 

d. 	
The project design shall protect and promote significant historic or natural features and shall take into account structures of historic and/or cultural value. 

e. 	
Low impact development techniques (LID) shall be incorporated into all redevelopment plans and all plans shall strive to manage stormwater on the site, providing opportunities for groundwater recharge and 


....G..... .......... .. .......... .... ... “.......... ... IG.... D......G... ... ....G..... ......G... .......” 
f. 	Landscaping and buffer design shall be incorporated in accordance with subsection 12. 
11. 	Design Requirements 
a. 	
The requirements found in this subsection are not merely guidelines. Applicants must use the following requirements in the design of the site and buildings. 

b. 	
Scale shall be compatible to surrounding uses and shall relate to the human form as well as other buildings in the area. 

c. 	
Massing of new structures shall be arranged in a manner that minimizes the appearance of a barracks style-structure 

1. 	
No contiguous building surface shall have a length greater than 35 feet. 

2. 	
In order to minimize massing, building surface projections or recesses shall have a depth of at least 5% or 5 feet, whichever is greater, rounded up to the nearest foot of the length of the façade and at minimum, such recesses shall create a visual break that can be easily identified from any viewing angle. 

3. 	
Such projections or recesses shall be equally spaced or uniformly arranged along the entirety of the façade. 

4. 	
Massing shall be further reduced through the use of varying architectural treatments. 

5. 	
Where applicable, new structures shall be aesthetically compatible with adjacent buildings. 

6. 	
Ground-floor façades that face streets shall have arcades, display windows, entry areas, awnings, or other architectural features along no less than 60% of their horizontal length. 

7. 	
Pedestrian-friendly features such as benches, niches, plantings, and pavers are required in order to create visual interest along ground floor façades. 



d. 	
Architecture embraces creativity and ingenuity in design. 

1. 	
Flat, blank building surfaces are not permitted. 

2. 	
Building façades shall have an attractive appearance from any viewing angle. 



e. 	
Proportionality shall be considered. Spatial relationships between windows, doors, signs and other architectural elements shall be compatible with the architectural style of the building and its surroundings. 

f. 	
Signs – Signs shall be designed to complement the required village theme of the development for both commercial and residential applications. 

1. Site plan applications shall include a sheet to specifically illustrate a coordinated signage plan. 
i. 	Signage shall be designed as a unified theme which shall be enforced throughout the life of the project. 
ii. 	Internally illuminated signage within the RDD shall be restricted to attached signage only. 
iii. 	Detached pole signs shall be limited to 24 square feet, and five feet in height. 
iv. 	
External illumination, if used, shall be downcast onto signs with care to insure that glare will not spill beyond the property line of the development. 

v. 	
Sign area will be strictly apportioned to permit one square foot of signage for each linear foot of building frontage used per use. 


2. 	
For the purposes of these regulations, prototypical architecture is equivalent to signage. 

3. 	
Franchise, logo or brand-name prototype architecture is strongly discouraged but certain design elements may be used to the extent that its appearance otherwise satisfies the spirit of these design regulations. If presented in the spirit of a New England village theme, the Commission may consider variations of prototypical architectural and sign features. 

4. 	
Internal directional and way-finding signs are permitted so long as commercial logos are not used and each directional sign is less than 2 square feet, not higher than 5 feet from grade, and does not impair visibility in any way.  Such signs do not include necessary traffic safety signage. 

5. 	
Where otherwise unspecified, the sign standards set forth in Section 4.03 of these regulations shall apply. 



g. 	
Roofs – where applicable, roof shapes and pitches shall be compatible with or provide enhancement to, surrounding structures. Pitched roofs are preferred, but flat roofing may be considered to maintain the character of a specific area. Green roofs may be used to offset LID requirements on the ground. 

h. 	
Windows and doors shall be designed so that placement patterns maintain a balance, conveying a sense of continuity and unity. 

1. 	
Placement shall provide and strengthen a sense of unity with surrounding structures. 

2. 	
Fenestration design shall take into consideration building views from all sides. 



i. 	
Building materials shall be selected based upon: 

1. 	
Their ability to create a New England Village aesthetic 

2. 	
Their ability to provide continuity with the surrounding area 

3. 	
Their durability 

4. 	
The predominant exterior building materials shall be as follows: 

i. 	Brick 
ii. 	Wood 
iii. 	Non-sedimentary stone 
iv. 	
Textured masonry 

v. 	
Vinyl or fiber cement (Hardie Board) siding boards may be permitted to simulate natural wood siding such as clapboard and shakes only when used in conjunction with alternating architectural materials to produce a visually desired aesthetic. 



5. 	
The use of smooth-faced concrete block and panels, pre-fabricated steel, exterior insulation and finish system (EIFS, DRYVIT), fiberglass or metal panels (excluding metal roofs and approved accents) is prohibited. 



j. 
Colors of surface materials are harmonious with compatible accents and: 

1. 	
are harmonious with surrounding architecture, 

2. 	
avoid large expanses of bright logo colors, and 

3. 	
are of low-reflectance earth-tone colors. 



k. 	
Mechanical equipment, utilities and dumpsters shall be: 


57 58 


Section 2.04 
1. 	Screened from view at any angle or located underground. 
i. 	Screening materials must be compatible with that of the redevelopment project. 
ii. 	Screening materials shall be made from durable materials. 
iii. 	Screening may be comprised of vegetated buffers, fences or architectural material if approved as compatible with other project materials by the Commission. 
l. 	
Outdoor display and sales are permitted only for the following purposes: 

1. 	
Outside display of merchandise for sale within a designed pedestrian environment such as in a village-style shopping center or courtyard area with kiosks or market carts, where outside merchandise display is an integral part of the theme and enhances the appearance of the site, and only as shown on the approved plan. 

2. 	
This subsection is not intended to allow the display of merchandise typically sold inside retail stores; rather, it is intended to encourage true pedestrian-oriented areas in a village atmosphere. 



m. 	
Outside dining areas shall not occupy sidewalks intended for pedestrian use and access. Outside dining and display areas are permitted only to the extent they are shown on an approved site plan. 

n. 	
Plazas/Courtyards/Squares are an important part of any mixed-use development serving as focal features of the development and providing areas for congregation. As such they shall be integrated into the project design in an amount equal to 5% of the gross floor area of the development up to the first 10,000 gross square feet of the development and thereafter in an amount equal to 1% of the gross square feet of the development. 

1. 	
No single plaza, courtyard or square required herein be less than 400 square feet in total area 

2. 	
In no case shall the entire plaza, courtyard or square area required herein be less than 800 square feet. 

3. 	
Computations shall accompany the concept and site plans. 

4. 	
Such space may be indoors and/or outdoors. 

5. 	
Such public spaces may be used for gathering, dining, outdoor sales, trade and vending, entertainment to the exclusion of live music, or other such public uses as deemed appropriate and approved by the Commission as part of the formal application process. 

6. 	
Such space shall not include common areas such as elevator lobbies, hallways, vestibules and foyers. 



o. 	
Loading docks and areas shall not be visible from public streets or from residential zones. All such facilities shall be designed as an integral part of the building, shall be suitably screened, shall not detract from the appearance of the building or site, and shall be accessible to all commercial areas within the building. 

p. 	
Dumpsters shall be screened so as not to be visible from public streets or from residential zones. All dumpsters shall be placed on a concrete pad, appropriately screened with commercial grade opaque fencing, and maintained for the life of the project. The location and design of the screening/enclosure shall be shown on the Site Plan. Restaurant dumpsters shall be located a minimum of 50 horizontal feet from any residential use and shall be maintained and cleaned regularly to reduce odors, including the use of environmentally friendly chemical additives to combat odor. 

q. 	
Reuse of existing structures, where applicable, shall conform to the requirements and guidelines of this section. In order to maintain the character of an existing structure, if desirable, the Commission may waive certain architectural requirements within this subsection that cannot be reasonably accommodated while saving the structure, but shall not waive requirements relating to plazas, courtyards, squares, signs, loading and dumpster areas, and required screening of these elements. 


12. 	Landscaping, Buffers and Screening -Landscaping shall be provided in accordance with this regulation. 
a. 	
Where the Commission deems that a reduction in the required front yard setback is beneficial to the project, required front yard landscaping may be reduced in kind, but shall not reduce the overall amount of landscaped area as required by these regulations. 

b. 	
Landscape areas shall include vegetated buffers, screening, and low impact development elements used for creative stormwater management, except that no detention/retention basins shall be permitted within the required landscape area unless designed to mimic a functional and natural water feature, or as an aesthetically pleasing landscape focal point. 

c. 	
Not more than 30% of such landscape area may be comprised of wetlands, watercourses, special flood hazard areas or slopes in excess of 20% unless the Commission can make a finding that such areas are subject to development and are worthy of such conservation. 

d. 	
An area computation shall be provided in tabular form on the landscaping plan to confirm the appropriate makeup of landscaped area. 

e. 	
In addition to the required minimum landscaped area of this subsection: 

f. 	
Front Yard landscaping shall comply with Section 4.04.1 of the regulations. 

g. 	
Parking lot landscaping shall comply with Section 4.04.2 of the regulations. 

h. 	
Buffers and screening shall comply with Section 4.04.3 of the regulations. 

i. 	
Where a conflict exists between the requirements of this regulation and the requirements found elsewhere in the regulation, the more restrictive shall apply. 


59 
13. 	Parking 
a. 	Due to the mixed-use nature within the RDD, parking shall be as follows: 
1. 	
Where feasible, parking structures shall be utilized. Any such parking structures, if so situated, shall incorporate street level commercial façades. 

2. 	
All other parking shall be provided in open lots and/or common or private garages. 

3. 	
Open lot parking shall be shielded from street view with landscaping and or structures. 

4. 	
If parking is to be combined, the applicant may avail themselves of percentage reductions as permitted in Section 4.01 of these regulations. 

5. 	
If residential parking is segregated from commercial parking, the number of parking spaces shall comply with the parking standards found within Section 4.01 of the regulations and the project narrative shall provide details as to how parking segregation will be accomplished and managed. 

6. 	
The density of development permitted in the RDD requires that special attention is paid to Low Impact Development Techniques. Such measures shall be utilized in parking lot design to maximize infiltration, improve water quality, and diminish flooding. Permeable paving is recommended but shall be required for any parking in excess of the minimum required by this regulation. 

7. 	
No required front yard setbacks shall be used for parking regardless of frontage reductions required or granted by the Commission. 

8. 	
The applicant shall provide a parking data table on the site plan indicating required and provided parking for each use and dwelling type including any specified reduction. 


14. 	Access Management – The implementation of Access Management should focus on the following: 
a. 	
Limit the number of access points. 

b. 	
Choose access locations that reduce conflicts within the development and on adjacent streets. 

c. 	
Encourage shared access between lots. 

d. 	
Consolidate access for contiguous lots. 

e. 	
Where possible, access locations shall be designed to be no less than 100 feet from intersections, unless aligned with a signalized intersection. 


15. 	
Storm-Water Management – A storm-water management plan shall be submitted at the time of site plan application. Such plan shall utilize and follow the ...... .. ... “.......... ... IG.... D......G... ... Storm-..... ......G... D..... .......” 

16. 	
Commercial Development – The development shall be required to construct and maintain the following indoor commercial space. 


a. 	
Commercial space – In no case shall the net indoor floor area of commercial space be less than 35% of the net indoor floor area within the entire RDD. 

b. 	
No single commercial end user shall occupy in excess of 10,000 square feet. 


60 

Section 2.04 
c. 	
Commercial space shall occupy all at grade street facing façades. 

d. 	
In no case shall commercial space be located over residential dwelling units. 

e. 	
Permitted commercial uses shall include: 

1. 	
Retail, but not smoke shops, package stores, pawn shops, or consignment stores. 

2. 	
Personal services, but not tattoo parlors. 

3. 	
Restaurants as defined in Article 9 of these regulations. Liquor sales in connection with food service establishments may be permitted to the extent that tables for food service shall comprise no less than 80% of the patron service area and no live entertainment shall be permitted. In deference to the residential component of the development, hours of operation shall not extend beyond 10:30 

P.M. 

4. 	
Offices. 



f. 	
For the purposes of determining compliance with this subsection, net floor area shall include all enclosed areas devoted to individual and exclusive commercial use, and shall not include certain common areas such as common hallways; stairwells; elevator lobbies; private parking garages; outdoor plazas, courtyards and squares, and indoor/outdoor dining areas. 

g. 	
For the purposes of determining compliance with this subsection, the applicant shall provide a detailed computation indicating the calculations used to compute the permitted amount of commercial space, including a comparison of commercial versus residential net floor area. 


17. 	Residential Development – Multifamily dwellings will provide the human element needed to energize and help maintain the desired village atmosphere within the RDD. 
a. 	
New multifamily dwelling units shall be permitted on upper levels of mixed use buildings within the RDD. 

b. 	
Residential units may be permitted on first floors to comply with ADA requirements only if facing an interior courtyard or plaza, but shall not be allowed on street façades where commercial space is otherwise required. 

c. 	
In no case shall the net floor area of all residential units combined exceed 65% of the net indoor floor area within the entire RDD. 

d. 	
Permitted residential uses shall include: 

1. 	One bedroom units, which shall comprise not more than 70% of the residential square footage allowed within the RDD. 
i. 	A one-bedroom unit shall be a minimum of 750 square feet gross floor area. 
2. 	Two bedroom units, which shall comprise not more than 70% of the residential square footage allowed within the RDD. 
i. 	A two-bedroom unit shall be a minimum of 925 square feet gross floor area. 
3. 	Kitchen, bedroom, dining and living areas may be arranged in any manner to meet the requirements of this section. 

e. 	
For the purposes of determining compliance with this subsection, net floor area shall include all enclosed areas devoted to individual and exclusive residential use, and shall not include certain common areas such as common hallways; stairwells; elevator lobbies; clubhouse; meeting rooms; private parking garages; and indoor/outdoor plazas, courtyards and squares, and outdoor dining areas. 

f. 	
For the purposes of determining compliance with this subsection, the applicant shall provide a detailed computation indicating the calculations used to compute the permitted unit numbers by type, including a comparison of residential versus commercial net floor area. 


18. Phasing – The applicant may wish to phase the redevelopment project and may do so under the following conditions: 
a.  
b.  The applicant shall own in fee simple all aspects of the project, including proposed future phases.  
c.  Each phase must be designed in a manner that permits it to stand alone as a complete redevelopment  
project in the case that any approved future phases are not constructed.  

61 62 
d.  Each phase shall comply with this regulation in its entirety, including development ratios between  
commercial and residential space.  
e.  Prior to the issuance of any certificate of occupancy by the building official, the applicant shall submit a  
financial guarantee in an amount and type satisfactory to the Town of Plainville for any unfinished portion  
of any phase of an approved project.  


Section 3.01 



Article 3. SPECIAL ZONES 

Section 3.01 Floodplain Zone 
1. 	
Purpose -The Floodplain Zone is intended to provide reasonable notice regarding property that may be subject to the effects of flooding. The Floodplain Zone pre-dates the designation of the Special Flood Hazard Area that is regulated by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) and in many cases, the Floodplain Zone and Special Hazard Area overlaps. The more restrictive of either requirement shall apply in all instances. The Flood Zone is shown on the Official Plainville Zoning Map. The SFHA is shown on the Official FEMA Maps.  A typical cross section of the SFHA is illustrated in figure 3.01.1, below. 

2. 	
Permitted Uses – The following uses are permitted within the Floodplain Zone: 

3. 	
Prohibited Uses -The following uses are prohibited within the Floodplain Zone: 


a.  Farming, poultry or livestock raising, forestry or nursery gardening; except that no commercial raising of  
furbearing animals or pigs, or storage of manure or other animal refuse shall take place less than 100 feet  
from any residential zone or residential use.  
b.  Public parks and playgrounds and public or private day camps.  
c.  Golf course, golf driving ranges, tennis courts, riding stables and similar recreational uses: public, private  
or commercial.  
d.  Wild life sanctuaries and preserves.  
e.  Open storage of  non-floatable industrial  or  commercial products  or  raw  materials when completely  
enclosed by an opaque fence at least six (6) feet high.  
f.  Public utilities.  
g.  Any other similar  uses  by permission of the Planning and Zoning Commission.  In determining the  
appropriateness  of  the  use,  the  Commission  shall  consider,  among  other  things,  the  amount  of  
development required, the type of structures proposed and the general compatibility of the use with  
other flood plain uses in the vicinity.  
h.  Any accessory use customary to a permitted use.  
i.  The above permitted uses shall also comply in every respect to these Zoning Regulations in their entirety.  
j.  Any existing nonconforming  use  shall be permitted to continue and repairs or alterations needed to  
ensure healthy, safe, and code complaint living or operational conditions shall be permitted in accordance  
with these regulations and the Town of Plainville Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance.  
k.  Any proposed improvements shall also comply with the Plainville Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance.  

a. 	
Any new residence. 

b. 	
Any new retail, commercial establishment, unless otherwise permitted above. 

c. 	
Any use requiring a substantial improvement that could be damaged by flooding. For the purposes of this section, substantial improvement shall be defined as any combination of repairs, reconstruction, alteration, or improvements to a structure taking place over a ten-year period in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure, unless such improvements successfully mitigate potential losses due to flooding. The market value of the structure should be the appraised value of the structure using the cost approach to value method prior to the start of initial repair or improvement or, in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include any project for improvement of a structure required to comply with existing health, sanitary or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living or operational conditions. 


63 
Area and Dimensional Standards 
Minimum Lot Area (S.F.)  40,000 (2)  
Minimum Frontage (Ft.)  150 (2)  
Minimum Front Yd. (Ft.)  20/50 (1) (2)  
Minimum Side Yd. (Ft.)  20 each/50 (1) (2)  
Minimum Rear Yd. (Ft.)  20/50 (1) (2)  
Maximum Height (Ft.)  40 (2)  
Maximum Stories  - 
Percent Impervious Coverage  50%  

(1) 	
Larger distance required where yard abuts any residential zone. 

(2) 	
Pre-existing conditions may be maintained. 


4. 	Procedures 
a. 	
Any use permitted under section 3.01.2 shall require the approval of the Planning and Zoning Commission in full compliance with Section 7.02 – Site Plan Application. 

a. 	Exemption: Repairs or alterations to existing single family residences not otherwise disqualified due to the substantial improvement clause shall not require site plan approval, but shall be subject to review and permitting, as may be applicable, by the Plainville Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission and/or the Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance Administrator. 

b. 	
All proposals for uses of land or alteration of topography within a Flood Plain Zone shall first be submitted to the Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance Administrator and the Plainville Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission for respective permits as may be applicable. 

c. 	
No approvals can be granted by the Planning and Zoning Commission without first obtaining any necessary wetland and/or Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance permits, or lacking that, a determination by the appropriate administrators that no such permit is required. 

d. 	
Any application for a change of zone from Floodplain to another zone classification shall be accompanied by documentation from FEMA that the portion of area the applicant wishes to exclude from the floodplain zone is not within an area defined as a Special Flood Hazard as defined by FEMA. 

e. 	
Approval shall only be granted where the Commission has received documentation stating that the level of the premises is adequately raised above the base flood elevation and that the purpose and integrity of these regulations is preserved. Where no base flood elevation is provided, the applicant shall be responsible to provide such information in accordance with the standards outlined in the Plainville Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance. 

f. 	
Notwithstanding any approvals granted by the Plainville Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission and the Plainville Planning and Zoning Commission, no building permit shall be issued until the Floodplain Administrator has issued a Flood Damage Prevention permit where required. 



64 
Section 3.02 
Section 3.02 Aquifer Protection Overlay Zone 
1. 	Purpose -The Aquifer Protection Overlay Zone is intended to protect water quality and water resources within Plainville. 
a. 	No use defined as a regulated use under Section 2(35) of the Plainville Aquifer Protection Area Regulations shall be permitted unless in accordance with the Aquifer Protection Area Regulations. 
2. 	Process – Approval for any use or structure within the Aquifer Protection Overlay Zone shall be obtained from the Plainville Aquifer Protection Agency, if required. 
65 
Section 3.03 Ridgeline Protection Overlay Zone 

1. 	
Purpose -The purpose of this section is to protect traprock ridges in Plainville so as to preserve their unique environmental attributes, their groundwater recharge function, and the visual and historic assets of these distinctive ridgeline areas. 

2. 	
Delineation of Regulated Areas 


a. 	
The Town of Plainville shall maintain a map or series of maps which generally delineate the Ridgeline and ......... ....... !... .. ....... ...... (......... ........ .. .. “... Official ......... ...”). 

b. 	
However, the actual presence and location of a Ridgeline and/or a Ridgeline Setback Area as determined by a licensed land surveyor, geologist, and/or geographer in accordance with Section 8-1aa(3) and (4) and Section 8-2 of the Connecticut General Statutes shall govern the applicability of this regulation to a proposed development. 

c. 	
In cases where an applicant disputes the designation of any part of his land as a regulated area, he shall have the burden of proving that designation inapplicable. 


3. 	Permitted Uses 
a. 	
Emergency work necessary to protect life or property. 

b. 	
Approved development proposals which were applied for prior to the effective date of this regulation, which approvals remain in effect. 

c. 	
Any pre-existing use of or building on the land. 

d. 	
Selective timbering, subject to the following conditions: 

1. 	
The work shall be done or monitored by a registered forester as certified by the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection. 

2. 	
Prior to commencing such activity, a plan prepared by a registered forester for the work shall be filed with the Plainville Planning Department. 



e. 	
Grazing of domesticated animals. 

f. 	
Passive recreation. 


4. 	Uses Allowed only by Special Exception -The following operations and uses shall be permitted in Ridgeline Setback Areas after receiving a Special Exception from the Commission: 
a. 	
Development in accordance with a site plan approved by the Commission, provided that no more than 20 percent of the portion of the lot within the Ridgeline Setback Area as defined in this section may be covered with impervious surfaces. 

b. 	
Quarrying within a Quarry Industrial Zone. 

c. 	
Timbering, subject to the following conditions: 

1. 	
Such timbering shall be done in accordance with a plan prepared by an arborist hired by the Town of Plainville and approved by the Commission. In deciding to approve such plan the Commission shall give due consideration to the environmental impacts from such timbering as well as the implementation of lesser means in the establishment, maintenance or enhancement of a view such .. ... ....... .. ..... .. ... ..G.... .. ..... .. .G..... ......  I. ... ..... .... .. ........’. .... is ..O...... .. ... .......... ... ......... ..... ... 150% .. ... ........’. ....G.... ..... .. ....... 

to the Town of Plainville, and the Town of Plainville shall reimburse the applicant for any overpayment. 

2. 	
Such timbering shall not result in the removal of all trees within a one thousand (1000) square foot area. 

3. 	
Such timbering shall not result in the creation of large treeless gaps along the top of the ridgeline. 

4. 	
Such timbering shall not result in the exposure of large, visible areas of any building as viewed from below the ridgeline setback area. 




66 
Section 3.03 
5. 	Standards for Granting of a Special Exception within Ridgeline Setback Areas: In addition to general considerations and standards for special exception of Section 7.03, the Commission shall require compliance with the following: 
a. 	That adequate safeguards have been taken to minimize the visual impact of proposed activities as viewed from public highways, public parks, or other areas accessible to the general public. 
Visual impacts may include, but not be limited to: unnatural gaps, cuts, projections, or other obviously artificial alterations of existing natural tree lines, ridgelines, prominent topographic features, or rock formations; the use of materials which, by their color, reflectance, finish, size, or orientation disrupt the natural or historic character of the ridgeline; the size, height, shape, and location of buildings; the height, intensity, coverage and glare from proposed lights. 
Safeguards may include, but not be limited to restrictions on the removal of trees and other vegetation, requiring supplemental landscaping, restrictions on structure colors and reflectivity of windows and roofs, requiring buffers and setbacks from ridgeline, restrictions on exterior lighting and height limitations. The Commission may require that clear cutting occur in a staggered or other pattern which reduces the visual impact of such cutting, and may further require that clear cutting be staged over a period of time to allow for re-growth of remaining vegetation. Additionally, the Commission may require that buildings be clustered to reduce visual impact. The Commission may require the installation of flags, balloons, or other on-site markers to allow evaluation of visual impacts as seen from various vantage points. 
b. 	That the viability of the area as a wildlife resource (habitat, breeding ground, foraging area, migratory pathway, etc.) is protected. 
Steps to protect these areas may include, but not be limited to, restricting the size of lawn areas or other clearings; restricting clear cutting to certain seasons of the year or to certain areas, patterns, methods of removal, or other restrictions which may be necessary to minimize the impact on wildlife and wildlife habitats. The Commission may require an analysis of the potential impacts of the proposed activity on wildlife to be prepared by an environmental specialist or biologist. 
c. 	That the groundwater quality and recharge potential of the area is preserved. 
The Commission may require an analysis of the possible impacts of the proposed activity on groundwater quality and recharge. In order to minimize such impacts, the Commission may require, but not be limited to, restrictions on the size or location of septic systems; the use of biofilters, detention ponds, retention ponds, and other methods of storm water management which protect surface and subsurface waters; and the regulation of the storage, handling or usage of hazardous materials or waste, including, but not limited to, fertilizers, pesticides and herbicides. 
d. 	
That areas of archaeological and historic importance have been identified, and adequate steps have been taken to preserve and/or record these areas. 

e. 	
That the stability of the ridgeline is protected and that erosion potential is kept to a minimum by minimizing changes to the existing topography, preserving existing vegetation, requiring the revegetation of disturbed areas, and requiring the installation and maintenance of sedimentation and erosion control structures as needed. 


Steps to protect the ridges stability may include, but not be limited to, requiring retaining walls or other methods to minimize the cutting and filling of slopes; requiring reforestation or landscaping of quarries upon reaching finished grade, or of other areas disturbed by development or clear cutting; and requiring that driveways, roads, and other improvements requiring grading shall be approximately parallel to existing contours. 
67 
6. 	Prohibited operations and uses in Ridgeline Setback Areas. All uses shall be prohibited in the Ridgeline Setback Areas except as otherwise permitted in Subsection 3.03.3 and by Special Exception in Subsection 
3.03.4. 
7. 	
Use Variances Prohibited: In accordance with Connecticut General Statutes Section 8-6, no variance shall be granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals which would allow any use of land within the Ridgeline Setback Area which would violate any subset of this regulation. 

8. 	
Waiver of Application Requirements: The Commission may waive the requirements for all or a portion of the required application information upon a finding that it is not essential to determining compliance with the conditions set forth in this section. 



Section 3.04 Airport Approach Overlay Zone 
1. 	
Purpose -Airport Approach Zone (AA Zone) is established for the purpose of reducing hazards which endanger lives and property at and near any airport established in the Town of Plainville. 

2. 	
Nature of Zone 


a. 	
The Airport Approach Zone is an overlay zone which extends over each zone in the Town of Plainville. 

b. 	
The standards imposed by the Regulations of the underlying zone shall remain in effect except as modified or supplemented by the provisions of the Airport Approach Zone. 

c. 	
The provisions of this Section shall not apply to single family dwellings. 

d. 	
The Commission may hold a public hearing on the proposed site plan if, in its judgment, the nature of the site plan is such that the public should have an opportunity to be heard. 


3. 	Permitted Uses: In an Airport Approach Zone, any use which is allowed in the zone upon which the AA Zone is superimposed is permitted, except any use which, by reason of electrical interference with radio communications, smoke emission or unusual light or glare, may be a hazard to aircraft. 
4. 	Height Restriction: No structures, trees or buildings, antennae, towers or power communication lines shall be erected or allowed to grow to a height in excess of the height of the surfaces defined herein. The surfaces defined below are established in relation to any airport runway existing or hereinafter constructed in the .... .. ........... ! G.. ........ “......... !....... ........... ........... !....... .... ...” ..... March 26, 1999 depicts the surfaces in relationship to Robertson Airport runway and is on file in the Planning Office for guidance purposes only.  The actual locations of all surfaces are defined herein: 
a. 	
Primary Surface: A 500-foot-wide surface longitudinally centered on a runway. When the runway has a specially prepared hard surface, the primary surface extends 200 feet beyond each end of that runway; but when the runway has no specially prepared hard surface, the primary surface ends at each end of that runway. The elevation of any point on the primary surface is the same as the elevation of the nearest point on the runway centerline. 

b. 	
Approach Surface: A surface longitudinally centered on the extended runway centerline and extending outward and upward from each end of the Primary Surface for a horizontal distance of 3,000 feet at a 20 to 1 slope. The inner edge of the Approach Surface is 500 feet wide and it expands uniformly to a width of 1,400 feet. 

c. 	
Horizontal Surface: A horizontal plane 150 feet above the established airport elevation, the perimeter of which is constructed by swinging arcs of 5,000 foot radii from the center of each end of the primary surface of each runway of the airport and connecting the adjacent arcs by lines tangent to those arcs. 

d. 	
Transitional Surface: These surfaces are located on each side of the runway and extend outward and upward on both sides of the runway at right angles to the runway centerline and runway centerline, extended at a slope of 7 to 1 from the sides of the Primary Surface and form the sides of the Approach Surfaces until they intersect with the Horizontal Surface. 

e. 	
Conical Surface: A surface extending outward and upward from the perimeter of the Horizontal Surface at a slope of 20 to 1 for a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet. 


68 
Section 4.01 



Article 4. BASIC STANDARDS 

Section 4.01 Off-Street Parking and Loading 


1. 	Purpose.  These parking regulations are adopted for the purposes of: 
• 	
Providing for sufficient parking facilities to serve the needs of existing and proposed uses. 

• 	
Providing for flexibility in meeting parking needs among different users and at different times in an efficient and cost effective manner. 

• 	
Minimizing the amount of land area devoted to parking. 

• 	
Minimizing the environmental impacts associated with parking lot runoff. 


2. 	Number of Parking Spaces. 
a. 	
Parking spaces shall be provided in sufficient number to accommodate the motor vehicles of all occupants, employees, customers, and any others normally visiting the premises at any one time. 

b. 	
Unless otherwise specified, all required spaces shall be off-street spaces. 

c. 	
The following table shall be used to determine the appropriate parking requirements as follows: 

1. 	
...... ..... .. ........ .. ... .... .... ... ..G... ......... .. ... ......... ..... .. “G...G.G ....... ..O.....” ...... G....... .. the Commission as provided in Section 4.01.A.3. 

2. 	
... ............ .. G... ....... ...... .... ......... .. ... ......... ..... .. “....... ......... .........” ..... ..O.... ... ........ .. . ....... E........ .. ... .GG...... ... .... ....... 




Exception shall, in part, be based upon the following: 
i. 	The Commission shall find, based on information submitted by the applicant, that such additional parking spaces are necessary. 
ii. 	Such additional parking spaces shall be installed in a way to minimize the aesthetic impact of the additional parking. 
iii. 	The surface treatment for such additional parking shall be porous concrete, pervious pavement or other surface treatment which will address water quality issues. 
Residential Use  Minimum Parking Required:  Special Exception Threshold:  
One-family structures  2.0 spaces for each dwelling unit  Special Exception not required  
Dwelling units in multi-family buildings and developments  • 1.0 spaces for each efficiency dwelling unit • 1.8 spaces for each one-bedroom dwelling unit • 2.0 spaces for each two (2) bedroom dwelling unit • 2.8 spaces for each three (3) bedroom or larger unit  • 1.8 spaces for each efficiency dwelling unit • 2.2 spaces for each one-bedroom dwelling unit • 2.4 spaces for each two (2) bedroom dwelling unit • 3.4 spaces for each three (3) bedroom or larger unit  
Rooms in a lodging house, rooming house, or boarding house  0.8 spaces per rented unit  1 space per rented unit  

69 70 
Retail / Service Use  Minimum Parking Required  Special Exception Threshold:  
For retail stores, personal service shops, shopping centers and similar uses  
• Less than 20,000 SF of gross floor area  3.5 spaces for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area  4.5 spaces for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area  
• 20,000 to 49,999 SF of gross floor area  3.0 spaces for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area  4.0 spaces for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area  
• 50,000 SF of gross floor area or more  2.5 spaces for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area  3.5 spaces for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area  
Gasoline service stations  A minimum of three (3) spaces (not including spaces for gas pumps) PLUS any parking required for ancillary retail use  A maximum of five (5) spaces (not including spaces for gas pumps) plus any parking required for ancillary retail use  
Automobile – dealer / repairer  One (1) space for every 10 vehicles on display PLUS one (1) space per employee PLUS two (2) spaces per repair bay  One (1) space for every 10 vehicles on display PLUS one (1) space per employee PLUS three (3) spaces per repair bay  
Day Care Center  One (1) space for every four (4) children  One (1) space for every five (5) children  

Office Use  Minimum Parking Required  Special Exception Threshold:  
For business and professional offices and financial institutions  3.5 spaces for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area  4.5 spaces for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area  
For medical offices and facilities  4.5 spaces for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area PLUS 1 parking space for each employee  6.0 spaces for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area PLUS 1 parking space for each employee  

Hospitality / Lodging Use  Minimum Parking Required  Special Exception Threshold:  
Restaurants, café, taverns, and other eating or beverage establishments, whether public or private, with seating  1.0 space per fifty (50) square feet of floor area used for eating or beverage purposes PLUS 1.0 space per two employees  1.0 space per forty (40) square feet of floor area used for eating or beverage purposes PLUS 1.0 space per employee  
Restaurants – take-out and delivery only  4 spaces per 1,500 square feet gross floor area PLUS 1 space per employee  5 spaces per 1,500 square feet gross floor area PLUS 1 space per employee  
Hotel or motel  1 space per room  1.2 spaces per room  
Assembly such as theaters, stadiums, amusement, recreation, religious, educational or other similar uses  1 parking space for each 4.0 seats whether fixed or not, or as determined by the Commission on a case by case basis  1 parking space for each 3.0 seats whether fixed or not, or as determined by the Commission on a case by case basis  

Industrial Use  Minimum Parking Required  Special Exception Threshold:  
Industrial or manufacturing  1.0 spaces for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area  3.5 spaces for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area  
Wholesaling, warehousing and/or distribution  0.5 spaces for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area  2.0 spaces for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area  

Section 4.01 
Other Use  Minimum Parking Required  Special Exception Threshold:  
Hospital, convalescent nursing home  or  1 space per 3.0 beds PLUS 1 space per each employee  1 space for every 2.0 beds plus 1 for each employee  
Funeral homes  1.0 per 3 seats of capacity  1.0 per 2 seats of capacity  

d. 	
For other uses not specifically listed, the Commission shall determine the appropriate parking standard. 

e. 	
In the case of multiple or mixed uses on the same property, the parking spaces required shall be the sum of the requirements for each of the various uses and/or structures computed separately, unless modified according to Section 4.01. A.3. 


3. 	Potential Reduction of Number of Parking Spaces. 
a. 	
Central Commercial District -In a Central Commercial zone, the Commission may, by Special Exception, reduce the parking requirements for any use to eighty (80) percent of the minimum parking spaces required due to the high level of pedestrian activity and the multi-purpose nature of trips. Sufficient documentation is required to allow a determination that adequate parking will be available for such use(s). 

b. 	
Permanent Shared Use Reduction for Offsetting Peaks (Same Lot) -In a business zone, the Commission may, by Special Exception, permit a reduction of up to twenty-five (25) percent of the minimum parking spaces required for the proposed uses with offsetting peak demand. Sufficient documentation is required to allow a determination that adequate parking will be available for such uses. 

c. 	
Permanent Shared Use Reduction for Offsetting Peaks (Separate Lots) -In a business zone, the Commission may, by Special Exception, permit off-street parking spaces for a predominantly evening use on one lot to be used as part of the off-street parking spaces required for a predominantly day-time use on another lot. In addition to sufficient documentation to allow a determination of the appropriate amount of spaces to be shared, safe access is required and mutual and reciprocal parking easements must be filed in the office of the Town Clerk. 

d. 	
Permanent Shared Use Reduction (Multiple Parcels) -In a business zone, the Commission may, by Special Exception, permit a reduction of the provision of up to twenty-five (25) percent of the parking spaces required for the uses on two or more sites due to shared use of parking facilities when: 

1. 	
The parking facilities provided on the sites are interconnected with adjacent parking facilities to create a functional parking arrangement. 

2. 	
Appropriate access and parking easements are executed between the adjacent properties and recorded in the Office of the Town Clerk. 

3. 	
The Commission is satisfied that the parking needs of the joint users on the sites occur at different hours of the day or that adequate parking will be available for the current and potential future uses. 



e. 	
Permanent Compact Space Reduction 

1. 	
In parking lots in excess of 50 spaces, the Commission may allow the installation of compact spaces not to exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the total number of spaces installed at eight (8) feet by sixteen (16) feet. 

2. 	
These spaces shall be clearly designated as compact car parking. 

3. 	
This reduction may only be considered for single-tenant buildings where there is reasonable assurance of private control of these areas. 



f. 	
Temporary Installation Reduction -In a business zone, the Commission may, by Special Exception, defer the immediate installation of up to twenty-five (25) percent of the required parking spaces where sufficient evidence has been presented to show that: 

1. 	
The reduced parking facilities will adequately serve the proposed use. 

2. 	
There is adequate space reserved on the site, as shown upon the Site Development Plan, to install the full parking requirements. 

3. 	
The owner accepts, in writing, a requirement that the owner will file the Site Development Plan in the office of the town clerk, stipulating that the owner, or the successors or assigns of the owner, will install as many of the deferred parking spaces as the Commission deems necessary within six (6) months of the Commission's request, when, in the opinion of the Commission, such installation is needed. 



g. 	
Commission May Specify Reduction -In the case of multiple or mixed uses and/or structures on the same property, the Commission may, by Special Exception, authorize a reduction of up to twenty-five (25) percent of the total parking spaces required for the combined, separate uses and/or structures. 


71 
4. 	Handicapped Spaces. 
a. 	
Parking spaces designed for handicapped persons shall be provided in all parking lots. 

b. 	
The number and size of parking spaces shall be in accordance with the Connecticut State Building Code and/or the Connecticut Manual of the Americans with Disabilities Act, as amended, whichever is more stringent. 


5. 	Size of Parking Facilities. 
a. 	Except as provided below, parking spaces and aisle shall be installed and maintained so that a rectangular area at least nine (9) feet wide and eighteen (18) feet long, exclusive of access or maneuvering space, is provided for each parking space as follows: 

A  Parking angle  0°  30°  45°  60°  90°  
B  Curb length  22.00  18.00  12.73  10.39’  9.00’  
C  Stall depth  8.00’  16.79  19.09  20.09’  18.00’  
D  Vehicular aisle width – two-way circulation  24.00’  24.00’  24.00’  24.00’  24.00’  
D  Vehicular aisle width – one-way circulation  14.00’  12.00’  13.00’  18.00’  24.00’  

b.  Where parking spaces overhang a landscaped area (minimum six feet in width), the depth of the parking  
space may be reduced by two (2) feet provided that appropriate wheel stops or curbs are provided.  
c.  Where circumstances exist which make perpendicular parking (90°)  or  angled parking with  one-way  
circulation  advantageous  due  to  traffic  safety  considerations,  the  Commission  may  require  such  
configuration.  

72 
Section 4.01 
6. 	Surface Treatment. 
a. 	
Unless modified or waived by the Commission, parking areas for any use shall have one or more of the following surface treatment as authorized by the Town Engineer and approved by the Commission: 

1. 	
Standard dense mix asphalt pavement with at least six inches of process stone and 2 1/2 inches of bituminous concrete for parking spaces and/or travel aisles. 

2. 	
Porous concrete (designed in accordance with standards in the Low Impact Development and Stormwater Management Design Manual) for parking spaces and/or travel aisles. 

3. 	
Permeable asphalt pavement (designed in accordance with standards in the Low Impact Development and Stormwater Management Design Manual) for parking spaces only. 

4. 	
Open course concrete pavers with either topsoil/grass or pea gravel for overflow parking spaces only that see minimal use for most of the year. 



b. 	
When and where required by the Commission, curbing within parking areas shall be made of granite or cast in-place concrete although the Commission may also require no curbing in order to promote low impact development techniques. 

c. 	
In order to properly identify parking stalls and other areas reserved for other than public use, striping in yellow traffic paint 4" wide shall be painted outlining these areas. 


7. 	Snow Removal. 
a. 	Each parking lot shall be designed to accommodate snow removal in a safe and efficient manner. Snow storage areas shall be designed into site plan in areas that will not interfere with landscaping or other required site features. 
8. 	Limitations on Parking in Required Yards. 
a. 	
In a Central Commercial (CC) or General Commercial (GC) District, parking shall not be located in a required yard setback except by permission of the Commission. 

b. 	
In a Restricted Industrial (RI) or General Industrial (GI) District, no off-street parking and/or loading spaces or areas are permitted in any required front yard setback. 

c. 	
In a Restricted Industrial (RI) or General Industrial (GI) District, no off-street parking and/or loading spaces or areas are permitted in any required side and/or rear yard setback except that the Commission may permit parking in the side or rear yard setback if, in its judgment, the physical features and characteristics of the site, including but not limited to, inland wetlands, watercourses, rock outcroppings and/or excessive slopes make it impractical to prohibit parking in the side or rear yards. 

d. 	
In a Technology Park (TP) District, there shall be no parking or loading in any required front yard and there shall be no parking or loading in any required rear yard setback or side yard setback which abut a residential zone. 

e. 	
For a development containing efficiency dwelling units, parking shall not be located in a required rear, front or side yard except by permission of the Commission. 


73 

1. 	
In any district, in connection with every building or part thereof hereafter erected, having a gross floor area of 10,000 square feet or more, which is to be occupied by manufacturing, storage, warehouse, goods display, retail store, wholesale store, market, hotel, hospital, laundry, dry cleaning or other uses similarly requiring the receipt or distribution by vehicles of material or merchandise, there shall be provided and maintained on the same lot with such building, at least one off-street loading space plus one additional such loading space for each 20,000 square feet, or major fraction thereof, gross floor area so used in excess of 20,000 square feet. 

2. 	
Each loading space shall not be less than 10 feet in width, 25 feet in length and 14 feet in height. 

3. 	
No such space shall be located closer than 50 feet to any other lot in any Residence Zone unless wholly within a completely enclosed building or unless enclosed on all sides by a wall or opaque fence not less than six feet in height. 

4. 	
In a regional shopping mall, the developer shall provide for all off-street loading which is logically and conveniently located for bulk pickups and deliveries, scaled to delivery vehicles expected to be used, with access for such vehicles provided for. The number of loading spaces in such a regional shopping mall shall be adequate in number to service the demand of the uses created within the mall and be so located as to not interfere with the safe movement of the normal internal traffic and emergency vehicles. The developer shall satisfy the Commission that the number of loading spaces proposed is adequate. 


74 
Section 4.01 

Plainville recognizes the need to support and encourage alternate transportation modes and seeks through these regulations to provide safe and convenient alternative transportation access to and within parking lots including movement to and from public walkways, bikeways and/or streets. Understanding that use of alternative modes of transportation benefit the economy, community and the environment requires parking lot design that provides clearly defined pathways, sidewalks or routes that are safe, comfortable and convenient, thus encouraging such alternative modes of transportation. For the purpose of these regulations, alternative transportation shall include pedestrian and bicycle users as well as manual and motorized transport units for handicapped citizens. 
1. 	Street Sidewalks Required 
a. 	
Construction of sidewalks shall be required along the street frontage of all new site developments.  Such sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with Town specifications within the street right-of-way. 

b. 	
A waiver to this section may only be approved by a majority vote of the Commission when received in writing from an applicant demonstrating hardship in accordance with subsections 1 or 2, or in accordance with the provisions of subsections 3 or 4 below: 

1. 	
the provisions of a sidewalk would cause significant and demonstrated environmental harm to adjacent wetlands or wildlife habitat 

2. 	
the provision of a sidewalk in accordance with Town specifications would pose significant engineering challenges 

3. 	
the cost of required improvements would exceed 25% of the proposed site development plans 

4. 	
the Commission can reasonably determine that the benefit of such sidewalk is significantly diminished by a lack of similar facilities within a reasonable distance and that prospects for connections to existing sidewalks are unlikely given the developed nature of the land 




2. 	Alternative Transportation Access 
a. 	
To encourage alternative transportation, the Commission may require alternative transportation access connecting the principal building(s) to the required street sidewalk. 

b. 	
If required by the Commission, alternative transportation access: 

1. 	
may be constructed of concrete, bituminous concrete, raised platform decking or permanent markings on pavement within parking lots 

2. 	
shall be clearly defined using signage and/or pavement markings 

3. 	
shall be located in such a manner as to promote usage and maximize safety to the users of such facilities 

4. 	
shall have a net width of at least four feet exclusive of any two-foot car overhang area 

5. 	
A waiver to this section may be approved by a majority vote of the Commission 




3. 	Provisions for Bicycles 
a. 	
In order to conserve energy and lessen congestion in the streets, the Commission may require bicycle racks to service sidewalks, trails, and transit facilities as well as public and private facilities where it is reasonably expected that they will be utilized. 

b. 	
If required by the Commission, bicycle racks shall: 

1. 	
be conveniently located at bus stops/shelters and/or building entrances as required by the Commission in such a manner so as not to interfere with pedestrian or vehicular activity and to provide maximum visibility for the bicycles stored there 

2. 	
be constructed to accommodate a minimum of three bicycles, or one bicycle per 10,000 square feet of building area, whichever is greater 




75 
Section 4.02 Traffic Circulation and Parking 
1. 	Traffic Access 
a. 	
All proposed access to the site shall accommodate two-way traffic entering and exiting the site unless the development has three or more driveways. 

b. 	
The Commission may permit one-way traffic entering or exiting the site at one driveway for developments with three or more driveways provided the driveway is not a primary ingress and/or egress to the site. 

c. 	
The number of site access drives shall be adequate to accommodate existing traffic and traffic generated by the proposed development. 

d. 	
Site access drives shall be properly aligned and provide adequate site distance for motorists and pedestrians. 

e. 	
All proposed curb cuts shall not be located too near intersections, street corners, places of public assembly and other similar safety considerations. 

f. 	
For changes in use to existing developments with a single one-way driveway that cannot physically provide two-way access, the Commission shall require appropriate signage to minimize conflicts. 


2. 	Circulation and Parking 
a. 	
Adequate off-street parking and loading areas shall be provided to prevent patrons, visitors and/or employees of a particular use from parking in public streets. 

b. 	
Adequate, safe and accessible pedestrian circulation shall be provided to and within the site. 

c. 	
Interior pedestrian and vehicular traffic circulation systems shall be designed to minimize conflicts between these two types of traffic and to provide safe access to and from buildings, structures and off-street parking areas. 

d. 	
Loading areas shall be designed and located to prevent conflicts with pedestrian traffic. 


3. 	Fire Lanes 
a. 	
The Commission shall require fire lanes, if in its judgment the type, scale, location and traffic generated by a proposal warrants the creation and maintenance of fire lanes. 

b. 	
Fire lanes shall be included on the site plan and be marked as follows: 

1. 	
The outer limits of the fire lane shall be a line four (4) inches wide, painted yellow. 

2. 	
The words "FIRE LANE" shall be painted at fifteen (15) foot intervals in yellow traffic paint. The Letters shall be a minimum of three (3) inches wide and twelve (12) inches high. 

3. 	
Signs indicating "FIRE LANE -NO PARKING -TOW ZONE" at least eighteen inches by twenty-four inches (18" x 24") shall be posted along the fire lane. 

4. 	
All fire lane signs, striping and lettering shall be kept in good repair and clearly legible. 




4. 	Traffic Impact Study -The Commission shall require a Traffic Impact Study if it finds that this type of study is necessary to determine the amount and type of vehicular traffic that will be generated by proposal. The study shall evaluate the impact of the traffic generated by the proposal on local streets surrounding the proposed development. The applicant shall bear all costs associated with required traffic studies. 
76 

Section 4.03 


Section 4.03 Signs 
1. 	
Purpose -The purpose of these Sign Regulations is to provide for the appropriate and effective use of signs as a means of identification, direction and the reasonable promotion of commercial and industrial uses within the Town of Plainville which does not impair the aesthetic quality of the community and/or pedestrian and traffic safety. It is not the intent of this Regulation to in any way discriminate against, regulate or interfere with publication, circulation, distribution or dissemination of any material that is constitutionally protected. 

2. 	
Applicability -No sign shall be established, constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, extended or moved unless the sign conforms to the provisions of these Regulations. 

3. 	
Signs in Residential Zones -The following signs are permitted in residential zones subject to the issuance of a permit where required: 


a. 	
Sale or Rental Signs -A sign which advertises the sale or rental of a premise or lot which is: 

1. 
Six (6) square feet or less in area. 

2. 
Erected behind the building line. 



b. 	
Farm Products -A sign which advertises farm products raised on the premises which is: 

1. 
Three (3) square feet or less in area. 

2. 
Attached to the building or structure from which the farm product is being sold. 

3. 
Erected behind the building line. 



c. 	
Home Occupation Signs -A sign which advertises a permitted or approved home occupation conducted by a resident of the premises which is: 

1. 
Three (3) square feet or less in area. 

2. 
Attached to the residence. 

3. 
Erected behind the building line. 



d. 	
Special Exception Use -A sign identifying a use which has obtained a Special Exception provided that such sign: 

1. 
Is approved by the Commission as a Special Exception. 

2. 
Shall not exceed twenty-four (24) square feet in area. 

3. 
Shall be erected a minimum of twelve (12) feet from any property line. 

4. 
Shall not exceed a maximum height of twelve (12) feet. 




4. 	Signs in Commercial and Industrial Zones 
a. 	
Attached Signs 

1. 	
One attached sign shall be permitted per business establishment conducted within a building except that the Commission may, by Special Exception, approve the location of more than one attached sign per business establishment, if it determines that more than one attached sign is necessary to adequately identify the business and the proposed sign does not impair the character and appearance of the area in which it is erected. 

2. 	
The total area of all attached signs shall not exceed 1 square foot for each linear foot of the front facade of a building (defined as the longest building wall which is used to provide primary access to the public). Only one such frontage may be counted per building. The total area of all attached signs shall be shared equitably within multi-tenant buildings using gross lease area, length of storefront or other acceptable measurement. 

3. 	
Attached signs shall not project above the roof line and shall not project more than twelve (12) inches from the wall or surface to which they are attached except that a projecting sign or canopy may be utilized provided that: 


i. 	Any such projecting sign shall not exceed four (4) square feet in area. 
ii. 	The bottom edge of a projecting sign shall be at least seven (7) feet above ground level in pedestrian areas. 
iii. 	No projecting sign shall extend more than six (6) feet from the wall to which it is attached. 
iv. 	
No projecting sign shall exceed the height of the building to which it is attached. 

v. 	
If a back-lit canopy sign, is proposed, it shall not exceed the area normally permitted for an attached sign and any lettering, logo, or any other type of advertising message on any canopy that is not back-lit shall count toward the maximum permitted area of an attached sign. 


vi. 	Any such attached sign, projecting or canopy shall be erected only after approval of the supporting structure by the building official. 

b. 	
Detached Signs 


77 
1. 	Except as may be otherwise allowed in this section, one detached sign may be permitted per lot provided that such sign: 
i. 	Shall not exceed twenty-four (24) square feet in area unless the Planning and Zoning Commission has granted a Special Exception for a detached sign which exceeds twenty-four (24) square feet in area. 
ii. 	Shall be erected a minimum of twelve (12) feet from any property line. 
iii. 	Shall not exceed twelve (12) feet in height unless the Planning and Zoning Commission has granted a Special Exception for a detached sign which exceeds 12 feet in height provided that the maximum permissible height of any such detached sign shall not: 
a. 	
In a CC, GC, RI, GI, or TP Zone, exceed thirty (30) feet in height. 

b. 	
In a QI Zone, exceed sixty (60) feet in height. 


2. 	Gasoline service stations may have one movable sign for each highway frontage provided that such sign: 
i. 	Shall not exceed nine (9) square feet in area. 
ii. 	Shall not exceed a maximum height of four (4) feet. 
iii. 	Shall be located a minimum of two (2) feet from the property line. 
3. 	Traffic control signs directing vehicular traffic entering and exiting a site provided there shall not be more than four (4) such signs permitted per acre of lot area and provided any such sign: 
i. 	Shall not exceed one (1) square foot in area. 
ii. 	Shall not exceed a maximum height of four (4) feet. 
iii. 	Shall be located a minimum of two (2) feet from the property line. 
4. 	A sign which advertises the sale or rental of a premise or lot provided that such sign: 
i. 	Is eight (8) square feet or less in area. 
ii. 	Is erected behind the building line. 
5. 	Temporary Signs 
a. 	
Political Signs -Signs advertising candidates seeking public political office provided that such signs: 

1. 	
Shall not be located within the road right-of-way and shall only be located on private property with property owner's permission. 

2. 	
Shall not be erected earlier than sixty (60) days before the election and shall be removed within thirty (30) days of the election. 

3. 	
Shall not exceed twenty-four (24) square feet in area. 

4. 	
Shall be erected a minimum of twelve (12) feet from any property line. 

5. 	
Shall not exceed twelve (12) feet in height. 



b. 	
Non-profit Organization's Charitable Events -Signs advertising non-profit organization's charitable events provided that such signs: 

1. 	
Shall not be located within the road right-of-way and shall only be located on private property with property owner's permission. 

2. 	
Shall not be erected earlier than thirty (30) days before the charitable event and shall be removed within fifteen (15) days of the end of the event. 

3. 	
Shall not exceed twenty-four (24) square feet in area. 

4. 	
Shall be erected a minimum of twelve (12) feet from any property line. 

5. 	
Shall not exceed twelve (12) feet in height. 




78 
Section 4.03 
c. 	
Real Estate -The Zoning Enforcement Officer may issue a permit for temporary signs associated with a development containing five (5) or more lots or one or more buildings which exceed 5,000 square feet of total floor area which is located on a lot with a minimum of one-hundred (100) feet of frontage on federal, state or local highway: 

1. 	A sign, not larger than eight feet by four feet (8' by 4'), which advertises the sale, lease or rental of lots or structures provided that such sign: 
i. Shall be erected a minimum of twelve (12) feet from the property line. 
ii. Shall not exceed twelve (12) feet in height. 
2. 	A sign, not larger than six feet by four feet (6' by 4'), which identifies the institution financing the construction of lots and/or the entity constructing the structures provided that such sign: 
i. Shall be erected a minimum of twelve (12) feet from the property line. 
ii. Shall not exceed twelve (12) feet in height. 
3. 	
The duration of this permit is six (6) months except that such permit may be renewed for an additional six (6) month period. 

4. 	
Upon completion of the project, all such temporary signs shall be immediately removed from the property. 



d. 	
Grand Opening Signs – The Zoning Enforcement Officer may issue a permit for temporary banners associated with the grand opening of a new business establishment one week prior to the opening date provided that such banners shall be removed within one week of the opening date. 


6. 	
Sign Lighting -No internal light from a sign, or external light source meant to illuminate such sign, shall glare into the street or any adjoining property and/or distract the attention of users of a public highway. 

7. 	
Sign Construction and Maintenance -All signs shall: 


a. 	
Be constructed in a permanent manner. 

b. 	
Consist of long-lasting materials. 

c. 	
Be assembled and affixed in such a manner that they shall not be ordinarily affected by weather. 

d. 	
Be kept in safe condition and in good repair. 


8. 	Removal of Signs -When the operation of a business at a location with attached and/or detached signs ceases and the tenant and/or owner vacates the premises, the owner of the property shall be responsible for either: 
a. 	
The removal of all attached and detached signs associated with the defunct business. 

b. 	
The insertion of white opaque plastic material conforming to the requirements of any applicable building code in the existing attached and/or detached sign frame. 


9. 	Sign Location 
a. 	No sign shall be located on a corner lot or near any intersection in a location or fashion which impairs the visibility of pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
10. 	Sign Prohibitions – Except as modified herein by Subsection 4.02.5 of these Regulations, the following signs are prohibited: 
a. 	
Signs that are illuminated in a manner or with such intensity or brightness that they may cause glare, distraction or nuisance to operators of vehicles, pedestrians, or neighboring property owners. 

b. 	
Signs attached to any tree, fence or utility pole. 

c. 	
Signs painted directly upon any wall or roof of any structure or building. 

d. 	
Portable signs, such as sandwich board signs or A-frame signs, which are moveable and not permanently attached to a building, structure or the ground, except as specifically provided for under subsection 5 of this section. 

e. 	
Pennants, streamers, aerial signs, inflatable signs or flag-like devices hung from or attached to any part of a building, vehicle, structure or otherwise on a lot for commercial purposes, except where specifically exempted pursuant to subsection 5 of this section. 

f. 	
Signs projected onto a surface by any means. 

g. 	
Rotating, blinking, animated or flashing signs, message boards capable of a slide show or series of stills, full motion, or a combination thereof, including signs with display screens using intermittent internal illumination by mechanical or digital controls that produce an illusion of movements such as, but not limited to, flashing, running, rotating, video graphics, animation, change in color and brightness or scrolling advertisement message, projected by LED, LCD, plasma, or functionally equivalent technology, with the exception of content neutral time, date and temperature signs if the image is displayed in less than 2.5 square feet. 


79 
1. 	EXCEPTION: to address the volatility of fuel prices at a fuel filling station, the changeable copy sign may be digital for price information only, provide that: 
i. 	Only the price copy is illuminated on a black background; 
ii. 	The sign illumination can be adjusted so as to be visible by day without creating glare at night; 
iii. 	The sign does not flash intermittently; and, 
iv. 	The copy is not changed more frequently than twice per day 
11. 	Non-Conforming Signs 
a. 	
Existing signs of a size, type or location which do not conform to all of the provisions of these Regulations, are considered non-conforming structures under this section. 

b. 	
Any increase in size shall be deemed to be an enlargement or extension of a non-conforming structure. 

c. 	
Non-conforming signs shall not be relocated to any other location, unless such relocation results in the elimination of the non-conformity, except that the Commission may, by Special Exception, approve the relocation of a non-conforming detached sign on the same lot if it determines that the proposed relocation of the detached sign: 

1. 	
Improves the aesthetic quality of the site and its surrounding properties. 

2. 	
Increases the distance of the detached sign from any property line. 

3. 	
The relocation of the sign improves vehicular and pedestrian safety. 




80 

Section 4.04 


Section 4.04 Landscaping and Screening 

1. 	Front Yard Landscaping 
a. 	
Except in the Central Commercial Zone, all required front yard areas shall be landscaped as follows: 

b. 	
At least 25% of the total area of any required front yard must be landscaped with mulch and appropriate plant materials such as, juniper, perennial flowers and/or the like. 

c. 	
The required front yard area shall be planted with at least one tree, indigenous to the region, for every 1,200 square feet, or fraction thereof of the required front yard. 

d. 	
The remainder of the required front yard, except necessary access ways, shall be grass. 

e. 	
The Commission may modify this requirement if in its judgment the physical features and characteristics of the site, including but not limited to inland wetlands, watercourses, rock outcropping and/or excessive slopes, make it impractical to require such landscaping in a required front yard. 


2. 	Parking Lot Landscaping – Off-street parking areas shall be landscaped with indigenous species in accordance with the following standards except that parking lots in the Central Commercial Zone shall be exempt from this requirement in order to maximize the availability of off-street parking: 
a. 	
Low Impact Development 

1. 	
These regulations require that low impact development techniques be considered when designing for site drainage. 

2. 	
The Commission strongly encourages the location of required parking lot landscaping features using bioretention swales/gardens, tree filters or other low impact development techniques designed to accommodate the LID requirements of these regulations. 



b. 	
The Commission strongly encourages the preservation of existing, healthy vegetation that can otherwise be used to meet the requirements of this regulation. 

1. 	
Invasive species shall not be considered appropriate for tree preservation. 

2. 	
The Commission shall require additional plantings where native species are not sufficient to meet the requirements of this section. 



c. 	
Interior Landscape Areas 

1. 	
Off-street parking areas shall have at least ten (10) square feet of interior landscaping for each parking space. 

2. 	
Parking spaces that abut the perimeter of the parking lot shall not be computed in the amount of required interior landscaping area with the exception of the minimums required below. 

3. 	
Interior landscape areas shall: 


i. 	Contain a minimum of one hundred (100) square feet for lots of ten (10) or more spaces regardless of their location. 
ii. 	Contain a minimum of fifty (50) square feet for lots of nine (9) or fewer spaces regardless of their location. 
iii. 	Be planted with a combination of grass, and/or mulch and small shrubs. 
iv. 	Include at least one deciduous tree, indigenous to the region, not less than two inches (2") in diameter and six feet (6') in overall height immediately after planting.  

d. 	
Perimeter Parking Lot Shade Trees 

1. 	
For parking lots consisting of ten (10) or fewer parking spaces, two (2) parking lot shade trees of at least two inches (2") in diameter shall be required. 

2. 	
One (1) additional parking lot shade tree shall be required for every ten (10) additional parking spaces. 

3. 	
Parking lot shade trees shall be planted at intervals best suited to evenly distribute the plantings around the perimeter of the parking lot. 



e. 	
Landscaped islands and parking areas shall be arranged in the interest of efficient snow removal and maximum safety for both pedestrian and vehicular traffic.  

f. 	
Landscape islands shall be required to channelize pedestrian and vehicular traffic and to separate major access to the site and buildings and structures located on the site.  

g. 	
The Commission may modify the parking lot landscaping requirement for parking lots if in its judgment the physical features of the site, including but not limited to inland wetlands, rock outcropping and/or excessive slopes make it impractical to require such shade trees and alternative landscaping is proposed on the site to offset these requirements. 


81 
3. 	Buffers and Screening 
a. 	
If a business property, use or building within a business zone abuts a residential zone, a twenty-five (25) foot buffer area with screening is required. The required buffer area may include parking and interior circulation by permission of the Commission only with the provision of additional buffer elements, but shall not contain refuse containers, structures or any equipment capable of emitting odor or noise. 

b. 	
If a business property, use or building within a business zone abuts an existing residence within a business zone, standard setbacks shall apply and screening will be required by the Commission in a manner adequate to protect the residential use. 

c. 	
Such screening shall consist of one or more of the following elements as required by the Commission> 

1. 	
Opaque fencing a minimum of six (6) feet high. 

2. 	
Trees and shrubs, indigenous to the region a minimum of five (5) feet in height at the time of planting with a minimum height at maturity of six (6) feet, and are planted intervals deemed appropriate for the species. 

3. 	
Alternate rows of trees and shrubs. 

4. 	
Vegetated berms. 

5. 	
Combinations of items 1 through 4 as may be considered necessary by the Commission. 

6. 	
The Commission may modify the buffer and screening requirements for sites in the Central Commercial Zone or if in its judgment the physical features and characteristics of the site, including but not limited to inland wetlands, watercourses, rock outcropping and/or excessive slopes, or existing vegetation make it impractical to require such screening and buffers. 



d. 	
If in the judgment of the Planning and Zoning Commission additional screening is necessary to protect nearby residential areas from detriment, the Commission may require landscaping, fencing or other appropriate screening within any required front, side or rear yard. 

e. 	
All service delivery areas and outside storage of goods and materials associated with the primary use of the property shall be properly and reasonably screened: 

1. 	
From adjacent lots and streets. 

2. 	
With a combination of trees, indigenous to the region, shrubs, earthen berms, fences and/or other plant materials throughout the year. 

3. 	
In character with the surrounding neighborhood. 



f. 	
Parking areas adjacent to the side and rear property lines that abut residential zones and/or uses shall be appropriately screened in accordance with the provisions of this section. 

g. 	
Outside storage areas and refuse areas shall be visually screened from adjacent lots and streets by trees, shrubs and/or a fence. 


4. 	Vegetation 
a. 	
The preservation of existing trees over five inches in diameter (5") shall be encouraged by the Commission. 

b. 	
Proposed landscaping shall be indigenous to the region. 


82 
Section 4.05 
Section 4.05 Waste Removal and Recycling 
1. 	
Solid waste removal and recycling services shall be provided by the owners of the development, with all costs thereof incurred by same. 

2. 	
Dumpsters shall be screened so as not to be visible from public streets or from residential zones. 

3. 	
All dumpsters shall be placed on a concrete pad, appropriately screened with commercial grade opaque fencing, and maintained for the life of the project. 

4. 	
The location and design of the screening/enclosure shall be shown on the Site Plan. 

5. 	
Restaurant dumpsters shall be located a minimum of 50 horizontal feet from any residential use and shall be maintained and cleaned regularly to reduce odors. 

6. 	
If deemed necessary by any local or state health official with jurisdiction, the use of environmentally friendly chemical additives or other measures to combat odor may be required. 


83 

Section 4.06 Removal and Deposition of Earth Material 
1. 	Authorization: Earth material consists of naturally occurring sand, gravel, clay or other similar material. For the purposes of this section, the term earth material does not include rock quarries and associated processing activities, which are permitted only within quarry industrial zones. Removal or deposition of earth material shall be permitted only in strict compliance with the regulations contained within this section, and sections 
7.02 and 7.03 of these regulations. 
2. 	
Purpose: As Plainville is a densely settled community, it has been determined that activities relating to the excavation and/or deposition of earth materials can be disruptive to the quiet and peaceful enjoyment of adjacent properties, as well as causing environmental concerns relating to loss of vegetation, air and water quality, excessive noise, soil erosion and sedimentation, drainage, stagnant water features, safety, and the creation of conflicts with established local traffic patterns. It is the express purpose of this section to provide a set of standards to regulate removal or deposition of earth materials in a manner that insures minimal adverse impact to adjacent properties, the natural and built .......G.... ... ... ....’. .............. ........ 

3. 	
Permitted Activities 

4. 	
Allowed by Right: Removal or deposition of less than 75 cubic yards of material (cumulative) is permitted in residential applications only. Any such activity shall also be subject any permits required under the various local jurisdictions and the cumulative effect shall toll from the effective of this revised regulation: August 7, 2015. 

5. 	
Site Plan Requirements: In addition to providing full compliance with the site plan requirements found on the Checklist (Appendix A) and the application requirements of Section 7.02 of these regulations, the following standards also apply: 


a.  Allowed by Right -see subsection 4.  A  
b.  Removal or deposition of earth material on any property in any district as a result of an approved subdivision, wetland, and/or zoning application(s) as may be applicable provided that the construction site shall retain upon completion a minimum of four (4) inches of topsoil in areas to be either seeded, planted with trees, shrubbery or cultivated in compliance with an approved landscaping plan, the implementation of an approved erosion and sedimentation control plan, and an environmental site assessment (if applicable) to be conducted in accordance with the low impact development requirements of these regulations.  IW SP SE SUB  
c.  Removal or deposition of earth material on any property in any district for the purposes of earth excavation or site reclamation only except that no processing activities are permitted. The standards of this section must be adhered to as well as applicable site plan requirements and special exception criteria found under sections 7.02 and 7.03 of these regulations.  SP SE  
d.  Earth material stockpiles associated with an ........ ..........’. ....... .... ....... .. height limitation and visual screening as deemed necessary to protect the privacy of adjacent properties. Only the requirements of section 7.02 and section 7.03 as applicable shall apply. Processing of earth materials may be permitted within the GI and QI zones only.  SP SE  

a. 	
The site plan shall show contours of the existing and proposed elevations at no less than 2 foot intervals. 

b. 	
The site plan shall indicate the location and description of wooded areas and natural vegetative communities. 

c. 	
No activity shall occur within 40 feet of any property line unless the applicant is the owner of the adjacent property. 


84 
Section 4.06 
d. 	
Safety fencing shall be provided around the full perimeter of all excavation activities. 

e. 	
Plans shall provide for a phased approach to limit the amount of soil exposure. 

f. 	
No greater than two acres may be cleared for excavation activity at any time, not inclusive of a reasonable staging area and access road as approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission. 

g. 	
Maximum grades permitted upon completion of the activity shall be 1:4 vertical to horizontal. 

h. 	
No earth material removal may occur at a grade that is less than those of adjacent street grades. 

i. 	
Deposition of material in quantities and locations as approved by the Commission shall undergo testing and analysis to insure that the material is compatible with that of the original material and will not cause any detriment to existing site drainage characteristics. All imported material shall first be approved by the Town Engineer for compliance with this section. 


6. 	Special Exception Requirements: Special exception criteria shall be carefully reviewed enabling the Commission to make findings of fact that any application for removal or deposition of earth materials only is or is not a suitable use of the property within the zone in which it is proposed. In addition to evaluating the suitability of the use in relation to the special exception criteria and other requirements of section 7.03 of these regulations, the applicant shall provide the following materials in support of the special exception application: 
a. 	
Project Narrative -The applicant, owner and/or operator shall provide a project narrative that fully discloses the following information: 

1. 	
!........’. ..... ........ .. ... ....... ......... 

2. 	
Proposed activities. 

3. 	
Area/acreage of proposed activity. 

4. 	
Area/acreage of any land restored under a previous certificate if applicable. 

5. 	
Type of earth material to be removed/deposited. 

6. 	
Volume in cubic yards of any earth material excavated or deposited. 

7. 	
A description of all machinery on the site, and for transport to and from the site, to be used in the proposed operation. 



b. 	
Reclamation Plan -The applicant, owner and/or operator shall provide a site reclamation plan, with due respect to phasing, that clearly illustrates the property characteristics after reclamation. 

1. 	
Top soil from the site shall be used to install a four-inch layer of top soil. 

2. 	
If additional top soil is needed to meet this requirement, the material shall be tested and results provided to the Town Engineer who shall confirm its acceptability prior to its placement. 

3. 	
Regardless of site vegetation conditions, prior to any approved operation, the reclamation plan shall provide for a planting plan that is in harmony with surrounding properties. 

4. 	
The existing topography shall not be altered in a permanent manner inconsistent with the goals and recommendations of the Town of Plainville Plan of Conservation and Development as may be amended from time to time. 



c. 	
Noise Mitigation Plan -The goal of a noise mitigation plan is to reduce or eliminate annoyance or disturbance to surrounding neighborhoods and environments from noise caused by excavation activities. The applicant, owner and/or operator shall provide a noise abatement plan designed to mitigate noise from the excavation and transport activities within the adjacent neighborhood. The NMP must address, at minimum, the following elements: 

1. 	
Responsible party for noise mitigation activities, contact information, their responsibilities and their qualifications, including the NMP preparer. 

2. 	
Project location and distance to closest receptor of noise, including a description of the surrounding zoning and parcel information (i.e., commercial, residential, hospitals, schools, parks, sensitive habitat). 

3. 	
A list of proposed activities. 

4. 	
Days and working hours of proposed activities including trucking to and/or from the site. 

5. 	
! .... .. .....-.......... ....... .... to include any noise generating machinery, vehicles or equipment. 

6. 	
Description of noise monitoring standards, methods, and acceptable levels. 

7. 	
D.......... .. .......... .......... ... ...-..G...... ..... ....... 

8. 	
Signature of responsible party. 

9. 	
The noise abatement plan shall call for back-up alarms that meet required State and/or Federal standards while utilizing innovative tones found to be less disturbing than conventional beeping alarms such as white noise. 




85 
10.The noise abatement plan shall call for silent tailgate technology to be used on the operation to further diminish excessive noise. 
d. 	
Dust Control Plan -A Dust Control Plan identifies fugitive dust sources at the excavation site and describes all of the dust control measures to be implemented before, during, and after any dust generating activity for the duration of the project. The applicant, owner and/or operator shall provide a dust control plan designed to prevent airborne pollutants, such as dust and sand particles, from blowing off the site and impacting adjacent neighborhoods. 

1. 	
The DCP shall be tailored to insure that diligent measures are taken to control dust from leaving the site. 

2. 	
All fugitive dust sources must be identified. 

3. 	
Measures such as site irrigation/spraying, mulching, windbreaks, street sweeping, construction entrance maintenance, staging area maintenance, operational speeds, and employee training must be addressed within the plan. 

4. 	
The use of continuous ambient air monitors for measurement of PM-10, PM-2.5 and PM-1 particulates to assist in measuring compliance with State DEEP air quality standards found under Connecticut General Statutes Section 22a-174 as may be amended is recommended by these regulations and may be required by the State Department of Energy and Environmental Protection. 

5. 	
The dust control plan shall indicate the party responsible for dust control activities, their contact information, responsibilities and qualifications, including the DCP preparer. 



e. 	
Transportation Plan -The applicant, owner and/or operator must provide a traffic study that takes into consideration the following factors: 

1. 	
Existing traffic counts during hours of operation, but particularly at peak commuting hours based upon best available information. 

2. 	
Proposed truck trips to and from the operation, broken down as follows: 

i. 	Truck trips per day to and from the site 
ii. 	Size of the trucks used in the transport of the earth material 
iii. 	Hours of operation 
iv. 	
Route to and from the operation 

v. 	
Required/provided turning radius into and out of excavation site 



3. 	
The Transportation Plan shall consider the potential worst-case impacts to local traffic flow and safety and shall recommend original solutions to prevent/mitigate traffic and safety concerns. 



f. 	
Stormwater Plan -The applicant, owner and/or operator shall provide a stormwater management plan prepared by a professional engineer that takes the following factors into consideration: 

1. 	
No activity that permanently alters the drainage characteristics of the site shall be permitted. 

2. 	
No temporary removal and replacement with non-native earth materials, or any earth materials of a lesser drainage classification, is permitted. 

3. 	
Removal of material beyond that which is necessary to maintain the natural drainage characteristics of the site is not permitted; post excavation increase in runoff is not permitted. 

4. 	
Temporary water quality basins are permitted, but must be filled during site remediation with native material stockpiled specifically for that purpose. 

5. 	
The requirements of the Plainville Low Impact Development and Stormwater Management Design Manual shall be implemented in full, even if on a temporary basis, as though the proposed activity constitutes actual site development. 




7. 	Processing: No processing of any kind shall be permitted at any location approved under these regulations. Off-site processing may occur only at established processing facilities that are already in existence, or as may be duly authorized through the issuance of an approval granted by the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
86 
Section 4.06 
8. 	
Natural Diversity Database: The applicant, owner and/or operator shall investigate the presence of any areas identified on the most recent Connecticut Natural Diversity Database Map for any species listed on the endangered species or species of special concern lists. Any indication of activity shall be reported to the appropriate State of Connecticut authority and a review shall be requested. The applicant, owner and/or operator shall bear in mind any recommendation from the State of Connecticut in preparation of plans for earth material removal or deposition as well as the ongoing management of the operation. 

9. 	
Certificate Duration: Any special exception approved under this section shall be valid for one year from the date that any statutory appeal period expires, or, in the event of an appeal, the date upon which the applicant receives a favorable judgement. 


a. 	
No certificate shall be approved for any activity that is reasonably construed to take in excess of one year to complete. 

b. 	
If the applicant wishes to continue earth removal activity in excess of the one-year certificate duration, a new application must be made at least 60 days prior to the expiration of the previous permit. 


10. 	Renewal Procedure: Special exception certificates are valid for one year and may be renewed in compliance with the following criteria: 
a. 	
A new application containing all required documentation shall be submitted to the Commission at least 60 days but not more than 90 days prior to the expiration of the existing certificate.  

b. 	
The Commission shall consider the following factors when deciding whether to grant site plan approval and/or a new special exception certificate: 

1. 
Compliance with the proposed site plan submitted with the previous site plan application 

2. 
Compliance with the conditions of the previous special exception certificate 

3. 
Compliance with the approved remediation plan submitted with the prior application 

4. 
Compliance with the approved stormwater plan submitted with the prior application 

5. 
Compliance with the project narrative submitted with the prior application 

6. 
Compliance with the approved noise abatement plan submitted with the prior application 

7. 
Compliance with the approved dust control plan submitted with the prior application 

8. 
Compliance with the approved transportation plan submitted with the prior application 




11. 	
Right of Entry/Correction of Violations: The applicant, owner and/or operator must submit a written agreement, signed by the owner of the premises, the operator, and the applicant, permitting the Town of Plainville full access and entry to the property that is subject to the special exception certificate and site plan approval to perform inspections and complete all work necessary to correct and abate any violations of these regulations and conditions of the certificate which the certificate holder has made and failed to correct within the time required by the Zoning Enforcement Officer. Any such work carried out by the Town of Plainville to correct said violation shall be deducted from any cash or demand financial guarantees provided by the applicant, operator and/or owner. 

12. 	
Third party review: The Commission reserves the right to request a third party review of engineering studies and plans, including the required Reclamation Plan, Noise Mitigation Plan, Dust Control Plan, Transportation Study and/or Stormwater Management Plan by a professional engineer or other qualified entity in compliance with and as authorized by section 7.08.E of these regulations. 

13. 	
Financial Guarantee: In order to protect the interests of the Town of Plainville and that of the surrounding property owners, the applicant, owner and/or operator shall submit a financial guarantee. 


a. 	The applicant, owner and/or operator shall provide a financial guarantee, in a form acceptable to the Town of Plainville in the form of cash, passbook or irrevocable letters of credit which shall be subject to legal review. 
1. Surety bonds shall not be accepted. 
87 
14. 
Denial: The Commission may deny the issuance of a special exception certificate and/or site plan application for the following reasons: 

15. 	
Findings: The Commission shall state upon the record the reasons for approval or denial of any application under this section including findings of compliance, partial compliance, or non-compliance with any required report or plan. 


a.  Failure to comply with any of the requirements of this regulation  
b.  Failure to adequately demonstrate mitigation of any environmental concerns listed under this regulation  
c.  Failure to comply with any of the conditions appropriately placed upon the previously approved special  
exception certificate shall be sufficient reason for denial of any subsequent special exception certificate  
d.  Failure to comply with the previously approved site plan shall be sufficient  reason  for denial of any  
subsequent site plan  
e.  The applicant,  owner  and/or operator has previously violated, and failed to timely correct any such  
violation of regulations or conditions attached to a previously issued special exception certificate for earth  
material removal/deposition activities  
f.  The issuance of a permit would result in the violation of any provision of the Town of Plainville zoning  
regulations, code or ordinance, or any statute or regulation of the State of Connecticut or the United  
States including, but not limited to, those relating to the conservation of natural resources.  

In addition, the Commission shall make a finding that the new application is in compliance, or is not in compliance with Section 7.03.D, Special Exception Criteria. Such findings shall include specific reasoning as to whether the applicant has met or failed to meet their obligation to satisfactorily demonstrate that the public health, safety and welfare will be protected as outlined in the criteria. 
88 
Section 4.07 
Section 4.07 Fences 
1. 	
Purpose: This Section is intended to control the size, location, and type of fences and walls in all zoning districts in order to allow for the protection of neighborhood aesthetics and to provide for the privacy and protection of real and personal property while not infringing on public safety and general welfare, or adversely affecting adjoining property values. 

2. 	
All fences erected in the Town of Plainville require a Fence Permit issued by the Building Official. In addition, all fences erected in commercial and/or industrial zones require approval of the Commission. Prior to the issuance of a permit, the permitting official shall consider the purpose of this section when reviewing fence design. 

3. 	
The following types of fences may be erected between the front property line and the required front yard setback line in residential, commercial and industrial zones: 


a. 	
A stone, masonry, wood, vinyl or metal fence or wall no more than thirty-six (36) inches high, except that installation of wire mesh or grid, chain link, fabric and/or material fences shall be prohibited. 

b. 	
A two or three rail ranch or split rail fence with posts no more than four feet-... ...... (4’6”) .... ... ... top rail no more than four (4) feet high. 

c. 	
On a corner lot with two front building lines, fences not exceeding six (6) feet in height may be permitted to extend to within three (3) feet of one front property line on the portion of the lot designated as the rear yard. Refer to the definition of Corner Lot to ascertain which portion of the lot is considered the rear yard. In no case shall such fence be allowed closer than twenty-five (25) feet from any front corner. The corner shall be considered a point at which the continuation of the two front property lines intersect. 

d. 	
Exception: rear lots may erect a six (6) foot fence of a type and style permitted below along all property lines except for those property lines comprising the boundaries of the required access way. 


4. 	The following fences may be erected behind the required front yard setback line in residential and commercial zones: 
a. 	
A stone, masonry, wood, vinyl or metal fence or wall that does not exceed six (6) feet in height, except that installation of fabric and flexible material fences shall be prohibited. 

b. 	
Plastic or vinyl opaque privacy slats may be required in chain link fences. 

c. 	
The permitting authority may allow a fence up to eight (8) feet in height to be installed in the rear or side yard of a residential property only where such property directly abuts an existing industrial use. 


5. 	The following fences may be erected behind the front building line in industrial zones: 
a. 	
A stone, masonry, wood, vinyl or metal fence or wall which does not exceed eight (8) feet in height may be erected on property lines in rear and side yards only in Restricted and General Industrial Zones in accordance with site plan requirements and by permission of the Planning and Zoning Commission except that installation of fabric and material fences shall be prohibited. 

b. 	
The Commission may require opaque fencing in industrial zones where it is deemed that additional buffer is required. 

c. 	
The requirements found in this subsection shall not apply to fences providing security for utility installations within the site. 


89 
6. 	General requirements affecting fence installations: 
a. 	
Fences located in commercial and industrial zones shall be installed with steel posts set in concrete. 

b. 	
All supporting structure shall be located on the interior side of the fence. 

c. 	
No fence shall be installed that restricts visibility or sight lines of vehicles or pedestrians entering or exiting a property. 

d. 	
Wire fences of any type shall not have sharp edges at the top of the fence, except where required by state statute for barbed wire fence installation. 

e. 	
All fencing shall be maintained in good repair and shall be repaired as needed within four (4) weeks of an order to do so by the Building Official or Zoning Enforcement Officer. 

f. 	
Any repairs to an existing fence shall be of the same material. 


90 
Section 4.08 
Section 4.08 Obstructions on Corner Lots (Corner Visibility) 
On a corner lot in any zone except the Central Commercial Zone, no wall, fence or other structure shall be erected and no hedge, tree, shrub or other growth shall be maintained in a way that would obstruct visibility in the street right-of-way or in the triangular area defined by points located twenty-.... .... (25’) .... ...G ..... ... ...... lines would intersect unless specifically authorized by the Commission. 

1. 	
Nothing in these regulations shall prohibit the projection of more than 18 inches into a required yard by pilasters, belt courses, sills, cornices, eaves, gutters or similar architectural features. 

2. 	
Nothing in these regulations shall prohibit the projection of more than 30 inches into a required yard by uncovered steps or porches, cantilevered balconies, or chimneys. 

3. 	
Uncovered handicap ramps are permitted to project to within five feet of any property line under the following circumstances: 


a. 	
The applicant shall provide documentation from a certified health care provider that there is a genuine need for such a ramp. 

b. 	
The ramp shall be constructed in accordance with the requirements of the American with Disabilities Act and all applicable building, health and safety codes. 

c. 	
Any such ramp shall be dismantled removed when it is no longer medically required. 


91 
Section 4.10 Water and Sewer 
Adequate provision for water and sewerage shall be made for any proposed development. 
Section 4.11 Commercial Lighting 
1. 	
Outdoor illumination of a building, structure, parking area or any other portion of a lot must be properly shielded and directed in such a manner as not to produce glare or discomfort on public streets or neighboring property, thereby adversely affect abutting properties or public or private streets. 

2. 	
All fixtures shall be full cut off design, except where otherwise required by law. 

3. 	
Any external lighting of a parking area must be directed and shielded in such a manner as to not be generally visible from adjacent properties. 

4. 	
Any lighting must be directed away from residential areas. 

5. 	
The maximum height of a pole used for external illumination shall not exceed 20'. 

6. 	
Within ridgeline setback areas no lighting poles and no light fixtures shall exceed a height above grade of ten 


(10) feet, and no light source shall exceed 0.2 foot-candle at the property line or at the downslope edge of the ridgeline setback area, whichever is closer to the light source. 
7. 	The use of strobe lights or other light source that oscillates or fluctuates in intensity or color is prohibited unless required by the Federal Aviation Administration. 

92 
Section 4.12 
Section 4.12 Soil Erosion and Sediment Control 
1. 	
All development and other activities shall make appropriate provision for soil erosion and sediment control. 

2. 	
Such provision shall be in accordance with the Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control, as amended. 

3. 	
For development requiring a Zoning Permit, Special Exception, Site Plan or Subdivision, a Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plan shall be submitted with the application. 

4. 	
The Commission may require the applicant post a financial guarantee, in an amount, form, and duration satisfactory to the Commission, to assure and guarantee that adequate erosion and sediment control measures are installed and maintained, before any Permit is issued for activities shown on the approved plan. 


Section 4.13 Stormwater Management 
1. 	
Any application or activity involving site plan approval, special exception approval, or subdivision approval shall provide for a stormwater management system, including low impact development techniques, in accordance with the Plainville Low Impact Development and Stormwater Management Design Manual as may be amended from time to time and adopted by the Commission on September 28, 2010 with an effective date of December 1, 2010. 

2. 	
Any modifications to the standards and requirements of the Low Impact Development and Stormwater Management Design Manual shall be documented in accordance with the waiver provisions of the manual. 


93 



Article 5. FORM STANDARDS 

Section 5.01 Design Standards 
1. 	
The character and appearance of the proposed use, building, parking and loading areas, outside storage areas, signs, landscaping and external illumination shall be in general harmony with the character and appearance of the surrounding neighborhood and will not adversely affect the general health, safety or welfare of the inhabitants of the Town of Plainville. 

2. 	
No air conditioning, heating, or ventilation equipment shall project above the peak or highest elevation of any roof surface or parapet, other than chimneys. 

3. 	
Strict attention shall be paid to landscaping requirements found in this regulation to insure that appropriate vegetation is established for all development. 


94 
Section 5.01 
This page left intentionally blank 
95 

Article 6. SPECIAL STANDARDS 

Section 6.01 Non-Conforming Lots 
A main structure and permitted accessory structures may be constructed on a lot in any subdivision not approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission, but filed at the Office of the Plainville Town Clerk on or before March 28, 1956, subject to the following provisions: 
1. 	
The lot must have a minimum of 5,000 square feet. 

2. 	
The lot must have no less than fifty (50) feet frontage. 

3. 	
The lot must be served by public water or sewer and the street or highway on which it is located must be paved in bituminous concrete with a hard surface. 


Section 6.02 Non-Conforming Structures and Uses 
1. 	Nonconforming Structures -Any nonconforming structure lawfully existing at the time of adoption of these Regulations, or any later amendments, may be continued as a nonconforming structure.  The following shall apply: 
a. 	
A legal nonconforming structure which is damaged or destroyed by fire, explosion, act of God, or the public enemy, may be rebuilt with the same footprint and floor area and the use continued, but not to any greater extent than in the previously existing structure, unless such use conforms to the zone in which district the structure lies.  Reconstruction of the structure must begin within one year of the event or the structure shall be required to comply with the Regulations for the specific use and zone. Such reconstruction shall not increase the value of the structure from the appraised value, prior to any recent damage, by more than 25%. 

b. 	
A legal nonconforming structure may be maintained and repaired provided such work does not increase the non-conforming aspect of the structure and complies with other applicable parts of these Regulations for the specific use and zone. Such maintenance or repair shall not increase the value of the structure from the appraised value, prior to any recent damage, by more than 25%. 

c. 	
No nonconforming structure, if rebuilt under this section, may be used in a manner more nonconforming that what it was used for prior to its destruction. 


2. 	Nonconforming Uses -Any nonconforming use of buildings or land lawfully existing at the time of adoption of these Regulations, or any later amendments, may be continued as a nonconforming use. The following shall apply: 
a. 	
Any claim of a nonconforming use must be documented prior to the resumption of such nonconforming use. 

b. 	
No nonconforming use shall be more nonconforming than the prior documented use. 

c. 	
No legal nonconforming use may be changed except to a conforming use or, with the approval of a Site Plan and Special Exception by the Commission, may be changed to another nonconforming use that is less objectionable in character than the original use. 

d. 	
The Commission shall require that any change to a nonconforming use is subject to such conditions as may be deemed necessary to protect the reasonable enjoyment and value of any neighboring property. 

e. 	
No legal nonconforming use, and no portion of a building containing a nonconforming use, shall be extended or expanded. 

f. 	
No legal nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any other portion of a building, lot or parcel of land. 


96 
Section 6.03 
Section 6.03 Outdoor Wood Burning Furnaces 
After due consideration, given the dense settlement patterns in the Town of Plainville, the Commission has determined that outdoor wood burning furnaces cannot be regulated in a manner sufficient to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the public. 
1. 	To assure that public nuisance is avoided, outdoor wood burning furnaces are not a permitted use in any zone within the Town of Plainville. 
97 
Section 6.04 Wireless Telecommunication Facilities 
1. 	
Purpose – Since the passage of the Telecommunications Act of 1996 and subsequent legal decisions it has been found that location and placement of telecommunications equipment of any kind is under the sole jurisdiction of the Connecticut Siting Council. The purpose of this section is to provide guidance on the design and location of antennas, equipment and towers used in conjunction with the provision of a range of wireless telecommunication services including cellular and digital communication services, personal communication services, paging and radio and television broadcasting services within the Town of Plainville while protecting the public, and neighborhoods and the general aesthetic quality of the community and minimizing the adverse visual and operational effects of wireless telecommunication facilities. 

2. 	
In accordance with State Statutes, new free-standing wireless structures do require submittal of a site plan for staff and Commission review prior to any Siting Council Hearings. 

3. 	
Any telecommunications equipment including satellite dishes, microwave dishes or antennae of any kind that do not require CT Siting Council Approval shall utilize the guidelines found herein to design and locate any such equipment. 

4. 	
More specifically the purposes of this section are: 


a. 	
To accommodate the need for wireless telecommunication facilities while not unreasonably regulating their location and number. 

b. 	
To encourage the joint use of any existing or new antennas or towers. 

c. 	
To encourage creative design measures to minimize adverse visual effects of wireless telecommunications facilities through proper design, siting, and vegetative screening. 

d. 	
To avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from antenna or tower failure or from falling ice through careful siting of antennas and towers. 

e. 	
To site facilities below visually prominent ridge lines. 

f. 	
To reduce the number of antennas or towers needed in the future. 


5. 	Residential Zones 
a. 	
Satellite dishes, microwave dishes and antennas for the use and enjoyment of the resident shall be located in the rear yard of a residential lot. If signals cannot be obtained in the rear yard, the satellite dish or antenna may be located in a side yard. 

b. 	
Residential antennas, located on a principal residential dwelling unit, shall not exceed twenty-four (24) feet in height. Ground mounted antennas shall not exceed twenty-four (24) feet in height, including any platform or base upon which the antenna is mounted or affixed. 

c. 	
Satellite dish, microwave dish and antennas shall not exceed six (6) feet in height and/or diameter. 

d. 	
If signals cannot be obtained from a side or rear yard and/or by a satellite or microwave dish and/or antenna installed in compliance with the height restriction contained in this section of the Regulation, satellite dishes, microwave dishes and antennas in this section of the Regulation may be located in the front yard or on the roof of the dwelling unit and/or in excess of the height restriction contained in this section of the Regulations. The maximum height and/or diameter of a satellite or microwave dish shall not exceed six (6) feet and the maximum height of a ground mounted antenna shall not exceed thirty (30) feet. 


98 
Section 6.04 
6. 	Commercial Wireless Telecommunication Facilities 
a. 	
Structure Mounted -Commercial wireless telecommunication sites are permitted if mounted to existing towers, utility poles, water towers, bridges and other similar structures in accordance with the following provisions: 

1. 	
No changes are made to the height of the structure. 

2. 	
No panel antenna should exceed sixty (60) inches in height and twenty-four (24) inches in width. 

3. 	
No dish antenna should exceed thirty-six (36) inches in diameter. 

4. 	
Equipment buildings and cabinets should be located in accordance with the provisions of this Section. 



b. 	
Roof Mounted -Commercial wireless telecommunication facilities are mounted to the rooftop of a building in a non-residential zone should comply with the following provisions: 

1. 	
Panel antennas should not exceed sixty (60) inches in height, twenty-four (24) inches in width and/or six (6) inches in depth; whip antennas should not exceed forty-eight (48) inches in height; and/or dish antennas should not exceed thirty-six (36) inches in diameter. 

2. 	
The shed used for housing the equipment should not exceed one-hundred-fifty (150) square feet in area or eight (8) feet in height. The cabinets used for housing equipment should not exceed sixty (60) inches in depth and sixty (60) inches in width, and seventy-two (72) inches in height. 

3. 	
No change is made to the existing height of the structure. 

4. 	
All wireless telecommunications structures should be visually screened and/or shielded from view from all of the surrounding streets and driveways used by the general public. 

5. 	
Telecommunications structures should be of a material and/or color which matches the exterior of the building or structure. 



c. 	
Free-Standing -Wireless telecommunication facility, as defined in these Regulations, are encouraged to locate in a TP, RI, GI and/or QI Zones.  The site should have a minimum area of one or more acres. 


7. 	Application Requirements 
a. 	
In accordance with the Connecticut General Statutes, any such free standing tower proposal shall be submitted to the Commission with a complete site plan prior to submittal to the CT Siting Council for local staff and Commission review and the applicant shall present the information to the Commission at the next available Commission meeting. 

b. 	
Review comments from the staff and the Commission will be forwarded to the CT Siting Council. 

c. 	
All new free-standing Wireless Telecommunication Facilities shall be accompanied by a Site Plan which contains the following information: 

1. 	A plan, prepared by a Land Surveyor, licensed in the State of Connecticut, depicting: 
i. 	Coverage maps illustrating the need for the facility. 
ii. 	The service area of the proposed wireless telecommunication site. 
iii. 	The service radius for the proposed wireless telecommunication site. 
iv. 	
The existing and approved locations of the applicant's other telecommunication sites within the Town of Plainville. 

v. 	
Existing towers owned and/or used by the applicant within a 2-mile radius of the Town of Plainville. 


2. 	A plan, prepared by an Architect or Structural Engineer, licensed in the State of Connecticut, depicting where and how the proposed telecommunication facility shall be affixed to a building, structure and/or the ground. 

d. 	
Additional Submission Requirements: 

1. 	
Wireless telecommunication antenna or tower base elevation and height. 

2. 	
Proximity of the antenna or tower to residential structures and residential zoning districts. 

3. 	
Nature of the uses of properties within one thousand (1,000) feet of the antenna or tower site. 

4. 	
A topographic profile showing the proposed antenna or tower, ancillary equipment and proposed landscaping and screening from adjoining properties. 

5. 	
Proposed ingress and egress from a public street to the antenna or tower site. 

6. 	
A report, prepared by an Architect or Structural Engineer, licensed to practice in the State of Connecticut, which certifies the conformance of the structural standards of the antenna or tower design to all state and national building code requirements. 




99 
8. 	Additional Considerations: 
a. 	
The impact of the proposed wireless telecommunication facility on neighborhood property values. 

b. 	
The future use or re-use of the site with provisions for facility removal and site restoration. 

c. 	
The need for wireless telecommunication at the proposed location. 


9. 	Additional Standards 
a. 	
Wireless Telecommunication Facilities -The following minimum standards shall be considered in the design and location of each wireless telecommunication facility: 

1. 	Wireless telecommunication towers should not exceed: 
a. 	
Three (3) times the maximum height of a building in the underlying zoning district, except that a limitation of 90 feet shall apply in the Central Commercial Zone. 

b. 	
One-hundred-eighty (180) feet in height in a QI Zone. 


2. 	
No wireless telecommunication antenna or tower should exceed a height equal to the linear distance of the nearest existing building except that this provision shall not apply to an antenna or tower constructed on a parcel with an existing building if the owner of the property submits a written waiver of this requirement to the Commission. 

3. 	
Wireless telecommunication facilities should be designed and constructed to accommodate a minimum of three (3) users. 

4. 	
No signs other than for safety reasons shall be permitted on any wireless telecommunication facility. 

5. 	
No lights or illumination shall be permitted on any wireless telecommunication facility unless required by the Federal Aviation Administration and/or the Federal Communications Commission. 

6. 	
Wireless telecommunication facilities should have a galvanized finish or be painted a non-contrasting blue, grey or other neutral color. 

7. 	
Wireless telecommunication facilities shall be surrounded by a security fence, a minimum of six (6) feet in height. 

8. 	
The first ten (10) feet of any communication antenna or tower shall be designed to prevent unauthorized access and this distance shall be measured from the ground level. 

9. 	
All ground wireless telecommunication facilities must comply with the setback requirements for the underlying zoning district. 

10. 	
All antennas and towers should be located a minimum distance of 125% of the height of the antenna or tower away from a property line. 



b. 	
Roof Mounted Antenna -The following minimum standards are suggested for each roof mounted antenna: 

1. 	
Antennas should be attached to a principal non-residential structure or building. 

2. 	
Antennas should be made of a material and/or color which matches the exterior of the building or structure. 

3. 	
Antennas should not exceed the permitted maximum height of a building or structure in the zoning district in which they are located. 

4. 	
Antennas should be located a minimum of ten (10) feet from the roof's edge or ten (10) percent of the roof width, whichever distance is greater. 

5. 	
Satellite and microwave dish antennas should not exceed six (6) feet in diameter and should be located or screened so as to minimize visibility. 

6. 	
Roof mounted antennas, satellite and microwave dish antennas should not occupy more than twenty-five (25) percent of the roof area. 



c. 	
Accessory Equipment and Buildings -All accessory buildings associated with wireless telecommunication facilities should comply with the following minimum standards: 


1. 	Each accessory building or structure (per carrier) should not contain more than one-hundred-fifty 
(150) square feet of area or exceed eight (8) feet in height. 
2. 	
Each accessory building or structure should comply with the set-back requirements for the zone in which it is located. 

3. 	
Only cabinets are permitted on a rooftop. Cabinets shall be designed to blend with the color and design of the building. 


100 
Section 6.05 
Section 6.05 Solar Energy Regulations 
1. 	
Purpose -The intent of this section is to provide for the orderly use of solar energy systems as an alternate source of energy.  The Commission finds that solar energy is beneficial to the environment and provides an economical energy source to those who choose to use it.  The Commission also finds that standards are required to protect the character and aesthetics of the community, as well as to protect property values and the quiet and peaceful enjoyment of real property.  It is also recognized that the Town of Plainville is not a land-rich community.  As such, ground mounted solar energy installations shall be permitted only where it can be demonstrated that no prudent and feasible alternative exists, and then only to the degree needed to satisfy the needs of the onsite consumer and other applicable standards as follows. 

2. 	
No ground mounted solar energy system shall be permitted unless it can be documented that the on-site 


.....G..’. .........(.) .... .... ...G.. ..... ... . .... ... ............ .. . O........ .......... ......... 
or a qualified solar energy system installation engineer, and where such deficiencies cannot be remedied for less than 15% of the total project costs.  Such documentation shall be provided in writing by said professional 
... ..... .... .... ............’. .....  .... ....G........ ..... .. ....... ....... .. ...... .. .... 
planning, engineering and building officials. 
3. 	Rooftop solar energy systems Installations for properties in residential, commercial and industrial zones are permitted by right if it can be demonstrated the installation can comply with the following standards: 
a. 	
Rooftop installations shall not exceed a height of greater than eight (8) inches from the peak of the highest roof ridgeline on roofs having a pitch equal to or greater than 2-inch vertical for every 12-inch horizontal rise, not including projections such as cupolas or similar features, nor greater than a vertical height of five (5) feet above a flat roof system, or a pitched roof system having less than a 2-inch vertical for every 12-inch horizontal rise.  Inverters, where required by code to be co-located on the roof, shall be located in a manner that minimizes visibility at all times. 

b. 	
In order to preserve community aesthetics, visible portions of the installations shall incorporate symmetry.  Where practical, vent stacks and other roof protrusions shall be relocated to allow for the greatest symmetry possible. Such relocation shall not be required when documentation is submitted to verify that such equipment relocation would exceed 15% of total project costs.  Any such additional costs shall be cumulative along with additional costs required for structural roof repair. 

c. 	
No panels shall be installed that will cause glare onto any adjacent property. 


4. 	Ground mounted solar energy systems Installations for properties in residential, commercial and industrial zones are permitted only after a site plan application is submitted and approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission. Any such application shall comply with the following standards: 
a. 	
Under no circumstance may ground mounted installations be approved where an alternate rooftop installation is feasible. 

b. 	
Energy capacity requirements shall be documented based upon historic and proposed use and shall be provided by a qualified solar energy system installation engineer. 

c. 	
No such residential installation shall occupy more ground area than that of the one story footprint of the primary structure, and 

d. 	
No such commercial/industrial installation shall occupy more ground area than that needed to adequately service the needs of the occupants and operational requirements of any premises as certified by a qualified solar energy system installation engineer. 

e. 	
Ground mounted installations shall not exceed a height of six (6) feet from adjacent grade at any point. 

f. 	
No such installation shall be permitted in any front yard. 

g. 	
Rear and side yard setbacks shall be a minimum of 10 feet from any property line. 

h. 	
Ground mounted installations and associated electrical connections may be secured by any conforming fence of the owners choosing; however, the entire installation shall be screened from view from any public street or adjacent residential lot by arborvitae or an approved alternate planted six feet on center in areas that will not interfere with solar access.  Landscape screening shall be located outside of any fence used to secure the installation. 

i. 	
No panels may be installed that will cause glare onto any adjacent property, public or private. 


101 
5. 	
Abandonment/Discontinuance:  Any solar energy system shall be considered abandoned when it fails to operate for more than one year due to malfunctioning components, disrepair, or by virtue of reaching the end of its useful life. 

6. 	
Removal:  Any solar energy system that has been abandoned for a period in excess of two years shall be 


...G...... ... ..G.... .. ... .....’. ........ 
7. 	Referral: All solar energy system installations submitted for approval to the building official shall be referred to the Department of Planning and Economic Development for compliance review and process determination. 
102 
Section 7.01 

Article 7. PROCEDURES 

Section 7.01 Zoning Certificate of Compliance 


1. 	An application for a Zoning Certificate of Compliance shall be made to the Building Official on a form provided for that purpose before: 
a. 	
Any land, building, or structure is devoted to any new or changed use of premises within the category of business or residential uses. 

b. 	
The erection or alteration of any building or structure is commenced in any zone. 

c. 	
Any Building Permit or Certificate of Occupancy is issued by the Building Official relating to any of the foregoing. 


2. 	Such application for a Zoning Certificate shall be accompanied by: 
a. 	
A plot plan and other drawings and documentation showing the information required in the Appendix of these Regulations. 

b. 	
The appropriate fee. 


3. 	Any application for a Zoning Certificate may be summarily rejected and may be considered void and of no effect if: 
a. 	
Another application for a Zoning Certificate as to the same land, building, structure, or use of all parts or portions thereof is still pending before the Building Official. 

b. 	
An appeal is pending before the Zoning Board of Appeals or any legal proceeding is pending before any court of competent jurisdiction or pending in any other form of dispute resolution relating to a Zoning Certificate or on an application for a Zoning Certificate on the same land, building, structure or use thereof as to which such application is being made. 

c. 	
A Zoning Certificate is outstanding on the same land, building, structure or use, but neither Certificates of Compliance nor Occupancy, nor both, have been approved in conjunction therewith. 

d. 	
Two (2) or more applications are filed simultaneously with the Building Official, whether similar or dissimilar, each application applying to the same land, building, structure or use thereof. 


4. 	A Zoning Certificate of Compliance shall not be construed as a zoning approval; said certificate is solely for the purpose of verifying compliance with applicable zoning regulations. 

1. 	
A decision on a Zoning Certificate Application shall be made as soon as feasible but in no event shall such decision take longer than thirty (30) days from the date of acceptance of a complete submittal. 

2. 	
If the proposed new or changed use or if the proposed erection or alteration of any building or structure is found from the application to be in compliance with these Regulations, the Building Official shall issue a Zoning Certificate setting forth the date on which the permit was issued and shall forward a copy thereof to the office of the Town Assessor. 

3. 	
No Zoning Certificate shall be issued for the erection, the interior or exterior enlargement of gross floor area or the external alteration of any building or structure where any other approvals are necessary, unless a Site Plan Application or other such approval therefore has been approved by the Commission in accordance with the provisions of these Regulations. 

4. 	
Any application for a Zoning Certificate shall be rejected if the Building Official finds that: 


103 
a. 	
The application is incomplete and has notified the applicant in writing of the reason(s) why the application is incomplete. 

b. 	
The application is not in compliance with the Zoning Regulations and has notified the applicant in writing of the reason(s) why the application does not comply with the Zoning Regulations. 


5. 	
An application for a Zoning Certificate may be withdrawn by the applicant at any time prior to final action by filing a formal written request to that effect with the Building Official, except that there shall be no rebate of any portion of the fees which may have been paid by the applicant for a Zoning Certificate application that is subsequently withdrawn. 

6. 	
The Building Official is not authorized to approve, and shall not approve, any Zoning Certificate for property on which there exists a zoning violation, unless such zoning permit will remedy such violation. 



1. 	
In accordance with CGS Section 8-3(f), the Building Official shall inform the recipient of a Zoning Certificate of that notice of issuance of a zoning Certificate may be published by the recipient in a newspaper having substantial circulation in Plainville in order to establish the appeal period per CGS 8-7. 

2. 	
Any such notice to be published by the recipient shall contain: 


a. 	
A description of the building, use or structure. 

b. 	
The location of the building, use or structure. 

c. 	
The identity of the applicant. 

d. 	
A statement that an aggrieved person may appeal to the Zoning Board of Appeals in accordance with the provisions of CGS 8-7. 



1. 	Unless waived by the Building Official, an as-built plan shall be: 
a. 	
Prepared by a licensed Land Surveyor demonstrating that the location of the foundation of any building or addition to an existing building or structure for which a Zoning Certificate has been issued is in compliance with the Zoning Regulations and the approved site plan. 

b. 	
Filed with the Building Official by the holder of the Zoning Certificate upon completion of the foundation of any building or addition to an existing building or structure for which a Zoning Permit has been issued. 



Any Zoning Certificate issued by the Building Official under the provisions of these Regulations, but under which no work is commenced within twelve (12) months from the date of issuance, shall expire by limitation. 

A Zoning Certificate of Compliance is not a permit, but rather a statement that work has been reviewed and complies with the Zoning Regulations. Such Certificate of Zoning Compliance does not absolve the holder from obtaining any other required permits that may be necessary to complete the work proposed. 
104 
Section 7.02 
Section 7.02 Site Plan Application 


1. 	A Site Plan Application shall be submitted for: 
a. 	
Any use, other than single family dwelling and customary accessory structures incidental to the existing residence on an approved building lot. 

b. 	
Any proposed use or proposed building or structure or any proposed change to an approved Site Plan. 

c. 	
Any proposed change in land contours on a lot, or any portion thereof. 

d. 	
Any application for a Special Exception. 

e. 	
Any proposed use of a lot, building or structure which is the result of a Use Variance granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals. 

f. 	
Any conforming change of use at an existing location if any of the following circumstances apply: 

1. 	
A proposed change in land contours on the lot, or any portion thereof. 

2. 	
The proposed development or use of an undeveloped portion of a lot. 

3. 	
A proposed increase in building coverage or parking spaces located on a lot. 



g. 	
A proposed addition to an existing building or structure except as modified herein: 

1. 	
Accessory recreational facilities for an existing business or industrial use located in a Central Commercial, General Commercial or General Industrial Zone provided no accessory building or structure associated with the recreational facility exceeds 200 square feet. The owner, lessee or tenant must obtain written permission from the Commission for the accessory recreational facility. 

2. 	
Additions to an existing primary building or structure in a General Industrial Zone provided no approved Site Plan is on file in the Town Clerk's Office and the addition does not exceed 10% of the gross area of the primary building or structure or 1,000 square feet, whichever amount is less. The addition must comply with all of the other applicable Zoning Regulations. 



h. 	
Any activity designated in the Regulations as requiring Site Plan Approval. 


2. 	A Site Plan Application shall be accompanied by: 
a. 	
Eight (8) sets of full-.... (24” .. 36”) ...... .. ........ ...... ...... ... ...... .. .. ........... professional, for review by the Commission and its designees that comply with the requirements in 

b. 	
Appendix A of these Regulations. 

c. 	
Fifteen (15) .... .. “....-....” (11” .. 17”) copies of such materials. 


3. 	
The Commission may, in accordance with the requirements of these Regulations and Appendix A of these Regulations, require the submission of additional information as deemed necessary to make a reasonable review of the application. 

4. 	
If a Site Plan Application involves an activity regulated pursuant to CGS 22a-36 to 22a-45, inclusive, the applicant shall submit an application for a permit to the Inland Wetlands Commission not later than the day such application is filed with the Commission. 


105 

1. 	
The date of receipt for the Site Plan Application shall be determined in accordance with Subsection 7.08.B. 

2. 	
An incomplete Site Plan Application may be denied in accordance with Subsection 7.08.C. 

3. 	
For new construction or other activity considered to be significant in the sole judgment of the Commission, the Commission: 


a. 	
May hold a public hearing on the application and such public hearing, if required, shall be held in accordance with applicable state statutes and these regulations. 

b. 	
May require that the applicant give public notice in accordance with the requirements of Subsection 

7.08.G of these Regulations. 

c. 	
May require additional technical assistance in accordance with Subsection 7.08.E. 


4. 	Notification to adjoining municipalities may be required in accordance with the requirements of Subsection 
7.08.H. 
5. 	
Notification to water companies may be required in accordance with the requirements of Subsection 7.08.I. 

6. 	
Whenever approval of a Site Plan is the only approval required, a decision on the application shall be rendered within sixty-five days after the date of receipt of such Site Plan Application except that the applicant may 

7. 	
consent to one or more extensions of such period provided the total period of any such extension or extensions shall not exceed sixty-five days. 

8. 	
Notwithstanding the provisions of this Section, if an application involves an activity regulated pursuant to CGS 22a-36 to 22a-45, inclusive and the time for a decision by the Commission would elapse prior to the thirty-fifth day after a decision by the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission, the time period for a decision shall be extended to thirty-five days after the decision of such agency. 

9. 	
Approval of a site plan shall be presumed unless a decision to deny or modify it is rendered within the applicable time period specified above (approval as a result of failure of the Commission to act). 

10. 	
The applicant may, at any time prior to action by the Commission, withdraw such application. 


106 
Section 7.02 

1. 	
The Commission may approve, approve with modifications, modify or deny a Site Plan Application or Site Plan Modification. 

2. 	
On a Site Plan Application involving an activity regulated pursuant to CGS 22a-36 to 22a-45, inclusive, the Commission shall: 


a. 	
Wait to render its decision until the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission has submitted a report with its final decision. 

b. 	
Give due consideration to any report of the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission when making its decision. 


3. 	
On a Site Plan Application involving notice to adjoining municipalities under Subsection 7.08.H or notice to water companies under Subsection 7.08.I, the Commission shall give due consideration to any report or testimony received. 

4. 	
In acting upon a Site Plan Application or Site Plan Modification, the Commission shall: 


a. 	
Make a finding the proposed use and proposed buildings and structures conform to the requirements of these Regulations. 

b. 	
Modify the Site Plan Application if such modification is necessary to achieve the objectives of this Regulation. 

c. 	
Deny the Site Plan Application, enumerating its reasons for denial. 


5. 	Before the Commission approves a Site Plan Application, it shall consider the following: 
a. 	
Conformity with any other applicable laws, codes or ordinances. 

b. 	
The recommendations, if any, of all solicited departments, boards and commissions. 


6. 	
In approving a Site Plan Application, the Commission may impose conditions deemed necessary to protect the public health, safety, welfare, convenience, and property values. 

7. 	
The Commission may require the applicant post a performance bond, in an amount, form, and duration satisfactory to the Commission, to assure and guarantee: 


a. 	
That adequate erosion and sediment control measures are installed and maintained, before any Permit is issued for activities shown on the approved plan. 

b. 	
The completion of all of the required and approved site improvements including, but not limited to, grading, regrading, drainage, erosion control, lighting, screening, landscaping, pavement, sidewalks and other reasonable elements depicted on the site plan and approved by the Commission. 

c. 	
That all of the improvements shown on the approved plan are implemented before issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy is granted. 


8. 	The Commission shall not approve any Site Plan for property on which there exists a zoning violation, unless such Site Plan will remedy such violation. 
107 

1. 	
Whenever it grants or denies a Site Plan Application, the Commission shall send, by certified mail, a copy of such decision to the applicant within fifteen (15) days after such decision is rendered. 

2. 	
The Commission shall cause notice of the approval or denial of site plans to be published in a newspaper having a substantial circulation in Plainville within fifteen (15) days after such decision is rendered. 

3. 	
In any case in which such notice is not published within the fifteen (15) day period after a decision has been rendered, the person who submitted such plan may provide for the publication of such notice within ten (10) days thereafter. 

4. 	
On any application for which the period for approval has expired and on which no action has been taken, the Commission shall send a letter of approval to the applicant within fifteen (15) days of the date on which the period for approval expired and such letter of approval shall state the date on which the five-year completion period expires. 



1. 	Following approval of a Site Plan Application, one (1) fixed-line Mylar of the approved plan(s) shall, unless this requirement is waived by the Commission, be submitted to the Planning Office: 
a. 	
Bearing the raised seal and signature of the appropriate professionals which prepared the drawing(s). 

b. 	
Bearing a copy of the decision letter of the Commission and any other town regulatory agencies authorizing the activity. 

c. 	
Containing a signature block where the Chairman of the Commission can indicate the approval of the Commission and the expiration date of the plan. 


2. 	
Following signature by the Chairman, the fixed-line Mylar shall be filed by the applicant .. ... .... ....’. office before any Building Permits are issued for the activities shown on the approved plan. 

3. 	
The applicant must file the signed Mylar in the Town Clerk's Office within ninety (90) days after the expiration of the appeal period and failure to file the Mylar will render the approval null and void. 

4. 	
The Commission may extend the time period for filing the Mylar in the Town Clerk's Office if the applicant requests such an extension within ninety (90) days of the date of approval. The Commission may grant a one extension for filing the Mylar a period not to exceed twelve months if the applicant can demonstrate cause for such an extension. 


108 
Section 7.02 

1. 	
All work in connection with an approved site plan approved after July 1, 2011, other than the exceptions listed within this section, shall be completed within five (5) years after the date of approval of the site plan and failure to complete all work within such five(5) year period shall result in automatic expiration of the approval of such site plan unless the Commission has granted an extension of the time to complete work in connection with such site plan not to exceed a total of ten (10) years from the approval date. 

2. 	
Site plans approved prior to July 1, 2011 that have not expired prior to May 9, 2011, other than the exceptions listed within this section, shall be completed within nine (9) years after the date of approval of the site plan and failure to complete all work within such nine (9) year period shall result in automatic expiration of the approval of such site plan unless the Commission has granted an extension of the time to complete work in connection with such site plan not to exceed a total of fourteen (14) years from the approval date. 

3. 	
All work in connection with an approved site plan for residential projects equal to or greater than 400 units in size shall be completed within ten (10) years of the date of approval with no extensions permitted and failure to complete all work within such ten (10) year period shall result in automatic expiration of the approval. 

4. 	
All work in connection with an approved site plan for commercial, industrial or retail projects equal to or greater than 400,000 square feet in size shall be completed within five (5) to ten (10) years of the date of approval, where if the initial permit duration was less than ten (10) years after the date of approval of the site plan, an extension may be granted not to exceed a total of ten (10) years from the approval date and failure to complete all work within the initial approved permit duration period shall result in automatic expiration of the approval unless the Commission has granted an extension of the time to complete work in connection with such site plan not to exceed a total of ten (10) years from the approval date. 

5. 	
Requests for extensions must be submitted to the Commission prior to the initial expiration date. The Commission may condition the approval of any extension on a determination of the adequacy of any bond, surety or other financial guarantee. 


109 

Section 7.03 Special Exception Application 

1. 	
A Special Exception Application shall be submitted for any activity designated in the Regulations as requiring a Special Exception. 

2. 	
Each application for a Special Exception shall be accompanied by a Site Plan Application meeting the requirements of Section 7.02 of these regulations unless: 


a. 	
The Planning Office finds that there are no physical changes proposed to the site or any building or structure and the submission of a Site Plan Application is not necessary for the Commission to evaluate the proposal. 

b. 	
The Commission waives all or part of the site plan application and fee when, in the sole judgment of the Commission, the requested Special Exception does not involve activity triggering site plan application requirements. 


3. 	A Special Exception Application shall be accompanied by ten (10) copies of the following information: 
a. 	
A statement describing the existing and proposed use or uses. 

b. 	
A statement describing how the Special Exception criteria in Subsection 7.03.D are addressed. 


4. 	
The Commission may require the submission of additional information as deemed necessary to make a reasonable review of the application. 

5. 	
If a Special Exception Application involves an activity regulated pursuant to CGS 22a-36 to 22a-45, inclusive, the applicant shall submit an application for a permit to the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission not later than the day such application is filed with the Commission. 


110 
Section 7.03 

1. 	The date of receipt of the Special Exception Application shall be determined in accordance with Subsection 
7.08.B. 
2. 	
An incomplete Special Exception Application may be denied in accordance with Subsection 7.08.C. 

3. 	
The Commission shall hold a public hearing on the Special Exception Application and shall: 


a. 	
Publish a legal notice in accordance with the requirements of Subsection 7.08.F. of these Regulations. 

b. 	
Require that the applicant give public notice in accordance with the requirements of Subsection 7.08.G of these Regulations. 


4. 	Notification to adjoining municipalities may be required in accordance with the requirements of Subsection 
7.08.H. 
5. 	
Notification to water companies may be required in accordance with the requirements of Subsection 7.08.I. 

6. 	
The Commission shall process the Special Exception Application within the period of time permitted under CGS 8-7d: 


a. 	
The public hearing shall commence within sixty-five (65) days after receipt of the application. 

b. 	
The public hearing shall be completed within thirty-five (35) days after such hearing commences. 

c. 	
All decisions shall be rendered within sixty-five (65) days after completion of such hearing. 

d. 	
The applicant may consent to one or more extensions of any period specified herein provided the total extension of all such periods shall not be for longer than sixty-five (65) days. 


7. 	
Notwithstanding the provisions of this Section, if an application involves an activity regulated pursuant to CGS 22a-36 to 22a-45, inclusive and the time for a decision by the Commission would elapse prior to the thirty-fifth day after a decision by the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission, the time period for a decision shall be extended to thirty-five (35) days after the decision of such agency. 

8. 	
The applicant may, at any time prior to action by the Commission, withdraw such application. 

9. 	
The applicant shall bear the burden of demonstrating that any applicable Special Exception Criteria in these Regulations are addressed. 


111 

1. 	
Special Exception Uses are declared to possess such special characteristics that each Special Exception shall be considered on an individual basis. 

2. 	
On a Special Exception Application involving an activity regulated pursuant to CGS 22a-36 to 22a-45, inclusive, the Commission shall: 


a. 	
Wait to render its decision until the Inland Wetlands Commission has submitted a report with its final decision. 

b. 	
Give due consideration to any report of the Inland Wetlands Commission when making its decision. 


3. 	
On a Special Exception Application involving notice to adjoining municipalities under Subsection 7.08.H or notice to water companies under Subsection 7.08.I, the Commission shall give due consideration to any report or testimony received. 

4. 	
Before the Commission approves a Special Exception Application, it shall determine that the application: 


a. 	
Is in conformance with the applicable provisions of these Regulations. 

b. 	
Has, in the sole discretion of the Commission, satisfied any applicable Special Exception criteria in Subsection 7.03.D of these Regulations. 

c. 	
Is in harmony with the purposes and intent of these Regulations. 


5. 	
Before granting a Special Exception, the Commission shall determine that any accompanying Site Plan Application is in conformance with the applicable provisions of these Regulations. 

6. 	
In granting a Special Exception, the Commission may stipulate such conditions as are reasonable and necessary to protect or promote the public health, safety or welfare; property values; the environment; sound planning and zoning principles; improved land use, site planning and land development; or better overall neighborhood compatibility. 

7. 	
The Commission may require the applicant post a performance bond, in an amount, form, and duration satisfactory to the Commission, to assure and guarantee: 


a. 	
That adequate erosion and sediment control measures are installed and maintained, before any Permit is issued for activities shown on the approved plan. 

b. 	
The completion of all of the required and approved site improvements including, but not limited to, grading, regrading, drainage, erosion control, lighting, screening, landscaping, pavement, sidewalks and other reasonable elements depicted on the site plan and approved by the Commission. 

c. 	
That all of the improvements shown on the approved plan are implemented before issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy is granted. 


8. 	Any condition or safeguard attached to the granting of a Special Exception: 
a. 	
Shall remain with the property as long as the Special Exception use is still in operation. 

b. 	
Shall continue in force and effect regardless of any change in ownership of the property. 


9. 	The Commission shall not approve any Special Exception for property on which there exists a zoning violation, unless such Special Exception will remedy such violation. 
112 
Section 7.03 

A request for a special exception involves asking the Commission for permission to construct a structure and/or engage in a use that is not permitted as of right in the zone the subject property is located within. As used in this 
........... ... ...G “....... ......... ...” ....... . ... .... ..... .. .......... .. . ........ ......... ...... . 
specific zone so long as certain criteria are met. The responsibility of the Planning and Zoning Commission, is to insure that any special exception use does not impact the existing neighborhood in a negative manner. A special exception use may be acceptable or inappropriate depending on the intensity of the use and proximity to and impact upon neighboring properties. Using the criteria outlined in this section, the Commission must carefully weigh the impacts the proposed use will have, and balance the request of the applicant with the rights of existing neighbors to quiet and peaceful enjoyment of their property based on its current zoning status. In considering any application for a Special Exception, the Commission shall evaluate the merit of the application with respect to the following factors: 
1. 	Suitable Location for Use 
a. 	
The location and size of the site, the nature and intensity of the operations involved in or conducted in connection with the use, and the location of the site with respect to streets giving access to it are such that the use shall be in harmony with the appropriate and orderly development in the district in which it is located and shall promote the welfare of the Town. 

b. 	
The lot, on which the proposed use is located and the proposed buildings, structures and parking area are situated, is of sufficient size and adequate dimension to permit the normal operation of the use in manner which is not detrimental to the surrounding area and/or adjacent properties and consistent with the zoning district. 

c. 	
The proposed use and proposed buildings and structures are in harmony and character with the surrounding properties and area and do not hinder or discourage the development and use of adjacent properties. 

d. 	
The nature of the proposed use and its location does not impair public health, safety or the general welfare to the public. 

e. 	
The proposed use and its location are consistent with orderly development of the Town and conform to the requirements of these Regulations. 

f. 	
The proposed use and proposed buildings and structures do not impair the value of adjacent properties. 

g. 	
The location and size of any use located in or adjacent to a residential zone, the nature and intensity of the operations of such use, the site layout and design of the proposed buildings and structures associated with the proposed use, vehicular access to and from the site and any proposed exterior illumination are compatible and consistent with the development and use of the neighborhood and adjacent properties, do not create a conflict with or impede the normal traffic on local roads or within the neighborhood and do not hinder or discourage the orderly and appropriate development and/or use of adjacent property and buildings. 


2. 	Environmental Protection and Conservation 
a. 	
Appropriate consideration shall be given to the protection, preservation, and/or enhancement of natural, scenic, historic, and unique resources including, where appropriate, the use of conservation restrictions to protect and permanently preserve natural, scenic, historic, or unique features which enhance the character and environment of the area. 

b. 	
The proposed use, proposed buildings and structures and other site features are designed and maintained in such a manner as not to impose an unacceptable risk to aquifers and public water supplies. 


3. 	Appropriate Improvements 
a. 	
The design elements of the proposed development will be attractive and suitable in relation to the site characteristics, the style of other buildings in the immediate area, and the existing and probable future character of the neighborhood in which the use is located. 

b. 	
The proposed buildings, structures and signs shall be sized, designed and situated to be in character and harmony with the surrounding area and adjacent properties. 

c. 	
The location, nature and height of buildings, walls, and fences, planned activities and the nature and extent of landscaping on the site will be such that the use shall not hinder or discourage the appropriate development and use of adjacent land and buildings or impair the value thereof. 

d. 	
The property and proposed parking areas shall be suitably landscaped with a combination of trees, shrubs and other plant materials to enhance the appearance of the proposed development and, as appropriate, filter and screen the view of the proposed development from the surrounding area and adjacent properties. 

e. 	
The proposed use or activity shall have no adverse effect upon the neighboring area resulting from the use of signs, exposed artificial lights, colored lights of any nature, flashing lights, loudspeakers or other noisemaking devices. 

f. 	
In cases where it is proposed to convert a structure designed and built originally for other uses, the structure is adaptable to the proposed use from the point of view of public health and safety and can meet all the requirements of the zoning regulations for the intended use. 


113 
4. 	Suitable Transportation Conditions 
a. 	
The design, location and specific details of the proposed use or activity shall not adversely affect safety in the streets nor unreasonably increase traffic congestion in the area nor interfere with the pattern of vehicular circulation in such a manner as to create or augment unsafe traffic conditions. 

b. 	
Parking area or areas will be of adequate size for the particular use, shall be suitably screened from adjoining residential uses, and entrance and exit drives shall be laid out so as to prevent traffic hazards and nuisances. 

c. 	
Streets and other rights-of-way shall be of such size, condition and capacity (in terms of capacity, width, grade, alignment and visibility) to adequately accommodate the traffic to be generated by the particular proposed use. 

d. 	
The nature and location of any proposed buildings and structures shall not impede access to the site and/or access for emergency response vehicles including but not limited to ambulances and fire apparatus. 

e. 	
Local streets serving the proposed use are of adequate condition to carry traffic generated by the proposed use. 

f. 	
Provisions shall be made for vehicular traffic to enter and exit the site, which do not create an undue traffic hazard and/or cause undue traffic congestion. 


5. 	Adequate Public Utilities and Services 
a. 	
The provisions for water supply, sewage disposal, and storm water drainage conform to accepted engineering practices, comply with all standards of the appropriate regulatory authority, and shall not unduly burden the capacity of such facilities. 

b. 	
The proposed use or activity shall provide easy accessibility for fire apparatus and police protection and is laid out and equipped to further the provision of emergency services. 

c. 	
Any proposed public improvements shall comply with the applicable Town, State or Federal Regulations, Requirements, Standards or Guidelines. 


6. 	
Long Term Viability Adequate provision has been made for the sustained maintenance of the proposed development (structures, streets, and other improvements). 

7. 	
Policy Documents 


a. 	
The proposed use or activity does not conflict with the purposes of the Regulations. 

b. 	
The proposed use or activity facilitates achievement of one or more of the goals, objectives, policies, and recommendations of the Plan of Conservation and Development, as amended. 

c. 	
The proposed use and proposed buildings and structures are consistent with the policies, goals and objectives of the Plan of Conservation and Development. 


114 
Section 7.03 

1. 	
Whenever it grants or denies a Special Exception, the Commission shall state upon its record the reason(s) for its decision. 

2. 	
The Commission shall send, by certified mail, a copy of any decision on a Special Exception Application to the applicant within fifteen (15) days after such decision is rendered. 

3. 	
The Commission shall cause notice of the approval or denial of the Special Exception Application to be published in a newspaper having a substantial circulation in Plainville within fifteen (15) days after such decision is rendered. 

4. 	
In any case in which such notice is not published within the fifteen-day period after a decision has been rendered, the person who submitted such application may provide for the publication of such notice within ten (10) days thereafter. 



1. 	
A Special Exception granted by the Commission shall only become effective upon the filing of a copy, certified by the Commission, in the land records of the Town, in accordance with the provisions of CGS 8-3d. 

2. 	
A Special Exception shall only authorize the particular use or uses specified in the Commission's approval. 

3. 	
Failure to strictly adhere to the documents, plans, terms, conditions and/or safeguards approved by the Commission or its staff shall be a violation of these Regulations and the Commission shall have the authority to revoke the permit at any time the operation is found to be in non-compliance with the original permit. 

4. 	
A Special Exception may be amended or modified in like manner as provided above for the granting of a Special Exception except that amendments which shall be found to be of a minor nature or which do not materially alter the Special Exception, as determined by the Commission, may be authorized with Commission approval only, without another public hearing. 


115 
Section 7.04 Regulation Amendment Application 


1. 	
A Regulation Amendment Application shall be submitted for any proposal to amend, change, or repeal any Section of these Regulations. 

2. 	
Any such application shall be accompanied by ten (10) copies of the precise wording of the existing and proposed text and any other supporting information. 

3. 	
The Commission may require the submission of additional information as deemed necessary to make a reasonable review of the application. 

4. 	
The Commission shall not be required to hear any petition or petitions relating to the same changes, or substantially the same changes, more than once in a period of twelve (12) months unless it finds, on facts presented in writing, that a material change in the situation justifies this action. A change of ownership of property or any interest therein shall not be deemed a material change in the situation for the purpose of this Section. 


116 
Section 7.04 

1. 	
The date of receipt for the Regulation Amendment Application shall be determined in accordance with Subsection 7.08.B. 

2. 	
An incomplete Regulation Amendment Application may be denied in accordance with Subsection 7.08.C. 

3. 	
The Commission shall hold a public hearing on the Regulation Amendment Application and shall cause a legal notice to be published in accordance with the requirements of Subsection 7.08.F of these Regulations. 

4. 	
The Commission shall give notice to the regional planning agency when any portion of the land affected by a regulation change affecting the use of a zone is located within five hundred (500) feet of the boundary of another municipality and: 


a. 	
Such notice shall be made by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by electronic mail in accordance with Section 8-3b of the Connecticut General Statutes as may be amended. 

b. 	
The regional planning agency may submit its advisory findings and recommendations to the Commission at or before the hearing but if such report is not submitted, it shall be presumed that such agency does not disapprove of the proposal. 


5. 	Notification to adjoining municipalities may be required in accordance with the requirements of Subsection 
7.08.H. 
6. 	
Notification to water companies may be required in accordance with the requirements of Subsection 7.08.I. 

7. 	
A copy of the proposed regulation shall be filed by the applicant in the office of the Town Clerk for public inspection at least ten (10) days before the public hearing. 

8. 	
The Commission shall process the Regulation Amendment Application within the period of time permitted under CGS 8-7d: 


a. 	
The public hearing shall commence within sixty-five (65) days after receipt of the application. 

b. 	
The public hearing shall be completed within thirty-five (35) days after such hearing commences. 

c. 	
All decisions shall be rendered within sixty-five (65) days after completion of such hearing. 

d. 	
The applicant may consent to one or more extensions of any period specified herein provided the total extension of all such periods shall not be for longer than sixty-five (65) days. 

e. 	
These provisions shall not apply to any action initiated by the Commission regarding adoption or change of any Regulation. 


9. 	The applicant may, at any time prior to action by the Commission, withdraw such application. 
117 

1. 	
The Commission shall act upon the changes requested in such Regulation Amendment Application. 

2. 	
Any report from an adjacent municipality or a regional planning agency shall be made a part of the record of such hearing. 

3. 	
On a Regulation Amendment Application involving notice to adjoining municipalities, water companies, or a regional planning agency, the Commission shall give due consideration to any report or testimony received. 

4. 	
In making its decision the Commission shall take into consideration the Plan of Conservation and Development, prepared pursuant to CGS 8-23. 

5. 	
Before approving any Regulation Amendment Application, the Commission shall determine that the proposed regulation change will aid in: 


a. 	
Protecting the public health, safety, welfare, or property values. 

b. 	
Implementing the municipal Plan of Conservation and Development. 

c. 	
Attaining the purposes of these Regulations. 


6. 	Such Regulation(s) shall be established, changed or repealed only by a majority vote of all the members of the Commission. 
118 
Section 7.04 

1. 	
Whenever the Commission acts upon a Regulation Amendment Application, it shall state upon the record the reasons for its decision. 

2. 	
In making its decision, the Commission shall state upon the record its findings on consistency of the proposed establishment, change or repeal of such Regulations with the Plan of Conservation and Development, as amended. 

3. 	
As part of approving a Regulation Amendment Application, the Commission shall establish an effective date for the Regulation change provided that a notice of the decision of the Commission shall have been published in a newspaper having a substantial circulation in Plainville before such effective date. 

4. 	
The Commission shall send, by certified mail, a copy of any decision on a Regulation Amendment Application to the applicant within fifteen (15) days after such decision is rendered. 

5. 	
The Commission shall cause notice of the approval or denial of the Regulation Amendment Application to be published in a newspaper having a substantial circulation in Plainville within fifteen (15) days after such decision is rendered. 

6. 	
In any case in which such notice is not published within the fifteen-day period after a decision has been rendered, the person who submitted such application may provide for the publication of such notice within ten (10) days thereafter. 



A regulation amendment approved by the Commission shall be filed in the office of the Town Clerk before the effective date. 
119 

Section 7.05 Zone Change Application 

1. 	
A Zone Change Application shall be submitted for any proposal to alter the zoning designation of any parcel(s) of land or part thereof. 

2. 	
A Zone Change Application shall be: 


a. 	
Signed by the affected property owner(s). 

b. 	
Commenced by the Commission on its own initiative. 


3. 	A Zone Change Application shall be accompanied by: 
a. 	
Ten (10) copies of an A-2 survey of the parcel or parcels in question except that the Commission shall be exempt from this requirement. 

b. 	
Ten (10) copies of a legal description of the parcel or parcels in question except that the Commission shall be exempt from this requirement. 


4. 	A Zone Change Application shall be accompanied by: 
a. 	
Ten (10) copies of a map showing all parcels comprising the proposed change and all those parcels, or portions thereof, within 500 feet of the boundaries of the proposed zone change and such map shall: 

1. 	
Be prepared to Class D Survey standards. 

2. 	
Show the owners of record, parcel area, ... !.......’. .... .... ... ... on each lot with such information obtained from the most recent Assessor records in Plainville and, if necessary, any adjacent municipality. 



b. 	
A certification from the applicant or its designated agent shall certify that the map and owner list was prepared as specified herein. 


5. 	The Commission shall not be required to hear a Zone Change Application that has been rejected within one (1) year from the date of rejection unless it finds, on facts presented in writing, that a material change in the situation justifies this action. A change of ownership of property or any interest therein shall not be deemed a material change in the situation for the purpose of this Section. 
120 
Section 7.05 

1. 	
The date of receipt of the Zone Change Application shall be determined in accordance with Subsection 7.08.B. 

2. 	
The Commission shall hold a public hearing on the Zone Change Application and shall cause a legal notice to be published in accordance with the requirements of Subsection 7.08.F of these Regulations. 

3. 	
If the zone change application is commenced by the Commission on its own initiative, the Commission shall, via regular mail, notify property owners within the proposed zone change of the time, place and purpose of the public hearing at least 15 days prior to such hearing. 

4. 	
If the zone change application is initiated by the affected property owner(s), the applicant or its designated agent shall: 


a. 	
Notify property owners within the proposed zone change and property owners within 200 feet in all directions of the property included in a proposed zone change of the time, place and purpose of the public hearing at least 15 days prior to such hearing. 

b. 	
Submit evidence of such mailing, in the form of United States Post Office Certificates of Mailing, to the Planning Office along with the above said list of property owners, not less than five (5) calendar days prior to the hearing date. 

c. 	
Failure to comply with any of the procedures required herein, shall be deemed a valid basis for denial of the subject request. 


5. 	The Commission shall give written notice to the regional planning agency when any portion of the land affected by a Zone Change Application is located within five hundred (500) feet of the boundary of another municipality and: 
a. 	
Such notice shall be made by certified mail, return receipt requested. 

b. 	
Such notice shall be made not later than thirty (30) days before the public hearing. 

c. 	
The regional planning agency may submit its advisory findings and recommendations to the Commission at or before the hearing but if such report is not submitted, it shall be presumed that such agency does not disapprove of the proposal. 


6. 	Notification to adjoining municipalities may be required in accordance with the requirements of Subsection 
7.08.H. 
7. 	
Notification to water companies may be required in accordance with the requirements of Subsection 7.08.I. 

8. 	
A copy of the proposed zone change shall be filed by the applicant in the Office of the Town Clerk for public inspection at least ten days before the public hearing. 

9. 	
An incomplete Zone Change Application may be denied in accordance with Subsection 7.08.C. 

10. 	
The Commission shall process the Zone Change Application within the period of time permitted under CGS 8-7d: 


a. 	
The public hearing shall commence within sixty-five (65) days after receipt of the application. 

b. 	
The public hearing shall be completed within thirty-five (35) days after such hearing commences. 

c. 	
All decisions shall be rendered within sixty-five (65) days after completion of such hearing. 

d. 	
The applicant may consent to one or more extensions of any period specified herein provided the total extension of all such periods shall not be for longer than sixty-five (65) days. 

e. 	
These provisions shall not apply to any action initiated by the Commission regarding a Zone Change Application. 


11. 	The applicant may, at any time prior to action by the Commission, withdraw such application. 
121 

1. 	
In making its decision the Commission shall take into consideration the Plan of Conservation and Development, prepared pursuant to CGS 8-23. 

2. 	
On a Zone Change Application involving notice to adjoining municipalities under Subsection 7.08.H, notice to water companies under Subsection 7.08.I, or notice to a regional planning agency under Subsection 7.05.B.5, the Commission shall give due consideration to any report or testimony received. 

3. 	
Before approving any Zone Change Application, the Commission shall determine that the proposed zone change: 


a. 	
Is in accordance with the Plan of Conservation and Development. 

b. 	
Is suitable for the intended location. 

c. 	
Will aid in protecting the public health, safety, welfare, or property values. 

d. 	
Will aid in attaining the purposes of these Regulations. 


4. 	Such Zone Change shall be established, changed or repealed only by a majority vote of all the members of the Commission except that, if a protest against a proposed change is filed with the Commission at or before a hearing, signed by the owners of twenty (20) percent or more of the area of the lots affected by such proposed change or of the lots within five hundred (500) feet in all directions of the property included in the proposed change, such change shall not be adopted except by a vote of two-thirds of all the members of the Commission. 
122 
Section 7.05 

1. 	Whenever the Commission acts upon a Zone Change Application, it shall state upon the record: 
a. 	
The reason for its decision. 

b. 	
Its findings on consistency of the proposed zone change with the Plan of Conservation and Development, as amended. 


2. 	
As part of approving a Zone Change Application, the Commission shall establish an effective date for the zone change provided a notice of the decision of the Commission shall have been published in a newspaper having a substantial circulation in Plainville before such effective date. 

3. 	
If the application was submitted by the affected property owner(s), the Commission shall send, by certified mail, a copy of any decision on a Zone Change Application to the applicant within fifteen (15) days after such decision is rendered. 

4. 	
The Commission shall cause notice of the approval or denial of the Zone Change Application to be published in a newspaper having a substantial circulation in Plainville within fifteen (15) days after such decision is rendered. 

5. 	
In any case in which such notice is not published within the fifteen-day period after a decision has been rendered, the person who submitted such application may provide for the publication of such notice within ten (10) days thereafter. 



A Zone Change Map approved by the Commission shall be filed in the office of the Town Clerk before the effective date. 
123 
Section 7.06 Change in Use 
1. 	
Unless waived by the Commission, a Site Plan Modification shall be submitted when the subject site requires modifications to comply with requirements in these Regulations for setbacks, parking, landscaping, screening, or other requirements. 

2. 	
A Site Plan Modification shall meet the same standards and be treated as a Site Plan Application unless the Regulations clearly indicate that it should be treated as a Zone Change Application, Special Exception Application, or similar application. 


Section 7.07 Concept Plan Submission 
1. 	
An applicant may prepare and submit a pre-submission concept plan for informal presentation to the Commission. 

2. 	
Such pre-submission concept application shall provide information on the location of significant natural features (wetlands, watercourses, steep slopes, flood plain) and other relevant information and shall provide sufficient information for the Commission to visualize how the finished use or development shall look and how it shall be built. 

3. 	
The Commission shall informally review the concept Plan for general conformance with these regulations and may request additional information where deemed necessary. 

4. 	
A concept plan shall be considered only informational and advisory in nature and no development rights shall attach to the review or consideration of any concept plan. 

5. 	
Such review shall not be binding on the applicant or the Commission. 

6. 	
In accordance with PA 03-184 (as codified in CGS 7-159b as may be amended), such review and any results or information obtained from it may not be appealed under any provision of the Connecticut General Statutes. 

7. 	
A concept plan shall be placed on file in the Commission's office for continuing reference purposes for any subsequent application. 

8. 	
A fee for concept plan submittal shall be provided by the applicant and shall be equal to one-half the cost of the type or types of applications eventually required for the proposed activity. 


124 

Section 7.08 
Section 7.08 General Procedures 


1. 	
Applications to the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be submitted to the Planning Office. 

2. 	
Applications shall be submitted on forms obtained from the Planning Office for the type of application being submitted. 

3. 	
Applications shall be accompanied by the appropriate fee(s) except that the Commission or the Town shall be exempt from any application fee. 

4. 	
Applications shall be submitted with such supporting plans, materials, and other information as required by these Regulations. 

5. 	
Applications shall be signed by the applicant and, if applicable, the owner of the property affected. 



For the purposes of calculating statutory timeframes for processing applications, the date of receipt of an application to the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be: 
1. 	
The day of the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Commission immediately following the day of submission of the application to the Planning Office. 

2. 	
Thirty-five (35) days after submission, whichever is sooner. 



1. 	
Each application shall be reviewed by the Planning Office to determine whether the application is substantially complete. 

2. 	
An application requiring approval from the Planning and Zoning Commission shall not be considered actually complete until all of the information as required by these Regulations or the Commission has been received by the Commission. 

3. 	
An incomplete application or an application submitted without the requisite fee may be denied. 



Where a proposed development or activity requires multiple applications, the Planning and Zoning Commission may conduct any public hearings simultaneously or in the order they deem appropriate. 
125 

1. 	
On any application, the Planning and Zoning Commission may seek the advice and opinion of other officials, boards, or commissions to assist it in evaluating applications. 

2. 	
On any application, the Planning and Zoning Commission may retain an architect, landscape architect, professional land use planner, or retain such other technical expertise as it feels is needed to review, comment, and guide its deliberations on any application if it finds that the nature and intensity of development may have a significant impact on the site and its surrounding areas and that town staff lacks the necessary expertise to investigate and/or review said conditions. 

3. 	
When the Commission determines such additional technical expertise is required: 


a. 	
An estimate for those services shall be made by a qualified party. 

b. 	
The applicant shall deposit one hundred and fifty percent (150%) of that estimated cost with the Commission. 

c. 	
Such payment shall be made prior to the review of the application and/or submission. 

d. 	
Upon completion of the technical review and final action of the Commission, the balance of remaining funds, if any, shall be reimbursed to the applicant. 

e. 	
Applicants shall not be responsible for costs incurred for technical assistance which exceed one hundred-fifty percent (150%) of the estimate received by the Commission. 



1. 	
When a public hearing is required by these Regulations or is scheduled by the Planning and Zoning Commission, the Planning Office shall cause notice of the hearing to be published in a newspaper having a substantial circulation in Plainville. 

2. 	
Such notice shall be published at least twice at intervals of not less than two (2) days, the first not more than fifteen (15) days, nor less than ten (10) days, and the last not less than two (2) days before the date of the hearing. 



1. 	
When required by these Regulations, the applicant shall post a sign at least fifteen (15) days in advance of such hearing in conformity with approved specifications (available in the Planning Office). 

2. 	
The following requirements shall apply: 


a. 	A signed affidavit must be submitted by the applicant on the day of the hearing affirming compliance with the regulations. 
3. 	Failure to post the required sign in accordance with the approved specifications and within the prescribed timeframe will result in the application being incomplete; the Commission may deny without prejudice, allow the applicant to withdraw without prejudice, or agree by majority vote of sitting Commissioners to postpone the hearing until appropriate notification is given; adequate statutory timeframes must be considered. 
a. 	Application fees shall not be refunded or credited to any subsequent same or similar application that fails to meet these requirements. 
126 
Section 7.08 

1. 	In accordance with CGS 8-7d(f), the Commission or Zoning Board of Appeals shall notify the clerk of an adjoining municipality of any application concerning any project on any site in which: 
a. 	
Any portion of the property affected by a decision is within five hundred (500) feet of the boundary of the adjoining municipality. 

b. 	
A significant portion of the traffic to the completed project shall use streets within the adjoining municipality to enter or exit the site. 

c. 	
A significant portion of the sewer or water drainage from the project shall flow through and significantly impact the drainage or sewerage system within the adjoining municipality. 

d. 	
Water runoff from the improved site shall impact streets or other municipal or private property within the adjoining municipality. 


2. 	
Such notice shall be made by certified mail, return receipt requested and shall be mailed within seven (7) days of the day of the submission to the Planning Office of the application, petition, request or plan. 

3. 	
No hearing shall be conducted on any application, petition, request or plan unless the adjoining municipality has received the notice required under this Section. 

4. 	
Such adjoining municipality may, through a representative, appear and be heard at any hearing on any such application, petition, request or plan. 



1. 	In accordance with CGS 8-3i, an applicant shall provide written notice to a water company and the Commissioner of Public Health when an application, petition, request or plan is filed with the Commission or Zoning Board of Appeals concerning any project on any site that is within: 
a. 	
An aquifer protection area, provided such area has been delineated in accordance with CGS 22a-354c. 

b. 	
The watershed of a water company, provided such water company or said commissioner has filed a map with the Commission and on the Plainville land records showing the boundaries of the watershed. 


2. 	
Such notice shall be made by certified mail, return receipt requested and shall be mailed not later than seven days after the date of the day of the submission to the Planning Office. 

3. 	
Prior to the scheduled meeting regarding the application, the applicant shall submit the following to the Planning Office or the application shall be considered incomplete: 


a. 	
A copy of the complete package of information. 

b. 	
Proof of mailing. 


4. 	Such water company and the Commissioner of Public Health may, through a representative, appear and be heard at any hearing on any such application, petition, request or plan. 

Any person who makes an application to the Commission pertaining to real property, the record title to which is held by a trustee of any trust, shall file with said application a sworn statement disclosing the name(s) of the equitable owner (s) of such real property or the beneficiary(ies) of the trust. 
127 
This page left intentionally blank 
128 
Section 8.01 


Article 8. ADMINISTRATION 
Section 8.01 Authority 
These Regulations are adopted under the authority of Chapter 124 of the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut, as amended. 
Section 8.02 Purposes 
It is the purpose of these Regulations to: 
1. 	
Promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the community. 

2. 	
Lessen congestion in the streets. 

3. 	
Secure safety from fire, panic, flood and other dangers. 

4. 	
Promote health and the general welfare. 

5. 	
Provide adequate light and air. 

6. 	
Prevent the overcrowding of land. 

7. 	
Avoid undue concentration of population. 

8. 	
Facilitate the adequate provision for transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other public requirements. 

9. 	
Conserve the value of buildings. 

10. 	
Encourage the most appropriate use of land throughout such municipality. 

11. 	
Encourage the development of housing opportunities consistent with soil types, terrain and infrastructure capacity, for all residents of the municipality and the planning region. 


Section 8.03 
Section 8.03 Zoning Districts 
1. 	
For the purpose of promoting the health, safety, economic and general welfare of the community, the Town of Plainville is divided into the zones or districts as enumerated in these Regulations. 

2. 	
The boundaries of all districts, as established herein and amended from time to time, are those shown on the Zoning Map, Town of Plainville, Connecticut filed in the office of the Town Clerk, which map is part of these regulations.  Any facsimile maps, including any printed herewith, are not official and are for convenience only. 

3. 	
When in accordance with the provisions of these regulations, changes are made in district boundaries or other matter portrayed on the Zoning Map, such changes shall be made on the Zoning Map after the amendment has been approved by the Commission, together with an entry on the Zoning Map as follows: "As amended to (date)", such date to be that of the most recent amendment. 

4. 	
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply: 


a. 	
Boundaries, unless otherwise clearly indicated on the zoning map, are either street lines or lines drawn parallel to and back from a street line, the distance indicated on said map. 

b. 	
Boundaries indicated as approximately following plotted lot lines shall be construed as following such lot lines. 

c. 	
Boundaries indicated as approximately following town limits, shall be construed as following town limits. 

d. 	
Boundaries indicated as parallel to, or extensions of, features indicated in subsections 1 through 3 above, shall be so construed. Distances not specifically indicated in the Zoning Map shall be determined by the scale of the map. 

e. 	
In the case of a lot lying in more than one district, the provisions of the less restrictive district may be applied for a distance of not over thirty (30) feet into a more restrictive district, provided that the lot has frontage on a street in the less restrictive district. 

f. 	
In cases of uncertainty, the Commission shall determine the location of the boundary. 


130 
Section 8.04 
Section 8.04 Application 
1. 	
Any use of land, buildings or structures not expressly permitted by these Regulations in the various zoning districts is prohibited and, in the event of uncertainty as to whether a use is permitted, the Commission shall be responsible for interpreting these Regulations. 

2. 	
No building or structure or premises shall be used or occupied, and no building or part thereof or other structure shall be erected, raised, moved, placed, reconstructed, extended, enlarged or altered except in conformity with the regulations herein specified for the district, as shown on the official map in which it is located. 

3. 	
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of these Regulations shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety and welfare. 

4. 	
It is not intended by these Regulations to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way impair or interfere with existing provisions of other laws or ordinances, except those specifically repealed by these Regulations, or with private restrictions placed upon property by covenant, deed or other private agreement, or with restrictive covenants running with the land to which the Town is a party. Where these Regulations impose a greater restriction upon land, buildings or structures than is imposed or required by such existing provisions of law, ordinance, contract or deed, the provisions of these Regulations shall control. 

5. 	
No lot on which a building is or shall be erected, shall be reduced or diminished so that the yards, courts or open spaces shall be smaller than prescribed by this schedule. 


Section 8.05 Enforcement and Penalties 
1. 	
These Regulations shall be enforced by the Zoning Enforcement Officer, appointed by the Planning and Zoning Commission, who is empowered to cause any building, structure, place, or premises to be inspected and examined and to order in writing the remedying of any condition found to exist therein or threat in violation of any provisions of these Regulations. 

2. 	
Where the Zoning Enforcement Officer is unable to act, the Planning and Zoning Commission may designate another Town Official to enforce these Regulations. 

3. 	
The owner or agent of a building or premises where a violation of any provision of said Regulations shall have been committed or shall exist, or the lessee, or tenant of a building or entire premises where such violation shall have been committed or shall exist, or the owner, agent, lessee, or tenant of any part of the building or premises in which such violation shall have been committed or shall exist, or the agent, architect, building contractor or any other person who shall commit, take part or assist in any such violation or who shall maintain any buildings or premises in which any such violation shall exist shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not less than $10.00 and not more than $100.00 for each and every day that such violation continues but if the offense be willful, on conviction thereof, the punishment shall be a fine of not less than $100.00 or more than $250.00 for each and every day that such violation shall continue. 


Section 8.06 
Section 8.06 Board of Appeals 
1. 	
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the following powers and duties, as specified in Section 8-6 of Chapter 124 of the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut, as amended: 

2. 	
No application with respect to a matter which has been denied by the Zoning Board of Appeals shall again be filed within six months from its original denial, unless a new application is submitted with an affidavit containing facts showing that there has been a material change in conditions affecting the merits of the application. 


a.  To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is an error in any order, requirement, or decision  
made by the Zoning Enforcement Officer.  
b.  To determine and vary the application of these Zoning Regulations, solely with respect to a parcel of land  
where, owing to conditions especially affecting such parcel but not affecting generally the district in which  
it is located, a literal enforcement of these Regulations would result in exceptional difficulty or unusual  
hardship. Any such variance to these Zoning Regulations shall be in harmony with their general purpose  
and  intent,  and  shall  be  made  with  due  consideration  of  conserving  the  public  health,  safety,  
convenience, welfare and property values.  
c.  To vary these Zoning Regulations on a temporary basis provided that the variance shall not exceed thirty  
consecutive days in a calendar year and provided further that a temporary variance for a location may be  
granted only once during a calendar year.  
d.  To hear and decide on location approvals for any person who desires to obtain a license for the sale or  
repair of motor vehicles in accordance with applicable State Statutes.  

Section 8.07 Validity 
If any section, paragraph, subdivision, clause, or provision of these Regulations shall be adjudged invalid, such adjudication shall apply only to the section, paragraph, subdivision, clause or provision so adjudged, and the remainder of these Regulations shall be deemed valid and effective. 
Section 8.08 Repeal and Effective Date 
All prior Zoning Regulations are hereby repealed as of the effective date of these Regulations. 
These Regulations shall be effective April 13, 1989 with amendments through July 25, 2007. 
132 
Section 9.01 

Article 9. DEFINITIONS 
Section 9.01 Use of Terms 
In the construction of this Regulation the rules and definitions contained in this Article shall be observed and applied, except where the context clearly indicates otherwise. 
1. 	
Words used in the singular shall include the plural and the plural singular; and words used in the present tense shall include the future. 

2. 	
The word "shall" is mandatory. 

3. 	
The word "may" is permissive. 

4. 	
The word "lot" shall include the words "piece", "parcel" and "plot". 

5. 	
The words "zone", "zoning district" and "district" have the same meaning. 

6. 	
The phrase "used for" shall include the phrases "arranged for", "designated for", "intended for", "maintained for" and "occupied for". 

7. 	
The phrase "these Regulations" shall refer to the entire zoning regulation. 

8. 	
Uses of land, buildings or structures not clearly permitted in the various zoning districts are prohibited. 


Section 9.02 Definitions 
For the purposes of these regulations, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. 
ACCESSORY APARTMENT: A separate living unit that is attached to, housed within, and collectively having the exterior appearance of a single-family residence, including full sleeping, cooking and sanitary facilities. Such accessory apartment unit shall not change the residential classification of a single-family dwelling to a two family dwelling. This definition shall include accessory healthcare apartment. 
ACCESSORY USES: a subordinate use or building customarily incident to and located on the lot occupied by the main use or building. 
ADULT CABARET:(a) An establishment devoted to adult entertainment, either with or without a liquor license, presenting material distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting specified anatomical areas and/or specified sexual activities; (b) a cabaret that features topless dancers, go-go dancers, strippers, male or female impersonators, or similar entertainers for observation by patrons. 
ADULT MINI-MOTION PICTURE THEATER: An enclosed building with a capacity for less than fifty persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities. 
ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER: An enclosed building with a capacity for more than fifty persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified anatomical areas or specified sexual areas. 
Section 9.02 
ADULT VIDEO AND/OR BOOK STORE: An establishment having five (5) percent of its stock in trade books, magazines, publications, tapes or films that are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified anatomical areas and/or specified sexual activities. 
ALTERATION: A change or rearrangement in the structural parts of a building, the movement of all or any part thereof, or the reconstruction thereof, so as to produce a noticeable change in appearance, character, or construction; also, means an enlargement, whether by increase in height, coverage, volume or floor area. 
ANTENNA: A device used in communications which transmits or receives telecommunications or radio signals. Such devices shall be limited to dish antennas, microwave antennas, whip antennas, omnidirectional antennas and panel antennas. 
BILLBOARD: A sign that directs attention to a business, commodity, service or entertainment conducted, sold or offered at a location other than the premises on which the sign is located. 
BUILDING: Any structure having a roof and intended for shelter, housing, or enclosure of persons, animals, or 
G......... ......... ... ..... ......... G... .... ..... (8) .... ..... ......... (.) . “........” .. ....... 
in section 16-50i of the Connecticut General Statutes, and (b) structures similar in height-to-diameter ratio of chimneys, flagpoles, antennas, utility poles and steeples, provided such structures are accessory to a building or use permitted by these regulations, and not the principal use or structure on the lot. 
BUILDING AREA: The aggregate or maximum horizontal cross section of the main building on a lot, together with its accessory buildings. The building area excludes steps, one-story open porches, balconies, terraces and cornices, eaves gutters or chimneys which project not more than thirty (30) inches. 
BUILDING LINE: The line fixed, now or hereafter, by the Town Planning and Zoning Commission; and where no line has been fixed by such Commission, is a line parallel to the street line at a distance therefrom of a minimum of twenty-four (24) feet. 
CARE FACILITY, DOG AND/OR CAT: A dog and/or cat care facility is an organized, controlled and monitored environment, providing supplementary care for a group of friendly dogs and/or cats by allowing them to interact and play throughout the day, and provide limited boarding services to existing clientele. The purpose is to provide stimulation, exercise and socialization for the dog and/or cat. 
CLUB, OR PHILANTHROPIC OR FRATERNAL ORGANIZATION: Means an organization of persons incorporated pursuant to law, which is the owner, lessee or occupant of an establishment operated solely for social, patriotic, benevolent, or athletic purpose, but not for pecuniary gain, and includes the establishment so operated. A club shall cater only to its G.G.... .. ...... ....G....... ...G. ! “..G... .. . ...” .. . person who, whether as a charter member or admitted in agreement with the bylaws of the club, has become a bona-fide member thereof, who maintains his membership by the payment of his annual dues in a bona-fide manner in accordance with such bylaws, and whose name and address are entered on the list of membership. Such establishment may include banquet halls for use of the membership and rental to the general public for lawful functions. 
CO-LOCATED WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITY: Telecommunication facilities which utilize an existing tower, building or other structure for the placement of antenna that does not require the construction of a new communications tower. 
COMMON INTEREST COMMUNITY: A project or development duly established in accordance with the provisions of the Common Interest Ownership Act, Chapter 828 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as it may be amended from time to time. 
134 

Section 9.02 
COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY: A facility supporting antennas and microwave dishes that sends and/or receives radio frequency signals. 
COMMUNICATIONS TOWER: A structure that is intended to support antennas and other telecommunications equipment in the provision of wireless telecommunication services. Such structures shall be limited to monopoles and lattice towers. 
CONDOMINIUM: A unit in a plan or project, building or buildings, or other structure or structures separately offered for sale, with joint ownership of the common areas by the owners of all units; the plan or project being duly established in accordance with the provisions of the Connecticut Condominium Act, Chapter 825 of the General Statutes of Connecticut, as amended from time to time. 
DAY CARE CENTER, CHILDREN OR ADULT: A commercial facility providing a program of supplementary care to not more than twenty-four related or unrelated persons outside their own home on a regular basis for three to twelve hours a day, which may also be an accessory facility to exclusively serve employees of a commercial facility. 
DAY CARE CENTER, FAMILY: A private single family home, providing a program of supplementary care to not more than six children/adults, including the provider's own children/relatives, where the children/adults are cared for on a regular basis for three to twelve hours a day, and where the principal provider of the services resides on the premises. Family day care homes shall not be regulated differently from a single-family home. 
DISH ANTENNA: A dish-like antenna used to link communications sites together by wireless transmission of voice or data. These antennas include microwave antennas and microwave dish antennas. 
DISTRIBUTION CENTER: An establishment engaged in the receipt and distribution of goods, products, cargo and materials including transshipment of goods, product, cargo and materials by rail, air, motor vehicle or freight but excluding bulk storage of materials that are flammable or explosive or that create hazardous or commonly recognized offensive conditions. 
DRIVE THROUGH SERVICE: Includes retail and service activity occurring at a window or kiosk where consumers queue their motor vehicles in a lane to receive and pay for goods and services at such window or kiosk. 
DWELLING: A building arranged, intended or designated to be occupied by one or more families living independently of each other within individual units. 
DWELLING UNIT: Living quarters for one family, which may be classified as a single family detached dwelling, condominium dwelling, apartment dwelling, efficiency apartment dwelling, accessory apartment dwelling and/or .........’. quarters that shall consist of not less than one habitable room in addition to required kitchen and sanitary facilities. 
FAMILY: One person; a group of two or more people related by blood, marriage, legal adoption, or legal guardianship; or a group of not more than six unrelated people, living and cooking together in the same dwelling unit as a single housekeeping unit. A family may also include domestic help, but does not include roomers, boarders, or lodgers. 

Section 9.02 
FARMING: Farming is synonymous with the term agriculture and shall include cultivation of soil, dairying, raising or harvesting any agricultural commodity, including the raising, feeding, caring for, training and management of livestock including but not limited to horses, cattle, sheep, goats, bees, poultry, fowl and any other species raised for food production, breeding, exhibition or sale; the harvesting of sugar maple; processing and preparation of a commodity grown or raised on the premises for market; the operation, G.....G.... ............. .G.....G... .. G.......... .. . ...G. ..’. .......... ..... ... .O...G.... The term farm includes farm buildings and accessory buildings thereto, including a primary dwelling. Livestock, poultry and other traditional farm animals are not to be considered as domestic or household pets. 
FLOOD PLAIN ZONE: a local zoning designation shown on the Plainville Zoning Map. The Flood Plain Zone may overlap with the Special Flood Hazard Area; however, for regulatory purposes, the more restrictive shall apply. 
FRONTAGE: The linear measurement of a lot along a PAVED street. 
GASOLINE SERVICE STATION: A building or structure designed or used primarily for the retail sale or supply of fuels, lubricants, air, water and other operating commodities of motor vehicles including the customary space and facilities for the installation of such commodities on or in such motor vehicles, but does not include painting or body repairs. 
HEALTH FITNESS CLUB: A club or facility designed to offer athletic activities, physical conditioning and/or diet, exercise and nutritional counseling. Such facility may include but not be limited to the following activities: aerobic dance classes, stationary aerobic and weight lifting equipment such as treadmills, free weights and Nautilus type equipment, but not playing fields or courts of any kind. 
HEIGHT OF A BUILDING OR STRUCTURE: The vertical distance in feet as measured from the mean level of the ground surrounding the building to a point midway between the highest and lowest points of the roof, excluding chimneys, spires, towers and similar projections. 

136 

Section 9.02 
HOME OCCUPATION, LOW IMPACT: A home office activity conducted entirely within a dwelling unit in a manner clearly subordinate to the residential use of the dwelling unit. Such use occupies no more than a prescribed percentage of the dwelling unit, does not affect the residential character of the neighborhood, and does not create a nuisance in the neighborhood. Such use does not involve the servicing of any clients from the premises. 
HOME OCCUPATION, MODERATE IMPACT: A home occupation or business activity conducted entirely within a dwelling unit in a manner clearly subordinate to the residential use of the dwelling unit. Such use occupies no more than a prescribed percentage of the dwelling unit, but may have the potential to negatively affect the residential character of the neighborhood, and create a nuisance in the neighborhood. 
JUNK: 	Any abandoned, dilapidated, scrap, secondhand, waste and/or non-reclaimable or non-recyclable materials, products, goods or debris, whether or not stored, for sale or in the process of being dismantled, destroyed, modified, stored or disposed of which are not otherwise being utilized pursuant to these regulations. Such materials, products, goods or debris may include, but is not limited to inoperable motor vehicles, tires, vehicle parts, equipment, paper, metal, glass, building materials, household appliances, machinery, brush, wood, lumber and the like. 
JUNKYARD: Any lot, land, parcel, building, or structure or part thereof, used for the exchange, storage, collection, processing, purchase, sale, and/or disposal of junk. 
LATTICE TOWER: A trestle framework consisting of horizontal and vertical structures used to support antennas and design to resist all loads including wind loads without requiring guyed wires at any point. 
LIMITED ACCESS HIGHWAY: A highway designated to provide limited access by a ramp system in specifically designated locations. It shall not be deemed to meet frontage requirements in any zone, or be used as frontage requirements in the definition of a lot. 
LIVING QUARTERS: That portion of the building constructed with finished ceilings, walls, and floors. No rooms for heating equipment, garages, outside vestibules, unfinished basements, attic, or open or enclosed porches shall be included. No area of the structure which is located below first floor grade may be counted except in the case of split level homes, as provided elsewhere in these regulations. Measurements shall be taken from outside walls. 

Section 9.02 
LOT: 	A parcel of land fronting on a paved street, occupied or designed to be occupied by one building and the accessory buildings or uses customarily incident to it; or more than one building as allowed in these regulations. 
LOT, CORNER: A lot fronting on two streets at the street intersection with a front yard on each street frontage, one side yard and one rear yard. The yard opposite the front entrance to the principal building shall be deemed to be the rear yard. Where unusual topography and/or lot shape dictate atypical dwelling configuration, required yards shall be determined at the time of the approval of the lot by the Commission. In the case of an existing vacant lot, or the first cut of an eligible lot where no Commission action is necessary, staff shall make a determination on required yards based on the same set of standards. 
LOT, REAR: A lot located to the rear of another lot and served by an access way owned in fee by the owner of the rear lot. 
LOT, THROUGH: A lot fronting on two streets not at the street intersection with a front yard on each street frontage and two side yards. 

138 

Section 9.02 
LUXURY MOTOR COACH: Any self-contained and self-propelled travel coach sometimes referred to as a motor home not less than 22,000-pound gross vehicle weight or 25 feet gross vehicle length, which can be registered for travel on public roads and highways containing all or most of the amenities found in a single family home, but not including 5th wheels, or any type of non-motorized “... ......” ..G.... 
MEDICAL MARIJUANA DISPENSARY FACILITY: A place of business where marijuana may be dispensed or sold at retail to qualifying patients and primary caregivers and for which the department has issued a dispensary facility permit to an applicant under the Act and section 21a-408-14 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies. 
MEDICAL MARIJUANA PRODUCTION FACILITY: A secure, indoor facility where the production of marijuana occurs and that is operated by a person to whom the department has issued a producer license under the Act and sections 21a-408-20 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies. 
MOBILE HOME: A vehicle designed for human occupancy, not capable of being hauled over the road except by special license, and shall be considered a mobile home whether parked on wheels, a semi-permanent or permanent foundation. 
MONOPOLE: A structure composed of a single spire and platform used to support panel antennas. 
MOTOR VEHICLE, COMMERCIAL: Any type of vehicle designed and used for the discharge of any commercial activity including, but not limited to, transportation of workers, materials, equipment, merchandise, freight, or paying passengers and may include trucks, cars, vans and utility vehicles registered to a private individual or a corporate entity. 
MOTOR VEHICLE, REPAIR AND SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT: Shall be the definition established by Connecticut General Statutes. 
MOUNT: A structure or surface upon which antennas are mounted. 
MULTI-FAMILY DWELLINGS: A building intended and designated to be occupied by two or more families living in separate dwelling units. 
NON-CONFORMING LOT: A lot that does not comply with the regulations of the zone district in which it is located. 
NON-CONFORMING USE: A use that does not comply with the regulations of the use district in which it is located. 
OUTDOOR WOOD BURNING FURNACE: An outdoor accessory structure or appliance designed to transfer or provide heat through the burning of wood, solid waste, or any other material designed to be used in such equipment, for heating interior residential or commercial space or for providing any other ancillary heating needs including, but not limited to the heating of domestic hot water; swimming pool, Jacuzzi or hot tub water; or any commercial process, but does not include a fire pit, wood burning barbeque, or chiminea. 
PANEL ANTENNA: An antenna or array of antennas designed to concentrate a radio signal in a particular area. Panel antennas are typically flat, rectangular devices approximately six (6) square feet in area. These antennas are also referred to as directional antennas. 
PASSIVE RECREATION: Non-motorized recreation requiring little or no alteration of the existing topography, including and similar to hiking, bicycling, climbing, picnicking, and bird-watching. 

Section 9.02 
PASSIVE SOLAR TECHNIQUES: The use of house orientation, street and lot layout, vegetation, natural and man-made topographical features, protection of solar access within the development and other site design techniques to: 
• 	
Maximize solar heat gain, minimize heat loss and provide thermal storage within a building during the heating season. 

• 	
Minimize heat gain and provide for natural ventilation during the cooling season. 


PERSONAL SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT: A business establishment which offers direct service to customers from the premises, which in no way involves manufacture or assembly of a product, and which does not differ in general character or intensity from retail stores or business and professional offices. 
PUBLIC PARKING: The parking area located on a lot or plot of land which is not part of the required parking area for the main structure located thereon. If no main structure is located on the lot or plot of land, all parking areas may be designated as public parking. 
QUARRYING: The removal, excavation, processing, or grading of stone, fill, or other earth products within the ridgeline setback area and the Quarry Industrial Zone, regardless of the methods utilized (e.g., blasting, crushing, excavation equipment). 
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: Any type of vehicle used primarily for recreational use including but not limited to all-terrain vehicles, snowmobiles, motorized and/or non-motorized campers and/or camping trailers not exceeding 22,000-pound gross vehicle weight or 25 feet gross vehicle length, boats, and similar equipment including associated trailers but excluding mobile homes, hauling or box trailers and unregistered race cars of any kind or their associated trailers. 
RECREATION CENTER, INDOOR: A business providing recreation opportunity or service such as, but not limited to tennis, racquet ball, swimming, bowling, exercise and health center, miniature golf, driving range and similar uses, and appropriate accessory uses and facilities, but not to include game arcades, pool or billiard halls. 
RECYCLING FACILITY: A facility, the primary purpose of which is the collection or separation and processing, transformation or reuse of recyclable materials or resources such as, but not limited to glass, metal, paper, plastics, wood, household or business products, construction materials, soil, food or food byproducts into another form for immediate or future reuse, with or without a byproduct, including, but not limited to energy generation. 
REDEVELOPMENT DESIGN DISTRICT: an area comprised of one or more contiguous parcels meeting special exception and site plan criteria and requirements permitting an alternate but unified mixed use development that complies with the special regulations governing a Redevelopment Design District in lieu of the standard underlying zoning regulations. 
REGIONAL SHOPPING MALL: Property and structures under the ownership of one, or more than one entity, consisting of a minimum of 500,000 total gross leasable square feet and including an enclosed shopping mall and at least two department or anchor stores. Said total structural square footage may include any mix of office, retail, and wholesale trades, restaurant and indoor theaters or any other uses permitted in the zone(s) in which the Regional Shopping Mall is proposed. 
RESTAURANT: A place having an adequate kitchen and dining room, the primary business of which is the service of hot meals to patrons seated at tables or counters. Meals are served by waiters or waitresses and consumed at the table or counter where they are ordered. A Restaurant may have a Permit to allow the retail sales of alcoholic liquor to be consumed on the premises, as granted by the Department of Liquor Control 
140 

Section 9.02 
RESTAURANT, FAST FOOD: A place whose primary business is the quick sale of (1) frozen desserts, (2) food, already prepared, or prepared and cooked quickly, or cooked or heated in a microwave oven, or (3) non­alcoholic beverages for consumption on or off the premises. Generally, service is cafeteria style in disposable plates or containers, and food and beverages are not consumed at the point where they are ordered or paid for. 
RESTAURANT, DRIVE IN: An establishment where food or beverages are sold primarily for consumption by customers parked in motor vehicles on the premises, whether or not the establishment also serves customers indoors. 
RIDGELINE: The line on a traprock ridge, including the line on Pinnacle Rock and Bradley Mountain, created by all points at the top of a fifty (50) percent or greater slope (two horizontal for each vertical unit of distance), which slope is maintained for a distance of at least fifty (50) horizontal feet measured perpendicular to the contours of the slope and which consists of surficial basalt geology that may be determined by field observations and other topographic maps, bedrock geologic maps, surveys, and other available information. Where no surficial basalt geology (unconsolidated, loose rock) exists, bedrock basalt geology shall be used to define the traprock ridgeline. All slopes disturbed by human intervention shall be measured as immediately prior to such disturbance, to the extent such pre-existing conditions can be determined by available topographic maps or other records. 
RIDGELINE SETBACK AREA: The area bounded by (a) a line that parallels and is placed a horizontal distance of one hundred and fifty feet (150') off the lesser sloped side (typically the more wooded side) of all traprock (basalt) ridgelines as defined herein; and (b) that lowest contour line created where less than a fifty (50%) percent slope (two horizontal for each vertical unit of distance) exists for a distance of fifty horizontal feet (50') on the more steeply sloped side (typically the more rocky side) of all traprock (basalt) ridgelines as defined herein. 
SALVAGE FACILITY: A facility, the primary purpose of which is for the total or partial collection, reclamation, separation, disassembly, or sorting of items or materials, exclusive of trailers or motorized vehicles or components thereof, into reusable or recyclable byproducts to be redistributed for future reuse, but excluding a transfer station. 
SELECTIVE TIMBERING: The removal of no more than ten percent (10%) of the total number of living trees larger than six (6) inches in diameter at breast height (4.5 feet above grade), within that portion of any ridgeline setback area located on the lot on which such removal is to occur. 
SELF-STORAGE FACILITY: A facility available to the general public consisting of enclosed, individually leased storage units. 
SIGN: 	A structure, mechanism, display, or device that directs attention to a business, commodity, service or entertainment offered on the premises where the sign is located. The word "sign" shall include but not be limited to any model, banner, flag, pennant, insignia, device or representation used as, or which is in the nature of an announcement, advertisement or attraction. 
SIGN AREA: The entire face of a sign, including the advertising surface and any framing, trim or molding but not including the supporting structure unless such structure obviously is designed to be part of the sign. 
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM: An electrical generation or fluid heating system composed of a combination of both solar panels and solar energy equipment. 

Section 9.02 
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, ROOF-MOUNTED: A solar energy system that is installed upon or is part of the roof of a building or structure located on the subject property. Solar energy systems integrated as awnings or attached to the roofs of porches, sheds, carports and covered parking structures also fall under this distinction. 
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, GROUND MOUNTED: A solar energy system that is mounted directly on the ground by a series of supports that is not used for any other purposes, including shelter of any kind. 
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA): the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. Special flood hazard areas are determined utilizing the base flood elevations (BFE) provided on the flood profiles in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for a community. Base flood elevations provided on a Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) are only approximate (rounded up or down) and should be verified with the BFEs published in the FIS for a specific location. Special flood hazard areas include, but are not necessarily limited to, the land shown as Zones A, A1-30, AE, AO and AH and the coastal high-hazard areas shown as Zones V, V1-30 and VE on a FIRM. The SFHA is also called the "area of special flood hazard." The Special Flood Hazard Area may overlap with the Flood Plain Zone; however, for regulatory purposes, the more restrictive shall apply. 
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: Specified anatomical areas includes any of the following: (1) less than completely covered and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areolae; or (2) human male genitals in a discernably turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: Specified sexual activities includes any of the following: (1) the fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breasts; (2) sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated intercourse, oral copulation or sodomy; (3) masturbation, actual or simulated; or (4) excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities described in this definition. 
STREET LINE: The dividing line between the street and the lot. 
STORY: That portion of a building between any floor and the ceiling or roof above it and includes those basements used for a principal use. 
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected which is located on the ground or attached to something located on the ground. 
TIMBERING: The cumulative removal of more than ten (10) percent (10%) of the total number of living trees larger than six inches (6") in diameter at breast height (4.5 feet above grade). 
TRAILER, RESIDENTIAL HAULING: A hauling trailer intended for personal use stored on the residential property of the owner or user. 
TRAILER, COMMERCIAL HAULING: A hauling trailer used to carry or store goods and/or equipment for commercial delivery, service, construction, and/or sales stored on the commercial property of the owner or user. 
TRAILER, COMMERCIAL TRACTOR TYPE: An enclosed hauling trailer used primarily to carry large loads over the road by tractor trailer operators. 
TRAILER, RECREATIONAL HAULING: Any type of trailer used to transport and/or store personal recreational vehicles. 
142 

Section 9.02 
TRANSFER STATION: A facility for the collection and temporary storage of junk or waste for future transfer to another facility for processing or ultimate disposal. 
UTILITY USE: Uses, structures and equipment necessary to provide the community with electricity, cable television, telephone and other communication service, water, gas and other similar community needs whether or not they are owned and/or operated by a public, quasi-public or private company. 
WAREHOUSE/WAREHOUSING: A building primarily used for the storage of goods and materials. 
WHOLESALE TRADE: Establishments or places of business primarily engaged in selling merchandise to retailers; to industrial, commercial, institutional, or professional business users; to other wholesalers; or acting as agents or brokers and buying merchandise for, or selling merchandise to, such individuals or companies. 
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITY: Antennas, telecommunications equipment, monopoles, lattice towers communications towers, and equipment sheds and cabinets used together in conjunction with the provision of wireless communication services. Wireless telecommunication services shall be limited to cellular communication services, personal communication services, paging, radio and television broadcasting. 
YARD, FRONT: An open, unoccupied space extending the full width of the lot and situated between the street line and in the case of corner lots, the front yard shall be considered to extend along all streets. 
YARD, REAR: An open space on the same lot with a main building, unoccupied, except as herein permitted, extending the full length of the lot and situated between the rear line of the lot and the rear line of the building, projected to the side lines of the lot. 
YARD, SIDE: An open and unoccupied space on a lot and extending from the rear line of the front yard to the front line of the rear yard. 


Section 9.02 
YARD, MINIMUM SETBACK, FRONT: The minimum required distance from the front lot line to a building, structure, or use. 
YARD, MINIMUM SETBACK, REAR: The minimum required distance from the rear lot line to a building, structure, or use. 
YARD, MINIMUM SETBACK, SIDE: The minimum required distance from the side lot line to a building, structure, or use. 

144 
Section 10.01 



Article 10. APPENDICES 
Section 10.01 Appendix A – Site Plan Checklist 
SITE PLAN REQUIREMENTS AND CHECKLIST EFFECTIVE December 1, 2010 
Site Plan Requirements: All site plans shall bear the seal and signature of a registered land surveyor, professional engineer, architect, and/or landscape architect as appropriate to the specific proposal. Storm drainage for roof areas, parking lots, driveways and site drainage shall be prepared by a professional engineer in compliance with 
... ....’. ....G..... ....... ... ......... ..... ...G.. ...... ........ ... ... ...G.... .. ... ....G..... 
drainage plan in accordance with the Manual. An asterisk delineates that an item is required to be shown in tabular form within a Zoning Data Table. 
( ) 1. 	All site plans shall be prepared to Class A-2 Survey standards and bear the original seal and signature of a Land Surveyor licensed in the State of Connecticut. The Commission may waive this requirement if it finds that the proposed modification to an existing site plan is minor in nature and will not have an adverse effect on the site and/or adjacent properties. 
( ) 2. 	Names of developer and property owner. 
( ) 3. 	Street address of the property. 
( ) 4. 	Property lines and building lines. 
( ) 5. 	North point (arrow). 
( ) 6*. 	Zoning districts. 
( ) 7*. 	Property setback (*required and provided). 
() 8. Sidewalks. 
( ) 9. Curb cut, existing and/or proposed. 
( ) 10. Existing & proposed contours or spot elevations at no more than 5' intervals. 
( ) 11. Any existing buildings or structures. 
( ) 12. Proposed buildings or structures with dimensions, building area and number of stories. 
( ) 13. A note indicating the building use including the number of employees. 
( ) 14*. Lot area and dimensions (*required and provided). 
( ) 15. Inland wetland boundaries, if applicable. 
( ) 16. Soil types. 
( ) 17. Location of areas designated on the State of CT Natural Diversity Database Map. If applicable, 

provide documentation from appropriate authority that due consideration has been given to endangered species or species of special concern in accordance with DEP recommendations. 
Section 10.01 
( ) 18. 	Soil erosion and sediment control plan including a narrative detailing methods of installation, maintenance and emergency contact information. 
( ) 19. 	Limits of existing or proposed streets, curbs and sidewalks. 
( ) 20. 	Limits of any easements or rights of way, existing or proposed. 
( ) 21. 	A stormwater management plan prepared by a professional engineer which includes the location and elevation of existing and proposed drainage structures and elements developed in accordance with the Plainville Low Impact Development and Stormwater Management Design Manual. 
( ) 22. 	Location and elevation of all existing and proposed utilities – electricity, gas, water, sanitary sewers, storm drainage system, fire hydrants and fire alarm boxes. 
( ) 23*. 	Location of existing and proposed parking and loading spaces, clearly delineated, the total number of parking spaces on the lot in strict accord with the Zoning Regulations (*required and provided). 
( ) 24*. 	Internal and external landscape requirements for off-street parking areas in strict accord with the Zoning Regulations (*required and provided). 
( ) 25. 	Buffers and screening in strict accord with the Zoning Regulations. 
( ) 26*. 	Landscaping in required front yard in strict accord with the Zoning Regulations (*required and provided). 
( ) 27. 	The location, type and orientation of existing and/or proposed external lighting. For parking lots in excess of 10 vehicles where new lighting is proposed, provide a photometric lighting plan. 
( ) 28. 	Outside storage areas and refuse areas visually screened from adjoining properties by trees, shrubs and/or a fence. 
( ) 29. 	Existing and/or proposed sign locations, height, dimensions and type of illumination. 
( ) 30. 	Location Map showing the site and surrounding area at a Scale of 1" = 600'. 
• 	
The Planning and Zoning Commission may require additional technical assistance during its review of an application. The expense of the technical assistance shall be estimated by the Commission. The applicant shall deposit 150% of the estimated expense of this technical assistance with the Commission or its designated agent prior to the review of the application. 

• 	
Mylars are required for all Site Plan, Site Plan Modification, Subdivision, Resubdivision and Special Exception approvals where plans must be filed. Mylars must be endorsed by the Chairperson of the Planning and ...... .GG...... ... ..... .. ... .... ....’. ....... .. ... ......... .. ... .......ted agent, within 90 days of the date of approval of the plan. 

• 	
The Planning and Zoning Commission may require an applicant post a performance bond to guarantee the completion of the required and approved site improvements. 

• 	
The Planning and Zoning Commission may require the submission of a Traffic Impact Study if it finds this type of study is necessary to assess the impact of traffic generated by a proposal. 


146 
Section 10.02 
Section 10.02 Appendix B – Text Amendments by Date 

Approved September 28, 2010, effective December 1, 2010 
Repeal  Plainville zoning regulations with amendments to January 1, 2010  
Adopt  reorganized Plainville zoning regulation with low impact development design criteria effective  
December 1, 2010  


Approved May 24, 2011, effective June 6, 2011 
Section 1.02. A.3.7 remove philanthropic and fraternal uses from SE uses Section 1.02. A.4.4 regulate heavy traffic generators Section 1.01. B.4.1 accessory uses to be determined by commission Section 1.01. B.4.3 define campers as recreational vehicles Section 1.03. B (4) establish setbacks for decks and pools Section 1.03. B (5) permit green houses for educational uses Section 1.04. A.6.d establish maximum number of rear lots to be served by a single driveway Section 1.04. A.7 require maintenance and access agreement be filed by the applicant for approved rear lots Section 1.04. G clarify requirements for trailers and recreational vehicles in R zones Section 2.02. A.13 remove sale and storage of mobile homes from list of permitted uses Section 2.02. A.4.2 require bars and taverns to obtain a special exception Section 2.02. A.4.5 permit conference centers in TP Zone Section 2.02. A.5.3 redefine health club Section 2.02. A.5.4 redefine health fitness club Section 2.02. A.5.6 clarify accessory use of amusement games and/or machines Section 2.02. A.7.4 clarify ..........’. business and storage yard Section 2.02. A.7.5 clarify machine shop use Section 2.02. A.8.3 & 4 require a special exception for self-storage use in GI and QI zones Section 2.02. A.12.1 remove gas stations from list of permitted uses in the CC zone; permit in GC by SE Section 2.02. A.12.2 remove auto uses from list of permitted uses in the CC zone; permit in GC by SE 
“ remove boat sales and repairs from section entirely, redefine as rec. vehicle Section 2.02.A. 12.6 clarify type of trailers permitted, where, and by what process Section 2.02.A. 12.7 include camper within definition of recreational vehicle Section 2.02. A.13.1 remove single family dwellings as permitted use in CC and GC zones Section 2.02. A.13.2 limit # of efficiency units in GC zones to 25% of total development residential units Section 2.02. A. 14.4 regulate heavy traffic generators Section 2.04 A clarify requirements for drive through establishments Section 2.04. C limit # of efficiency units in GC zones to 25% of total development residential units Section 2.04. J add controlling standards for auto and rec. vehicle sales and service Section 2.04. K add text guiding new regulated use: heavy traffic generators Section 4.04.3 add and clarify controlling standards for required screening in business zones Section 4.04 add and clarify controlling standards for top soil, sand and gravel operations Section 4.01. C add section requiring sidewalks and access for pedestrians Section 7.02. A.1.a revisions to coincide with changes made under Sections 2.02.A.13.1 Section 9.02 define and redefine terms to support and coincide with changes made above 

Approved April 24, 2012, effective April 24, 2012 
Section 2.02. B.3.1 – 3.3 revise to permit ancillary retail for offsite customers in an RI Zone Section 2.04. D revise to reflect site plan approval required in lieu of special exception 

Approved August 14, 2012, effective August 21, 2012 
Section 9.02 revise current definition of recreational vehicles stipulating size limits for campers 
add definition of luxury motor coach Section 2.02. A.12.6 add luxury motor coach sales and service as permitted by SE in an RI Zone Section 2.04. L add new section 2.04.L specifying use regulations for luxury motor coach sales and service Section 1.04. G revise storage standards for items regulated under this section -add luxury motor coach 
Approved April 9, 2013, effective May 1, 2013 
Section 10.02 
Section 9.02 	revise current definition of accessory apartment add definition of wood burning furnace add definition of commercial motor vehicle add definition of low impact home occupation add definition of moderate impact home occupation 
Section 1.03. B 	revise detached and attached accessory structure/garage regulations-size, placement & standards 
Section 2.04. C 	revise commercial/multifamily mixed use in CC and GC zones-1 & 2 bedrooms vs. 2 % 3 room units, clarify intent, restrict efficiency apartment to 15% of residential units on property in GC zone 
Section 2.02. A.13 revise use tables citing commercial/multifamily mixed use Section 1.04. I add new section permitting low and medium impact home occupations Section 1.02. B.1 revise use tables citing low and medium impact home occupations Section 1.04. H add new section to regulate commercial motor vehicle storage in residential zones Section 1.02. B.3 revise use tables citing commercial motor vehicle storage in residential zones Section 4.05 revise fence requirements in all zones for added clarity and aesthetic Section 4.12 add new section prohibiting outdoor wood burning furnaces 

Approved May 28, 2013, effective June 7, 2013 
Section 2.02. A.2 revise use tables citing service-type uses to include dog day care facilities Section 2.04. M add new section regulating dog day care facilities in commercial and industrial zones Section 9.02 add definition of dog day care facility 

Approved June 11, 2013, effective July 1, 2013 
Section 4.07 add section to permit the projection of certain architectural features into required yards. Section 4.01. A.2 revise table to reduce required parking ratio for industrial, manufacturing, wholesale, warehousing, and distribution uses Section 6.02 repeal Section 6.02 Nonconforming Uses and adopt new Section 6.02 Nonconforming Structures 
and Uses Section 4.09 revise lighting section to address light glare Section 9.02 add definition of farming Section 1.04. E revise section to prohibit roosters, to consider the keeping of four or more rabbits to be a farming 
operation, and to clarify that no livestock may be sold at permitted farm stands. Section 9.02 revise definition of lot, corner; add definition of lot, rear Section 4.02 revise section to clarify frontage in calculating allowable signage; to clarify projecting signs; to 
clarify canopy signs; to clarify sign prohibitions. Section 2.02. A revise type of approval required for specific uses in GI and RI Zones Section 2.04. B clarify approved adaptive reuses in GI Zones 
Approved January 14, 2014, effective February 2, 2014 
Section 2.04 	clarify approved adaptive reuses in GI Zones 

Approved January 28, 2014, effective February 21, 2014 
Section 2.02.A.6.4&5 clarify appropriate zones where medical marijuana facilities can be located Section 2.04. N location and use standards for medical marijuana facilities Section 9.02 define medical marijuana dispensary and production facilities 

Approved March 11, 2014, effective April 4, 2014 
Section 2.02. A.7.8 add new use: recycling and salvage facilities Section 2.04. O use regulations for recycling and salvage facilities Section 9.02 revise definition of junk 
revise definition of junkyard revise definition of salvage yard; change to salvage facility add definition for recycling facility add definition for transfer station 
148 
Section 10.02 

Approved May 27, 2014, effective June 20, 2014 
Section 1.04. D 	define home site clarify permitted accessory uses waive open space requirement for lots of two acres or less define develop new administrative standards to deal with nonconforming uses 

Approved October 14, 2014, effective November 7, 2014 
Section 2.04. C.1 	permit HC units on first floor 

Approved April 28, 2015, effective May 22, 2015 
Section 2.02. A.13.4 add new use: Redevelopment Design District Section 2.04. P use regulations for Redevelopment Design District Section 9.02 define Redevelopment Design District 

Approved July 14, 2015, effective August 7, 2015 
Section 4.01. A.8 repeal section Section 4.04.2 revise to clarify required interior landscaping Section 4.06 repeal Section 4.06 Removal of Top Soil Sand and Gravel and adopt new Section 4.06 Removal and 
Deposition of Earth Material 

Approved January 24, 2017, effective February 2, 2017 
Section 1.02 B allow solar installations in residential zones Section 1.03 B clarify lot requirements Section 1.04 D Clarify density in GC and CC zones Section 2.02 B allow solar installation in business zones Section 6.05 add regulations for solar energy Section 9.02 add definition for solar energy system 
add definition for solar energy system, roof-mounted add definition for solar energy system, ground mounted 

Approved March 13, 2018, Effective March 22, 2018 
Section 1.04 F Accessory Apartments to allow medical apartments Section 2.04 M Dog Day Care Facilities to Dog and Cat Care Facilities Section 3.01 Flood Plain Zone Regulations Section 9.02 add definition for Flood Plain Zone 
Add definition for Special Flood Hazard Area 
Section 10.03 
Section 10.03 Appendix C – BY LAWS 

BY-LAWS OF THE PLAINVILLE 
TOWN PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION 

ARTICLE I -THE COMMISSION 
Section 1. Name of Commission. The name of the Commission shall be the Plainville Town Planning and Zoning Commission. 
ARTICLE II – OFFICERS 
Section 1. Officers. The officers of the Commission shall be a Chairman and a Secretary. 
Section 2. Chairman. The Chairman shall preside at all meetings of the Commission. Except as otherwise authorized by resolution of the Commission, the Chairman shall sign all contracts, and other instruments made by the Commission. At each meeting, the Chairman shall submit such recommendations and information as he may consider proper concerning the business affairs and policies of the Commission. 
At any regular or special meeting or hearing in the absence, incapacity or disqualification of the Chairman, a Chairman Pro Tempore shall be appointed by the Commission from among the members of the Commission present. 
Section 3. Secretary. The Secretary shall keep the records of the Commission, shall act as Secretary of the meetings of the Commission and record all votes, and shall keep a record of the proceedings of the Commission in a minute book to be kept for such purposes, and shall perform all duties incident to his office. Public Notices, voted by the Commission or required by laws of the State of Connecticut shall be prepared and signed by the Secretary, or, in his absence, by a member so designated by the Commission. 
150 
At any regular or special meeting, or hearing in the absence of the Secretary, a Secretary Pro Tempore shall be appointed by the Commission from among the members of the Commission present. 
Section 4. Duties of Commissioners. Commissioners shall perform such duties as are incumbent upon them by reason of their election to any office, and shall perform such other duties and functions as may from time to time be required by the Commission or the by-laws, or which may arise by reason of their appointment to serve on committees functioning within the Commission or in cooperation with other persons or groups. Section 5. Election. The Chairman and Secretary shall be elected at the annual meeting of the Commission from among the members of the Commission, and shall hold office for one year or until their successors are elected and qualified. Section 6. Vacancies. Should the office of Chairman or Secretary become vacant, the Commission shall elect a successor from its membership at the next meeting, and such election shall be for the unexpired term of said office. 
Section 7. Appearance, Representation & Disqualification. No member of this Commission shall appear for or represent any person, firm or corporation or other entity in any matter pending before this Commission or the Zoning Board of Appeals in the Town of Plainville. 
No member of this Commission shall participate in the hearing or decision of the Commission upon any matter in which he is directly or indirectly interested in a personal or financial sense. In the event of such disqualification, such fact shall be entered on the records of the Commission and the elector chosen by the remaining Commission members present shall act as a member of the Commission in the hearing and determination of the particular matter or matters in which the disqualification arose. 
Section 8. Disbursement of Monies. The Chairman shall sign all orders for the payment of monies under the direction of the Commission except as otherwise authorized by resolution of the Commission. The Commission may be resolution designate one or more Commissioners to countersign such orders and may from time to time qualify, change or cancel any such designation. 
Section 9. Annual Budget. An annual budget shall be prepared by the Budget Committee for adoption by the Commission. The Budget Committee shall be comprised of the Chairman and two members of the Commission appointed by the Chairman at the Annual Meeting. The proposed budget shall be submitted to the Commission at the last regular meeting in January of each year for adoption by the Commission except as otherwise authorized by resolution of the Commission. The Budget Committee shall represent the Commission in conferences and negotiations concerning the budget, subject to approval by the Commission. 
Section 10. Annual Report. The Chairman shall prepare an Annual Report to be submitted to the Commission before July 31, of each year, except as otherwise authorized by resolution of the Commission. The Chairman may appoint a committee from among the members of the Commission to assist in preparation of the Annual Report. 
Section 11. Personnel. The Commission may from time to time employ such personnel as it deems necessary to exercise its powers, duties and functions as prescribed by the laws of the State of Connecticut and the Town Charter, as amended. The Appointment, duties, term and compensation of such personnel shall be determined by the Commission subject to the Town Charter, as amended. 
ARTICLE III – MEETINGS 
Section 1. General Provisions. Regular meetings of the Commission shall be held at such time and place as may be originally designated or subsequently changed by resolution adopted by the Commission at any regular or special meeting. All meetings shall be held at the Plainville Town Hall in the absence of the specific designation of some other meeting place in any such resolution. In the event that the date of any annual or regular meeting as provided in any such resolution shall be held on the next succeeding secular day at the place and time designated in the resolution. 
Section 2. Annual Meetings. Annual meetings of the Commission shall be held without notice for the purpose of electing officers and for the conduct of such other business as may come before the meeting at its first meeting in January of each year. 
Section 3. Regular Meetings. Regular meetings of the Commission shall be determined by resolution of the Commission for the transaction of the business of the Commission. 
Section 4. Special Meetings. The Chairman of the Commission may, when he deems it expedient, and shall, upon the written request of three Commissioners call a special meeting of the Commission for the purpose of transacting any business designated in the call.  The call for a special meeting shall be prepared by the Secretary and delivered to any Commissioner or mailed to his business or home address at least two days prior to the date of such meeting. At such special meeting, no business shall be considered other than as designated in the service, but if all the Commissioners are present at a special meeting, any and all business may be transacted at such special meeting. 
Section 5. Quorum. The powers of the Commission shall be vested in the Commissioners thereof in office from time to time. Four Commissioners shall constitute a quorum for the purpose of conducting its business and exercising its powers and for all other purposes, except as otherwise provided in the General Statutes and Charter, as amended, but a smaller number may meet and adjourn from time to time until a quorum is obtained. At least twelve hours' notice of the time and place of holding such adjourned meeting shall be given to all Commissioners who were not present at the meeting from which adjournment was taken. 
152 
When a quorum is in attendance, action may be taken by the Commission only upon a vote of a majority of all of the members of the Commission, except as provided by Section 8-3 of the General Statutes, 1958 Revision, as amended. 
Section 6. Order of Business. At the regular meetings of the Commission the following shall be the order of business: 
1. 	
Roll Call 

2. 	
Reading and approval of the minutes of the previous regular meeting and any intervening special meetings 

3. 	
Bills and communications 

4. 	
Report of Town Manager, Town Engineer, Building and Zoning, Inspector, Consultant and Development Coordinator. 

5. 	
Reports of Committees 

6. 	
Unfinished business 

7. 	
New business 

8. 	
Adjournment 


Section 7. Manner of Voting. All members present shall vote on every question except that a member may refrain from voting if he has moved for postponement of the question for further study and the motion for postponement has been lost. 
The vote on all resolutions and motions shall be by roll call, and each resolution and motion shall be entered in full upon the minutes of the meeting, together with the ayes and nays thereon. 
Section 8. Matters before the Commission. Matters before the Commission shall be presented to the Commission in a manner, including properly completed forms, as may be prescribed by resolution of the Commission from time to time. 
ARTICLE IV -HEARING 
Section 1. Time and Place. The time and place of hearings shall be set by resolution at any regular or special meeting of the Commission. 
Section 2. Procedure. Hearings shall be conducted by the Chairman in accordance with a procedure originally designated or subsequently changed by the Commission. 
Section 3. Transcript. A transcript of each hearing shall be prepared by the Secretary and recorded in the minute book. 
ARTICLE V -PARLIAMENTARY AUTHORITY 

Parliamentary Authority. The rules contained in Roberts Rules of Order, revised, shall govern the Commission in all cases to which they are not inconsistent with the by-laws of the Commission, provisions of the Town Charter or the laws of the State of Connecticut. 
ARTICLE VI -AMENDMENTS 
Amendments to By-laws. Any amendment to these by-laws shall be submitted in writing at any meeting of the Commission and may be adopted by the affirmative vote of four members at a subsequent meeting of the Commission. 
154 

TOWN OF PLAINVILLE
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Adopted June 22, 2004
Effective February 7, 2014
Plainville Subdivision Regulations
2
Revisions
12/1/10 – See file for specific detail.
1. Reference New LID Stormwater Manual under §11.00
2. Revise Street Requirements and Design Specifications under §9.00
3. Revise Open Space Requirements under §5.00 and §6.00.
07/23/12 – Reformatted
02/07/14 – See specific file for detail.
1. Natural Diversity Database under – III §2.00 § § 2.02
2. Public Hearing Sign – III - §3.00 § § 3.03
3. Other Agency Comments – III §3.00 § §3.05
4. Post Approval Process and Financial Guarantees – III - §4.00 and §5.00
5. Rear Lots – IV §3.00 § §3.05
6. Open Space – IV - §5.00 - § §5.02
7. Recreational Open Space – IV - §7.00 § §7.01
8. Fee In Lieu of Open Space – IV - §8.00 § §8.03 and § §8.04
9. Proposed Street Stub – IV - §9.00 § § 9.01 and § § 9.10
10. Sidewalk Linkages – IV - §9.00 § § 9.12
11. Driveway Aprons – IV - §9.00 § § 9.14
12. Engineering and Inspection – IV - §9.00 §§9.15 §15.00
Reserved
Plainville Subdivision Regulations
3
Table of Contents
I. General Provisions ....................................................................................................................... 4
1.00 Authority .................................................................................................................................................... 4
2.00 Purpose ....................................................................................................................................................... 4
3.00 Jurisdiction: .............................................................................................................................................. 5
4.00 Interpretation, Conflict, and Separability: ................................................................................... 5
5.00 Modifications and Waivers: ............................................................................................................... 6
6.00 Enforcement, Violations, and Penalties: ....................................................................................... 6
II. Definitions ....................................................................................................................................... 7
III. Procedures ...................................................................................................................................... 9
1.00 Preliminary Discussion with Commission: ................................................................................. 9
2.00 Application Requirements: ................................................................................................................ 9
3.00 Consideration and Action: ............................................................................................................... 11
4.00 Post-Approval Procedures: ............................................................................................................. 12
5.00 Financial Guarantee: .......................................................................................................................... 16
IV. Design Standards ......................................................................................................................... 18
1.00 Predevelopment: ................................................................................................................................. 18
2.00 Identification and Conservation of Natural and Cultural Features: .............................. 19
3.00 Residential Subdivision Design:.................................................................................................... 20
4.00 Commercial and Industrial Subdivision Design: ................................................................... 21
5.00 Open Space and Recreation: ........................................................................................................... 21
6.00 Open Space Subdivisions: ................................................................................................................ 25
7.00 Improvement of Open Space Parcels:......................................................................................... 26
8.00 Fee in Lieu of Open Space: ............................................................................................................... 27
9.00 Streets: ..................................................................................................................................................... 28
10.00 Sanitary Sewers: .................................................................................................................................. 36
11.00 Storm Water Management: ............................................................................................................. 37
12.00 Landscaping Standards: ................................................................................................................... 37
13.00 Off-Subdivision Improvements: .................................................................................................... 39
14.00 Individual Lot Requirements: ........................................................................................................ 40
15.00 Engineering and Inspection: ........................................................................................................... 41
Plainville Subdivision Regulations
4
I. General Provisions
1.00 Authority
These regulations are adopted pursuant to the authority delegated to the Town
under Title 8, Chapter 126 of the General Statutes of Connecticut (CGS), as amended.
2.00 Purpose
These regulations are adopted for the following purposes:
01. To protect and provide for the public health, safety and general welfare of the
Town;
02. To guide the future growth and development of the Town in accordance with
the Plan of Conservation and Development;
03. To provide for adequate light, air and privacy; to secure safety from fire, flood
and other danger; and to prevent overcrowding of the land and undue
congestion of population;
04. To protect the character and the social and economic stability of all parts of the
Town and to encourage the orderly and beneficial development of all parts of
the Town;
05. To guide public and private policy and action in order to provide adequate and
efficient transportation, water, sanitary facilities, schools, parks and other
public requirements and facilities;
06. To provide the most beneficial relationship between the uses of land and
buildings and the circulation of traffic throughout the community, so that
proposed streets shall be in harmony with existing or proposed streets,
especially in regard to safe intersections and be so arranged and of such width
as to provide an adequate and convenient system for present and prospective
traffic needs;
07. To establish reasonable standards of design and procedures for subdivisions
and resubdivisions in order to further the orderly layout and use of land; and
to ensure proper legal descriptions and monumenting of subdivided land;
08. To ensure that public facilities are available and will have a sufficient capacity
to serve the proposed subdivision;
09. To prevent the pollution of air, wetlands and watercourses; to assure the
adequacy of drainage facilities; to safeguard the water table; and to encourage
the wise use and management of natural resources throughout the community
Plainville Subdivision Regulations
5
in order to preserve the integrity, stability and beauty of the community and
the value of the land;
10. To preserve the natural beauty and topography of the Town and to ensure
appropriate development with regard to these natural features;
11. To provide for open space and open space corridors through the most efficient
design and layout of the land while preserving the density of land as
established in the Town’s zoning regulations.
3.00 Jurisdiction:
These Regulations shall apply to the subdivision and resubdivision of land, as herein
defined, located within the Town. No subdivision or resubdivision of land shall be
made by any person, firm or corporation until an application for such subdivision or
resubdivision has been submitted to and approved by the Planning and Zoning
Commission, and a map thereof has been endorsed by the Commission and filed by
the applicant in the Office of the Town Clerk.
4.00 Interpretation, Conflict, and Separability:
01. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of these regulations shall
be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the purposes for
which these regulations are promulgated.
02. These regulations are not intended to interfere with, abrogate or annul any
other ordinance, rule or regulations, statute or provision of law. Where any
provision of these regulations imposes restrictions different from those
imposed by any other provisions of these regulations or any other ordinance,
rule or regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more
restrictive or impose higher standards shall control.
03. If any part or provision of these regulations is adjudged invalid by a court of
law, such judgment shall not affect or impair the validity of the remainder of
these regulations.
Plainville Subdivision Regulations
6
5.00 Modifications and Waivers:
01. The Commission may require such modifications to a plan of subdivision or
resubdivision as it deems necessary to fulfill the requirements of these
regulations;
02. The requirements of these regulations may be waived by six affirmative votes
of the full Commission when it is demonstrated that strict compliance with
such regulations will cause an exceptional difficulty or unusual hardship. The
Commission shall not grant a waiver unless it finds the following conditions
are met:
1. The property for which the waiver is sought is uniquely affected by these
regulations;
2. Physical features of the property or its location cause exceptional difficulty
or unusual hardship in meeting the requirements of these regulations;
3. The granting of a waiver will not have a significantly adverse effect upon
adjacent property or the public health and safety and will not compromise
the fair application of these regulations;
4. The granting of the waiver will not be in conflict with the Plan of
Conservation and Development;
5. Where it is proposed to vary any engineering standard contained in these
regulations or the Municipal Ordinances, a favorable report from the Town
Engineer has been received.
6.00 Enforcement, Violations, and Penalties:
01. Enforcement: It shall be the duty of the Commission and its agent to enforce
the provisions of these regulations;
02. Violations and Penalties: Any person, firm, or corporation making any
subdivision or transferring or conveying any lot within a subdivision after
December 29, 1953, which subdivision and/or lot(s) has/have not been
approved by the Commission and recorded in the Plainville land records, shall
be subject to such fines as provided in CGS Chapter 126.
Plainville Subdivision Regulations
7
II. Definitions
• Commission: the Plainville Planning and Zoning Commission;
• Improvement: any change or alteration to the existing conditions of the
subdivision site for the purpose of complying with these regulations, or any
approval granted hereunder. As used in these regulations, improvements include,
but are not limited to: construction and installation of roadways, paved streets,
curbs, gutters, sidewalks, utilities, street signs, monuments, shade trees, drainage
facilities, erosion and sedimentation control measures, open space or recreational
facilities, earth filling or removal, seeding and grading, or similar construction work
depicted on any final plan or required by these regulations.
• Lot: a parcel of land established in an approved subdivision or otherwise as
permitted by law and intended to be used, developed, or built upon as a recognized
unit of land area;
• Open space: open space shall include but shall not be limited to land left in its
natural, undisturbed state; land used for agricultural purposes or containing
important farmland soils as defined in a report entitled, “Important Farmlands-
Hartford County Connecticut, United States Dept. of Agriculture, Soil Conservation
Service;” land areas and facilities for passive recreation; and land areas for wildlife
habitat, groundwater recharge, scenic preservation and the like; which may serve
one or more of the following functions:
?? Serve as an open space corridor linking undeveloped areas;
?? Serve as wildlife habitat;
?? Serve as a land use buffer between otherwise incompatible uses;
?? Provide visual relief to the built-up landscape;
?? Preserve a natural geological or scenic area;
?? Protect natural resources, historic and/or cultural areas;
?? Protect drainage ways, flood plain and wetland areas;
?? Allow for the development of park and recreation facilities;
?? Stabilize land values on adjacent properties and the Town as a whole;
?? Define and control development.
• Resubdivision: a change in a map of an approved or recorded subdivision or
resubdivision if such change affects any street layout shown on such map, affects
any area reserved thereon for public use, or diminishes the size of any lot shown
thereon and creates an additional building lot, if any of the lots shown thereon have
been conveyed after the approval or recording of such map.
• Street, public: any travel way created, dedicated, and maintained for use by the
public;
• Street, private: any travel way created and maintained primarily for use by
members of a homeowners association or other group of landowners, which travel
way may also be open to public use;
• Subdivision: the division of a tract, or parcel of land, into three (3) or more parts or
lots for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or building development
expressly excluding development for municipal, conservation or agricultural
purposes, and includes resubdivision.
Plainville Subdivision Regulations
8
• Town: the Town of Plainville;
• Wetlands and watercourses: those lands so identified on the Official Inland
Wetlands and Watercourses Map of the Town of Plainville, as may be amended and
those lands that may be regulated under the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Act.
• Zoning regulations: the Plainville Zoning Regulations in effect when an application
for subdivision is received by the Commission.
Plainville Subdivision Regulations
9
III. Procedures
1.00 Preliminary Discussion with Commission:
01. Applicants may request an informal review by the Commission prior to
application submission. The purpose of the concept plan is to provide
Commission input in the formative stages of subdivision design.
02. Applicants seeking concept plan review shall request such review in writing to
the Commission at least 14 calendar days in advance of the Commission
meeting at which the informal review is scheduled.
03. The applicant shall not be bound by any concept plan for which review is
requested, nor shall the Commission be bound by any comments offered
during such review.
2.00 Application Requirements:
01. Application Submission and Official Receipt Time Frames: Applications shall
be officially received only at regularly scheduled meetings of the Commission.
Applicants shall submit applications to the Planning Department at least 14
calendar days prior to a regular Commission meeting for the application to be
placed on the agenda for that meeting.
02. Content: An application for subdivision shall include the following items:
1. Application form: A written application for approval of the plan, on the
form provided by the Planning Department, signed by the applicant and the
record owner.
2. Application fee: An amount set by and payable to the Town of Plainville.
3. Site Development Plan: The Site Development Plan shall be drawn to a
scale of not less than 1:1200 (1" = 100') and not greater than 1:480 (1" =
40') on a sheet size of 24" x 36". The plan shall show existing conditions
and the proposed layout of lots, streets and improvements for the proposed
subdivision and all contiguous land that may be subdivided in the future, in
order to allow the Commission to complete a general planning review of
the proposed subdivision including its relationship to the future
subdivision of contiguous land. Six (6) blue or black line prints shall be
submitted. The plan shall be prepared by and shall bear the name and seal
of a land surveyor and/or professional engineer licensed in Connecticut
and shall show at least the following information:
a. Title of the subdivision, which shall not duplicate the title of any
previous subdivision in the Town of Plainville.
b. Name of the owner of the land to be subdivided, and name of applicant.
c. Date, graphic scale, north point, key map at 1" = 1000'.
Plainville Subdivision Regulations
10
d. Existing and proposed property and street lines; indication of adjoining
property lines and street lines for a distance of 200 feet; and the names
of all adjacent subdivisions and/or property owners.
e. Existing and proposed watercourses, wetlands, and upland review
areas; conservation areas; easements and rights-of-way; base flood
elevation data; each map sheet depicting lands identified by a certified
soil scientist as watercourses or wetlands shall be signed by the soil
scientist responsible for their delineations.
f. Existing and proposed contours at an interval not exceeding two (2)
feet based on field or aerial survey and National Geodetic Vertical
Datum (NGVD) 1929, with spot elevations as warranted. Town, State or
U.S. bench marks shall be noted on the plan.
g. Proposed lots and lot numbers.
h. Existing permanent buildings and structures.
i. Principal wooded areas, and location of any specimen trees.
j. Ledge outcrops and existing stone walls and fences within the
subdivision.
k. Dimensions on all proposed property and street lines, area of each lot
and of areas not included in lots, and the total acreage of land included
in the subdivision.
l. Proposed width of all streets, rights-of-way and easements; the
proposed width of pavement; and proposed street names.
m. Existing and proposed monuments; any municipal boundary line, and
zoning district boundaries, if present.
n. Existing sidewalks within 500' of the proposed subdivision, and
proposed sidewalks.
o. Existing and proposed storm drains, catch basins, manholes, ditches,
watercourses, headwalls, sidewalks, gutters, curbs and other structures;
and existing and proposed water mains, sanitary sewers and related
facilities.
p. Existing and proposed open space for parks, playgrounds, stream
protection and other purposes.
q. The location of any test holes, test pits and borings.
r. The location of existing and proposed utilities.
s. A phasing plan, if applicable.
t. An erosion and sediment control plan prepared in accordance with the
2002 Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment control, as
may be amended.
u. Proposed landscaping.
v. Plans and profiles for all proposed streets and utilities;
w. Details and specifications for all structural elements included on the
plan and for all site improvements.
Plainville Subdivision Regulations
11
x. Area of proposed development shown on the “State of Connecticut
Natural Diversity Database Map”, listing threatened and special concern
species and significant natural communities. If impact is found, the
applicant shall request a review by the Department of Energy and
Environmental Protection in accordance with DEEP standards. Where
indicated, DEEP recommendations to conserve, preserve and/or protect
identified resources shall be considered in the design of the subdivision.
3.00 Consideration and Action:
01. Presence of wetlands and/or watercourses: If any part of the property which
is the subject of the application is designated inland wetlands and/or
watercourses or the proposed construction may affect land subject to such
regulations, the applicant shall file an application with the Plainville Inland
Wetlands and Watercourses Commission not later than the day of application
to the Planning and Zoning Commission. The Commission shall not take action
on the application until it has received a report from the Inland Wetlands and
Watercourses Commission.
02. Public hearings: Public hearings shall be held on all resubdivision applications.
The Commission may hold a public hearing on a subdivision application if the
Commission deems the application to be one of compelling public interest. In
either case, notice shall be provided in accordance with the Connecticut
General Statutes as amended. In addition, where a public hearing is required in
accordance with Connecticut General Statutes or these regulations, the applicant
shall post a sign giving notice of such hearing to be held at least fifteen (15) days in
advance of such hearing in conformity with approved specifications (available in
the Planning Office). The following requirements shall apply:
1. A signed, notarized affidavit must be submitted by the applicant on the day of
the hearing affirming compliance with these regulations.
2. Failure to post the required sign in accordance with the approved specifications
and within the prescribed timeframe will result in the application being
incomplete; the Commission may deny without prejudice, allow the applicant to
withdraw without prejudice, or agree by majority vote of sitting Commissioners
to postpone the hearing until appropriate notification is given; adequate
statutory timeframes must be considered.
3. Fees for an application that fails to meet these requirements shall not be
refunded or credited to any subsequent same or similar application.
03. Consideration: The Commission shall consider all comments on the proposed
subdivision or resubdivision offered by Town staff and by other Town
Departments, including the Plainville Police and Fire Departments. The
Commission shall determine regulatory compliance based on testimony
received.
1. On any application, the Planning and Zoning Commission may seek the advice
and opinion of other officials, boards, or commissions to assist it in evaluating
applications.
Plainville Subdivision Regulations
12
2. On any application, the Planning and Zoning Commission may retain an
engineer, architect, landscape architect, professional land use planner, or other
such technical expertise as it feels is necessary to review, comment, and guide
its deliberations on any application if it finds that the nature and intensity of the
proposed development may have a significant impact on the site and its
surrounding areas and that Town staff will not be able to complete a technical
review of an application in the time period prescribed by State Statute.
3. When the Commission determines such additional technical expertise is
required:
a. An estimate for the cost of those services shall be made by a qualified party.
b. The applicant shall deposit one hundred and fifty percent (150%) of that
estimated cost with the Commission.
c. Such payment shall be made prior to the review of the application.
d. Upon completion of the technical review and final action of the
Commission, the balance of remaining funds, if any, shall be reimbursed to
the applicant.
e. Applicants shall not be responsible for costs incurred for technical
assistance which exceed one hundred and fifty percent (150%) of the
estimate received by the Commission.
04. Action: The Commission shall approve, modify and approve, or deny an
application for subdivision or resubdivision within the timeframe prescribed
by the Connecticut General Statutes. The Commission may prescribe such
modifications to a plan as it deems necessary to bring the plan into compliance
with these regulations and/or the Zoning Regulations and/or to effect design
changes that the Commission judges will improve the layout of the subdivision;
the use or preservation of important site features; provisions for pedestrian,
bicycle, and/or vehicular circulation; the layout, type, and orientation of open
space in relation to the pattern of site development and continuity with off-site
open space and open space corridors; diminish adverse impacts on adjacent
properties; and/or promote neighborhood cohesion and sustainability.
4.00 Post-Approval Procedures:
01. Finalizing Approved Plans: Final plans shall be revised to conform to any
modifications required by the Commission prior to final endorsement by the
Commission.
02. Plan and Final Submittals
1. Following the Commission’s approval of subdivision plans, the applicant shall
submit to the Commission:
a. One (1) Mylar set of the approved plans, with the appropriate signature blocks
and any required modifications, and;
b. Three (3) paper sets of the approved plans, with any required modifications,
and;
c. One (1) electronic copy of drawings and data of the approved subdivision in
an approved electronic format (GIS) acceptable to the Planning Department.
Plainville Subdivision Regulations
13
2. Additional Submittals shall also be required, in a form satisfactory to the Town:
a. Any required grant(s) to the Town in a form ready for execution, and;
b. Any required easements for drainage, access, utility, or other purposes in a
form ready for execution, and;
c. A certificate of title indicating that any proposed conveyance to the Town is
free of encumbrances, and;
d. Evidence of the signatory’s authority to sign on behalf of the grantor.
3. Such grants or easements shall not be recorded on the land records until the
Subdivision Plan has been filed on the land records and until any necessary action
has been taken by any other appropriate Town agency or agencies.
03. Procedure for Recording. The Chairman or Secretary of the Commission shall sign
the approved plans and notify the applicant that they are ready to be recorded by the
applicant. Delivery of such plans to the applicant will be at the applicant’s expense.
04. Filing of Approved Plans. Once signed and authorized by the Commission, the
applicant shall file the signed set of the approved plans with the Town Clerk at the
applicant’s expense.
1. Unless otherwise provided by Connecticut General Statutes Section 8-25, as
amended, such plans shall be filed in the Town Clerk’s office within ninety (90)
days of the expiration of the appeal period under Connecticut General Statutes
Section 8-8, or in the case of an appeal, within ninety (90) days of the termination
of such appeal by dismissal, withdrawal or judgment in favor of the applicant.
2. The Commission may extend the time for such filing for up to two (2) additional
periods of ninety (90) days, and the approval shall remain valid until the
expiration of such extended time. The Commission shall not grant any request for
an extension which was submitted after the time for filing plans already expired.
3. In the event that any Subdivision Plan, when recorded, contains any changes not
approved or required by the Commission, the Plan shall be considered null and
void and the Commission may then file a notice with the Town Clerk voiding the
subdivision.
05. Modification of Approval. Any applicant requesting to modify an approved plan, or
any condition of approval, shall file a written request with the Commission, together
with the required fee.
1. The applicant shall state the reason why a modification is requested, and shall
describe any change in facts, circumstances or any unforeseen natural or technical
difficulties forming the basis for the request.
2. The Commission, in its sole discretion, may require a public hearing on any
request, or may require the applicant to submit a complete application under these
Regulations.
3. The Commission shall require a complete application under these Regulations for
any change meeting the definition of “resubdivision” under Connecticut General
Statutes Section 8-18, as amended.
Plainville Subdivision Regulations
14
06. Alternate Approval Formats: When submitting the subdivision plans for final
Commission endorsement, the applicant shall declare the type of approval formats as
authorized by Section 8-25 of the Connecticut General Statutes as may be amended
by using one of the following approval blocks:
1. Final Approval – No Financial Guarantee Required (§4.07).
2. Final Approval – Financial Guarantee Provided (§4.08).
3. Conditional Approval – No Financial Guarantee Provided (§4.09).
07. Plans to be Filed as “Final Approval – No Financial Guarantee Required”
1. A subdivision plan may be filed in this manner when:
a. no street improvements, public utilities, or other required improvements need
to be provided prior to the sale of any building lot in the subdivision, or;
b. street improvements, public utilities, or other required improvements have been
completed to the satisfaction of the Commission and the Town Engineer, or;
c. street improvements, public utilities, or other required improvements have
already been accepted by the Town of Plainville.
2. Such subdivision plans shall contain the following approval block:
Final Approval - No Financial Guarantee Required
No street improvements, public utilities, or other improvements are required to
be provided prior to the sale of any lot in the subdivision or street improvements,
public utilities, and other requirements have been completed and, if necessary,
accepted by the Town of Plainville.
Lots in this subdivision may be sold at any time
At a meeting on ________________________, the Plainville Planning and
Zoning Commission approved this subdivision plan in accordance with the
Plainville Subdivision Regulations.
______________________________________________ _______________
Commission Endorsement Date
Expiration Date:
Plainville Subdivision Regulations
15
08. Plans to be Filed as “Final Approval – Financial Guarantee Provided”
1. A subdivision plan may be filed as “Final Approval – Financial Guarantee
Provided” when a financial guarantee in a form and amount acceptable to the
Commission and the Town Engineer has been provided for street improvements,
public utilities, and other requirements remaining to be constructed.
2. Such subdivision plans shall contain the following approval block:
Final Approval - Financial Guarantee Provided
A financial guarantee has been provided to the Town of Plainville to ensure that
street improvements, public utilities, and other required improvements will be
constructed.
Lots in this subdivision may be sold at any time
At a meeting on ________________________, the Plainville Planning and
Zoning Commission approved this subdivision plan in accordance with the
Plainville Subdivision Regulations.
______________________________________________ _______________
Commission Endorsement Date
Expiration Date:
09. Plans to be filed as “Conditional Approval – No Financial Guarantee Provided”.
1. A subdivision plan and supporting plans shall be filed as “Conditional Approval”
when the street improvements, public utilities, and other requirements have not
been completed prior to filing of subdivision plans and no financial guarantee has
been provided to the Commission to ensure that such improvements will be
constructed.
2. Such subdivision plan shall contain the following signature block:
Conditional Approval
No Financial Guarantee Provided
Street improvements, public utilities, and/or other requirements in this subdivision
have NOT been completed to the satisfaction of the Commission and the Town
Engineer and a financial guarantee has NOT been provided to the Town of Plainville
to ensure that such improvements will be completed.
No lots shall be sold and no certificate of occupancy shall be
issued until all improvements, utilities, and/or other
requirements are completed, or an approved financial
guarantee has been provided to the Town of Plainville.
At a meeting on ________________________, the Plainville Planning and Zoning
Commission approved this subdivision plan in accordance with the Plainville
Subdivision Regulations.
______________________________________________ _______________
Commission Endorsement Date
Expiration Date:
Plainville Subdivision Regulations
16
3. Once all requirements are met and the public improvements are accepted by the
Town, the Conditional Approval filed in the Town Clerk’s Office may be
superseded with a new set of Mylar plans to be endorsed and filed with the
appropriate Final Approval – No Financial Guarantee Required” block in
accordance with Section 4.08.
4. Once a financial guarantee has been filed with the Commission, the Conditional
Approval may be superseded with a new set of Mylar plans to be endorsed and
filed with the appropriate “Final Approval – Financial Guarantee Provided” block
in accordance with Section 4.09.
5.00 Financial Guarantee:
01. An estimate of the cost of all public improvements shall be prepared by the
applicant’s engineer for review and comment by the Town Engineer. Such estimate
shall have added to it a contingency factor of no less than ten percent (10%).
02. Acceptable financial guarantees shall include:
1. a savings account, money market account, or certificate of deposit from financial
institutions approved by the Town of Plainville, provided each such account shall
be federally insured for the full amount of the deposit, and the Town of Plainville
shall have the sole authority to withdraw funds from the account, or;
2. a certified or official check from a financial institution approved by the Town of
Plainville, made payable only to the Town of Plainville, or;
3. an unconditional irrevocable letter of credit in accordance with the sample letter
in the Appendix, approved by the Town of Plainville and issued by a financial
institution authorized to do business in Connecticut, naming the Town as sole
beneficiary.
03. Any financial guarantee which has an expiration date shall include the following
provisions:
1. the financial guarantee shall not expire unless the Commission or its designated
agent has received written notice of such expiration at least thirty (30) days but
not more than forty-five (45) days before such expiration is to occur, and;
2. in the event such notice is received, the Town may withdraw without further
condition the balance of the financial guarantee, and;
3. unless such notice is received, the financial guarantee shall automatically be
extended for a period of not less than one year until all improvements or other
requirements of these regulations are completed.
04. Accrual of Interest or Dividends. Any interest or dividend on any account or
instrument shall accrue in the name of the applicant, and such funds shall be deemed
to increase the principal amount of the financial guarantee and may be used by the
Town in the same manner as the principal.
Plainville Subdivision Regulations
17
05. Release of Financial Guarantee
1. If the person posting a financial guarantee under this section requests a release of
all or a portion of such financial guarantee, the Commission shall, no later than
sixty-five days after receiving such request:
a. release or authorize the release of any such financial guarantee or portion
thereof, provided the Commission is reasonably satisfied that the
improvements for which such financial guarantee or portion thereof was
posted have been completed, or;
b. provide the person posting such financial guarantee with a written explanation
as to the improvements that must be completed before such financial
guarantee or portion thereof may be released.
2. No required financial guarantee, or portion of such required financial guarantee,
shall be released by the Commission until:
a. The release has been requested in writing by the applicant, providing
sufficient documentation of costs remaining on the project, as prepared by a
professional engineer, and;
b. The Town Engineer has submitted a letter indicating all required
improvements have been satisfactorily completed and whether all conditions
and requirements of the Commission's approval have been satisfied, and;
c. The applicant's engineer or surveyor has certified to the Commission or its
designated agent that all improvements and other work are in accordance with
submitted site plans, through submission of a set of detailed “As-Built" plans
or other sufficient documentation. All As-Built plans shall be filed in the
Plainville Land Records.
06. Retention of Financial Guarantee for Maintenance. A minimum of ten percent (10%)
of the total cost of construction and installation of all public improvements shall be
retained by the Town for twelve (12) months, including at least one (1) full winter
season, after Town acceptance of such completion.
07. Use of Financial Guarantee by Town. To the extent allowed by law, the Town or the
Commission may use funds derived from a financial guarantee to satisfy an
applicant’s obligations under these Regulations. If the financial guarantee is
inadequate to satisfy all such obligations, the applicant shall remain liable for the
remainder.
08. Erosion and Sedimentation Control Financial Guarantee. An erosion and
sedimentation control financial guarantee shall be established and provided in
accordance with the standards outlined under this Section prior to any activity being
conducted on the site. Release of such erosion and sedimentation control financial
guarantee shall be subject to the standards outlined under this Section as they apply
to erosion and sedimentation control.
Plainville Subdivision Regulations
18
IV. Design Standards
1.00 Predevelopment:
01. Site clearing, excavation, filling: No site shall undergo any clearing, excavating,
or filling until all requisite approvals and/or permits have been granted in
writing by all municipal, state, and federal agencies having jurisdiction. Site
clearing, excavation, or filling shall not be initiated until the zoning
enforcement officer and the wetland enforcement officer, if applicable, have
determined that appropriate erosion and sediment control measures are in
place according to the approved erosion and sediment control plan.
02. Removal of debris: All stumps and other tree parts, litter, brush, weeds, excess
or scrap building materials or other debris shall be removed from the site and
disposed of in accordance with the law. No tree stumps, or portions of tree
trunks or limbs shall be buried anywhere in the subdivision without prior
approval from the Town Planner and Wetlands Enforcement Officer, and in no
instance shall they be buried in regulated wetlands, upland review areas,
and/or areas of high groundwater. All dead or dying trees, standing or fallen,
shall be removed from all areas except open space. If trees and limbs are
reduced to chips, they may be used as mulch in landscaped areas, subject to
approval by the Town Planner and Wetlands Enforcement Officer.
03. Protection of existing plantings: Maximum effort shall be made to save existing
vegetation, and relocation of desirable trees on-site is particularly encouraged.
No material or temporary soil deposits shall be placed within four (4) feet of
shrubs or within the drip line of trees designated on the landscape plan to be
retained (unless it can be demonstrated that the drip line area is excessive for
specific tree species). Protective barriers or tree wells shall be installed around
each plant and/or group of plants that are to remain on the site. Barriers shall
not be supported by the plants they are protecting, but shall be self-supporting.
They shall be a minimum of four (4) feet high and constructed of a durable
material that will last until construction is completed. Snow fences are an
example of acceptable barriers.
04. Topsoil preservation: Topsoil shall be removed from disturbed areas and
stored in one or more stockpiles that are protected from erosion. Topsoil shall
be redistributed on all surfaces after final grading to provide at least 4 inches
of even cover to all disturbed areas of the subdivision and shall be stabilized by
seeding, planting, and other measures in accordance with the erosion and
sediment control plan.
Plainville Subdivision Regulations
19
2.00 Identification and Conservation of Natural and Cultural Features:
01. Location and mapping: Natural and cultural site features identified in item 02,
below, shall be identified on a map showing existing site conditions.
02. Conservation: The following specific features shall be conserved, either within
dedicated open space or via appropriate conservation mechanisms, to the
extent consistent with the reasonable utilization of land and in accordance
with other applicable local regulations. If it appears that such area(s) may exist
on the site, the Commission may seek expert input or may require the
applicant to provide expert input regarding the existence and/or relative value
of such areas.
1. Unique and/or fragile areas that may be identified by agencies or
individuals possessing bona fide expertise or as may be identified in
adopted plans or studies;
2. Water bodies, watercourses, wetlands, and flood prone areas;
3. Significant mature trees or significant mature stands of trees;
4. Noteworthy flora and fauna inhabiting or using the site within their life
cycle, and habitats of endangered, threatened wildlife and wildlife of
special concern, as identified on federal or state lists or that may be
identified by agencies or individuals possessing bona fide expertise or as
may be identified in adopted plans or studies;
5. Historically/archaeologically significant structures and sites;
6. Stone walls, and fences;
7. Rocky outcrops;
8. Slopes in excess of l5% extending a distance of 100 feet or more. Where
construction is proposed on slopes in excess of 15%, additional
engineering/best management practices may be required for slope
stabilization/conservation.
03. Improvements: Site improvements shall be located to preserve the natural and
cultural features of the site to the maximum extent practicable, to avoid areas
of environmental sensitivity, and to minimize negative impacts and alteration
of natural and cultural features.
04. Preservation of trees and woodlands: The applicant shall preserve existing
trees in accordance with a landscape plan required under Section IV.12.00.
05. Mitigation: The subdivision shall be laid out to reduce cuts and fills; to avoid
unnecessary impervious cover; to provide adequate access to lots; and to
mitigate adverse effects of shadow, noise, odor, traffic, drainage, and utilities
on neighboring properties.
Plainville Subdivision Regulations
20
3.00 Residential Subdivision Design:
01. Access: Residential lots shall generally front on local streets, not on collector or
arterial streets as identified in the Town of Plainville Plan of Conservation and
Development. The Commission may waive this requirement for a very limited
number of lots, only upon substantial demonstration that it is impractical and
infeasible for lots to front on local streets. Where such a waiver is granted, a
turnaround driveway must be provided. Shared driveways must be provided
for contiguous lots on a collector or arterial street where feasible.
02. Curb cuts: One driveway curb cut will be permitted per residential lot on a
local street, unless the distance between them is greater than 50 feet and
approval has been granted by the Town Planner and the Town Engineer. Only
one driveway curb cut will be permitted per residential lot on a collector
street.
03. Emergency access: Every lot shall have sufficient access to it for emergency
vehicles as well as for those needing access to the property for its intended use.
04. Unit placement: The placement of units in residential subdivisions shall take
into consideration topography, privacy, building height, solar orientation,
drainage, conservation of natural and cultural features, preservation of open
space, and character of the surrounding properties.
05. Rear lots: The Commission shall not approve rear lots unless it finds that such
lots provide the best development of the land because of the topography and
shape of the lands
06. Concept meeting: When open space is required in a subdivision, a concept
meeting with the Commission is encouraged so that the location of open space
may be agreed upon early in the application process.
07. Layout: Subdivisions shall be laid out to protect and preserve open space and
to advance the purposes identified in Section I.2.00. The subdivision shall also
be laid out to achieve any one, or a reasonable mix, of the following objectives:
1. To promote the conservation and open space goals, policies, and
recommendations outlined in Town Plan of Conservation and
Development.
2. That consideration be given to the preservation, creation, and connection
of areas used for wildlife habitat, recreational corridors and trails within
subdivision open space.
3. That a provision be provided for pedestrian access between properties and
for a perimeter design concept intended to facilitate the networking of
trails for pedestrian and/or equine use to ensure recreational access to
resource lands as provided for in the Subdivision Regulations.
Plainville Subdivision Regulations
21
4. That the location of the open space areas be primarily in areas which are
contiguous to existing open space areas or in areas of the site with the
highest probability of connecting with future open space areas.
5. That the scenic views and vistas, particularly as seen from public or scenic
roads, be preserved.
6. That the visual integrity of hilltops be maintained by siting lots so that
building silhouettes will be below the hilltop or, if the area is heavily
wooded, the building silhouettes will be at least ten (10) feet lower than the
average canopy height of trees on the hilltop.
4.00 Commercial and Industrial Subdivision Design:
01. Commercial and industrial subdivisions shall be designed according to the
same principles governing the design of residential subdivisions, namely,
buildings shall be located according to topography, with environmentally
sensitive areas avoided to the maximum extent practicable; factors such as
drainage, noise, odor, and surrounding land uses considered in siting
buildings; sufficient access shall be provided, and such access shall conform to
applicable access management regulations; and adverse impacts buffered.
5.00 Open Space and Recreation:
01. Purposes: All subdivisions under the terms, conditions and requirements of
these Regulations shall preserve open space land to serve one or more of the
following purposes:
1. The preservation of land areas as may be recommended within the Plan of
Conservation and Development.
2. The creation of public parks, playgrounds or other outdoor noncommercial
recreation areas, athletic fields and related facilities.
3. The protection of watercourses, or water supply.
4. The conservation of wetlands, marshes, and floodplains.
5. The protection of natural drainage systems.
6. The preservation of existing natural buffers.
7. The conservation of forests, ridgelines, wildlife, and other natural
resources.
8. The networking of trails and corridors on which motorized vehicles shall
be prohibited.
02. Open Space Plan: The subdivision map shall clearly delineate the extent of open
space land. The plan shall include the following information:
1. Areas of wetlands by soil type, flood plain zones by type, and areas with slopes
in excess of twenty-five percent (25%) that extend fifty (50) linear feet or more,
and;
2. The amount of these land types, if any, within the proposed open space shall be
calculated and shown in tabular form on the required plan, and;
Plainville Subdivision Regulations
22
3. Proposed improvements if any, including public access trails, parking, access
easements, landscaping and fencing or buffers, and;
4. Proposed property markers.
03. Minimum Requirements:
1. Conventional Subdivision: Twenty percent (20%) of the tract proposed for
subdivision shall be preserved as open space. Detention basins,
watercourses and wetlands, floodways and special flood hazard areas and
slopes in excess of twenty-five percent (25%) that extend fifty (50) linear
feet or more shall not be considered as meeting the requirements of open
space, except when in the judgment of the Commission such land is
reasonably subject to future development and deemed to be of benefit to
the Town’s existing or proposed open space inventory, recreation areas,
and/or upstream or downstream watersheds. In no case shall more than
one-half of said land be considered as satisfying open space requirements.
2. Open Space Subdivision: A minimum of twenty percent (20%) of the site
shall be preserved as open space and, as provided in Section 1.04.B of the
Zoning Regulations, greater development flexibility is allowed as more
open space is preserved. At least 20% of the open space preserved must be
free of wetlands, watercourses, flood plain A zones, and slopes in excess of
20% that extend 100 linear feet or more.
04. General Open Space Requirements:
1. Location of open space parcels: The location of the open space shall be
designed in accordance with one or more of the following factors as
appropriate to the site (some do conflict with others).
a. Where new roads are proposed, open space is located so as to create a
buffer between the existing Town/State road(s) and the proposed lots.
b. The open space is designed as a buffer between the proposed
subdivision and abutting properties.
c. The open space is located in areas to preserve significant cultural
features such as stone walls, canals or historic structures.
d. The open space is located in areas which connect existing open space or
areas with the greatest potential for future open space and facilitates
recreational and green space corridors and/or trails.
e. The open space extends beyond the wetland boundary side of a stream
or watercourse. Where a proposed subdivision includes an area
containing a significant stream or a stream linkage, the applicant shall,
where possible, preserve as open space the stream and an area located
within two hundred feet from either side of the centerline of the stream
as part of the open space requirement.
f. The open space is suitable for public active recreational use.
Plainville Subdivision Regulations
23
2. Access: All open space shall abut or have direct access to a street through a
right-of-way dedicated to public use. The right-of-way shall not be included
in the required open space area, shall be at least fifty (50) feet wide and
shall be suitable for foot traffic. In acceptable circumstances the
Commission may reduce or waive this requirement. Private open space
land that is to be used by selected or limited groups for recreation or other
similar purposes shall have access as required above, but such access shall
remain part of the private land.
3. Parking: Subdivision applications shall preserve a location for the parking
of vehicles within areas that can provide public access to existing and
proposed open space, particularly those areas which provide access to new
and existing trails and recreational areas as part of the open space
requirement. The Commission may reduce the open space requirement,
and thereby permit an equal increase in density, where an application
proposes the construction of parking areas, provided the value of the
construction is equivalent to the value of the land and the additional lots
obtained as a result of open space reduction.
4. Reduction of requirement: The Commission may permit a reduction in the
open space requirement and thereby permit an equal increase in density,
where the application proposes to construct public facilities, such as ball
fields, and other recreational facilities, provided the value of the
construction is equivalent to the value of the land and the additional lots
obtained as a result of open space reduction.
5. Adjacency to existing open space: When a property line of a subdivision
abuts existing open space, the Commission may require the new open space
lines to form a continuation of the existing area to provide a single, large,
unified area.
6. Monumentation: Monuments are required at all corners and angles of
Town open space, except where land characteristics cannot accept the
monuments.
7. Security: Any security for the completion of public utilities and
improvements shall also be available for completion of public or private
open space requirements in the event of a default of performance by the
applicant or his/her successor.
05. Preservation of Open Space:
The permanent preservation of open space shall be accomplished by deeding
the property, granting conservation easements, or any other method which
accomplishes irrevocable preservation in accordance with the requirements
set forth in this section to one of the following entities:
1. The Town of Plainville;
2. The State of Connecticut;
3. An approved owners association;
4. A recognized, nonprofit organization, such as a land trust.
Plainville Subdivision Regulations
24
06. Property deeded to the Town under the provisions of this section must be
retained as open space in perpetuity. If any open space land is required to be
used for a different public purpose, the Town shall provide an equivalent
amount of open space elsewhere in Plainville.
07. The preservation as outlined in Sections 5.04 and 5.05, regardless of the
method used, shall be completed within one year of the date of approval.
08. In determining which of the entities should own or control the proposed open
space, or whether to require open space in locations different from those
proposed, the Commission shall consider the following factors:
1. The ownership of any existing open space on adjacent properties or the
proximity to non-adjacent open space which might reasonably interconnect
with the proposed open space in the future.
2. The proposed use of open space for active or passive uses and the extent of
maintenance, supervision, or management required.
3. The potential benefits which the open space might provide to residents of
the Town or the state, if it were accessible to them.
4. The size, shape, topography and character of the open space.
5. The recommendations of the Plan of Conservation and Development;
6. The reports or recommendations of other Town or state agencies,
including, but not limited to the Plainville Conservation Commission, the
Central Connecticut Regional Planning Agency, and the Connecticut
Department of Environmental Protection.
09. Regardless of the manner of ownership of the open space, the instrument of
conveyance must include provisions satisfactory in form and substance to the
Commission to ensure:
1. The continued use of such land for the intended purposes;
2. The continuity of proper maintenance for those portions of the open space
requiring maintenance; and
3. When appropriate, the availability of funds required for such maintenance.
10. If dedicated open land or community recreation facilities are to be owned
jointly or in common by the owners of lots or dwelling units, maintenance of
the common land or facilities shall be permanently guaranteed through the
declarations of an owners association.
11. When an association is to own open space, the association must be legally
established to fulfill the following requirements prior to the endorsement of
the final plans.
1. The owners association must be established as a legally recognized entity.
2. The association must be responsible for liability insurance, local taxes, and
the maintenance of any recreational and other facilities.
3. There shall be mandatory membership in the association by all the original
lot owners and any subsequent owners.
Plainville Subdivision Regulations
25
4. Each lot owner shall have an equal vote in determining the affairs of the
association; costs shall be assessed equally to each lot; and the association
shall remain under the management of the applicant until the subdivision
assets are transferred to the association upon completion of a requisite
portion of the subdivision.
5. The association must have the power to assess and collect from each lot
owner a specified share of the costs associated with maintenance, repair,
upkeep and insurance of the open space.
6. The association must have the authority to adjust the assessment to meet
changed needs.
7. The method or organization, by-laws and rules of procedure of the owners
association shall be in a form acceptable to the Commission and are subject
to a review by the Town Attorney. The Commission may require that the
applicant for a subdivision establish a sinking fund to be used to maintain
common areas. The sinking fund shall be transferred to the owners
association when the assets are transferred to the association upon
completion of a requisite portion of the subdivision.
8. To prevent trespassing on adjacent lands, the boundary lines of all open
space shall be identified and marked in such reasonable manner as may be
required by the Commission to insure the identification of the open space.
6.00 Open Space Subdivisions:
01. Purpose: The purpose of an open space subdivision is to ensure that future
residential development in Plainville, to the extent reasonably possible,
preserves open space and the natural and cultural features of the land
including wetlands, watercourses, floodplains, wildlife, and the character of the
community. In the interest of promoting these objectives, these regulations
and Section 1.04.B of the Zoning Regulations allow a subdivision be designed
and developed with lots of lesser dimension and area than would otherwise be
required by the Zoning Regulations in exchange for a set-aside of a higher
percentage of the site as open space.
02. Establishment: It is hereby established that all land within the R-20, and R-40
zones, if subdivided, shall be evaluated for design as an open space subdivision.
Where the Commission approves an open space subdivision the dimensional
requirements (lot area, width/frontage, and required yards) of the underlying
zones shall be as provided for open space subdivisions in the Zoning
Regulations.
Plainville Subdivision Regulations
26
03. Pre Application Conference: Prior to the submission of an application for an
open space subdivision, the applicant is strongly encouraged to initiate a preapplication
conference with the Commission and its staff to discuss the
conceptual aspects of the proposed subdivision and to prepare and present a
conceptual plan for informal consideration by the Commission. The conceptual
plan shall be designed to allow the Commission to make a general comparison
between the open space subdivision and a conventional subdivision plan and
should contain all necessary information to facilitate the comparison such as
potential lot layout for both conventional and open space subdivision;
regulated wetlands; topography and areas of steep slopes; wooded areas;
other permanently-preserved open space within the vicinity of the proposed
subdivision; existing rights-of-way, road stubs, and potential roadway
interconnections to existing streets; and any other relevant information. The
concept plan must incorporate the design guidelines contained within these
regulations. Neither the pre-application conference, the informal review of the
conceptual plan, nor the Commission's suggestions shall be deemed to
constitute approval or denial of any portion of the application.
04. Recreational uses: The Commission, in its sole discretion, may permit noncommercial
recreational uses within the open space, provided that such uses
are not inconsistent with or harmful to the preservation of the restricted area
or to the character of the neighborhood. The Commission may also permit
activities and accessory structures necessary to support open space uses.
05. Modifications: The Commission may modify any application so as to designate
open space in locations other than those proposed if such modification will
further the conditions and requirements set forth in these regulations.
7.00 Improvement of Open Space Parcels:
01. Land to be used as public or private open space shall be left in a condition for
the purpose intended. The Commission may require certain improvements to
be made to developed and underdeveloped open space parcels. Where
directed by the Commission, undesirable growth and debris shall be removed
by the applicant; and open space to be used for recreation shall be graded to
dispose of surface water in accordance with these regulations and shall be
seeded as indicated by the proposed end use. In general, wetlands,
watercourses and wooded areas shall be left natural.
1. Improved open space: The Commission may require the installation of
landscaping and/or recreational facilities, taking into consideration:
a. The character of the open space land;
b. The estimated age and the recreational needs of persons likely to reside
in the subdivision;
c. Proximity, nature, and excess capacity of existing municipal
recreational facilities;
d. The cost of the recreational facilities;
Plainville Subdivision Regulations
27
e. Separation/delineation of open space from surrounding land uses; and
f. Reports of other Town commissions or departments regarding the
proposed improvements.
g. Sports field lighting and/or audio speakers are not permitted on
subdivision open space acquired under these regulations.
h. The Commission may at its discretion require a site improvement plan
as part of the final plans on public open space land that is reserved for
recreation. These plans shall be subject to the approval of the
Commission.
2. Unimproved open space: As a general principle, unimproved open space
should be left in its natural state. The Commission may require naturalized
planting of open space that has been used or disturbed in other ways and is
not in a suitable natural condition. The Commission may require certain
improvements such as the cutting of trails for walking or jogging, or the
provision of picnic areas, etc. In addition, the Commission may require an
applicant to make other improvements, such as removing debris and dead
or diseased trees, thinning trees or other vegetation to encourage more
desirable growth, repairing or replacing deteriorating/ dysfunctional
drainage features/structures, etc. Any such improvements shall be included
in an open space improvement site plan and approved by the Commission.
8.00 Fee in Lieu of Open Space:
01. When required: When conditions such as subdivision size, population density,
existing municipal facilities, topography, or other site- or subdivision-specific
characteristics are such that on-site open space is not desirable, the
Commission may require the applicant to provide a fee in lieu of open space or
a combination of land and fee.
02. Amount: Such payment or combination of payment and the fair market value
of land transferred shall be equal to no more than ten percent of the fair
market value of the land to be subdivided prior to the approval of the
subdivision. The fair market value shall be determined by an appraiser jointly
selected by the Commission and the applicant, with the cost to be borne by the
applicant.
03. Payment: Payment in full may be accepted prior to the recording of the
approved map, or a fraction of such payment, the numerator of which is one,
and the denominator of which is the number of approved parcels in the
subdivision, shall be made to the Town of Plainville at the time of the sale of
each approved parcel of land in the subdivision, and placed in a fund which
shall be used for the purpose of preserving open space or acquiring additional
land for open space or for recreational or agricultural purposes.
Plainville Subdivision Regulations
28
04. Notice: If payments are to be made upon the sale of individual lots, notice shall
be provided by the applicant alerting future buyers of the pendency of such
payments by notating the approved subdivision plan and recording a notice for
each approved lot in the Town Land Records. The Town shall file a release in
the Land Records for each payment received.
9.00 Streets:
01. General
1. The arrangement of streets shall be in harmony with the goals, policies, and
recommendations of the Town Plan of Conservation and Development and
any specific plans for the area of the subdivision.
2. For streets not shown on the Town Plan, the arrangement shall provide for
the appropriate and reasonable provision of new streets or other access or
the extension of existing streets.
3. Any street that is to be constructed in phases must make provisions for a
temporary cul-de-sac at the location where it is to terminate. This provision
may be waived only where the street extension is to occur immediately
following completion of the previous section.
4. The required right-of-way shall be accepted by the Town in accordance
with generally accepted procedures for acceptance of such
land/improvements.
02. Street Hierarchy
Streets shall be classified, designed, and constructed in accordance with the
guidelines of the Town of Plainville Plan of Conservation and Development and
the following hierarchy:
1. Arterial Street: intended to accommodate presently or at any future time
traffic other than that of the immediate neighborhood, as determined by
the Commission.
2. Collector Street: any street other than an Arterial Street which is intended
now or in the future to conduct traffic between local streets orbetween a
local street and arterial street as determined by the Commission.
3. Local Street: any street whose primary function is to give access to
properties only and which is not and will not in the future be likely to be
used by traffic other than that having origin and destination upon such
streets, as determined by the Commission. Local streets include gridiron
streets, loop streets, and cul-de-sacs.
Plainville Subdivision Regulations
29
03. Street Design
1. Right-of-Way Width: The road right-of-way shall be 50 feet in a residential
zone and 60 feet in a business or industrial district.
2. Pavement Width: The pavement width shall be as follows:
Pavement Width
• Arterial Street • Business or Industrial Districts 36 feet
• Residential Districts 30 feet
• Collector Street • Business or Industrial Districts 34 feet
• Residential Districts 28 feet
• Local Street • Business or Industrial Districts 30 feet
• Residential District 26 feet
04. Cul-de-Sac Streets
1. Residential Cul-de-sac streets in all residential zones shall not exceed 600
feet in length, measured from the right-of-way line of the intersection
street to the center point of the cul-de-sac radius along the street
centerline. The Commission may grant a waiver of the length requirement
of this section if the Commission deems it desirable due to adverse
topographic or environmental conditions, difficult site configuration, if
such street is likely to be extended in the future to another outlet, if no
potential outlet would be available to serve the residential zone area, or if
such extension serves the purposes of access management. A cul-de-sac
street shall conform to the following design criteria:
a. In no case shall a cul-de-sac street exceed 1,500 feet in length.
b. The transition curve entering into the cul-de-sac shall have a minimum
pavement radius of one hundred feet (100'), to create a “tear drop”
shape.
c. There shall be no driveway curb cuts within the transition curves.
d. Unless otherwise modified by the Commission, sidewalks are required
on both sides of the street from the intersecting street to the nearest
driveway on each side of the circle.
2. Industrial Cul-de-Sac Streets: Cul-de-sac streets in all industrial zones shall
generally not exceed 1500 feet in length, measured per Section 9.04.1
above. The Commission may grant a waiver of the length requirement of
this section if the Commission deems it desirable due to adverse
topographic or environmental conditions, difficult site configuration, if
such street is likely to be extended in the future to another outlet, if no
potential outlet would be available to serve the industrial zone area, or if
such extension serves the purposes of access management. A cul-de-sac
street shall conform to the following design criteria:
a. In no case shall a dead end street exceed 2,500 feet in length.
Plainville Subdivision Regulations
30
b. The transition curve entering into the cul-de-sac shall have a minimum
pavement radius of one hundred feet (100'), to create a “tear drop”
shape.
c. There shall be no driveway curb cuts within the transition curves.
3. Snow shelf easement: A snow shelf easement 15 feet deep shall be
established along the arc of a cul-de-sac for a distance of not less than 25
feet to provide for deposition of snow plowed from the cul-de-sac so as not
to interfere with planned driveways.
4. Unless modified by the Commission, the preferred design for the turnaround
area at the end of a cul-de-sac shall be as follows:
a. No landscaped center island.
b. The turn-around area shall be graded to drain to the outside.
c. No driveways shall be located on the outside of the turn-around within
the area defined by extending the pavement edge on the approaching
road across the turn-around area.
05. Gradients: Minimum gradient for streets shall be not less than 1.0 percent.
Maximum gradient shall not be more than 8.0 percent.
06. Angle of Intersections: Intersections between streets shall be at an angle of not
less than eighty degrees (80°) for a distance of not less than one hundred and
seventy-five feet (175'), unless specifically approved by the Commission.
Intersecting right-of-way lines at intersection shall be connected by a curve of
at least twenty foot (20') radius.
07. Street Jogs: Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than two hundred feet
(200') shall be prohibited.
08. Street Names: Proposed street names are subject to approval by the
Commission. No street name phonetically similar to any street in use in the
Town shall be used.
09. Boundaries of Rights-of-Way of Existing Streets: Boundaries of rights-of-way of
all existing streets lying within or adjacent to any subdivision shall be
relocated and laid out to meet the above standards to the extent which the
Commission in its discretion deems practicable and in the public interest. The
intersections of existing streets shall be joined by curves as required above for
new streets.
10. Future Street Stubs
1. Street stubs shall be provided where, in the opinion of the Commission,
they are necessary for a coordinated street system connecting a
subdivision with adjoining land that may be developed in the future. These
street stubs shall not require pavement unless proposed as a temporary
turnaround in the form of a hammerhead or cul-de-sac.
Plainville Subdivision Regulations
31
2. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to rough grade the street stubs
as shown on the final plans.
3. Ownership of street stubs and/or temporary cul-de-sacs shall be deemed
accepted by the Town of Plainville at the time of acceptance of all other
streets in the subdivision. Slope and grading rights, fifteen (15) feet outside of
the street right-of-way for grading of such future streets, shall be reserved for
future construction. Reservation of slope and grading rights shall also be shown
on the final subdivision map.
4. Final construction of street stubs shall be done by the applicant of the
abutting land. In the event two or more abutting subdivisions are being
built simultaneously, it shall be the shared responsibility of the applicants
to fulfill these requirements.
5. Any future developer extending a temporary street stub, cul-de-sac, or other
approved turnaround shall be required to remove the existing pavement outside
of the standard right of way, loam and seed said area from which pavement has
been removed, and install curbs and sidewalks in the disturbed area in
accordance with Town requirements. The subdivision plan shall provide
notification that such reclaimed paved area will be deeded to adjacent property
owners, upon extension of the road, to the boundary of the standard street right
of way required by the Town. Documents transferring such ownership shall be
prepared and recorded by the developer proposing such reconstruction or
extension after review and approval by the Town.
11. Curbs and Gutters
1. Curbing may be required on all new streets for the purposes of drainage,
safety, and delineation and protection of pavement edge. Curbing may be
required where existing streets are widened/improved.
2. Curbing may be waived on one or both sides of a subdivision street if, in the
judgment of the Commission, nonpoint drainage of storm water is a viable
and preferable alternative to its collection and discharge into a structured
storm water system and safety or delineation factors are of lesser concern.
3. Where curbing is not required, some type of edge definition and
stabilization shall be furnished for safety reasons and to prevent unraveling
of the pavement.
4. Curbing shall be designed to provide a ramp for bicycles and/or
wheelchairs as required by State law.
5. Curbing and ramps shall be constructed according to the specifications set
forth in the Specifications for Street Construction within the Town of
Plainville, as contained within the Ordinances of the Town of Plainville,
Connecticut.
6. Concrete curb shall be installed on all commercial and industrial roadways
unless waived or modified in favor of bituminous concrete curbing by the
Commission.
a. Concrete curb shall be six (6) inches at the top, eight (8) inches along
the bottom and twenty (20) inches in depth. The top of curb shall be
five (5) inches above the finished pavement grade.
Plainville Subdivision Regulations
32
b. The concrete mix shall be composed of a four thousand (4000) lb. mix
with a maximum slump of five (5) inches. Placement shall include
mechanical vibration of the concrete.
c. At least one (1) test cylinder per day shall be taken by the Department
of Technical Services. If warranted the Department of Technical
Services may request additional test cylinders. Any costs associated
with the test cylinders and testing shall be borne by the developer and a
copy of each test report shall be given to the Department of Technical
Services for its records.
7. Bituminous concrete curbing shall be installed on residential roadways
except that the following alternatives to standard continuous bituminous
lip curbing may be permitted by the Commission upon recommendation of
the Town Engineer:
a. Cast in place concrete curbing,
b. Granite curbing,
c. Cape Cod Bituminous concrete curbing with a 3” high rolled curb, or
d. Any of the above types of curbing installed with 24” openings at 50-foot
or closer intervals to allow runoff to discharge into a LID stormwater
conveyance or treatment system.
8. Equipment specifically designed for the installation of six (6) inch
bituminous concrete curbing shall be used. Hand formed curb will be
permitted only upon written approval of the Department of Technical
Services. The material and installation requirements shall conform to the
guidelines outlined in the most current State of Connecticut, Department of
Transportation, Standard Specifications for Roads, Bridges and Incidental
Construction.
9. The developer shall be required to receive permission from the
Department of Technical Services to install any curbing during the period
which extends from November 15th to April 15th.
Plainville Subdivision Regulations
33
12. Sidewalks: In order to support and encourage alternate transportation modes, these
regulations seek to provide safe and convenient bicycle and pedestrian access
within new subdivisions and between existing subdivisions, including movement to
and from public walkways, bikeways and streets. Pedestrians and cyclists who are
offered clearly defined routes that are well lit, safe, comfortable and convenient will
be encouraged to use such alternative modes of transportation. These regulations
strive to improve the viability and interconnectivity of all existing and future
transportation systems.
1. Sidewalks required on new residential streets except that the Commission
may allow sidewalks on only one side of the street where, due to unusual
topography, wetlands, rock outcroppings or other impediments, and with
due consideration to safety factors, where such sidewalk placement is
unfeasible. Sidewalks may be required in non-residential subdivisions, and
on existing streets that will connect sidewalks within the subdivision to
existing sidewalk within 150' of the subdivision boundaries.
2. Sidewalks and graded areas shall be constructed in accordance with the
following specifications:
a. The concrete sidewalk shall be installed over a compacted four (4) inch
process trap rock base. The walks shall be four (4) inches thick, except
at driveways where they shall be six (6) inches thick, reinforced with six
by six (6 x 6) wire mesh extending two (2) feet beyond each edge of the
driveway.
b. Sidewalk slabs shall be five (5) feet long, four (4) feet wide with proper
type expansion joints every twenty (20) feet and flush with the walk
surface.
c. Concrete shall be a four thousand (4,000) lb. mix, minimum five (5) to
seven (7) percent air entrainment and a maximum six (6) inch slump.
d. Concrete surfaces shall be thoroughly consolidated to remove air voids,
lightly screened, broom finished, edged and protected from the
elements.
e. All construction materials and methods shall be consistent with the
guidelines outlined in the applicable sections of the most current State
of Connecticut, Department of Transportation, Standard Specifications
for Roads, Bridges and Incidental Construction.
f. The developer shall be required to receive permission from the
Department of Technical Services to install any sidewalks during the
period which extends from November 15th to April 15th.
4. The Commission may accept the recording of a caveat in the Plainville land
records providing that owners of lots designated by the Commission shall
install sidewalks across the front of their lots at a future date, upon
direction of the Commission, when sidewalks are constructed for land
development proximate to the subdivision.
5. A modification to provisions requiring sidewalks may be permitted by the
Commission in accordance with Section I.5.02 of these regulations.
Plainville Subdivision Regulations
34
6. If the Commission does not grant a waiver for sidewalks, the following
requirements may be used in place of the standard requirements by permission
of the Commission:
a. Alternate sidewalks shall be constructed within a right-of-way, accepted by
the Town of Plainville, and;
b. Such alternate sidewalks shall be considered equal to standard sidewalks in
terms of public and private maintenance responsibilities, and;
c. The alternate sidewalk location is preferable due to added benefits that
cannot be realized by standard placement such as connection to an adjacent
sidewalk system and/or connection to a multi-use trail and /or mitigation of
negative environmental impacts.
13. Construction Specifications
The construction of roads in subdivisions shall be in accordance with the
following specifications:
1. All streets shall have a five (5) inch crown.
2. The sub-base shall be constructed of twelve (12) inches of bank run gravel
topped with a base of four (4) inches of processed aggregate or a total of
twelve (12) inches of processed aggregate. All sub-base and base materials
shall conform to the applicable specifications in the most current State of
Connecticut, Department of Transportation, Standard Specifications for
Roads, Bridges and Incidental Construction.
3. The developer shall perform all necessary grading operations to bring the
roadbed to finished sub-grade elevations as shown on the approved plan
and profile drawings. Where the initial excavation uncovers spongy or
unstable material, the developer shall remove such material within the
roadbed area to such depths as directed by the Department of Technical
Services and back fill with gravel or other suitable material before placing
the sub-base material. Grading shall include the placing of the bank run
gravel and the processed aggregate to the depths noted above.
4. The sub-base shall be compacted in material lifts not exceeding six (6)
inches with a self-propelled roller weighing not less than ten (10) tons or
equivalent vibratory unit exerting a downward force of not less than three
hundred (300) pounds per lineal inch of contact surface. Compaction shall
continue until the density of the compacted material achieves ninety-five
(95) percent of the theoretical dry density. After compaction, any low or
uneven portions of the roadbed shall be brought to grade to the satisfaction
of the Department of Technical Services. Any other method of compaction
must be approved by the Department of Technical Services.
5. Only after the roadbed base has been installed, inspected and approved by
the Department of Technical Services, may the pavement surface be
installed. The pavement surface shall consist of three (3) inches of
bituminous concrete for residential roadways and four (4) inches for
commercial and industrial roadways.
Plainville Subdivision Regulations
35
6. The bituminous concrete shall be manufactured in conformance with the
most current State of Connecticut, Department of Transportation, Standard
Specifications for Roads, Bridges and Incidental Construction. The
pavement shall be installed in two courses consisting of a two (2) inch
binder and minimum one (1) inch finished course after compaction. All
bituminous surfaces shall be thoroughly compacted to ninety five (95)
percent of the maximum theoretical density. The developer shall be
required to receive permission from the Department of Technical Services
to install any bituminous concrete pavement during the period which
extends from November 15th to April 15th.
14. Driveway Apron Installation
1. All driveway aprons shall be installed on public rights-of-way in
Commercial and Industrial zones. Such aprons shall be of eight (8) inch
concrete of the same strength and installed in the manner prescribed for
concrete sidewalks where applicable. The curb edge of the apron shall be
trenched at least six (6) inches wide, the total concrete pour height shall be
twenty (20) inches and the curb line grade shall be one and one-half (1 ½)
inches above the gutter line of the road surface. The apron shall be the full
width of the driveway with edges at a ninety (90) degree angle from the
sidewalk edge for a distance of eighteen (18) inches and curving at a
quarter circle turn to the road curb.
2. Driveway aprons in residential zones shall be constructed of concrete or
bituminous concrete. Any concrete apron shall be six (6) inches thick and
reinforced with wire mesh. Bituminous concrete aprons shall consist of a
three (3) inch surface over a compacted six (6) inch process aggregate base.
3. The developer shall be required to receive permission from the
Department of Technical Services in order to install driveway aprons
during the period which extends from November 15th to April 15th.
4. No Certificate of Occupancy shall be granted unless the required driveway
apron is installed or an appropriate financial guarantee is provided in a form and
amount approved by the Director of Technical Services.
15. Merestones
1. Merestones shall be furnished and set by the developer on the street lines
at all points of curvature (PC) and points of tangent (PT) and development
boundaries so that at final grade they shall be level with the ground surface.
2. Merestones shall be of reinforced concrete at least thirty-six (36) inches in
length, four (4) inches at top, six (6) inches at base.
Plainville Subdivision Regulations
36
16. Utilities
1. Utilities shall generally be located within the right-of-way on both sides of
and parallel to the street.
2. Utility areas shall be have a minimum of 4" of topsoil and shall be planted
with grass or ground cover; or treated with other suitable cover material.
3. Electric power, telephone, and other cable systems shall be placed
underground in all residential subdivisions, except that in those portions of
a subdivision adjacent to an existing Town road, the existing electric power
and telephone/cable system facilities on such road may be used. This
provision may be waived by the Commission only where the utility
company has determined that safe underground installation is not feasible
because of soil or water conditions or other natural or man-made
conditions.
10.00 Sanitary Sewers:
01. General: All installations shall be properly connected to an approved and
functioning sanitary sewer system prior to the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy.
02. Connection to Public Sanitary Sewer System
1. All subdivisions shall install public sewerage where feasible. All extensions
of public sewerage require the approval of the Water Pollution Control
Authority (WPCA). The Superintendent of Water Pollution Control should
be contacted early in the in the subdivision planning process for a
determination of feasibility.
2. All sanitary sewerage extensions and connections shall be done in
accordance with the rules and regulations of the WPCA.
3. The subdivision developer shall prepare and submit all plans and profiles
for approval of the Department of Technical Services prior to submission to
the Planning and Zoning Commission. The Department of Technical
Services may request engineering reports, additional engineering plans and
other relevant information pertaining to the sewer installation if deemed
appropriate. The sanitary sewer installation shall be inspected and tested
under the direction of the Department of Technical Services. Any costs
associated with inspections and testing shall be the responsibility of the
developer. No lateral connections to the public sanitary sewer will be
permitted until it is accepted by the Plainville Water Pollution Control
Authority.
4. Sanitary sewers shall be installed where possible within the right-of-way.
Otherwise, the developer shall grant the Town of Plainville all easements
and rights necessary to install and maintain the sewer lines. Such
easements shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet in width. The grant of
easement shall be in a form approved by the Town of Plainville and filed in
the land records of the Town Clerk's Office.
Plainville Subdivision Regulations
37
03. Subsurface Sewage Disposal Systems
1. If the Superintendent of Pollution Control determines that connection to
the public sewerage system is infeasible, all lots shall be served by
subsurface sewage disposal systems.
2. Subsurface systems shall be designed and installed in accordance with the
requirements of the Connecticut Public Health Code Regulations and
Technical Standards for Subsurface Sewage Disposal Systems. When
subsurface sewage disposal systems are proposed, the Town Sanitarian
should be contacted early in the subdivision planning process for
coordination of necessary percolation tests and required data. The
applicant is responsible for ensuring that the Director of Health has all the
required data needed to make a determination of the land’s suitability for
subsurface sewage disposal. Such determination is required prior to the
Commission's action on a subdivision application.
11.00 Storm Water Management:
01. Any subdivision shall provide for a stormwater management system, including
low impact development techniques, in accordance with the Low Impact
Development & Stormwater Manual for the Town of Plainville adopted by the
Commission.
02. Any modifications to the standards and requirements of the Low Impact
Development & Stormwater Manual shall be as provided for in the Manual.
12.00 Landscaping Standards:
01. Purpose
1. Landscaping shall be provided as part of subdivision design along streets,
at subdivision entrances and within open space, And other areas if
appropriate. It shall be conceived in a total pattern or theme throughout
the site, integrating the various elements of site design, preserving and
enhancing the particular identity of the site, and creating a pleasing site
character.
2. Landscaping may include plant materials such as trees, shrubs, ground
covers, perennials and annuals, and other materials such as rocks, water,
sculptures, walls, fences, paving material, and street furniture.
3. Where a landscaping pattern/theme has been previously approved in a
neighborhood, new subdivision lots should generally adhere to the
established theme.
02. Landscape Plan
1. A landscape plan prepared by a registered landscape architect shall be
submitted with each subdivision application which contains five (5) or
more lots and/or new road(s). The plan shall identify the existing tree line
plus existing mature trees, and proposed trees, shrubs and ground covers;
natural features such as rock outcroppings; and other landscaping
elements. The plan shall show where they are or will be located, and
Plainville Subdivision Regulations
38
planting and/or construction details. Where existing plantings are to be
retained, the applicant shall include in the plans proposed methods of
protecting them during construction.
2. A waiver to this provision may be granted by the Commission where it is
demonstrated that subdivision landscaping is not practical or feasible, or
where existing site vegetation to be preserved is sufficient to preclude the
need for additional landscaping. If a waiver is granted, the subdivision plan
must contain provisions for preservation of existing vegetation (where
appropriate), in accordance with Site Protection and General Planting
Requirements below.
03. Street Trees
1. Location. Shade and/or ornamental trees shall be installed along streets in
accordance with the approved landscape plan. Trees shall be either massed
or spaced evenly along the street or both, and shall be located within a
street trees easement located adjacent to the street right-of-way,
coordinated with utilities companies to ensure no trees are planted above
utility lines.
2. Street trees easement. All street trees will be located within an easement
dedicated to the Town of Plainville, located directly adjacent to the street
right-of-way. Said easement will prohibit removal of street trees without
the express written consent of the Director of Physical Services of the
Town. Maintenance of street trees will be the responsibility of the lot
owner.
3. Street trees waiver. Where topography or site conditions are not suitable
for street trees, street trees may be eliminated or may not be designed in
strict accordance with the above standards, at the Commission's discretion.
04. Site Protection and General Planting Requirements
1. Slope plantings. Landscaping of all cuts and fills and/or terraces shall be
sufficient to prevent erosion, and all roadway slopes steeper than 1 foot
vertically to 3 feet horizontally (1:3 ratio) shall be planted with ground
cover appropriate for the purpose and for soil conditions, water
availability, and environment.
2. Additional landscaping. In residential subdivisions, besides the screening
and street trees required, additional plantings or landscaping elements
may be required throughout the subdivision where necessary for privacy
or other reasons in accordance with the landscape plan approved by the
Commission and taking into consideration cost constraints (for example,
where lots have back yards fronting on a street, the Commission may
require screening between the street and the back yard). In nonresidential
subdivisions, all disturbed areas of the site not occupied by buildings and
other impervious surfaces shall be landscaped by the planting of grass or
other ground cover, shrubs, and trees as part of the landscape plan
approved by the Commission.
Plainville Subdivision Regulations
39
3. Planting specifications. Deciduous trees shall have at least a 2-1/2 inch
caliper at planting. Size of evergreens and shrubs shall be allowed to vary
depending on setting and type of tree/shrub. All plant materials shall be of
nursery stock quality; and all trees, shrubs, and ground covers shall be
planted according to accepted horticultural standards. Dead and dying
plants shall be replaced by the applicant during the following planting
season.
4. Plant species. The plant species selected should be hardy and non-invasive
for this area as identified by the state of Connecticut, and appropriate in
terms of function and size.
05. Buffers
1. Buffers are required at the perimeters of a subdivided tract.
2. Buffers shall consist of natural vegetation supplemented by suitable
noninvasive landscape material to provide a continuous visual barrier
along the boundaries of adjoining properties.
13.00 OffSubdivision
Improvements:
01. Purpose: The Commission may require that reasonable off-subdivision
improvements are designed and constructed as part of an approved
subdivision plan to provide connections to existing infrastructure or to ensure
that existing infrastructure is of suitable condition and/or capacity to
accommodate the flows, movements, or volumes generated or demanded by
the future residents of the subdivision.
02. Types of Improvements That May Be Required
1. The Commission may require an applicant to provide reasonable and
necessary traffic and pedestrian circulation improvement; sewerage;
drainage facilities and other improvements including land and easements,
located off-subdivision of the property limits of the subdivision but
necessitated or required by the subdivision. 'Necessary' improvements are
those clearly and substantially related to the subject subdivision. The
Commission shall indicate in its approval the basis of the required
improvements.
2. Streets. Street improvements may include (but are not limited to):
alignment, channelization, barriers, new or improved traffic signalization,
signs, curbs, sidewalks, trees, utility improvements not covered elsewhere,
the construction or reconstruction of new or existing streets, and other
associated street or traffic improvements. Off-subdivision streets from
which the subdivision is directly accessed shall be of such condition that
safe, adequate access to the subdivision is provided. The applicant may be
required to correct deficiencies such as horizontal/vertical alignment
(inadequate sight line), inadequate drainage, substandard width,
substandard pavement condition, where such conditions directly affect the
safety of the proposed subdivision’s future residents.
Plainville Subdivision Regulations
40
3. Drainage. If the existing system functions inadequately or does not have
adequate capacity to accommodate the applicant's stormwater runoff given
existing and reasonably anticipated peak-hour flows, drainage
improvements may include (but are not limited to): installation, relocation,
or replacement of storm drains, culverts, catch basins, manholes, riprap,
improved drainage ditches and appurtenances, and relocation or
replacement of other storm drainage facilities or appurtenances.
4. Sanitary Sewers. If the existing system does not have adequate capacity to
accommodate the applicant's flow given existing and reasonably
anticipated peak-hour flows, sanitary sewer improvements may include
(but are not limited to): installation, relocation, or replacement of collector,
trunk, and interceptor sewers, pump stations, and associated
appurtenances.
14.00 Individual Lot Requirements:
01. Building Permit Plot Plan/Topographic Map
1. Prior to the building of any structure on a lot, a plot plan/topographic map
drawn under the standards of a Zoning Location Survey to a scale not
smaller than l' = 40' and not larger than 1" = 20', certified Class A-2 and
bearing the certification and seal of a Land Surveyor licensed in
Connecticut, shall be provided.
2. Certificate of Occupancy
a. Prior to issuance of a permanent certificate of occupancy, an as-built
plan, at the same scale as the plot plan/topographic map submitted for
the building permit, certified Class A-2, shall be submitted.
b. No permanent certificate of occupancy shall be issued until site/grading
plans have been complied with and accepted by the Town Engineer and
Zoning Enforcement Officer (per CGS 8-3(f)). If for any reason, finished
grading and other site work is not completed, the Town Engineer shall
determine the amount of a cash bond to insure final grading and site
work. The cash bond shall be submitted to the Planning Department
prior to issuance of a permanent certificate of occupancy.
c. No permanent certificate of occupancy will be issued unless a roadway
base and binder course of bituminous concrete, constructed in
accordance with these regulations, has been completed to the
satisfaction of the Town Engineer.
d. No permanent certificate of occupancy will be issued unless all lot
corners and angle points as indicated in the certified plot plan have
been marked with iron pins or monuments in the field.
Plainville Subdivision Regulations
41
15.00 Engineering and Inspection:
01. Basic Requirements
1. The developer shall furnish all lines, grades and construction stakes for all
construction, setting of merestones, etc.
02. Inspections
1. All construction and materials used in connection with these public
improvement specifications shall be subject to the inspection and approval
of the Department of Technical Services or its authorized representatives.
No materials or work shall be approved or accepted without such
inspection and it shall be the responsibility of the developer to notify the
Department of Technical Services or his agents at various stages during
construction so that the necessary inspections may be made.
2. The developer shall provide connections to a public water supply and
sanitary sewer system for each lot deriving its access from the proposed
streets covered under these public improvement specifications, when such
utilities are available or when their extension is deemed practical by the
Town. The standards for water mains shall be those in effect by the Valley
Water Systems or its successor, but in no case shall they be less than six (6)
inch cement lined cast iron pipe.
3. The Department of Technical Services and Fire Department will arrange for
locations of fire hydrants as required.
4. All trenches within the roadway limits shall be backfilled with materials
acceptable to the Department of Technical Services and in no case shall clay
or other unsuitable material be used for backfill. All trench backfill shall be
thoroughly compacted to the satisfaction of the Department of Technical
Services before the roadway pavement is installed.
5. Where the land contours adjacent to a street right-of-way requires a cut or
fill slope on the adjacent property, such slopes shall be constructed in
accordance with specifications of the Department of Technical Services and
the developer shall install such protective facilities as the Department of
Technical Services shall require. In all cases where grading outside street
limits are required, the developer shall furnish necessary easements and
slope rights to and in the name of the Town of Plainville so that the Town
may maintain them upon acceptance of the streets. Where such abutting
property is owned by persons other than the developer, necessary
easements and/or slope rights shall be acquired prior to construction. All
documents shall be subject to approval of the Town of Plainville.
6. All construction and materials used in connection with these public
improvement specifications shall be subject to the inspection and approval of
the Department of Technical Services or its authorized representatives. No
materials or work shall be approved or accepted without such inspection and it
shall be the responsibility of the developer to notify the Department of
Technical Services or his agents at various stages during construction so that the
necessary inspections may be made.
Plainville Subdivision Regulations
42
7. On any application, the Planning and Zoning Commission may authorize the
Town Engineer to retain engineering, material and construction inspection
and/or other technical expertise as it feels is necessary to perform construction
review and inspection on any application where it finds that the nature and
intensity of the proposed development rises to the level that Town staff is
unable to provide adequate inspection and review services.
8. When the Commission determines such additional technical expertise is
required:
a. An estimate for those services shall be made by a qualified party, and;
b. The applicant shall deposit one hundred and fifty percent (150%) of that
estimated cost with the Commission, and;
c. Such payment shall be made prior to the review of the application and/or
submission, and;
d. Upon completion of inspections and upon final acceptance of the
improvements by the Town of Plainville, the balance of remaining funds, if
any, shall be reimbursed to the applicant, and;
e. Applicants shall not be responsible for costs incurred for technical
assistance which exceed one hundred-fifty percent (150%) of the estimate
received by the Commission.

TOWN OF PLAINVILLE
INLAND WETLANDS AND
WATERCOURSES REGULATIONS
Adopted July 1, 1974
REVISIONS
Section Revisions Effective Date
Adoption 07/01/1974
Section 8.3 Notification to Public Water Supply Co. 04/16/2007
Section 11.2 Timeframe for Rendering a Decision. 04/02/2008
Section 7.11 Applicant Notification Requirements for -
Section 10.8 Conservation and Preservation -
Section 10.9 Easements. 03/04/2009
Section 7.10 Duration of Permit Extensions -
Section 11.6 Duration of Permit 07-01-2010
Section 7.5 Low Impact Development
Section 9.3 Public Notification Requirements 02-09-2011
Section 4.1 Withdrawal of Water for Fire Emergency 12-02-2011
Section 4.2 Installation of Dry Hydrants Permitted 12-02-2011
Section 7.10 Duration of Permit Extensions 12-02-2011
Section 11.6 Duration of Permit 12-02-2011
TOWN OF PLAINVILLE
INLAND WETLANDS AND
WATERCOURSES REGULATIONS
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Title and Authority ..................................................... Section 1 ...................................................... Page 1
Definitions.................................................................. Section 2 ...................................................... Page 2
Inventory of Inland Wetlands
and Watercourses ...................................................... Section 3 ...................................................... Page 5
Permitted and Nonregulated Uses ............................. Section 4 ...................................................... Page 5
Activities Regulated by the State .............................. Section 5 ...................................................... Page 7
Regulated Activities to be Licensed .......................... Section 6 ...................................................... Page 7
Application Requirements ........................................ Section 7 ...................................................... Page 8
Application Procedures ............................................. Section 8 ...................................................... Page 12
Public Hearings ......................................................... Section 9 ...................................................... Page 13
Considerations for Decisions .................................... Section 10 .................................................... Page 14
Decision Process and Permit ..................................... Section 11 .................................................... Page 16
Action by Duly Authorized Agent ............................ Section 12 .................................................... Page 18
Bond and Insurance ................................................... Section 13 .................................................... Page 18
Enforcement .............................................................. Section 14 .................................................... Page 19
Amendments ............................................................. Section 15 .................................................... Page 21
Appeals ..................................................................... Section 16 .................................................... Page 23
Conflict and Severance ............................................. Section 17 .................................................... Page 24
Other Permits ............................................................ Section 18 .................................................... Page 25
Application Fees ....................................................... Section 19 .................................................... Page 26
Effective Date of Regulations ................................... Section 20 .................................................... Page 27
Appendices – For Reference Only
A .............................................................................. Definition of Agriculture ............................. Page 28
B .............................................................................. CGS Section 8-7d ........................................ Page 29
C ................................................................................. By-Laws ........................................................ Page 31
D ................................................................................. Upland Review Area Guidelines ................... Page 35
-1-
Section 1
Title and Authority
1.1 The inland wetlands and watercourses of the State of Connecticut are an indispensable and
irreplaceable but fragile natural resource with which the citizens of the state have been endowed.
The wetlands and watercourses are an interrelated web of nature essential to an adequate supply
of surface and underground water; to hydrological stability and control of flooding and erosion; to
the recharging and purification of groundwater; and to the existence of many forms of animal,
aquatic and plant life. Many inland wetlands and watercourses have been destroyed or are in
danger of destruction because of unregulated use by reason of the deposition, filling or removal of
material, the diversion or obstruction of water flow, the erection of structures and other uses, all
of which have despoiled, polluted and eliminated wetlands and watercourses. Such unregulated
activity has had, and will continue to have, a significant, adverse impact on the environment and
ecology of the State of Connecticut and has and will continue to imperil the quality of the
environment thus adversely affecting the ecological, scenic, historic and recreational values and
benefits of the state for its citizens now and forever more. The preservation and protection of the
wetlands and watercourses from random, unnecessary, undesirable and unregulated uses,
disturbance or destruction is in the public interest and is essential to the health, welfare and safety
of the citizens of the state. It is, therefore, the purpose of these regulations to protect the citizens
of the state by making provisions for the protection, preservation, maintenance and use of the
inland wetlands and watercourses by minimizing their disturbance and pollution; maintaining and
improving water quality in accordance with the highest standards set by federal, state or local
authority; preventing damage from erosion, turbidity or siltation; preventing loss of fish and other
beneficial aquatic organisms, wildlife and vegetation and the destruction of the natural habitats
thereof; deterring and inhibiting the danger of flood and pollution; protecting the quality of
wetlands and watercourses for their conservation, economic, aesthetic, recreational and other
public and private uses and values; and protecting the state's potable fresh water supplies from the
dangers of drought, overdraft, pollution, misuse and mismanagement by providing an orderly
process to balance the need for the economic growth of the state and the use of its land with the
need to protect its environment and ecology in order to forever guarantee to the people of the
state, the safety of such natural resources for their benefit and enjoyment and for the benefit and
enjoyment of generations yet unborn.
1.2 These regulations shall be known as the "Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations of the
Town of Plainville."
1.3 The Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission of the Town of Plainville was established in
accordance with an ordinance adopted December 17, 1973, and shall implement the purposes and
provisions of these regulations and the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Act in the Town of
Plainville.
1.4 These regulations have been adopted and may be amended, from time to time, in accordance with
the provisions of the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Act and these regulations.
1.5 The Commission shall enforce the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Act and shall issue, issue
with terms, conditions, limitations or modifications, or deny permits for all regulated activities in
the Town of Plainville pursuant to sections 22a-36 to 22a-45, inclusive, of the Connecticut
General Statutes, as amended.
-2-
Section 2
Definitions
2.1 As used in these regulations:
"Act" means the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Act, sections 22a-36 through 22a-45,
inclusive, of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
"Bogs" are watercourses distinguished by evergreen trees and shrubs underlain by peat deposits,
poor or very poor drainage, and highly acidic conditions.
"Clear-cutting" means the harvest of timber in a fashion which removes all trees down to a twoinch
diameter at breast height.
"Commission" means the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission of the Town of
Plainville.
"Commissioner of Environmental Protection" means the Commissioner of the State of
Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection.
"Continual flow" means a flow of water which persists for an extended period of time; this flow
may be interrupted during periods of drought or during the low flow period of the annual
hydrological cycle, June through September, but it recurs in prolonged succession.
"Deposit" includes, but shall not be limited to fill, grade, dump, place, discharge or emit.
"Discharge" means emission of any water, substance, or material into waters of the state whether
or not such substance causes pollution.
"Essential to the farming operation" means that the proposed activity is necessary and
indispensable to sustain farming activities on the farm.
"Farming" shall be consistent with the definition as noted in section 1-1(q) of the Connecticut
General Statutes. (See Appendix A)
“Feasible” means able to be constructed or implemented consistent with sound engineering
principles.
“License” means the whole or any part of any permit, certificate of approval or similar form of
permission which may be required of any person by the provisions of sections 22a-36 to 22a-45,
inclusive.
"Management practice" means a practice, procedure, activity, structure or facility designed to
prevent or minimize pollution or other environmental damage or to maintain or enhance existing
environmental quality. Such management practices include, but are not limited to: erosion and
sedimentation controls; restrictions on land use or development; construction setbacks from
wetlands or watercourses; proper disposal of waste materials; procedures for equipment
maintenance to prevent fuel spillage; construction methods to prevent flooding or disturbance of
wetlands and watercourses; procedures for maintaining continuous stream flows; confining
-3-
construction that must take place in watercourses to times when water flows are low and fish and
wildlife will not be adversely affected.
"Marshes" are watercourses that are distinguished by the absence of trees and shrubs and the
dominance of soft-stemmed herbaceous plants. The water table in marshes is at or above the
ground surface throughout the year and areas of open water six inches or more in depth are
common, but seasonal water table fluctuations are encountered.
"Material" means any substance, solid or liquid, organic or inorganic, including but not limited to
soil, sediment, aggregate, land, gravel, clay, bog, mud, debris, sand, refuse or waste.
"Municipality" means the Town of Plainville.
"Nurseries" means places where plants are grown for sale, transplanting, or experimentation.
"Permit" see license
"Permittee" means the person to whom a license has been issued.
"Person" means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, limited liability company,
company, organization or legal entity of any kind, including municipal corporations,
governmental agencies or subdivisions thereof.
"Pollution" means harmful thermal effect or the contamination or rendering unclean or impure of
any waters of the state by reason of any waste or other materials discharged or deposited therein
by any public or private sewer or otherwise so as directly or indirectly to come in contact with
any waters. This includes, but is not limited to, erosion and sedimentation resulting from any
filling, land clearing or excavation activity.
“Prudent” means economically and otherwise reasonable in light of the social benefits to be
derived from the proposed regulated activity provided cost may be considered in deciding what is
prudent and further provided a mere showing of expense will not necessarily mean an alternative
is imprudent.
"Regulated activity" means any operation within or use of a wetland or watercourse involving
removal or deposition of material, or any obstruction, construction, alteration or pollution, of such
wetlands or watercourses, but shall not include the specified activities in section 22a-40 of the
Connecticut General Statutes. Furthermore, any clearing, grubbing, filling, grading, paving,
excavating, constructing, depositing or removing of material and discharging of storm water on
the land within one hundred (100) feet measured horizontally from the boundary of any wetland
or watercourse is a regulated activity. The Commission may rule that any other activity located
within such upland review area or in any other non-wetland or non-watercourse area is likely to
impact or affect wetlands or watercourses and is a regulated activity.
"Remove" includes, but shall not be limited to drain, excavate, mine, dig, dredge, suck, bulldoze,
dragline or blast.
"Rendering unclean or impure" means any alteration of the physical, chemical or biological
properties of any waters of the state, including, but not limited to, change in odor, color, turbidity
or taste.
-4-
"Significant impact" means any activity, including, but not limited to, the following activities
which may have a major effect:
1. Any activity involving deposition or removal of material which will or may have a
substantial effect on the wetland or watercourse or on wetlands or watercourses outside
the area for which the activity is proposed.
2. Any activity which substantially changes the natural channel or may inhibit the natural
dynamics of a watercourse system.
3. Any activity which substantially diminishes the natural capacity of an inland wetland or
watercourse to: support aquatic, plant or animal life and habitats; prevent flooding;
supply water; assimilate waste; facilitate drainage; provide recreation or open space; or
perform other functions.
4. Any activity which is likely to cause or has the potential to cause substantial turbidity,
siltation or sedimentation in a wetland or watercourse.
5. Any activity which causes substantial diminution of flow of a natural watercourse or
groundwater levels of the wetland or watercourse.
6. Any activity which is likely to cause or has the potential to cause pollution of a wetland
or watercourse.
7. Any activity which damages or destroys unique wetland or watercourse areas or such
areas having demonstrable scientific or educational value.
"Soil scientist" means an individual duly qualified in accordance with standards set by the Federal
Office of Personnel Management.
"Swamps" are watercourses that are distinguished by the dominance of wetland trees and shrubs.
"Submerged lands" means those lands which are inundated by water on a seasonal or more
frequent basis.
"Town" means the Town of Plainville.
"Waste" means sewage or any substance, liquid, gaseous, solid or radioactive, which may pollute
or tend to pollute any of the wetlands and watercourses of the Town.
"Watercourses" means rivers, streams, brooks, waterways, lakes, ponds, marshes, swamps, bogs,
and all other bodies of water, natural or artificial, vernal or intermittent, public or private, which
are contained within, flow through or border upon the Town or any portion thereof not regulated
pursuant to sections 22a-28 through 22a-35, inclusive, of the Connecticut General Statutes.
Intermittent watercourses shall be delineated by a defined permanent channel and bank and the
occurrence of two or more of the following characteristics: (a) evidence of scour or deposits of
recent alluvium or detritus, (b) the presence of standing or flowing water for a duration longer
than a particular storm incident, and (c) the presence of hydrophytic vegetation.
"Wetlands" means land, including submerged land as defined in this section, not regulated
pursuant to sections 22a-28 through 22a-35, inclusive, of the Connecticut General Statutes, which
consists of any of the soil types designated as poorly drained, very poorly drained, alluvial and
floodplain by the National Cooperative Soils Survey, as it may be amended from time to time, of
the Natural Resources Conservation Service of the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA).
Such areas may include filled, graded, or excavated sites which possess an aquic (saturated) soil
moisture regime as defined by the USDA Cooperative Soil Survey.
-5-
Section 3
Inventory of Inland Wetlands and Watercourses
3.1 The map of wetlands and watercourses entitled "Official Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Map,
Town of Plainville, Connecticut" delineates the general location and boundaries of inland
wetlands and the general location of watercourses. Copies of this map are available for
inspection at the office of the Town Clerk and in the Technical Services Department at the
Municipal Center. In all cases, the precise location of wetlands and watercourses shall be
determined by the actual character of the land, the distribution of wetland soil types and location
of watercourses. The Commission may use aerial photography, remote sensing imagery, resource
mapping, soils maps, site inspection observations or other information in determining the location
of the boundaries of wetlands and watercourses.
3.2 Any person may petition the Commission for an amendment to the map. All petitions for a map
change shall be submitted in writing and shall include all relevant facts and circumstances which
support the change. The petitioner shall bear the burden of proof regarding the proposed map
amendment. Such proof may include, but not be limited to aerial photography, remote sensing
imagery, resource mapping or other available information. The Commission may require such
person to provide an accurate delineation of regulated areas in accordance with section 15 of
these regulations.
3.3 The Commission shall maintain a current inventory of regulated areas within the town. The
Commission may amend its map as more accurate information becomes available.
3.4 All map amendments are subject to the public hearing process outlined in section 15 of these
regulations.
Section 4
Permitted Uses as of Right & Nonregulated Uses
4.1 The following operations and uses shall be permitted in inland wetlands and watercourses, as of
right:
a. grazing, farming, nurseries, gardening and harvesting of crops and farm ponds of three acres
or less essential to the farming operation, and activities conducted by, or under the authority
of, the Department of Environmental Protection for the purposes of wetland or watercourse
restoration or enhancement or mosquito control. The provisions of this subdivision shall not
be construed to include road construction or the erection of buildings not directly related to
the farming operation, relocation of watercourses with continual flow, filling or reclamation
of wetlands or watercourses with continual flow, clear cutting of timber except for the
expansion of agricultural crop land, the mining of top soil, peat, sand, gravel or similar
material from wetlands or watercourses for the purposes of sale;
b. a residential home (A) for which a building permit has been issued or (B) on a subdivision
lot, provided the permit has been issued or the subdivision has been approved by a municipal
planning, zoning or planning and zoning commission as of the effective date of promulgation
of the municipal regulations pursuant to subsection (b) of section 22a-42a, or as of July 1,
1974, which ever is earlier, and further provided no residential home shall be permitted as of
right pursuant to this subdivision unless the permit was obtained on or before July 1, 1987;
c. boat anchorage or mooring;
-6-
d. uses incidental to the enjoyment and maintenance of residential property, such property
defined as equal to or smaller than the largest minimum residential lot site permitted
anywhere in the municipality provided that in any town where there are no zoning regulations
establishing minimum residential lot sites, the largest minimum lot site shall be two acres.
Such incidental uses shall include maintenance of existing structures and landscaping, but
shall not include removal or deposition of significant amounts of material from or onto a
wetland or watercourse, or diversion or alteration of a watercourse;
e. Construction and operation, by water companies as defined by section 16-1 of the
Connecticut General Statutes or by municipal water supply systems as provided for in chapter
102 of the Connecticut General Statutes, of dams, reservoirs and other facilities necessary to
the impounding, storage and withdrawal of water in connection with public water supplies
except as provided in sections 22a-401 and 22a-403 of the Connecticut General Statutes and;
f. Maintenance relating to any drainage pipe which existed before the effective date of any
municipal regulations adopted pursuant to section 22a-42a of the Connecticut General
Statutes or July 1, 1974, whichever is earlier, provided such pipe is on property which is
zoned as residential but which does not contain hydrophytic vegetation. For purposes of this
subdivision, “maintenance” means the removal of accumulated leaves, soil, and other debris
whether by hand or machine, while the pipe remains in place.
g. Withdrawals of water for fire emergency purposes.
4.2 The following operations and uses shall be permitted, as nonregulated uses in wetlands and
watercourses, provided they do not disturb the natural and indigenous character of the wetland or
watercourse by removal or deposition of material, alteration or obstruction of water flow or
pollution of the wetland or watercourse:
a. conservation of soil, vegetation, water, fish, shellfish and wildlife; and
b. outdoor recreation including play and sporting areas, golf courses, field trials, nature study,
hiking, horseback riding, swimming, skin diving, camping, boating, water skiing, trapping,
hunting, fishing and shell fishing where otherwise legally permitted and regulated.
c. The installation of a dry hydrant by or under the authority of a municipal fire department,
provided such dry hydrant is only used for firefighting purposes and there is no alternative
access to a public water supply. For purposes of this section, “dry hydrant” means a nonpressurized
pipe system that: (A) is readily accessible to fire department apparatus from a
proximate public road, (B) provides for the withdrawal of water by suction to such fire
department apparatus, and (C) is permanently installed into a lake, pond or stream that is a
dependable source of water.
4.3 All activities in wetlands or watercourses involving filling, excavating, dredging, clear cutting,
clearing, or grading or any other alteration or use of a wetland or watercourse not specifically
permitted by this section and otherwise defined as a regulated activity by these regulations shall
require a permit from the Commission in accordance with section 6 of these regulations, or for
certain regulated activities located outside of wetlands and watercourses from the duly authorized
agent in accordance with section 12 of these regulations.
4.4 To carry out the purposes of this section, any person proposing a permitted operation and use or a
nonregulated operation and use shall, prior to commencement of such operation and use, notify
the Commission on a form provided by it, and provide the Commission with sufficient
information to enable it to properly determine that the proposed operation and use is a permitted
or nonregulated use of a wetland or watercourse. The Commission shall rule that the proposed
operation and use or portion of it is a permitted or nonregulated operation and use or that the
proposed operation and use is a regulated activity and a permit is required.
-7-
Section 5
Activities Regulated Exclusively by the Commissioner of Environmental Protection
5.1 The Commissioner of Environmental Protection shall have exclusive jurisdiction over regulated
activities in or affecting wetlands or watercourses, undertaken by any department, Commission or
instrumentality of the State of Connecticut, except any local or regional board of education,
pursuant to sections 22a-39 or 22a-45a of the Connecticut General Statues.
5.2 The Commissioner of Environmental Protection shall have exclusive jurisdiction over tidal
wetlands designated and regulated pursuant to sections 22a-28 through 22a-35 of the Connecticut
General Statutes, as amended.
5.3 The Commissioner of Environmental Protection shall have exclusive jurisdiction over activities
authorized under a dam repair or removal order issued by the Commissioner of Environmental
Protection under section 22a-402 of the Connecticut General Statutes or a permit issued by the
Commissioner of Environmental Protection under sections 22a-403 of the Connecticut General
Statutes. Any person receiving such dam repair or removal order or permit shall not be required
to obtain a permit from a municipal wetlands Commission for any action necessary to comply
with said dam order or to carry out the activities authorized by said permit.
5.4 The Commissioner of Environmental Protection shall have exclusive jurisdiction over the
discharge of fill or dredged materials into the wetlands and watercourses of the state pursuant to
section 401 of the Federal Clean Water Act, as amended, for activities regulated by the U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers under section 404 of the Federal Clean Water Act.
Section 6
Regulated Activities to be Licensed
6.1 No person shall conduct or maintain a regulated activity without first obtaining a permit for such
activity from the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission of the Town of Plainville.
6.2 Any person found to be conducting or maintaining a regulated activity without the prior
authorization of the Commission, or violating any other provision of these regulations, shall be
subject to the enforcement proceedings and penalties prescribed in section 14 of these regulations
and any other remedies as provided by law.
-8-
Section 7
Application Requirements
7.1 Any person intending to conduct a regulated activity or to renew or amend a permit to conduct
such activity, shall apply for a permit on a form provided by the Commission. The application
shall contain the information described in this section and any other information the Commission
may reasonably require. Application forms may be obtained in the Technical Services
Department at the Municipal Center.
7.2 If an application to the Town of Plainville Planning and Zoning Commission for subdivision or
resubdivision of land involves land containing a wetland or watercourse, the applicant shall, in
accordance with Section 8-3(g), 8-3c, or 8-26, as applicable, of the Connecticut General Statutes,
submit an application for a permit to the Commission in accordance with this section, no later
than the day the application is filed with such Planning and Zoning Commission.
7.3 The application shall contain such information as is necessary for a fair and informed
determination thereon by the Commission.
7.4 A prospective applicant may request the Commission to determine whether or not a proposed
activity involves a significant impact activity.
7.5 All applications shall include the following information in writing or on maps or drawings:
a. the applicant’s name, home and business mailing addresses and telephone numbers; if the
applicant is a Limited Liability Corporation or a Corporation, the managing member’s or
responsible corporate officer’s name, address, and telephone number;
b. the owner’s name, mailing address and telephone number and written consent of the land
owner if the applicant is not the owner of the land upon which the subject activity is
proposed;
c. the applicant’s interest in the land;
d. the geographical location of the land which is the subject of the proposed activity and a
description of the land in sufficient detail to allow identification of the inland wetlands and
watercourses, the area(s) (in acres or square feet) of wetlands or watercourses to be disturbed,
soil type(s), and wetland vegetation;
e. the purpose and a description of the proposed activity and proposed erosion and
sedimentation controls and other management practices and mitigation measures, including
low impact development practices, which may be considered as a condition of issuing a
permit for the proposed regulated activity including, but not limited to, measures to (1)
prevent or minimize pollution or other environmental damage, (2) maintain or enhance
existing environmental quality, or (3) in the following order of priority: restore, enhance and
create productive wetland or watercourse resources;
f. alternatives, including low impact development practices, which would cause less or no
environmental impact to wetlands or watercourses and why the alternative as set forth in the
application was chosen; all such alternatives shall be diagramed on a site plan or drawing;
g. a site plan showing the proposed activity and existing and proposed conditions in relation to
wetlands and watercourses and identifying any further activities associated with, or
reasonably related to, the proposed regulated activity which are made inevitable by the
proposed regulated activity and which may have an impact on wetlands or watercourses;
h. names and mailing addresses of adjacent land owners;
-9-
i. statement by the applicant that the applicant is familiar with all the information provided in
the application and is aware of the penalties for obtaining a permit through deception or
through inaccurate or misleading information;
j. authorization for the members and agents of the Commission to inspect the subject land, at
reasonable times, during the pendency of an application and for the life of the permit;
k. a completed DEP reporting form; the Commission shall revise or correct the information
provided by the applicant and submit the form to the Commissioner of Environmental
Protection in accordance with section 22a-39-14 of the Regulations of Connecticut State
Agencies;
l. any other information the Commission deems necessary to the understanding of what the
applicant is proposing; and
m. submission of the appropriate filing fee based on the fee schedule established by the
Plainville Town Council.
7.6 At the discretion of the Commission or its agent, or when the proposed activity involves a
significant impact, additional information, based on the nature and anticipated effects of the
activity, including but not limited to the following, is required:
a. site plans for the proposed activity and the land which will be affected thereby which show
existing and proposed conditions, wetland and watercourse boundaries, land contours,
boundaries of land ownership, proposed alterations and uses of wetlands and watercourses,
and other pertinent features of the land and the proposed activity, prepared by a professional
engineer, land surveyor, architect or landscape architect licensed by the state, or by such other
qualified person;
b. engineering reports and analyses and additional drawings to fully describe the proposed
activity including any filling, excavation, drainage or hydraulic modifications to watercourses
and the proposed erosion and sedimentation control plan;
c. mapping of soil types consistent with the categories established by the National Cooperative
Soil Survey of the U.S. Natural Resources Conservation Service; the wetlands shall be
delineated in the field by a soil scientist and the soil scientist’s field delineation shall be
depicted on the site plans;
d. a description of the ecological communities and functions of the wetlands or watercourses
involved with the application and the effects of the proposed activity on these communities
and wetland functions;
e. a description of how the applicant will change, diminish, or enhance the ecological
communities and functions of the wetlands or watercourses involved in the application and
each alternative which would cause less or no environmental impact to wetlands or
watercourses, and a description of why each alternative considered was deemed neither
feasible nor prudent;
f. analysis of chemical or physical characteristics of any fill material; and
g. management practices and other measures designed to mitigate the impact of the proposed
activity.
7.7 The applicant shall certify whether:
a. any portion of the property on which the regulated activity is proposed is located within 500
feet of the boundary of an adjoining municipality;
b. traffic attributable to the completed project on the site will use streets within the adjoining
municipality to enter or exit the site;
c. sewer or water drainage from the project site will flow through and impact the sewage or
drainage system within the adjoining municipality; or,
-10-
d. water run-off from the improved site will impact streets or other municipal or private
property within the adjoining municipality.
7.8 Ten (10) copies of all application materials shall be submitted to comprise a complete application
unless an applicant is otherwise directed by the Commission’s staff.
7.9 Any application to renew or amend an existing permit shall be filed with the Commission in
accordance with section 8 of these regulations at least sixty-five (65) days prior to the expiration
date of the permit. Any application to renew or amend such an existing permit shall contain the
information required under section 7 of these regulations provided:
a. the application may incorporate the documentation and record of the prior application;
b. the application shall describe the extent of work completed at the time of filing and the
schedule for completing the activities authorized in the permit;
d. the application shall state the reason why the authorized activity was not initiated or
completed within the time specified in the permit;
d. the application shall describe any changes in facts or circumstances involved with or affecting
wetlands or watercourses or use of the land for which the permit was issued;
e. the Commission may, prior to the expiration of a permit, accept an untimely application to
renew such permit if the authorized activity is ongoing and allow the continuation of work
beyond the expiration date if, in its judgment, the permit is likely to be renewed and the
public interest or environment will be best served by not interrupting the activity;
7.10 Any application to renew a permit shall be granted upon request of the permit holder unless the
Commission finds that there has been a substantial change in circumstances which requires a new
permit application or an enforcement action has been undertaken with regard to the regulated
activity for which the permit was issued provided no permit shall be valid for more than ten
years; and further provided that any permit issued prior to July 1, 2011 that did not expire prior to
May 9, 2011 shall be valid for no more than fourteen years.
7.11 For any permit application involving property subject to a conservation restriction or preservation
restriction, the following shall apply:
a. for purposes of this section, "conservation restriction" means a limitation, whether or not
stated in the form of a restriction, easement, covenant or condition, in any deed, will or other
instrument executed by or on behalf of the owner of the land described therein, including, but
not limited to, the state or any political subdivision of the state, or in any order of taking such
land whose purpose is to retain land or water areas predominantly in their natural, scenic or
open condition or in agricultural, farming, forest or open space use.
b. for purposes of this section, "preservation restriction" means a limitation, whether or not
stated in the form of a restriction, easement, covenant or condition, in any deed, will or other
instrument executed by or on behalf of the owner of land, including, but not limited to, the
state or any political subdivision of the state, or in any order of taking of such land whose
purpose is to preserve historically significant structures or sites.
c. no person shall file a permit application, other than for interior work in an existing building or
for exterior work on an existing building that does not expand or alter the footprint of such
existing building, relating to property that is subject to a conservation restriction or a
preservation restriction unless the applicant provides proof that the applicant has provided
written notice of such application, by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the party
-11-
holding such restriction, including, but not ,limited to, any state agency that holds such
restriction, not later than sixty days prior to the filling of the permit application.
d. in lieu of such notice pursuant to subsection 7.11c, the applicant may submit a letter from the
holder of such restriction or from the holder’s authorized agent, verifying that the application
is in compliance with the terms of the restriction. (03/04/09)
-12-
Section 8
Application Procedures
8.1 All petitions, applications, requests or appeals shall be submitted to the Inland Wetlands and
Watercourses Commission of the Town Plainville.
8.2 The Commission shall, in accordance with Connecticut General Statutes section 8-7d(f), notify
the clerk of any adjoining municipality of the pendency of any application, petition, appeal,
request or plan concerning any project on any site in which:
a. any portion of the property affected by a decision of the Commission is within five hundred
feet of the boundary of an adjoining municipality;
b. a significant portion of the traffic to the completed project on the site will use streets within
the adjoining municipality to enter or exit the site;
c. a significant portion of the sewer or water drainage from the project on the site will flow
through and significantly impact the drainage or sewerage system within the adjoining
municipality; or
d. water run-off from the improved site will impact streets or other municipal or private
property within the adjoining municipality.
Such notice shall be made by certified mail, return receipt requested, and shall be mailed within
seven days of the date of receipt of the application, petition, appeal, request or plan.
8.3 When an application is filed to conduct or cause to be conducted a regulated activity upon
an inland wetland or watercourse, any portion of which is within the watershed of a water
company as defined in section 25-32a of the Connecticut General Statutes, the applicant
shall provide written notice of the application to the water company and the Commissioner
of Public Health in a format prescribed by said commissioner, provided such water
company or said commissioner has filed a map showing the boundaries of the watershed on
the land records of the municipality in which the application is made and with the Inland
Wetlands Commission of such municipality. Such notice shall be made by certified mail,
return receipt requested, and shall be mailed not later than seven days after the date of the
application. The water company and the Commissioner of Public Health, through a
representative, may appear and be heard at any hearing on the application. Documentation
of such notice shall be provided to the Commission. (4/16/07)
8.4 The date of receipt of a petition, application, request or appeal shall be the day of the next
regularly scheduled meeting of the Commission, immediately following the day of submission to
the Commission or its agent of such petition, application, request or appeal or thirty-five days
after such submission, whichever is sooner.
8.5 At any time during the review period, the applicant shall provide such additional information as
the Commission may reasonably require. Requests for such additional information shall not stay
the time limitations as set forth in subsection 11.2 of these regulations.
8.6 All applications shall be open for public inspection.
8.7 Incomplete applications may be denied.
-13-
Section 9
Public Hearings
9.1 The Inland Wetlands Commission shall not hold a public hearing on an application unless the
inland wetlands Commission determines that the proposed activity may have a significant impact
on wetlands or watercourses, a petition signed by at least twenty-five persons who are eighteen
years of age or older and who reside in the municipality in which the regulated activity is
proposed, requesting a hearing is filed with the inland wetlands Commission not later than
fourteen days after the date of receipt of such application, or the inland wetlands Commission
finds that a public hearing regarding such application would be in the public interest.
The inland wetlands Commission may issue a permit without a public hearing provided no
petition provided for in this section is filed with the inland wetlands Commission on or before the
fourteenth day after the date of receipt of the application. Such hearing shall be held no later than
sixty-five days after the receipt of such application.
All applications and maps and documents relating thereto shall be open for public inspection. At
such hearing any person or persons may appear and be heard.
9.2 Notice of the public hearing shall be published at least twice at intervals of not less than two days,
the first not more than fifteen days and not fewer than ten days, and the last not less than two days
before the date set for the hearing in a newspaper having a general circulation in each town where
the affected wetland and watercourse is located.
9.3 In addition to the notification requirements required under Section 9.2, the applicant shall post a
sign fifteen (15) days in advance of such hearing in conformity with approved specifications
(available in the Department of Technical Services). The following requirements shall apply:
a. A signed and notarized affidavit must be submitted by the applicant on the day of the hearing
affirming compliance with the regulations.
b. Failure to post the required sign in accordance with the approved specifications and within
the prescribed timeframe will result in the application being incomplete and the Commission
may deny without prejudice, or allow the applicant to withdraw without prejudice.
c. Application fees shall not be refunded or credited to any subsequent same or similar
application that fails to meet these requirements.
d. Signs shall not be required for a public hearing involving amendments to the official Inland
Wetlands and Watercourses Map or Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations (text).
-14-
Section 10
Considerations for Decision
10.1 The Commission may consider the following in making its decision on an application:
a. The application and its supporting documentation
b. Reports from other agencies and commissions including but not limited to the
Town of Plainville:
1. Conservation Commission
2. Planning and Zoning Commissions
3. Building Official
4. Health Officer
c. The Commission may also consider comments on any application from the North Central
Conservation District, the Central Connecticut Regional Planning Agency or other regional
organizations; agencies in adjacent municipalities which may be affected by the proposed
activity, or other technical agencies or organizations which may undertake additional studies
or investigations.
d. Non-receipt of comments from state agencies and commissions listed in subsection 10.1b and
c above within the prescribed time shall neither delay nor prejudice the decision of the
Commission.
e. For an application for which a public hearing is held, public comments, evidence and
testimony.
10.2 Criteria for Decision. In carrying out the purposes and policies of sections 22a-36 to 22a-45,
inclusive, of the Connecticut General Statutes, including matters relating to regulating, licensing
and enforcing of the provisions thereof, the Commission shall take into consideration all relevant
facts and circumstances, including but not limited to:
a. the environmental impact of the proposed regulated activity on wetlands or watercourses;
b. the applicant’s purpose for, and any feasible and prudent alternatives to, the proposed
regulated activity which alternatives would cause less or no environmental impact to
wetlands or watercourses.
c. the relationship between the short term and long term impacts of the proposed regulated
activity on wetlands or watercourses and the maintenance and enhancement of long-term
productivity of such wetlands or watercourses.
d. Irreversible and irretrievable loss of wetland or watercourse resources which would be caused
by the proposed regulated activity, including the extent to which such activity would
foreclose a future ability to protect, enhance or restore such resources, and any mitigation
measures which may be considered as a condition of issuing a permit for such activity
including, but not limited to, measures to (1) prevent or minimize pollution or other
environmental damage, (2) maintain or enhance existing environmental quality, or (3) in the
following order of priority: restore, enhance and create productive wetland or watercourse
resources;
e. the character and degree of injury to, or interference with, safety, health or the reasonable use
of property which is caused or threatened by the proposed regulated activity; and
f. impacts of the proposed regulated activity on wetlands or watercourses outside the area for
which the activity is proposed and future activities associated with or reasonably related to,
the proposed regulated activity which are made inevitable by the proposed regulated activity
and which may have an impact on wetlands and watercourses.
-15-
10.3 In the case of an application which received a public hearing pursuant to a finding by the
Commission that the proposed activity may have a significant impact on wetlands or
watercourses, a permit shall not be issued unless the Commission finds on the basis of the record
that a feasible and prudent alternative does not exist. In making this finding the Commission
shall consider the facts and circumstances set forth in subsection 10.2 of this section. The finding
and the reasons therefore shall be stated on the record in writing.
10.4 In the case of an application which is denied on the basis of a finding that there may be feasible
and prudent alternatives to the proposed regulated activity which have less adverse impact on
wetlands or watercourses, the Commission shall propose on the record in writing the types of
alternatives which the applicant may investigate provided this subsection shall not be construed to
shift the burden from the applicant to prove that he is entitled to the permit or to present
alternatives to the proposed regulated activity.
10.5 For purposes of this section, (1) “wetlands and watercourses” includes aquatic, plant or animal
life and habitats in wetlands or watercourses, and (2) “habitats” means areas or environments in
which an organism or biological population normally lives or occurs.
10.6 A municipal inland wetlands agency shall not deny or condition an application for a regulated
activity in an area outside wetlands or watercourses on the basis of an impact or effect on aquatic,
plant, or animal life unless such activity will likely impact or affect the physical characteristics of
such wetlands or watercourses.
10.7 In reaching its decision on any application after a public hearing, the Commission shall base its
decision on the record of that hearing. Documentary evidence or other material not in the hearing
record shall not be considered by the Commission in its decision.
10.8 In the case of an application where the applicant has provided written notice pursuant to
subsection 7.11c of these regulations, the holder of the restriction may provide proof to the inland
wetlands agency that granting of the permit application will violate the terms of the restriction.
Upon a finding that the requested land use violates the terms of such restriction, the inland
wetlands agency shall not grant the permit approval. (03/04/09)
10.9 In the case of an application where the applicant fails to comply with the provisions of
subsections 7.11c or 7.11d of these regulations, 1) the party holding the conservation or
preservation restriction, other than a state agency that holds such restriction, may, not later than
fifteen days after receipt of actual notice of permit approval, file an appeal with the inland
wetlands agency, subject to the rules and regulations of such agency relating to appeals.
The inland wetlands agency shall reverse the permit approval upon a finding that the requested
land use violates the terms of such restriction; or 2) the state agency that holds such restriction
may, not later than thirty days after receipt of actual notice of permit approval, file an appeal with
the inlands agency, subject to the rules and regulations of such agency relating to appeals. The
inland wetlands agency shall immediately reverse such permit approval if the commissioner of
the state agency that holds such restriction certifies that the lands use authorized in such permit
violates the terms of such conservation or preservation restriction.
10.10 Nothing is subsections 7.11.c or 7.11.d of these regulations shall be construed to prohibit the
filing of a permit application or to require such written notice when the activity that is subject of
such permit application will occur on a portion of property that is not restricted under the terms of
such conservation or preservation restriction.
-16-
Section 11
Decision Process and Permit
11.1 The Commission, or its duly authorized agent acting pursuant to Section 12 of these regulations,
may, in accordance with Section 10 of these regulations, grant the application as filed or grant it
upon other terms, conditions, limitations or modifications of the regulated activity designed to
carry out the purposes and policies of the Act, or deny the application. Such terms may include
any reasonable measures which would mitigate the impacts of the regulated activity and which
would (a) prevent or minimize pollution or other environmental damage, (b) maintain or enhance
existing environmental quality, or (c) in the following order of priority: restore, enhance and
create productive wetland or watercourse resources.
11.2 No later than sixty-five (65) days after receipt of an application, the Commission may hold a
public hearing on such application. At such hearing any person or persons may appear and be
heard and may be represented by agent or attorney. The hearing shall be completed within
thirty-five (35) days of its commencement. Action shall be taken on applications within sixtyfive
(65) days after completion of a public hearing. In the absence of a public hearing, action
shall be taken on applications within sixty-five (65) days from the date of receipt of the
application. The applicant may consent to one or more extensions of the periods specified in this
subsection, provided the total extension of all such periods shall not be for longer than sixty-five
(65) days, or may withdraw the application.
The failure of the Commission to act within any time period specified in this subsection, or any
extension thereof, shall not be deemed to constitute approval of the application. An application
deemed incomplete by the Commission shall be withdrawn by the applicant or denied by the
Commission. (4/2/08)
11.3 The Commission shall state upon its record the reasons and bases for its decision.
11.4 The Commission shall notify the applicant and any person entitled to such notice of its decision
within fifteen (15) days of the date of the decision by certified mail, return receipt requested, and
the Commission shall cause notice of its order in the issuance or denial of the permit, to be
published in a newspaper having general circulation in the town wherein the inland wetland or
watercourse lies. In any case in which such notice is not published within such fifteen-day
period, the applicant may provide for the publication of such notice within ten days thereafter.
11.5 If an activity authorized by an inland wetland permit also involves an activity which requires a
zoning or subdivision approval, special zoning permit, or variance or special exception, under
sections 8-3(g), 8-3c, or 8-26 of the Connecticut General Statues, the Commission shall file a
copy of the decision and report on the application with the Town of Plainville’s Planning and
Zoning Commission within fifteen days of the date of the decision thereon.
11.6 Any permit issued by the Commission for the development of land for which an approval is
required under section 8-3, 8-25 or 8-26 of the Connecticut General Statutes shall be valid for
five years provided the Commission may establish a specific time period within which any
regulated activity shall be conducted. Any permit issued by the Commission for any other
activity shall be valid for not less than two years and not more than five years. Any permit issued
by the Commission prior to July 1, 2011 that was in effect and did not expire prior to May 9,
2011 shall be valid for a period not less than nine years after the date of such approval.
-17-
11.7 No permit issued by the Commission shall be assigned or transferred without the written
permission of the Commission.
11.8 If a bond or insurance is required in accordance with section 13 of these regulations, the
Commission may withhold issuing the permit until such bond or insurance is provided.
11.9 General provisions in the issuance of all permits:
a. The Commission has relied in whole or in part on information provided by the applicant and
if such information subsequently proves to be false, deceptive, incomplete or inaccurate, the
permit may be modified, suspended or revoked.
b. All permits issued by the Commission are subject to and do not derogate any present or future
rights or powers of the Commission or the Town of Plainville, and convey no rights in real
estate or material nor any exclusive privileges, and are further subject to any and all public
and private rights and to any federal, state, and municipal laws or regulations pertinent to the
subject land or activity.
c. If the activity authorized by the Commission’s permit also involves an activity which requires
zoning or subdivision approval, special permit, variance or special exception under sections
8.3(g), 8-3c, or 8-26 of the Connecticut General Statutes, no work pursuant to the wetland
permit may begin until such approval is obtained.
d. In constructing the authorized activities, the permittee shall implement such management
practices consistent with the terms and conditions of the permit as needed to control storm
water discharges and to prevent erosion and sedimentation and to otherwise prevent pollution
of wetlands and watercourses.
e. Permits are not transferable without the prior written consent of the Commission.
-18-
Section 12
Action by Duly Authorized Agent
12 .1 The Commission may delegate to its duly authorized agent the authority to approve or extend a
license for an activity that is not located in a wetland or watercourse when such agent finds that
the conduct of such activity would result in no greater that a minimal impact on any wetlands or
watercourses provided such agent has completed the comprehensive training program developed
by the Commissioner of Environmental Protection pursuant to section 22a-39 of the Connecticut
General Statutes. Requests for such approval shall be made on a form provided by the
Commission and shall contain the information listed under Section 7.5 of these regulations and
any other information the Commission may reasonably require. Notwithstanding the provisions
for receipt and processing applications prescribed in Sections 8, 9 and 11 of these regulations,
such agent may approve or extend such an activity at any time.
12.2 Any person receiving such approval from such agent shall, within ten days of the date of such
approval, publish, at the applicant’s expense, notice of the approval in a newspaper having a
general circulation in the town wherein the activity is located or will have an effect. Any person
may appeal such decision of such agent to the Commission within fifteen days after the
publication date of the notice and the Commission shall consider such appeal at its next regularly
scheduled meeting provided such meeting is no earlier than three business days after receipt by
such Commission or its agent of such appeal. Any person may appear and be heard at the
meeting held by the Commission to consider the subject appeal. The Commission shall, at its
discretion, sustain, alter, or reject the decision of its agent or require an application for a permit in
accordance with Section 7 of these regulations.
Section 13
Bond and Insurance
13.1 The Commission may require as a permit condition the filing of a bond with such surety in such
amount and in a form approved by the Commission.
13.2 The bond or surety shall be conditioned on compliance with the provisions of these regulations
and the terms, conditions and limitations established in the permit.
-19-
Section 14
Enforcement
14.1 The Commission may appoint an agent or agents to act in its behalf with the authority to issue
notices of violation or cease and desist orders and carry out other actions or investigations
necessary for the enforcement of these regulations. In carrying out the purposes of this section,
the Commission or its duly authorized agent shall take into consideration the criteria for decision
under section 10.2 of these regulations.
14.2 The Commission or its agent may make regular inspections at reasonable hours of all regulated
activities for which permits have been issued with the consent of the property owner or the
authorized agent of the owner during the life of the permit.
14.3 In the case in which a permit has not been issued or a permit has expired, the Commission or its
agent may make regular inspections at reasonable hours with the consent of the property owner or
the authorized agent of the property owner.
14.4 If the Commission or its duly authorized agent finds that any person is conducting or maintaining
any activity, facility or condition which is in violation of the Act or these regulations, the
Commission or its duly authorized agent may:
a. issue a written order by certified mail, return receipt requested, to such person conducting
such activity or maintaining such facility or condition to immediately cease such activity or to
correct such facility or condition. Within ten (10) calendar days of the issuance of such order
the Commission shall hold a hearing to provide the person an opportunity to be heard and
show cause why the order should not remain in effect. The Commission shall consider the
facts presented at the hearing and within ten (10) days of the completion of the hearing notify
the person by certified mail that the original order remains in effect, that a revised order is in
effect, or that the order has been withdrawn. The Commission shall publish notice of its
decision in a newspaper having general circulation in the municipality. The original order
shall be effective upon issuance and shall remain in effect until the Commission affirms,
revises or withdraws the order. The issuance of an order pursuant to this subsection shall not
delay or bar an action pursuant to section 22a-44(b) of the Connecticut General Statutes, as
amended.
b. issue a notice of violation to such person conducting such activity or maintaining such facility
or condition, stating the nature of the violation, the jurisdiction of the Commission, and
prescribing the necessary action and steps to correct the violation including, without
limitation, halting work in wetlands or watercourses. The Commission may request that the
individual appear at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Commission to discuss the
unauthorized activity, and/or provide a written reply to the notice or file an application for the
necessary permit. Failure to carry out the action(s) directed in a notice of violation may result
in issuance of the order provided in section 14.4.a or other enforcement proceedings as
provided by law.
14.5 The Commission may suspend or revoke a permit if it finds that the permittee has not complied
with the terms, conditions or limitations set forth in the permit or has exceeded the scope of the
work as set forth in the application including application plans. Prior to revoking or suspending
any permit, the Commission shall issue notice to the permittee, personally or by certified mail,
return receipt requested, setting forth the facts or conduct which warrants the intended action.
The Commission shall hold a hearing to provide the permittee an opportunity to show that it is in
compliance with its permit and any and all requirements for retention of the permit.
-20-
The permittee shall be notified of the Commission’s decision to suspend, revoke, or maintain a
permit by certified mail within fifteen (15) days of the date of its decision. The Commission
shall publish notice of the suspension or revocation in a newspaper having general circulation in
the municipality.
-21-
Section 15
Amendments
15.1 These regulations and the Official Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Map for the Town of
Plainville may be amended from time to time by the Commission in accordance with changes in
the Connecticut General Statutes or regulations of the Connecticut Department of Environmental
Protection, or as new information regarding soils and inland wetlands and watercourses becomes
available.
15.2 An application filed with the Commission which is in conformance with the applicable inland
wetlands regulations as of the date of the receipt of such application shall not be required
thereafter to comply with any change in inland wetland regulations, including changes to setbacks
and buffers, taking effect on or after the date of such receipt and any appeal from the decision of
such Commission with respect to such application shall not be dismissed by the Superior Court
on the grounds that such a change has taken effect on or after the date of such receipt. The
provisions of this section shall not be construed to apply (1) to the establishment, amendment or
change of boundaries of inland wetlands or watercourses or (2) to any change in regulations
necessary to make such regulations consistent with the provisions of the Act as of the date of such
receipt.
15.3 These regulations and the Town of Plainville Official Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Map
shall be amended in the manner specified in section 22a-42a of the Connecticut General Statutes,
as amended. The Commission shall provide the Commissioner of Environmental Protection with
a copy of any proposed regulations and notice of the public hearing to consider any proposed
regulations or amendments thereto, except map amendments, at least thirty-five days before the
public hearing on their adoption.
15.4 Petitions requesting changes or amendments to the Official Inland Wetlands and Watercourses
Map, Plainville, Connecticut, shall contain at least the following information:
a. the petitioner's name, mailing address and telephone number;
b. the address, or location, of the land affected by the petition;
c. the petitioner's interest in the land affected by the petition
d. map(s) showing the geographic location of the land affected by the petition and the existing
and the proposed wetland(s) and watercourse(s) boundaries on such land in accurate detail
together with the documentation supporting such proposed boundary locations; and
e. the reasons for the requested action.
15.5 Any person who submits a petition to amend the Official Inland Wetlands and Watercourses
Map, Plainville, Connecticut, shall bear the burden of proof for all requested map amendments.
Such proof may include, but is not limited to, professional interpretation of aerial photography
and remote sensing imagery, resource mapping, soils mapping, or other information acceptable to
the Commission. If such person is the owner, developer or contract purchaser of the land which
is the subject of the petition, or if such person is representing the interests of such an owner,
developer or purchaser, in addition to the information required in subsection 15.4, the petition
shall include:
a. the name, mailing address and telephone number of the owner(s) of such land and owner(s)
agent or other representative;
b. the names and mailing addresses of the owners of abutting land;
-22-
c. documentation by a soil scientist of the distribution of wetland soils on said land. Such
documentation shall at a minimum include the report of the soil scientist documenting the
location of wetland soils on the land and a map of the said land indicating the flag locations
set by the soil scientist and defining the boundaries of wetland soil types; and
d. map(s) showing any proposed development of the land in relation to existing and proposed
wetland and watercourse boundaries.
15.6 Watercourses shall be delineated by a soil scientist, geologist, ecologist or other qualified
individual.
15.7 A public hearing shall be held on petitions to amend the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Map.
Notice of the hearing shall be published in a newspaper having a general circulation in the
municipality where the land that is the subject of the hearing is located at least twice at intervals
of not less than two days, the first not more than fifteen days, nor less than ten days, and the last
not less than two days before the date set for the hearing. All materials including maps and
documents relating to the petition shall be open for public inspection.
15.8 The Commission shall hold a public hearing on a petition to amend the regulations and the Inland
Wetlands and Watercourses Map within sixty-five days after receipt of such petition. The
hearing shall be completed within thirty-five days after commencement. The Commission shall
act upon the changes requested in such petition within sixty-five days after completion of such
hearing. At such hearing, any person or persons may appear and be heard and may be
represented by agent or attorney. The petitioner may consent to one or more extensions of any
period specified in this subsection, provided the total extension of all such periods shall not be for
longer than sixty-five days, or may withdraw such petition. Failure of the Commission to act
within any time period specified in this subsection or any extension thereof, shall not be deemed
to constitute approval of the petition.
15.9 The Commission shall make its decision and state, in writing, the reasons why the change in the
Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Map was made.
-23-
Section 16
Appeals
16.1 Appeal on actions of the Commission shall be made in accordance with the provisions of section
22a-43 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
16.2 Notice of such appeal shall be served upon the Commission and the Commissioner of
Environmental Protection.
-24-
Section 17
Conflict and Severance
17.1 If there is a conflict among the provisions of these regulations, the provision which imposes the
most stringent standards for the use of wetlands and watercourses shall govern. The invalidity of
any word, clause, sentence, section, part, subsection, subdivision or provision of these regulations
shall not affect the validity of any other part which can be given effect without such invalid part
or parts.
17.2 If there is a conflict between the provisions of these regulations and the provisions of the Act, the
provisions of the Act shall govern.
-25-
Section 18
Other Permits
18.1 Nothing in these regulations shall obviate the requirements for the applicant to obtain any other
assents, permits or licenses required by law or regulation by the Town of Plainville, the State of
Connecticut or the Government of the United States including any approval required by the
Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers.
Obtaining such assents, permits or licenses is the sole responsibility of the applicant.
-26-
Section 19
Application Fees
19.1 Method of Payment. All fees required by the Town shall be submitted to the Commission by
check or money order payable to the Town of Plainville, or by cash at the time the application is
filed with the Commission.
19.2 No application shall be granted or approved by the Commission unless the correct application fee
is paid in full or unless a waiver has been granted by the Commission pursuant to subsection 19.7
of these regulations.
19.3 The application fee is not refundable.
19.4 Fee Schedule. Application fees shall be based on the schedule adopted by the Plainville Town
Council.
19.5 The Town of Plainville Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission may require additional
technical assistance in evaluating an application submitted to the Commission in accordance with
these Regulations if it finds that the nature and intensity of development may have a significant
impact on the site and its surrounding areas and that Town staff will not be able to complete a
technical review of an application in the time period prescribed by state statute. If the Town of
Plainville Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission requires such expertise, the expense of
same will be estimated by the Commission, based on preliminary estimates from such experts,
and said estimate of costs times 150% will be paid over to the Commission by the applicant prior
to the review of said application. Upon completion of the technical review and a determination of
the costs incurred any excess will be refunded for costs incurred, to the applicant. Applicant shall
not be responsible for costs incurred in excess of 150% of the Commission's estimate.
19.6 Exemption. Boards, commissions, councils and departments of the Town of Plainville are exempt
from all fee requirements.
19.7 Waiver. The applicant may petition the Commission to waive, reduce or allow delayed payment
of the fee. Such petitions shall be in writing and shall state fully the facts and circumstances the
Commission should consider in its determination under this subsection. The Commission may
waive all or part of the application fee if the Commission determines that:
a. The activity applied for would clearly result in a substantial public benefit to the environment
or to the public health and safety and the applicant would reasonably be deterred from
initiating the activity solely or primarily as a result of the amount of the application fee, or
b. The amount of the application fee is clearly excessive in relation to the cost to the Town for
reviewing and processing the application.
c. The applicant has shown good cause.
The Commission shall state upon its record the basis for all actions under this subsection.
-27-
Section 20
Effective Date of Regulations
20.1 These regulations are effective upon filing in the Office of the Town Clerk and publication of a
notice of such filing in a newspaper having general circulation in the Town of Plainville.
-28-
APPENDIX A
Statutory Definition of Agriculture
Connecticut General Statutes section 1-1(q), as amended
Except as otherwise specifically defined, the words “agriculture” and “farming” shall include cultivation
of the soil, dairying, forestry, raising or harvesting any agricultural or horticultural commodity, including
the raising, shearing, feeding, caring for, training and management of livestock, including horses, bees,
poultry, fur-bearing animals and wildlife, and the raising or harvesting of oysters, clams, mussels, other
molluscan shellfish or fish; the operation, management, conservation, improvement or maintenance of a
farm and its buildings, tools and equipment, or salvaging timber or cleared land of brush or other debris
left by storm, as an incident to such farming operations; the production or harvesting of maple syrup or
maple sugar, or any agricultural commodity, including lumber, as an incident to ordinary farming
operations or the harvesting of mushrooms, the hatching of poultry, or the construction, operation or
maintenance of ditches, canals, reservoirs or waterways used exclusively for farming purposes; handling,
planting, drying, packing, packaging, processing, freezing, grading, storing or delivering to storage or to
market, or to a carrier for transportation to market, or for direct sale any agricultural or horticultural
commodity as an incident to ordinary farming operations, or, in the case of fruits and vegetables, as an
incident to the preparation of such fruits or vegetables for market or for direct sale. The term “farm”
includes farm buildings, and accessory buildings thereto, nurseries, orchards, ranges, greenhouses,
hoophouses and other temporary structures or other structures used primarily for the raising and, as an
incident to ordinary farming operations, the sale of agricultural or horticultural commodities. The term
“aquaculture” means the farming of the waters of the state and tidal wetlands and the production of
protein food, including fish, oysters, clams, mussels and other mulluscan shellfish, on leased, franchised
and public underwater farm lands. Nothing herein shall restrict the power of a local zoning authority
under chapter 124.
-29-
APPENDIX B
Connecticut General Statutes section 8-7d, as amended
Hearings and decisions. Time limits. Day of receipt. Notice to adjoining municipality. (a) In all
matters wherein a formal petition, application, request or appeal must be submitted to a zoning
commission, planning and zoning commission or zoning board of appeals under this chapter, a planning
commission under chapter 126 or an inland wetlands Commission under chapter 440 and a hearing is
required or otherwise held on such petition, application, request or appeal, such hearing shall commence
within sixty-five days after receipt of such petition, application, request or appeal and shall be completed
within thirty-five days after such hearing commences, unless a shorter period of time is required under
this chapter, chapter 126 or chapter 440. Notice of the hearing shall be published in a newspaper having a
general circulation in such municipality where the land that is the subject of the hearing is located at least
twice, at intervals of not less than two days, the first not more than fifteen days or less than ten days and
the last not less than two days before the date set for the hearing. In addition to such notice, such
commission, board or Commission may, by regulation, provide for notice to persons who own or occupy
land that is adjacent to the land that is the subject of the hearing. All applications and maps and
documents relating thereto shall be open for public inspection. At such hearing, any person or persons
may appear and be heard and may be represented by agent or by attorney. All decisions on such matters
shall be rendered within sixty-five days after completion of such hearing, unless a shorter period of time
is required under this chapter, chapter 126 or chapter 440. The petitioner or applicant may consent to one
or more extensions of any period specified in this subsection, provided the total extension of all such
periods shall not be for longer than sixty-five days, or may withdraw such petition, application, request or
appeal.
(b) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, whenever the approval of a site
plan is the only requirement to be met or remaining to be met under the zoning regulations for any
building, use or structure, a decision on an application for approval of such site plan shall be rendered
within sixty-five days after receipt of such site plan. Whenever a decision is to be made on an application
for subdivision approval under chapter 126 on which no hearing is held, such decision shall be rendered
within sixty-five days after receipt of such application. Whenever a decision is to be made on an inland
wetlands and watercourses application under chapter 440 on which no hearing is held, such decision shall
be rendered within sixty-five days after receipt of such application. The applicant may consent to one or
more extensions of such period, provided the total period of any such extension or extensions shall not
exceed sixty-five days or may withdraw such plan or application.
(c) For purposes of subsection (a) or (b) of this section and section 7-246a, the date of receipt of a
petition, application, request or appeal shall be the day of the next regularly scheduled meeting of such
commission, board or Commission, immediately following the day of submission to such commission,
board or Commission or its agent of such petition, application, request or appeal or thirty-five days after
such submission, whichever is sooner.
If the commission, board or Commission does not maintain an office with regular office hours, the office
of the clerk of the municipality shall act as the agent of such commission, board or Commission for the
receipt of any petition, application, request or appeal.
(d) The provisions of subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to any action initiated by any
zoning or planning and zoning commission regarding adoption or change of any zoning regulation or
boundary.
-30-
(e) Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, if an application involves an activity regulated
pursuant to sections 22a-36 to 22a-45, inclusive, and the time for a decision by a zoning commission or
planning and zoning commission established pursuant to this section would elapse prior to the thirty-fifth
day after a decision by the inland wetlands Commission, the time period for a decision shall be extended
to thirty-five days after the decision of such Commission. The provisions of this subsection shall not be
construed to apply to any extension consented to by an applicant or petitioner.
(f) The zoning commission, planning commission, zoning and planning commission, zoning board of
appeals or inland wetlands Commission shall notify the clerk of any adjoining municipality of the
pendency of any application, petition, appeal, request or plan concerning any project on any site in which:
(1) Any portion of the property affected by a decision of such commission, board or Commission is
within five hundred feet of the boundary of the adjoining municipality; (2) a significant portion of the
traffic to the completed project on the site will use streets within the adjoining municipality to enter or
exit the site; (3) a significant portion of the sewer or water drainage from the project on the site will flow
through and significantly impact the drainage or sewerage system within the adjoining municipality; or
(4) water runoff from the improved site will impact streets or other municipal or private property within
the adjoining municipality. Such notice shall be made by certified mail, return receipt requested, and shall
be mailed within seven days of the date of receipt of the application, petition, request or plan. Such
adjoining municipality may, through a representative, appear and be heard at any hearing on any such
application, petition, appeal, request or plan.
-31-
APPENDIX C
BY-LAWS
PLAINVILLE INLAND WETLANDS AND WATERCOURSES COMMISSION
ARTICLE I - THE COMMISSION
Section 1. Name of Commission. The name of the Commission shall be the Plainville Inland
Wetlands and Watercourses Commission.
ARTICLE II - OFFICERS
Section 1. Officers. The officers of the Commission shall be a Chairperson, a Vice-chairperson,
and a Secretary.
Section 2. Chairperson. The Chairperson shall preside at all meetings of the Commission.
Except as otherwise authorized by resolution of the Commission, the Chairperson shall sign all
contracts, and other instruments made by the Commission. At each meeting, the Chairperson
shall submit such recommendations and information as may be considered proper concerning the
business affairs and policies of the Commission.
Section 3. Vice-chairperson. At any regular or special meeting or hearing in the absence,
incapacity or disqualification of the Chairperson, the Vice-chairperson shall preside. In the
absence, incapacity or disqualification of both the Chairperson and the Vice-chairperson, a
Chairperson Pro Tempore shall be appointed by the Commission from among the members of
the Commission present.
Section 4. Secretary. The Secretary shall perform all duties incidental to the office. Public
Notices, voted by the Commission or required by laws of the State shall be prepared and
published in the name of the Secretary, or, if absent, by a member so designated by the
Chairperson. At any regular or special meeting, or hearing in the absence of the Secretary, a
Secretary Pro Tempore shall be appointed by the Commission from among the members of the
Commission present. A recording secretary employed by the Town shall record all votes and
prepare a record of the proceedings of the Commission in accordance with state law
Section 5. Duties of Commissioners. Commissioners shall perform such duties as are incumbent
upon them by reason of their election to any office, and shall perform such other duties and
functions as may from time to time be required by the Commission or the by-laws, or which may
arise by reason of their appointment to serve on committees functioning within the Commission
or in cooperation with other persons or groups.
Section 6. Election. The Chairperson, Vice-chairperson, and Secretary shall be elected at the
annual meeting of the Commission from among the members of the Commission, and shall hold
office for one year or until their successors are elected and qualified.
-32-
Section 7. Vacancies. Should the office of Chairperson, Vice-chairperson, or Secretary become
vacant, the Commission shall elect a successor from its membership at the next meeting, and
such election shall be for the unexpired term of said office.
Section 8. Appearance: Representation: Disqualification. No member of this Commission shall
participate in the hearing or decision of the Commission upon any matter in which they are
directly or indirectly interested in a personal or financial sense. In the event of such
disqualification, such fact shall be entered on the records of the Commission and the elector
chosen by the remaining Commission members present shall act as a member of the Commission
in the hearing and determination of the particular matter or matters in which the disqualification
arose.
Section 9. Annual Report. The Chairperson shall prepare an Annual Report to be submitted to
the Commission before July 31, of each year, except as otherwise authorized by resolution of the
Commission. The Chairperson may appoint a committee from among the members of the
Commission to assist in preparation of the Annual Report.
ARTICLE III - MEETINGS
Section 1. General Provisions. Regular meetings of the Commission shall be held at such time
and place as may be originally designated or subsequently changed by resolution adopted by the
Commission at any regular or special meeting. All meetings shall be held at the Plainville
Municipal Center in the absence of the specific designation of some other meeting place in any
such resolution. In the event that the date of any annual or regular meeting as provided in any
such resolution shall fall on a legal holiday, the meeting shall be held on the next succeeding
secular day at the place and time designated in the resolution.
Section 2. Annual Meetings. Annual meetings of the Commission shall be held without notice
for the purpose of electing officers and for the conduct of such other business as may come
before the meeting at its first meeting in January of each year.
Section 3. Regular Meetings. Regular meetings of the Commission shall be determined by
resolution of the Commission for the transaction of the business of the Commission.
Section 4. Special Meetings. The Chairperson of the Commission may, when deemed
expedient, and shall, upon the written request of three Commissioners call a special meeting of
the Commission for the purpose of transacting any business designated in the call. The call for a
special meeting shall be prepared by the Town staff and delivered to any Commissioner or
mailed to their business or home address at least two days prior to the date of such meeting. At
such special meeting, no business shall be considered other than as designated in the call.
-33-
Section 5. Quorum. The powers of the Commission shall be vested in the Commissioners
thereof in office from time to time. Four Commissioners shall constitute a quorum for the
purpose of conducting its business and exercising its powers and for all other purposes, but a
smaller number may meet and adjourn from time to time until a quorum is obtained. At least
twelve hours' notice of the time and place of holding such adjourned meeting shall be given to all
Commissioners who were not present at the meeting from which adjournment was taken. When
a quorum is in attendance, action may be taken by the Commission only upon a vote of a
majority of all of the members of the Commission.
Section 6. Order of Business. At the regular meetings of the Commission the following shall be
the order of business:
1. Roll Call
2. Approval of the minutes of previous meetings
3. Public comments
4. Unfinished business
5. New business
6. General reports
7. Bills and communications
8. Adjournment
Section 7. Manner of Voting. All members present shall vote on every question except that a
member may refrain from voting if they have moved for postponement of the question for further
study and the motion for postponement has been lost. The vote on all resolutions and motions
shall be by roll call, and each resolution and motion shall be entered in full upon the minutes of
the meeting, together with the ayes and nays thereon.
Section 8. Matters before the Commission. Matters before the Commission shall be presented to
the Commission in a manner, including properly completed forms, as may be prescribed by
resolution of the Commission from time to time.
ARTICLE IV - HEARING
Section 1. Time and Place. The time and place of hearings shall be set by resolution at any
regular or special meeting of the Commission.
Section 2. Procedure. Hearings shall be conducted by the Chairperson in accordance with a
procedure originally designated or subsequently changed by the Commission.
Section 3. Transcript. A transcript of each hearing shall be prepared by the Secretary and
recorded in the minute book.
-34-
ARTICLE V - PARLIAMENTARY AUTHORITY
Parliamentary Authority. The rules contained in Roberts Rules of Order, revised, shall govern
the Commission in all cases to which they are not inconsistent with the by-laws of the
Commission, provisions of the Town Charter or the laws of the State of Connecticut.
ARTICLE VI - AMENDMENTS
Amendments to By-Laws. Any amendment to these by-laws shall be submitted in writing at any
meeting of the Commission and may be adopted by the affirmative vote of four members at a
subsequent meeting of the Commission.
-35-
APPENDIX D
Guidelines for Upland Review Area Regulations Under Connecticut’s Inland Wetlands and
Watercourses Act
STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL
PROTECTION
79 Elm Street
Hartford, CT 06106-5127
Sidney J. Holbrook
Commissioner
GUIDELINES
UPLAND REVIEW AREA REGULATIONS
CONNECTICUT’S INLAND WETLANDS &
WATERCOURSES ACT
June, 1997
Wetlands Management Section
Bureau of Water Management
Preparation of this report was funded in part by a grant from the U.S. Environmental Protection Agenoy,
The Department of Enviro~maental Proteetion’s programs and services are offered ;vithout regard to race, color, religion,
nation of origin, age, sex or disability. In coufonnance with the Americans With Disabilities Act, the DEP makes every
effort to provide equally effective services for persons with disabilities. Individuals with disabilities needing auxiliary
aides or services for effeetis,e communication in DEP programs should call (860) 424-3019 or TDD 424-3333.
Cover Picture From: Forested Wetlands/Functions, Benefits and the Uses of Best Management Practices, U.S.D,A. Forest
Service.
(Printed on Recycled Paper)
STATE OF CONNECTICUT
DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
To: Municipal Inland Wetland Agencies
From: Charles E. Berger, Director ~_,~ ~,~ ~Ct~
Inland Water Resources Division
Date: June 30, 1997
Under the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Act, Connecticut’s municipalities regulate proposed
development activities in or affecting wetlands and watercourses. In support of the municipal
wetland agencies, DEP’s Wetlands Management Section provides a comprehensive Wetlands
Management Training Program for wetland agency commissioners and Model Regulations for
local inland wetland programs. Guidelines for Upland Review Area Regulations was published in
accordance with sections 22a-42(d) and 22a-42a(f) of the General Statutes to assist Connecticut’s
inland wetland agencies in developing and implementing municipal regulations for activities
proposed on uplands around wetlands or watercourses.
The guide was drafted in response to inquires from wetland agency members, river management
groups, the regulated community, and other interest persons, for guidance in implementing what
are popularly called buffer or setback provisions in wetland regulations. The guide uses the term
upland review area to describe the non-wetland or non-watercourse area in which certain types of
activities, as defined in municipal regulations, are regulated activities. Other terms for describing
this area are used in municipal regulations. We selected the term upland review area because it
best conveys the regulatory scheme under the inland wetlands statues wherein a wetland agency
reviews regulated activities case-by-case and approves or disapproves them on their merits.
For further information about DEP’s Inland Wetlands Management Programs, please call (860)
424-3019.
(Printed on Recycled Paper)
79 Elm Street Hartford, CT 06106-5127
An Equal Opportunity Employer
Guidelines for Upland Review Area Regulations
Under Connecticut’s Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Act
Wetlands and Uplands: an Introduction
The relationship between a wetland or waterc9urse and its surrounding upland is complex.
Upland land clearing, excavating, filling and other construction activities if not properly planned
and executed can have significant impacts on adjacent wetlands and watercourses. Under the
Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Act, the municipal wetlands agency has broad authority to issue
permits not only for activities in wetlands or watercourses themselves, but for activities located
elsewhere when such activities are likely to impact or affect wetlands or watercourses. It is the
department’s policy to encourage municipal wetland agencies to review proposed aci~’vitt’es
located in upland areas sutT"otmding wetlands and watercourses wherever such activities ate
likely to impact or affect wetlands or watercourses.1
An understanding of how certain activities in upland areas affect wetlands and watercourses has
led most towns to adopt regulations requiring wetland agency review of proposed development
adjacent to wetlands and watercourses.2 Such regulations are optional under the Act, but serve to
inform the public as to the circumstances under which a wetlands permit is required of activities
proposed adjacent to a wetland or watercourse)
While requiring a permit for specified activities within defined upland review area boundatqes.
these wetland a~encies still maintain their authori .ty to regulate proposed activities located in more
distant upland areas if they find that the activities are likely to impact or affect a wetland or
watercourse.
The purpose of these guidelines is to assist municipal wetlands agencies to review and revise their
wetlands and watercourses regulations, if necessary. As such, the guidelines provide a foundation
for consistency in municipal regulations and permitting activities. They are not intended to
substitute for reasoned evaluation and judgement by municipal wetlands agencies of the local
wetland and watercourse resources, the conditions surrounding those resources, and the types of
activities which are likely to impact or affect those resources. Nor are they intended to guide
wetlands agencies through the decision making process for acting on permits. Both these topics
are more appropriately addressed in detail through the department’s Inland Wetlands Management
Training Program for wetland agency commissioners and their staff. Wetlands agencies are
reminded that they should review proposed changes in their inland wetlands and watercourses
regulations with their town attorney.
Bureau of Water Management
IWRD-WM-GUIDE/Review Page 1. June 1997
Model Municipal Upland Review Area Regulations
In addition to implementing the law to protect wetlands and watercourses, regulations inform the
public on what to expect if one proposes an activity in or affecting a wetland or watercourse in the
subject town. Upland review area regulations reduce or eliminate the need for case-by-case rulings
by providing notice as to what activities need wetland permits. By specifying where a permit is
required, such regulations foster consistency and are convenient for the public. In determining the
boundaries for its upland review area regulations, the wetland agency should consider the specific
kinds of development activities on uplands which are likely to impact or affect wetlands and
watercourses and the nature of that impact or affect.
An upland activity which is likely to impact or affect wetlands or watercourses is a regulated
activity and should be identified as such in the regulations. In identifying upland review area
regulated activities, the wetlands agency must apply the standard established under section 22a-
42a(f) of the General Statutes and find that the activity is "... likely to impact or affect wetlands or
watercourses.’’4 Examples of upland regulated activities are included in the models below. In
implementing its upland review area regulations, the wetland agency must be cognizant that
certain proposed activities, which are permitted uses as of right or as nonregulated uses under
section 22a-40 of the General Statutes, are not regulated and do not require a permit from the
wetlands agency under the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Act.
There are a number of ways that the boundaries of an upland review area may be defined in
regulations. In selecting its approach, the wetland agency should consider the special nature of
their town’s wetland and watercourse resources, the purposes and intent of the Inland Wetlands
and Watercourses Act, and how the regulations will be implemented.
Three models for upland review area regulations are presented below. The first model provides
that certain specified activities if conducted within a specified distance measured from any
wetland or watercourse are regulated activities. As such, the first model is the basic model and
easiest to implement. The second model expands upon that basic model by identifying specific
wetland and watercourse resources of special concern and providing site specific review area
widths for those resources. This model should be used where the wetland agency believes
additional protection though a wider review area is needed or to take existing land development or
uses into account with a narrower review area. The third model adds to the basic model a slope
and soil factor in determining the site specific width or location of the upland review area. The
first and second models are easily understood and implemented, while the third is technically
complex and not easily implemented without trained staff.
Note that the first sentence of each model definition below is the definition of the term regulated
act~’viO~ taken from section 22a-38(13) of the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Act and, as such,
its meaning may not be changed in municipal inland wetlands regulations.
Bureau of Water Management
IWRD-WM-GUIDE/Review Page 2. June 1997
ModeI Regulation Optionss
Model "Regulated activity" means any operation within or use of a wetland or watercourse
involving removal or deposition of material, or any obstruction, construction,
alteration or pollution, of such wetlands or watercourses, but shall not include the
specified activities in section 22a-40 of the Connecticut General Statutes.
Furthermore, any clearing, grubbing, filling, grading, paving, excavating,
constructing, depositing or removing of material and discharging of storm water on
the land within __ feet measured horizontally from the boundary of any wetland
or watercourse is a regulated activity. The Agency may rule that any other activity
located within such upland review area or in any other non-wetland or nonwatercourse
area is likely to impact or affect wetlands or watercourses and is a
regulated activity.
Model "Regulated activity" means any operation within or use of a wetland or watercourse
involving removal or deposition of material, or any obstruction, construction,
alteration or pollution, of such wetlands or watercourses, but shall not include the
specified activities in section 22a-40 of the Connecticut General Statutes.
Furthermore, any clearing, grubbing, filling, grading, paving, excavating,
constructing, depositing or removing of material and discharging of storm water on
the land within the following upland review areas is a regulated activity:
(1) within feet measured horizontally from the ordinary high
water mark6 of Town Lake, Smith Lake or Pine Meadow Pond;
(2) within feet measured horizontally from the ordinary high water
mark of Ledge Brook and of Big Trout Brook between the Route 51 and
Main Street Bridges over Big Trout Brook.
(3) within feet measured horizontally from the boundary of the
wetlands comprising Great Swamp;
(4) within the area enclosed by the foot contour elevation
surrounding Ice Pond Bog; such contour is depicted on the Inland Wetlands
and Watercourses Map for the Town of ;
(5) within __ feet measured horizontally from the boundary of any other
wetland or watercourse.
The Agency may rule that any other activity located within such upland review area
or in any other non-wetland or non-watercourse area is likely to impact or affect
wetlands or watercourses and is a regulated activity.
ModelIlI. "Regulated activity" means any operation within or use of a wetland or watercourse
involving removal or deposition of material, or any obstruction, construction,
alteration or pollution, of such wetlands or watercourses, but shall not include the
Bureau of Water Management
IWRD-WM-GUIDE/Rex4ew Page 3. June 1997
specified activities in section 22a-40 of the Connecticut General Statutes.
Furthermore, any clearing, grubbing, filling, grading, paving, excavating,
constructing, depositing or removing of material and discharging of storm water in
the following areas is a regulated activity:
(1) on land within __ feet measured horizontally from the boundary of
any wetland or watercourse, provided
(2) if the slope of such land exceeds 5%,7 within the distance measured
horizontally from the boundary of the wetland or watercourse equal to __
feet plus an additional 5 feet for each 1% increase in slope greater than 5%,
but not more than __[e.g., 200]__ feet;
(3) on land designated on the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Map of the
Town of as containing highly erodible soils.
The Agency may rule that any other activity located within such upland review area
or in any other non-wetland or non-watercourse area is likely to impact or affect
wetlands or watercourses and is a regulated activity.
Considerations in Establishing Upland Review Areas
Regulated Activities
The Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Act (Sections 22a-36 through 22a-45a of the General
Statutes) defines regulated aci~’vity to mean:
’" ... any operation within or use of a wetland or watercourse involving the removal or deposition
of material, or any obstruction, construction, alteraiT"on or polhttion of sttch wetlands or
watercourses, but shah not inchtde the specified activities in section 22a-40 of the Connecticut
General Statutes." ~
In addition to activities located in a wetland or watercourse, any activity located in a non-wetland
or non-watercourse area ~vhich is likely to impact or affect a wetland or watercourse may be
deemed to be a regulated activity (unless the activity is a use permitted as of right or as a
nonregulated activity). However, the likelihood of an activity having a substantive impact on a
wetland or watercourse will depend on a number of factors, including the nature of the wetland or
watercourse, the activity, soils and slope of the land, and would generally decrease with increasing
distance of the activity from the wetland or watercourse. At some point, impacts from that activity
on wetlands and watercourses would be expected to become de minimis and not measurable.
The DEP believes that a 100 foot-~vide upland review area is sufficient for reviewing construction
Bureau of Water Management
IWRD-WM-GU!DE/Review Page 4. June 1997
activities in areas surrounding wetlands or watercourses because most of the activities which are
likely to impact or affect these resources will be located in that area. However, based on the
special factors of concern to a wetlands agency, e.g., wetland and watercourse values, slope, soils,
existing development, etc., a greater or lesser distance may be appropriate for a particular
municipality. However, beyond 100 feet it is neither practical nor desirable, from a wetlands and
watercourses management perspective, to automatically require an inland wetlands permit for all
construction activities. It must be emphasized that other municipal authorities and mechanisms
involving planning, zoning and subdivision decisions and plans of conservation and development,
play a role in addressing the broader watershed issues.
Upland Review Areas, Setbacks and Buffers
In a number of municipal inland wetlands regulations, upland review areas are referred to as
setbacks or buffers.9 We chose the term upland review area to describe the non-wetland or nonwatercourse
area in which certain activities would be regulated because it best conveys the
regulatory scheme under the wetlands statutes wherein a wetland agency reviews regulated
activities case-by-case and approves or disapproves them on their merits. The inland wetland
statutes do not authorize a blanket prohibition of all activities either in the wetlands or in upland
review, buffer or setback areas.
Use of Upland Review Area Reguhttions
Most municipal wetland agencies have already adopted some form of upland review area
regulations]° Such regulations are based on a presumption that the regulated activity will have an
adverse impact on the adjacent wetland or watercourse. A person proposing to conduct a regulated
activity has the burden to demonstrate to the wetlands agency that the impacts of his proposal are
consistent with the purposes and provisions of the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Act and,
therefore, that he is entitled to the permit. An applicant who successfully documents to the
satisfaction of the wetlands agency that his proposed activities are fully consistent with the
purposes and provisions of the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Act is entitled to receive a
permit. The factors the wetlands agency must consider in making its decision on the application
are prescribed in section 22a-41 of the General Statutes.n
The Role of the Upland Review Area in Protecting Wetlands and Waterconrses
Upland areas surrounding wetlands or watercourses function in a number of ways to protect these
resources. An understanding of these functions and how they potentially may be impacted by
construction activity or development is necessary for the wetlands agency to adopt an upland
review area and subsequently regulate activities therein. Since the functions will vary depending
on the specific project site, each permit application will be different and must be reviewed on its
individual merits.
Bureau of Water Management
1WRD-WIvI-GUIDE/Review Page 5. June 1997
Control Non-point Source Pollution
*Vegetation and natural soils foster removal of nutrients, sediments, particulates, and other
potential pollutants and pathogens from storm-water runoff thereby protecting water
quality
*Sediments arising from road sanding and construction activities are trapped
*Flood flows, stream bank erosion, and storm-water discharges to wetlands and
watercourses are attenuated
*Separating distances from wetlands or watercourses allow for treatment of wastewaters
Protect A~uatic Habitat
*Wind-thrown trees, dropped branches and detritus create important habitat for aquatic
organisms within watercourses
*Stabilize under cutting stream banks, providing shelter for fish and other aquatic
organisms
*Riparian areas are an essential component of habitat and for mammals, birds, amphibians,
reptiles, invertebrates and other wetland animals
*Watercourses are allowed to meander naturally without endangering development
Control Temperature
*Shrubs and trees shade wetlands and watercourses and help maintain cold water aquatic
habitats in summer and insulate them from deep frost in winter
*Water temperatures suitable for fish spawning and egg and fry development are
maintained
*Cooler water supports higher dissolved oxygen
Provide Food for Ao_uatic Life
*Decomposing leaves and detritus contribute to the food chain, especially of aquatic
insects
*Insects falling from branches feed fish and other aquatic life
Bureau of Water Management
IWRD-WM-GUIDE/Review Page 6. June 1997
Insulate Fish and Wildlife From Human Activities
*Potential for human interference with fish and wetland wildlife is reduced
Provide a Corridor Linking Wetlands and Watercourses
*Wildlife habitats are continuous, not fragmented or isolated, allowing for migratory habits
of wetland wildlife
Examples of Regulated Activities in Uplaud Review Areas and Their Potential Wetland or
Watercourse Impacts
Keep in mind that the substance and significance of an impact will vary from site to site and may
decrease with increasing distance from the wetland or watercourse.
Clearing, grubbing and grading
*Loss of stream shading
*Increased surface water temperature
*Loss of food source for aquatic organisms
*Loss of riparian habitat/diminished in stream habitat value
*Increased storm-water runoff
*Reduced capacity to remove nutrients and other impurities from runoff
*Soil erosion/sedimentation
*Destabilization of stream banks
*Increased disturbance of aquatic and wetland animals
*Release of nutrients bound in the soil
*Loss of instream habitat diversity from wind-thrown trees and branches
Paving
*Increased storm-water runoff/discharge
*Decreased ground-water recharge, reduced stream flow during dry seasons
*Non-point source of water pollntion, including petroleum products from motor vehicles
*Source of sand and grit from storm water discharges
*Disruption offish spawning and fish-egg incubation
*Periodic disturbance from maintenance of storm-water management system
*Thermal loading in watercourses
Excavating
*Soil erosion/sedimentation
*Altered surface and ground-water discharge patterns and quantity
Bureau of Water Management
IWRD-WM-GUIDE/Rex4ew Page 7. June 1997
*Diversion or dewatering of wetland/watercourse
*Destabilization of watercourse channels
Filling
*Diversion of surface water drainage/dewatering
*Loss of flood-water storage
*Increased flooding or flood hazards
*Increased stream erosion
*Erosion of fill material
*Sedimentation
Constructing
*Soil erosion/deposition
*Disturbance of adjacent fish and wildlife habitats
*Increased non-point sources of water pollution
*Fragmentation of wetland/watercourse habitats
Depositing material
*Erosion/loss of material into regulated area
*Leaching/pollution potential
*Disturbance of adjacent aquatic habitats
*Alteration of riparian habitats
*Other impacts similar to filling and constructing
Removing material
*Discharge/loss of material to regulated area
*Modification of riparian habitats
*Surface drainage changes
*Other impacts similar to clearing, grubbing or grading
Discharging storm water
*Water quality - discharge of road sands/grit; oils; grease
*Water quantity - flow attenuation; velocity dissipation
*Erosion/sedimentation
*Assimilation of potential pollutants
*Change in receiving stream water temperature
*Increase velocity of runoffand decrease travel time to the receiving watercourse
*Nuisance flooding
Bureau of Water Management
IWRD-WM-GUIDE/Review Page 8, June 1997
Determining Uphtnd Review Area Boundaries
Due to the variability of Connecticut’s landscape features, even within the same watershed, and the
multiplicity of regulated activities which may be involved in site development, it is not practical to
establish separate upland review area boundary distances for each category or type of regulated
actt’vity. Instead, the upland review area should be of sufficient width to ensure that it will
encompass the activities that are most likely to impact or affect the adjacent wetlands or
watercourses. It is recommended that upland review area boundaries be delineated using a
uniform distance measured horizontally and perpendicular from the ordinary high water mark of a
lake, pond, river or stream or from a wetland soil boundary.
The upland review area width adopted by the wetlands agency may be wider or narrower than the
100 foot width recommended by DEP. DEP encourages municipal wetlands agencies base their
upland review area widths giving due consideration to local landscape factors including the value,
or importance, of wetland or watercourse resources, extent of existing land use and, ira wetland
agency deems it to be practicable, on the slope and soils of the land to be developed or other
factors.
To be enforceable, the upland review areas must be adopted in the town’s inland wetlands and
watercourses regulations following the procedures described under section 22a-42a of the General
Statutes.~2 Importantly, the upland review area regulations must be easy to understand by a
property owner and easy to implement by the inland wetlands agency (should it need to take an
enforcement action), as well as by any other interested person.
A uniform review area width has the advantage of simplicity over a variable width in that it is
easier to delineate, understand and administer. The disadvantage of a variable, non-unifurm, width
upland review area regulation is that its inherent complexity may make the regulation difficult to
establish and subsequently administer. Ordinarily, the agency will need a professional staff person
to delineate and enforce variable upland review area regulations. Also, citizens may be confused
using a variable approach and disagreements over the actual location on the ground of the outer
limit of the upland review area may complicate permit and enforcement proceedings. Verification
of the upland review area location is particularly important in an enforcement action where the
burden is on the agency to prove that there is a violation of its regulations. For these reasons, the
department urges caution in adopting complex upland review area boundaries (e.g., Model Option
1]I, above).
While it is desirable for upland review areas to be depicted on the town’s official inland wetlands
and watercourses map, depending on the type of review area adopted, actual mapping may not be
necessary provided appropriate narrative description is included in the town’s inland wetlands and
watercourses regulations and such provisions are clearly referenced on the official map.
Wetlands agency regulations governing wetlands maps and the official wetlands maps themselves
should state that such wetlands and watercourses maps were prepared for information purposes
only and that the actual character of the land shall govern the agency’s jurisdiction thereon. The
Bureau of Water Management
IWRD-WM-GU1DE/Review Page 9. June 1997
official wetlands and watercourses maps should also clearly reference or depict all upland review
areas which have been adopted by the agency.
Boundary_ Factors
There are a number of factors which should be considered in defining upland review area
boundaries. For unique situations, such as with an important bog, the boundary of the review area
could be set by using an elevation contour encompassing the subject area. In addition, upland
review areas may be wider or narrower for specified wetlands or watercourses. For example, an
upland review area for a significant wetland or watercourse habitat or for wetlands and
watercourses located in a public water supply watershed could be set wider than a review area for
wetlands or watercourses located in other less critical areas.
* Significant Wetland and Watercourse Resources
All wetlands have intrinsic value, some wetland areas being more or less ecologically
valuable than others. But ira wetland or watercourse is known to be ecologically
significant, or to have a critical function or value such as in flood control or as habitat for
an endangered species, a wider, more protective, upland review area may be appropriate.
Unique wetland and watercourse values such as in research, education or recreation may
also warrant a wider upland review area.
DEP encourages all towns to evaluate their wetlands resources. To that end, DEP offers
training guidance on a methodology for identifying the relative importance of the wetlands
and watercourses in a town or within a watershed. (See: DEP Bulletin # 9 Method for the
Evaluation ofInland I’Vetlands in Connecticut, 1989 13 ) This methodology uses
mathematical and word expressions to assign relative "wetland value units" (WVU) to a
number of the common wetland and watercourse functions. The following functions are
defined in DEP Bulletin #9:
-Flood Control
-Ecological Integrity
-Wildlife Habitat
-Fish Habitat
-Nutrient Retention and Sediment Trapping
-Education Potential
-Visual/Esthetic Quality
-Agricultural Potential
-Forestry Potential
-Water Based Recreation
-Ground-water Use Potential
-Shoreline Anchoring and Dissipation of Erosive Forces
-Noteworthiness, including public water supply watersheds
Bureau of Water Management
IWRD-WM-GIJIDE/Review Page I0. June 1997
In addition, guidance on vernal pools is provided in a recent publication by the
Connecticut Forest Stewardship Program and the University of Connecticut Cooperative
Extension System titled Identification and Protection of lZernal Pool ggetlands of
Connecticut. Both of the above referenced publications are available from the DEP
Bookstore, 79 Elm Street, Hartford, phone 860-424-3555.
* Slope
By enlarging the width of the upland review area in proportion to its slope upward from the
wetland or watercourse, the wetland agency may have a better opportunity to protect
wetlands and watercourses from sedimentation originating from upland construction
activities. For example, wherever the minimum 100 foot upland review area slope exceeds
5%, regulations could add 5 feet (or other reasonable measure) of review area distance
hotTzontally for each 1% increase in slope. Thus, if the basic 100 foot wide review area
has a 15% slope upward from the ordinary high water line or wetland soil boundary, an
additional 50 feet would be added to the horizontal width of the upland review area
(5ft/l% x 10% = 50ft). Similarly, where the land slopes away (downward) from the
regulated area, e.g., as in the case of a hilt-side seep wetland, the width of the review area
could be reduced.
In general, the greater the slope of the land being developed, the greater the potential threat
of damage to adjacent wetlands and watercourses from erosion and sedimentation.
However, in practice, unless a town already has good town-wide topographic mapping,
calculating a slope parameter for a town-wide map of the upland review area boundary
would require considerable professional engineering expertise.
A practical approach to using the slope factor may be for wetland agencies to assert their
jurisdiction case-by-case over major construction activities on any steeply sloped areas
located outside the upland review area where wetlands and watercourses may be threatened
by sedimentation caused by erosion at upland construction sites. Such sedimentation is
deemed to be pollution and may be cause for an enforcement action under the inland
wetlands statutes (see definition of regulated activity above).
* Soils
Combined with slope, the type of soil found adjacent to wetlands and watercourses is an
important factor in how development may affect adjacent wetlands or watercourses. Soil
characteristics such as texture, cohesiveness and organic content influence the creation of
rill and gully formation as a result of erosion by water. In turn, this creates a potential for
sedimentation of adjacent wetlands and watercourses. The United States Department of
Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation Service, has compiled lists of highly erodible
soil map units which can be located using their published soil surveys. While these lists
were compiled primarily for agricultural applications, they may also be useful in evaluating
the erosion potential from construction activity.
Bureau of Water Management
IWRD-WM-GIJIDE/Review Page 11. June 1997
Also, the permeability of a particular soil, the rate at which groundwater travels through a
soil, is an important consideration when evaluating the potential for an upland review area
td renovate wastewater discharges to the ground water that may subsequently discharge to a
wetland or watercourse. This may be an important consideration when septic system
leaching fields or storm water infiltration trenches are proposed adjacent to wetlands or
watercourses.
For more information on highly erodible soils, refer to Highly Erodible SoilMap Units of
Connecticut, USDA-NRCS (1986). For more information on soil permeability
characteristics, contact your local USDA-Natural Resource Conservation Service Center
(call 860-487-4011 for the center near you). Information on ground-water as it relates to
sewage treatment can be found in Seepage and Pollutant Renovation (DEP Bulletin # 7)
and Carrying Capacity of Public Water Supply Watersheds (DEP Bulletin # 11).
Except when soils are used to define wetlands, regulation of development based on soil
characteristics is largely a responsibility of the town sanitarian and the planning and zoning
commission(s))4 However, where highly erodible soils are located adjacent to wetlands
and watercourses, erosion and sedimentation control is especially critical and should also
be addressed by the wetland agency.
Upland review area boundaries based on soil characteristics should be depicted as such on
the official inland wetlands and watercourses map for the subject town.
* Floodplain Limits
The landward boundary of a mapped floodplain, such as delineated by the 100-year flood
mapped by the National Flood Insurance Program, has been determined using a theoretical
design flood on the subject watercourse. Mapped flood limits have no direct relation to
the location of wetlands or smaller w~itercourses on the floodplain. Also, the floodplain
boundaries for most small watercourses have not been mapped. For these reasons, flood
insurance floodplain maps may not reflect a reasonable boundary of the upland review area.
*Urban Areas and Existing Development
Existing development of the area surrounding wetlands and watercourses has, more likely
than not, already had an impact on the upland area’s ability to protect those resources.
Degraded conditions should not be used to justify further degradation. The wetlands or
watercourses themselves may have been filled or modified for storm water or flood control.
For these reasons any remaining fringe of undisturbed area between the wetland or
watercourse and existing upland development may be all that there is to buffer adjacent
water resources from further degradation from new development. In such urban areas,
particular attention should be given to how storm ~vater discharges are managed so as to
minimize the opportunity for pollution and alteration of wetland or watercourse habitats.
Bureau of Water Management
Ia,VRD-W!VI-GUIDE/Review Page 12. June 1997
New development in urban areas that contain ’degraded wetlands or watercourses, may
provide an opportunity to improve these degraded resources while mitigating the impact of
the new development. This can be accomplished by habitat restoration or enhancement or
by using storm water management system retrofits that are designed to improve the quality
of the storm water discharge.
Endnotes
1. This document was prepared in response to inquiries from municipal wetland commissioners, the
Rivers Advisory Committee, the regulated community and other interested persons for guidance on
implementing setback and buffer provisions in municipal regulations adopted under Connecticut’s
Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Act. Section 22a-42d of the General Statutes directs the department
to provide guidance for the implementation of Section 22a-42a(f) of the General Statutes.
2. Over 80% of Connecticut’s municipal wetlands agencies have regulations governing regulated
activities in areas surrounding wetlands or watercourses.
3. Section 22a-42a(c)(2) of the General Statutes provides that a wetlands agency may delegate approval
authority for non-significant activities proposed in upland review areas to its agent provided such agent
has had DEP training.
4. Section 22a-42a(f) provides that the ~vetlands agency has jurisdiction over those activities proposed
in the upland review area which are "._ likely to impact or affect wetlands or watercourses." In
documenting the necessity for regulating specific activities conducted in upland review areas, it is not
sufficient to merely assert that the activity "may" impact or affect wetlands or watercourses.
5. Contact DEP for a copy of lnland Wetlands and Watercotn’ses Model Regulations. DEP’s Model
Regulatt’ons provide a comprehensive guide for implementing the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses
Act through municipal wetland agency regulations. ModelRegulations is updated as needed to reflect
current legislation.
6. "Ordinary high water mark" means a mark on the land caused by the presence and action of water,
which presence and action is so common and usual and so long continued in all ordinary years so as to
mark upon the land a distinction between the abutting upland and the watercourse. Such mark may be
found by examining the bed and bank of any watercourse and ascertaining thereon an abrupt change in
the characteristics ofsoit or vegetation or slope of the land. This term should be defined in municipal
wetlands regulations.
7. Percent slope is most simply determined by dividing the difference in elevation between two points
by the distance between the points (i.e., rise/run) and multiplying the result by 100. Ira slope factor is
used in regulations, the regulations must provide guidance as to how the slope should be measured in
the field e.g., on shortest straight line transect from any wetland or watercourse boundary to the highest
up gradient point on the land to be developed; number and location of transects; and, in recognition that
Bureau of Water Management
IWRD-W!vI-GUIDE/R.eview Page 13. June 1997
the actual slope of the land is not uniform, methods for averaging of slope over a site.
8. In implementing upland review area regulations, the ~vetlands agency must be cognizant of the "uses
as of right" provisions of section 22a-40 of the General Statutes. Under section 22a-40, certain activities
are uses of wetland and watercourses as of right or as a nonregulated use. Such uses are not regulated
and do not require a permit from the wetland agency. For example, subdivision (4) of section 22a-40(a)
prescribes that certain "... uses incidental to the enjoyment and maintenance of residential property..."
are permitted as of right: "[s]uch uses shall include maintenance of existing structures and landscaping
but shall not include removal or deposition of significant amounts of material from or onto a wetland or
watercourse or diversion or alteration of a watercourse." Other uses permitted as of right include certain
agricultural and forestry uses, boat anchorage and mooring, certain water company activities and
maintenance of drainage pipes which pre-date the regulations. Nonregulated uses include a number of
conservation and recreational activities. Persons proposing such uses should seek confirmation from
the municipal wetlands agency that their proposed project does not require a permit.
9. DEP has not adopted an upland review area provision for state agency actions because, unlike
municipal wetland agencies which have only one opportunity to review a project, DEP has a number of
opportunities during both planning and permitting of state agency projects. DEP reviews state agency
projects under the Environmental Policy Act (Findings of No Significant Impact, Environmental Impact
Statements) and several permit programs under Title 22a and 25 of the General Statutes. As partners in
state government, state agencies generally act cooperatively to address environmental issues. Utilizing
its technical resources, the State strives to apply site specific best management practices during the
different planing and regulatory reviews.
10. Depending on the wetland agency, upland review area widths range from 25 feet up to 650 feet from
wetland or watercourse boundaries.
11. Section 22a-41 of the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Act established the criteria for decision on
permit applications as follows: In carrying out the purposes and policies of sections 22a-36 to 22a-45,
inclusive, of the Connecticut General Statutes, including matters relating to regulating, licensing and
enforcing of the provisions thereof, the Agency shall take into consideration all relevant facts and
circumstances, including but not limited to:
the environmental impact of the proposed regulated activity on wetlands or
watercourses;
the applicant’s purpose for, and any feasible and prudent alternatives to, the proposed
regulated activity which alternatives would cause less or no environmental impact to
wetlands or watercourses;
the relationship between the short term and long term impacts of the proposed regulated
activity on wetlands or watercourses and the maintenance and enhancement of long-term
productivity of such wetlands or watercourses;
irreversible and irretrievable loss of wetland or watercourse resources which would be
caused by the proposed regulated activity, including the extent to which such activity
would foreclose a future ability to protect, enhance or restore such resources, and any
mitigation measures which may be considered as a condition of issuing a permit for such
Bureau of Water Management
IWRD-WM-GUIDE/Review Page l 4. June 1997
activity including, but not limited to, measures to (1) prevent or minimize pollution or
other environmental damage, (2) maintain or enhance existing environmental quality, or
(3) in the following order of priority: restore, enhance and create productive wetland or
watercourse resources;
the character and degree of injury to, or interference with, safety, health or the reasonable
use of property which is caused or threatened by the proposed regulated activity; and
impacts of the proposed regulated activity on wetlands or watercourses outside the area
for which the activity is proposed and future activities associated with or reasonably
related to, the proposed regulated activity which are made inevitable by the proposed
regulated activity and which may have an impact on wetlands or watercourses.
Additionally, if the wetlands agency holds a hearing because it found that the subject activity may have
a significant impact, the wetlands agency may not grant the permit unless it finds that the activity is
acceptable under the criteria listed above and that there is no less environmentally damaging feasible
and prudent alternative.
12. Under Section 22a-42a(b) of the General Statutes, the wetlands agency must provide the DEP with a
copy of notice of its hearing on proposed regulations and a copy of the proposed regulations no less than
35 days prior to the hearing thereon. DEP must review and approve all proposed wetland agency
regulations except proposed map revisions.
13. The methodology described in DEP Bulletin #9 is a resource planning tool intended to be used for
town-wide or watershed-wide assessments of wetland resources and is not designed to be used by
applicants or wetlands agencies to evaluate the significance of the impact of activities proposed in
permit applications.
14. Section 22a-329 of the General Statues provides that regulations adopted by a municipality pursuant
to CGS Sees. 8-2 and 8-25 shall require that proper provisions be made for soil erosion and sediment
control.
Bureau of Water Management
1WRD-WM-GU]DE,~Review Page 15. June 1997
Agency Mission
The mission of the Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) is to conserve, improve and protect the natural
resources and env’rronment of the State of Connecticut and to do this in a way that encourages the social and economic
development of Cotmeetieut xvhile preserving the natural environment and the life forms its supports in a delicete,
interrelated and cemplex balance, to the end that the state may fulfill its responsibility as tmstee of the environment for
present and future generations. The DEP achieves its mission through regulation, inspection, enforcement and licensing
procedures which help centrol air, land and water pollution in order to protect health, sal~ety and welfare. The Department
also improves and ceordinates the state’s environmental plans, functions and educational programs in cooperation with the
federal, regional and local governments, other public and private organizations and concerned individuals, xvhile managing
and protecting the flora and fauna for compatible uses by the citizens of the state.

Town of Plainville
Aquifer Protection Area Regulations
TABLE OF CONTENTS
SECTION PAGE
1 Title and Authority 2
2 Definitions 3
3 Delineation of Aquifer Protection Area Boundaries 9
4 Prohibited and Regulated Activities 11
5 Activities Regulated by the State 13
6 Application for an Exemption from Prohibition or Regulation 13
7 General Registration, Permit Application and Transfer Procedures 13
8 Registration Requirements 14
9 Permit Requirements 17
10 Public Hearings Regarding Permit Applications 21
11 Bond and Insurance Relevant to Permit Applications 21
12 Best Management Practices 22
13 Other State, Federal and Local Laws 24
14 Enforcement 25
15 Amendments 26
16 Appeals 26
17 Conflict and Severance 26
18 Application and Registration Fees 27
19 Effective Date of Regulations 28
2
Town of Plainville
Aquifer Protection Area Regulations
SECTION 1. Title and Authority
(a) Aquifers are an essential natural resource and a major source of public drinking water for
the State of Connecticut. Use of groundwater will increase as the population grows and
opportunities for new surface water supplies diminish due to the rising cost of land and
increasingly intense development. At the same time, numerous drinking water wells have
been contaminated by certain land use activities, and others are now threatened. To address
this problem, Connecticut has established the Aquifer Protection Area Program
(Connecticut General Statutes §22a-354a to §22a-354bb) to identify critical water supply
aquifers and to protect them from pollution by managing land use. Protection requires
coordinated responsibilities shared by the state, municipality and water companies to ensure
a plentiful supply of public drinking water for present and future generations. It is therefore
the purpose of these regulations to protect aquifer protection areas within the Town of
Plainville by making provisions for:
(1) implementing regulations consistent with state regulations and An Act Concerning
Aquifer Protection Areas, Connecticut General Statutes §22a-354a to §22a-354bb
(“the Act”);
(2) delineating aquifer protection areas on the city/town zoning or inland wetland and
watercourse areas maps;
(3) regulating land use activity within the aquifer protection area including: prohibiting
certain new activities; registering existing regulated activities; and issuing permits for
new regulated activities at registered facilities; and
(4) Administering and enforcing these regulations.
(b) These regulations shall be known as the Aquifer Protection Area Regulations (the "APA
Regulations") of the Town of Plainville.
(c) These regulations were adopted and may be amended, from time to time, in accordance
with the provisions of §22a-354p of An Act Concerning Aquifer Protection Areas, the
Connecticut General Statutes §22a-354a to §22a-354bb and the Regulations of Connecticut
State Agencies §22a-354i-1 through §22a-354i-10.
(d) The Planning and Zoning Commission of the Town of Plainville is established as the
Aquifer Protection Agency (the "Agency") in accordance with the "Ordinance for the
Establishment of an Aquifer Protection Agency," (the "APA Ordinance") effective
February 22, 1994, and shall implement the purposes and provisions of the APA Ordinance
and the Act.
3
(e) The Agency shall administer all provisions of the Act and shall approve or deny
registrations, issue permits, issue permits with terms, conditions, limitations or
modifications, or deny permits for all regulated activities in aquifer protection areas in the
Town of Plainville pursuant to the Act.
SECTION 2. Definitions
(a) As used in these regulations, the following definitions apply:
(1) "Affected water company" means “affected water company” as defined in §22a-354h
of the Connecticut General Statutes;
(2) “Agency” means the board or commission authorized by the municipality under
§22a-354o of the Connecticut General Statutes;
(3) “Agriculture” means “agriculture” as defined in the §1-1(q) of the Connecticut
General Statutes;
(4) "Applicant" means, as appropriate in context, a person who applies for an exemption
under §22a-354i-6 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies, a permit under
§22a-354i-8 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies or a permit under
Section 9 of the APA Regulations;
(5) "Application” means, as appropriate in context, an application for an exemption under
§22a-354i-6 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies, an application for a
permit under §22a-354i-8 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies or an
application for a permit under Section 9 of the APA Regulations;
(6) "Aquifer protection area" means "aquifer protection area" as defined in §22a-354h of
the Connecticut General Statutes and any extension of such area approved by the
Commissioner pursuant to §22a-354i-4 of the Regulations of Connecticut State
Agencies;
(7) "Area of contribution" means "area of contribution" as defined in §22a-354h of the
Connecticut General Statutes and as mapped in accordance with §22a-354b-1 of the
Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies;
(8) "Bulk storage facility" means property where oil or petroleum liquids are received by
tank vessel, pipeline, railroad car or tank vehicle for the purpose of storage for
wholesale distribution;
(9) “Certified Hazardous Materials Manager” means a hazardous materials manager
certified by the Institute of Hazardous Materials Management and who is qualified by
reason of relevant specialized training and relevant specialized experience to conduct
audits of regulated activities to ensure compliance with applicable laws and identify
appropriate pollution prevention practices for such activities;
4
(10) "Commissioner" means the commissioner of environmental protection, or his or her
agent;
(11) "Domestic sewage" means "domestic sewage" as defined in §22a-430-3(a) the
Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies;
(12) "Facility" means property where a regulated activity is conducted by any person,
including without limitation any buildings located on the property that are owned or
leased by that person; and includes contiguous land owned, leased, or for which there
is an option to purchase by that person;
(13) "Floor drain" means any opening in a floor or surface which opening or surface
receives materials spilled or deposited thereon;
(14) "Hazardous material" means (A) any hazardous substance as defined in 40 CFR 302.4
and listed therein at Table 302.4, excluding mixtures with a total concentration of less
than 1% hazardous substances based on volume, (B) any hazardous waste as defined
in §22a-449(c)-101 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies, (C) any
pesticide as defined in §22a-47 of the Connecticut General Statutes, or (D) any oil or
petroleum as defined in §22a-448 of the Connecticut General Statutes;
(15) "Hazardous waste" means "hazardous waste" as defined in §22a-449(c)-101 of the
Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies;
(16) "Industrial laundry" means a facility for washing clothes, cloth or other fabric used in
industrial operations;
(17) "Infiltration device" means any discharge device installed below or above the ground
surface that is designed to discharge liquid to the ground;
(18) "Inland wetland and watercourse areas map" means a map pursuant to §22a-42a of
the Connecticut General Statutes;
(19) "ISO 14001 environmental management system certification" means a current ISO
14001 environmental management system certification issued by an ISO 14001
environmental management system registrar that is accredited by the American
National Standards Institute (ANSI) - American Society for Quality (ASQ) National
Accreditation Board (ANAB);
(20) "Level A mapping" means the lines as shown on Level A maps approved or prepared
by the Commissioner pursuant to §22a-354c, §22a-354d or §22a-354z of the
Connecticut General Statutes encompassing the area of contribution and recharge
areas;
(21) "Lubricating oil" means oil that contains less than 1% chlorinated solvents and is
used for the sole purpose of lubricating, cutting, grinding, machining, stamping or
quenching metals;
5
(22) "Municipality" means "municipality" as defined in §22a-354h of the Connecticut
General Statutes;
(23) "Owner" means the owner or lessee of the facility in question;
(24) "De-icing chemical" means sodium chloride, calcium chloride, or calcium magnesium
acetate;
(25) "Person" means any individual, firm, partnership, association, syndicate, company,
trust, corporation, limited liability company, municipality, agency, political or
administrative subdivision of the state, or other legal entity of any kind;
(26) "Pollution" means “pollution” as defined in §22a-423 of the Connecticut General
Statutes;
(27) “Pollution prevention” means the use of processes and materials so as to reduce or
minimize the amount of hazardous materials used or the quantity and concentration of
pollutants in waste generated;
(28) "Professional engineer" means a professional engineer licensed in accordance with
Chapter 391 of the Connecticut General Statutes, and who is qualified by reason of
relevant specialized training and relevant specialized experience to conduct audits of
regulated activities to ensure compliance with applicable law and identify appropriate
pollution prevention practices for such activities;
(29) "Publicly Owned Treatment Works” means “publicly owned treatment works” as
defined in §22a-430-3 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies;
(30) "Public service company" means "public service company" as defined in §16-1 of the
Connecticut General Statutes;
(31) “Public supply well" means “public supply well” as defined in §19-13-B51b of the
Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies;
(32) "Recharge area" means “recharge area” as defined in §22a-354h of the Connecticut
General Statutes and as mapped in accordance with §22a-354b-1 of the Regulations
of Connecticut State Agencies;
(33) “Registered regulated activity” means a regulated activity which has been registered
under §22a-354i-7 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies or Section 8 of
the APA Regulations, and is conducted at the facility identified in such registration;
(34) "Registrant" means a person, who or which, has submitted a registration for an
existing regulated activity under §22a-354i-7 of the Regulations of Connecticut State
Agencies or Section 4 of the APA Regulations;
6
(35) "Regulated activity" means any of the following activities, which are located or
conducted, wholly or partially, in an aquifer protection area, except as provided for in
§22a-354i-5(c) and §22a-354i-6 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies, or
Section 4 of the APA Regulations:
(A) underground storage or transmission of oil or petroleum, to the extent such
activity is not pre-empted by federal law, or hazardous material, except for (i)
an underground storage tank that contains number two (2) fuel oil and is located
more than five hundred (500) feet from a public supply well subject to
regulation under §22a-354c or §22a-354z of the Connecticut General Statutes,
or (ii) underground electrical facilities such as transformers, breakers, or cables
containing oil for cooling or insulation purposes which are owned and operated
by a public service company,
(B) oil or petroleum dispensing for the purpose of retail, wholesale or fleet use,
(C) on-site storage of hazardous materials for the purpose of wholesale sale,
(D) repair or maintenance of vehicles or internal combustion engines of vehicles,
involving the use, storage or disposal of hazardous materials, including
solvents, lubricants, paints, brake fluids, transmission fluids or the generation of
hazardous wastes,
(E) salvage operations of metal or vehicle parts,
(F) wastewater discharges to ground water other than domestic sewage and
stormwater, except for discharges from the following that have received a
permit from the Commissioner pursuant to §22a-430 of the Connecticut
General Statutes: (i) a pump and treat system for ground water remediation, (ii)
a potable water treatment system, (iii) heat pump system, (iv) non-contact
cooling water system, (v) swimming pools,
(G) car or truck washing, unless all waste waters from such activity are lawfully
disposed of through a connection to a publicly owned treatment works,
(H) production or refining of chemicals, including without limitation hazardous
materials or asphalt,
(I) clothes or cloth cleaning service which involves the use, storage or disposal of
hazardous materials including without limitation dry-cleaning solvents,
(J) industrial laundry activity that involves the cleaning of clothes or cloth
contaminated by hazardous material, unless all waste waters from such activity
are lawfully disposed of through a connection to a publicly owned treatment
works,
(K) generation of electrical power by means of fossil fuels, except for (i) generation
of electrical power by an emergency engine as defined by §22a-174-22(a)(2) of
7
the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies, or (ii) generation of electrical
power by means of natural gas or propane,
(L) production of electronic boards, electrical components, or other electrical
equipment involving the use, storage or disposal of any hazardous material or
involving metal plating, degreasing of parts or equipment, or etching
operations,
(M) embalming or crematory services which involve the use, storage or disposal of
hazardous material, unless all waste waters from such activity are lawfully
disposed of through a connection to a publicly owned treatment works,
(N) furniture stripping operations which involve the use, storage or disposal of
hazardous materials,
(O) furniture finishing operations which involve the use, storage or disposal of
hazardous materials, unless all waste waters from such activity are lawfully
disposed of through a connection to a publicly owned treatment works,
(P) storage, treatment or disposal of hazardous waste subject to a permit under
§22a-449(c)-100 to §22a-449(c)-110, inclusive, of the Regulations of
Connecticut State Agencies,
(Q) biological or chemical testing, analysis or research which involves the use,
storage or disposal of hazardous material, unless all waste waters from such
activity are lawfully disposed of through a connection to a publicly owned
treatment works, and provided that on-site testing of a public supply well by a
public water utility is not a regulated activity,
(R) pest control services which involve storage, mixing or loading of pesticides or
other hazardous materials,
(S) photographic finishing which involves the use, storage or disposal of hazardous
materials, unless all waste water from such activity are lawfully disposed of
through a connection to a publicly owned treatment works,
(T) production or fabrication of metal products which involves the use, storage or
disposal of hazardous materials including (i) metal cleaning or degreasing with
industrial solvents, (ii) metal plating, or (iii) metal etching,
(U) printing, plate making, lithography, photoengraving, or gravure, which involves
the use, storage or disposal of hazardous materials,
(V) accumulation or storage of waste oil, anti-freeze or spent lead-acid batteries
which are subject to a general permit issued by the Commissioner under §22a-
208(i) and §22a-454(e)(1) of the Connecticut General Statutes,
(W) production of rubber, resin cements, elastomers or plastic, which involves the
8
use, storage or disposal of hazardous materials,
(X) storage of de-icing chemicals, unless such storage takes place within a weathertight
water-proof structure for the purpose of retail sale or for the purpose of deicing
parking areas or access roads to parking areas,
(Y) accumulation, storage, handling, recycling, disposal, reduction, processing,
burning, transfer or composting of solid waste which is subject to a permit
issued by the Commissioner pursuant to §22a-207b, §22a-208a, and §22a-208c
of the Connecticut General Statute, except for a potable water treatment sludge
disposal area,
(Z) dying, coating or printing of textiles, or tanning or finishing of leather, which
activity involves the use, storage or disposal of hazardous materials,
(AA) production of wood veneer, plywood, reconstituted wood or pressure-treated
wood, which involves the use, storage or disposal of hazardous material, and
(BB) pulp production processes that involve bleaching;
(36) "Release" means "release" as defined in §22a-133k-1 of the Regulations of
Connecticut State Agencies;
(37) "State aquifer protection regulations" means §22a-354i-1 to §22a-354i-10, inclusive,
of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies;
(38) "Storage" means the holding or possession of any hazardous material;
(39) "Storage tank" means a stationary device which is designed to store hazardous
materials, and is constructed of non-earthen materials including without limitation
concrete, steel, fiberglass or plastic;
(40) "Topographic feature" means an object, whether natural or man-made, located on the
earth surface and of sufficient size that it appears on a 1:24,000 scale topographic
quadrangle map drawn by the United States Geological Survey;
(41) "Underground" when referring to a storage tank or storage tank component means
that ten percent or more of the volumetric capacity of such tank or component is
below the surface of the ground and that portion which is below the surface of the
ground is not fully visible for inspection;
(42) “Vehicle” or "vehicles" means a “vessel” as defined by §15-170 of the Connecticut
General Statutes, and any vehicle propelled or drawn by any non-muscular power,
including without limitation an automobile, aircraft, all-terrain vehicle, tractor, lawn
mower or snowmobile;
(43) "Waters” means “waters” as defined in §22a-423 of the Connecticut General Statutes;
9
(44) "Well field" means “well field” as defined in §22a-354h of the Connecticut General
Statutes; and
(45) "Zoning district map" means any map showing zoning districts prepared in
accordance with maps adopted pursuant to §8-3 of the Connecticut General Statutes.
SECTION 3. Delineation of Aquifer Protection Area Boundaries
(a) The zoning, planning, or planning and zoning commission shall delineate the aquifer
protection areas on the Town of Plainville zoning district map or, if zoning district maps do
not exist, the inland wetland and watercourse areas map adopted pursuant to §22a-42a the
Connecticut General Statutes. Such delineation shall consist of the combined areas of
contribution and recharge areas as shown on Level A maps approved or prepared by the
Commissioner.
(1) Such boundaries shall be delineated within one hundred twenty (120) days after being
notified by the Commissioner that an aquifer protection area is located partially or
entirely within the Town of Plainville.
(2) Notice of such delineation shall be published in a newspaper having substantial
circulation in the affected area. Such notice shall include at least the following:
(A) a map or detailed description of the subject aquifer protection area; and
(B) the name, telephone number, and address of a representative of the Agency who
may be reached for further information.
(b) In order to clarify the location of an aquifer protection area boundary, the Agency may
apply to the Commissioner to extend such boundary to coincide with the nearest property
line, municipal boundary or topographic feature pursuant to §22a-354i-4 of the Regulations
of Connecticut State Agencies. Such extension shall, at a minimum, fully encompass the
aquifer protection areas bounded by the approved level A mapping but shall not exceed the
distance necessary to clarify the location of the aquifer protection area or to facilitate the
administration of regulations pertaining thereto. An aquifer protection area boundary may
not be extended without prior written approval of the Commissioner.
(1) Any request by the Agency to the Commissioner for extension of an aquifer
protection area boundary shall include at least the following:
(A) A map to scale delineating (i) the aquifer protection area boundary mapped
under Section 3(a) of the APA regulations and (ii) the proposed extension of the
aquifer protection area boundary;
(B) A certification by the chairperson or duly authorized agent of the Agency that
notice of such request has been provided to all owners of property within the
proposed extended aquifer protection area and all affected water companies in
accordance with the following:
10
(i) Such notice shall include at least the following:
(aa) A map showing the aquifer protection area boundaries and the
proposed extension of such boundaries,
(bb) the name, address, and telephone number of a representative of the
Agency who may be contacted for further information, and
(cc) a statement that any person may, not later than thirty (30) days
after said notification, submit to the Agency written comments on
such proposed boundary extension;
(ii) Such notice shall be effectuated by the following:
(aa) Delivery of notice by certified mail to those individuals and
entities identified in Subsection (b)(1)(B) of this Section, or
(bb) the publication of a notice in a newspaper having substantial
circulation in the affected area; and posting of notice near the
proposed boundaries of the subject aquifer protection area of at
least four signs each of which shall be at least four square feet in
size (2' x 2'); and
(iii) a summary of comments received by such Agency regarding the proposed
boundary extension and the Agency’s response.
(2) Not later than sixty (60) days after receiving the Commissioner's written approval of a
request to extend an aquifer protection area boundary, the Agency shall cause such
boundary to be delineated in accordance with Subsection (a) of this Section.
(c) No person may challenge the boundaries of the aquifer protection area under the APA
Regulations unless such challenge is based solely on a failure by the Agency to properly
delineate the boundaries in accordance with §22a-354n of the Connecticut General Statutes.
(d) A map of the location and boundaries of the aquifer protection areas, or regulated areas,
shall be available for inspection in the Office of the City/Town Clerk or the Agency.
(e) If the Level A mapping is amended in accordance with §22a-354b-1(i) or §22a-354b-1(j) of
the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies, the Agency shall cause the amended aquifer
protection area boundary to be delineated in accordance with Subsections (a) or (b) of this
Section.
11
SECTION 4. Prohibited and Regulated Activities
(a) All regulated activities are prohibited in aquifer protection areas, except as specified in
Subsection (b) of this Section.
(b) The following regulated activities are not prohibited in aquifer protection areas:
(1) A registered regulated activity which is conducted in compliance with §22a-354i-9 of
the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies or Section 12 of the APA Regulations;
and
(2) a regulated activity which has received a permit issued pursuant to §22a-354i-8 of the
Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies or Section 9 of the APA Regulations.
(c) The following are not regulated activities:
(1) Any activity conducted at a residence without compensation;
(2) any activity involving the use or storage of no more than two and one-half (2.5)
gallons of each type of hazardous material on-site at any one time, provided the total
of all hazardous materials on-site does not exceed fifty-five (55) gallons at any one
time;
(3) any agricultural activity regulated pursuant to §22a-354m(d) of the Connecticut
General Statutes;
(4) any activity provided all the following conditions are satisfied:
(A) such activity takes place solely within an enclosed building in an area with an
impermeable floor,
(B) such activity involves no more than 10% of the floor area in the building where
the activity takes place,
(C) any hazardous material used in connection with such activity is stored in such
building at all times,
(D) all waste waters generated by such activity are lawfully disposed through a
connection to a publicly owned treatment works, and
(E) such activity does not involve (i) repair or maintenance of internal combustion
engines, including without limitation, vehicles, or equipment associated with
such vehicles, (ii) underground storage of any hazardous material, or (iii) above
ground storage of more than one hundred and ten (110) gallons of hazardous
materials;
12
(5) any activity solely involving the use of lubricating oil provided all the following
conditions are satisfied:
(A) such activity does not involve cleaning of metals with chlorinated solvents at
the facility,
(B) such activity takes place solely within an enclosed building in an area with an
impermeable floor,
(C) any hazardous material used in connection with such activity is stored in such
building at all times, and
(D) such activity does not involve: (i) repair or maintenance of internal combustion
engines, including without limitation, vehicles, or equipment associated with
such vehicles, (ii) underground storage of any hazardous material, or (iii) above
ground storage of more than one hundred ten (110) gallons of such lubricating
oil and associated hazardous waste; and
(6) any activity involving the dispensing of oil or petroleum from an above-ground
storage tank or tanks with an aggregate volume of two thousand (2000) gallons or less
provided all the following conditions are satisfied:
(A) such dispensing activity takes place solely on a paved surface which is covered
by a roof,
(B) the above-ground storage tank(s) is a double-walled tank with overfill alarms,
and
(C) all associated piping is either above ground, or has secondary containment.
(d) Determination of a non-regulated activity
(1) Any person proposing to carry out a non-regulated activity, as set forth in Section
4(c) of these regulations, in an aquifer protection area shall, prior to commencement
of such activity; notify the Agency or its duly authorized agent on a form provided by
the Agency. Such form shall provide sufficient information to enable the Agency or
its duly authorized agent to properly determine that the proposed activity is a
regulated activity or a non-regulated activity within the aquifer protection area.
(2) If such activity is determined to be a non-regulated activity, then no further action
under the APA Regulations is necessary
13
SECTION 5. Activities Regulated by the State
(a) The Commissioner shall exclusively regulate activities within aquifer protection areas that
are specified in §22a-354p(g) of the Connecticut General Statutes. The Agency shall
regulate all other regulated activities.
(b) Any person conducting regulated activities that are within the authority of the
Commissioner shall submit a registration or obtain a permit or exemption from the
Commissioner prior to engaging in such activity. The Commissioner shall process
applications for those regulated activities.
(c) The Agency may submit an advisory decision to the Commissioner for consideration on
any permit regulated under this Section in accordance with the Connecticut General
Statutes §22a-354p(g).
SECTION 6. Application for an Exemption from Prohibition or Regulation
(a) The owner or operator of a regulated activity may seek an exemption from the
Commissioner pursuant to §22a-354i-6 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies.
Any person seeking an exemption from the Commissioner shall concurrently submit a copy
of the application for an exemption to the Agency and any affected water company.
(b) The Agency may submit written comments to the Commissioner on any exemption
regulated under this Section in accordance with §22a-354i-6(c) of the Regulations of
Connecticut State Agencies within sixty (60) days of the agency receipt of copy of the
application.
SECTION 7. General Registration, Permit Application and Transfer Procedures
(a) All applications for permits and registrations shall contain sufficient information for a fair
and informed determination of the issues. The Agency may request additional information
from the applicant for this purpose.
(b) The day of receipt of a registration, permit application or transfer form shall be the day of
the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Agency, immediately following the day of
submission of the application to the Agency or its duly authorized agent, or thirty-five (35)
days after such submission, whichever is sooner.
(c) At any time during the review period, the Agency may require the applicant or registrant to
provide additional information about the regulated activity. Requests for additional
information shall not stay the time limitations for registrations and permits as set forth in
Sections 8 and 9 of the APA Regulations.
14
(d) All permit applications and registrations shall be open for public inspection.
(e) Incomplete permit applications and registrations may be denied without prejudice.
(f) No permit or registration issued under Sections 8 or 9 of the APA Regulations shall be
assigned or transferred except with written approval by the Agency.
(g) The Agency shall notify the town clerk of any adjoining municipality of the pendency of
any application, petition, appeal, request or plan concerning any project on any site in
which: (1) any portion of the property affected by a decision of such agency is within fivehundred
feet of the boundary of the adjoining municipality; (2) a significant portion of the
traffic to the completed project on the site will use streets within the adjoining municipality
to enter or exit the site; (3) a significant portion of the sewer or water drainage from the
project on the site will flow through and significantly impact the drainage or sewerage
system within the adjoining municipality; or (4) water runoff from the improved site will
impact streets or other municipal or private property within the adjoining municipality.
Such notice shall be made by certified mail, return receipt requested, and shall be mailed
within seven days of the date of receipt of the application, petition, request or plan. Such
adjoining municipality may, through a representative, appear and be heard at any hearing
on any such application, petition, appeal, request or plan.
SECTION 8. Registration Requirements
(a) Any person engaged in a regulated activity which substantially commenced, or was in
active operation within the past five (5) years, or with respect to which a municipal building
permit was issued, either (A) before the effective date of the state aquifer protection
regulations, or (B) before the date an applicable aquifer protection area is designated on a
municipal zoning district map or inland wetland and watercourse areas map, whichever
occurs later, shall register the activity in accordance with this Section unless such person
has pending an application for an exemption pursuant to §22a-354i-6 of the Regulations of
Connecticut State Agencies.
(1) The Commissioner shall process registrations for those regulated activities specified
in §22a-354p(g) of the Connecticut General Statutes. The Agency shall process
registrations for all other regulated activities.
(2) If the regulated activity is not specified in §22a-354p(g) of the Connecticut General
Statutes, the person engaged in such activity shall submit a registration to the Agency
not later than one hundred eighty (180) days after adoption of regulations pursuant to
§22a-354p of the Connecticut General Statutes, or the designation the aquifer
protection area pursuant to §22a-354i-2 of the Regulations of Connecticut State
Agencies, whichever occurs later. Said person shall simultaneously file a copy of the
registration with the Commissioner, Commissioner of Public Health and the affected
water company.
(b) All registrations shall be provided on a form prescribed by the Agency and shall be
15
accompanied by the correct registration fee in accordance with Section 18 of the APA
Regulations. Such registration forms may be obtained from the Plainville Town Clerk or
the Agency. Such registration forms shall include at least the following information in
writing or on maps or drawings:
(1) The name, business telephone number, street address and mailing address of the:
(A) Registrant; if the registrant is a corporation or limited partnership, the full name
of the facility and such corporation or limited partnership as registered with the
Connecticut Secretary of State, and any officer or governing or managing body
of any partnership, association, firm or corporation,
(B) owner of such facility if different than the registrant, and
(C) manager or operator overseeing the operations of such facility;
(2) the location of such facility, using street address or other appropriate method of
location, and a map showing the property boundaries of the facility on a 1:24,000
scale United States Geological Survey topographic quadrangle base (if the site
boundary is too small to show on a map with a scale of 1:24,000, then submit a local
property or assessor’s map at a scale which clearly shows the facility boundaries);
(3) an identification of the regulated activity or activities conducted at the facility, as
described in Section 2(a)(35) of the APA Regulations, which regulated activity or
activities shall consist of any regulated activity which substantially commenced, was
in active operation, or with respect to which a municipal building permit was issued
within the past five years; and
(4) a certification by the registrant that the subject regulated activity is in compliance
with the best management practices set forth in Section 12(a) of the APA
Regulations, as follows, signed after satisfying the statements set forth in the
following certification:
"I have personally examined and am familiar with the information submitted in
this registration and all attachments, and I certify, based on reasonable
investigation, including my inquiry of those individuals responsible for obtaining
the information, the submitted information is true, accurate and complete to the
best of my knowledge and belief. I understand that any false statement made in
this document or certification may be punishable as a criminal offense under
§53a-157b of the Connecticut General Statutes and any other applicable law.”
(c) When deemed necessary to protect a public supply well subject to regulation under §22a-
354c or §22a-354z of the Connecticut General Statutes, the Agency may:
(1) require, by written notice, any registrant to submit for review and written approval a
storm water management plan prepared in accordance with Section 12(b) of the APA
Regulations. If so required, the storm water management plan shall be implemented
by the registrant immediately upon its approval; or
16
(2) require, by written notice, any registrant to submit for review and written approval the
materials management plan prepared in accordance with Section 12(a) of the APA
Regulations. If so required, the materials management plan shall be implemented by
the registrant immediately upon its approval.
(d) If the Agency determines that a registration is incomplete, it shall reject the registration and
notify the registrant of what additional information is required and the date by which it shall
be submitted.
(e) If the registration is determined to be complete, and the regulated activity is eligible for
registration, the Agency shall send written notification of such registration to the registrant.
Such registration shall be determined to be complete and eligible if the registrant has not
otherwise received a notice of rejection from the Agency, not later than one hundred and
eighty (180) days after the date the registration is received by the Agency.
(f) The following general provisions shall be included in the issuance of all registrations:
(1) The Agency has relied in whole or in part on information provided by the registrant
and if such information subsequently proves to be false, deceptive, incomplete or
inaccurate, the registration may be modified, suspended or revoked;
(2) all registrations issued by the Agency are subject to and do not derogate any present
or future rights or powers of the Commissioner, Agency, or municipality, and convey
no rights in real estate or material nor any exclusive privileges, and are further subject
to any and all public and private rights and to any federal, state, and municipal laws
or regulations pertinent to the subject land or activity;
(3) a complete registration shall expire five (5) years from the date of receipt of such
registration by the Agency;
(4) the registrant shall apply to the Agency to renew the registration on a form prescribed
by the Agency for a facility prior to expiration of such registration; and
(5) If a registered regulated activity is out of business or inactive when registration
renewal is required, a five (5) year allowance shall be in effect from the date the
registration expires. If the registrant has not applied to renew the registration within
five (5) years of the date the registration expires, the facility is no longer eligible for
registration.
(g) If a regulated activity which is eligible for registration in accordance with Subsection (a) of
this Section fails to be registered or if the registrant of an active registered activity fails to
apply for renewal prior to expiration, the Commissioner or municipal aquifer protection
agency, as appropriate, may accept a late registration at their discretion, subject to the
limitations in Subsection (f)(5) of this Section.
(h) Any person wishing to assume the benefits under a registration for regulated activities shall
apply to transfer such registration on a form prescribed by the Agency and submitted to the
Agency.
17
SECTION 9. Permit Requirements
(a) Any person may apply for a permit to add a regulated activity to a facility where a
registered regulated activity occurs.
(b) The Agency shall process permit applications for those registrants that have registered
pursuant to Section 8 of the APA Regulations. The Commissioner shall process permit
applications for regulated activities specified in §22a-354p(g) of the Connecticut General
Statutes and for those registrants that have registered pursuant to §22a-354i-7(b)(1) of the
Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies.
(c) Action shall be taken on permit applications within sixty-five (65) days after the completion
of a public hearing or in the absence of a public hearing within sixty-five (65) days from the
date of receipt of the application. The applicant may consent to one or more extensions of
either of these timeframes, provided the total extension of all such periods is sixty-five (65)
days or less.
(d) An application for a permit shall be made on a form prescribed by the Agency and shall be
accompanied by the correct application fee in accordance with Section 18 of the APA
Regulations. Such permit application forms may be obtained from the Plainville Town
Clerk or the Agency. Simultaneously with filing an application, the applicant shall send a
copy of the application to the Commissioner, the Commissioner of Public Health and the
affected water company. An application shall include the following information:
(1) The information as required for a registration under Section 8(b) of the APA
Regulations shall be provided for the proposed regulated activity;
(2) a confirmation and certification that the existing and proposed activity:
(A) remains and shall remain in compliance with Section 12(a) of the APA
Regulations,
(B) shall not increase the number of underground storage tanks used for storage of
hazardous materials, and
(C) remains and shall remain in compliance with all local, state, and federal
environmental laws;
(3) a materials management plan in accordance with Section 12(a) of the APA
Regulations;
(4) a storm water management plan in accordance with Section 12(b) of the APA
Regulations;
(5) the following environmental compliance information with respect to environmental
violations which occurred at the facility where the regulated activities are conducted,
within the five years immediately preceding the date of the application:
18
(A) any criminal conviction involving a violation of any environmental protection
law,
(B) any civil penalty imposed in any state or federal judicial proceeding, or any
penalty exceeding five thousand dollars imposed in any administrative
proceeding, and
(C) any judicial or administrative orders issued regarding any such violation
together with the dates, case or docket numbers, or other information which
identifies the proceeding. For any such proceeding initiated by the state or
federal government, the Agency may require submission of a copy of any
official document associated with the proceeding, the final judgment or order;
(6) any additional information deemed necessary by the Agency regarding potential
threats to the ground water and proposed safeguards; and
(7) the following certification signed by the applicant and the individual responsible for
preparing the application, after satisfying the statements set forth in the certification:
"I have personally examined and am familiar with the information submitted in
this document and all attachments, and I certify, based on reasonable
investigation, including my inquiry of those individuals responsible for obtaining
the information, the submitted information is true, accurate and complete to the
best of my knowledge and belief. I understand that any false statement made in
the submitted information is punishable as a criminal offense under §53a-157b of
the Connecticut General Statutes and any other applicable law.”
(e) The Commissioner, any affected water company or the Commissioner of Public Health
may, not later than thirty (30) days after receiving a copy of an application for a permit
under this Section, submit to the Agency written comments on such application. The
Agency shall give due consideration to any such comments, and shall provide a copy of the
decision to the Commissioner, the affected water company and the Commissioner of Public
Health.
(f) To carry out the purposes of the Act, the Agency may grant an application as filed, grant it
upon such terms, conditions, limitations or modifications necessary, or deny it. The
Agency shall state upon the record the reason for its decision.
(g) The Agency may hold a public hearing on an application for a permit in accordance with
Section 10 of the APA regulations.
(h) The Agency shall not issue a permit unless a complete application has been received and
the applicant demonstrates to the Agency's satisfaction that all requirements of this Section
of the APA regulations have been satisfied and all of the following standards and criteria
have been met:
(1) the proposed regulated activity shall take place at a facility where a registered
regulated activity occurs;
19
(2) the proposed regulated activity shall not increase the number, or storage capacity of
underground storage tanks used for hazardous materials except for the replacement of
an existing underground storage tank in accordance with Section 12(a)(3) of the APA
Regulations;
(3) the materials management plan and storm water management plan have been
satisfactorily prepared in accordance with Sections 12(a) and 12(b) of the APA
Regulations;
(4) the applicant has submitted a confirmation and certification that all regulated
activities remain and shall remain in compliance with all local, state and federal
environmental laws in accordance with Subsection (d)(2) of this Section;
(5) the applicant’s compliance record does not indicate (A) that any noncompliance
resulted from indifference to or disregard for the legal requirements, (B) an
unwillingness or inability to devote the resources necessary to comply and remain in
compliance, or (C) that instances of noncompliance have led to serious environmental
harm, harm to human health or safety, or a substantial risk of such harm;
(6) the proposed regulated activity shall be conducted in accordance with Section 12 of
the APA Regulations;
(7) the existing regulated activity is being conducted in accordance with Section 12 of the
APA Regulations; and
(8) the certification required under Subsection (d)(7) of this Section has been signed by
the applicant and the individual responsible for preparing the application.
(i) The Agency may impose reasonable conditions or limitations on any permit issued under
this Section to assure protection of the ground water, including, but not limited to the
following:
(1) best management practices in addition to those set forth in Section 12 of the APA
Regulations; and
(2) ground water monitoring.
(j) The following general provisions shall be included in the issuance of all permits:
(1) the Agency has relied in whole or in part on information provided by the applicant
and if such information subsequently proves to be false, deceptive, incomplete or
inaccurate, the permit may be modified, suspended or revoked;
(2) all permits issued by the Agency are subject to and do not derogate any present or
future rights or powers of the Commissioner, Agency, or municipality, and convey no
rights in real estate or material nor any exclusive privileges, and are further subject to
any and all public and private rights and to any federal, state, and municipal laws or
regulations pertinent to the subject land or activity;
20
(3) the permit shall expire ten (10) years from the date of issuance of such permit by the
Agency; and
(4) a person shall apply to the Agency to renew the permit on a form prescribed by the
Agency prior to expiration of such permit. Such renewal shall be granted upon
request by the Agency unless a substantial change in the permitted activity is
proposed, or enforcement action with regard to the regulated activity has been taken,
in which case, a new permit application shall be submitted and reviewed in
accordance with the provisions of this Section.
(k) The Agency shall notify the applicant or permittee within fifteen (15) days of the date of the
decision by certified mail, return receipt requested, and the Agency shall cause notice of its
order in issuance or denial of a permit to be published in a newspaper having a general
circulation in the municipality in which the aquifer protection area is located.
(l) A permittee may request a modification of a permit from the Agency. Such request shall be
on a form prescribed by the Agency, and shall include the facts and reasons supporting the
request. The Agency may require the permittee to submit a new application for a permit or
renewal in lieu of a modification request.
(m) A person wishing to assume the benefits under a permit for regulated activities shall apply
to transfer such permit on a form prescribed by the Agency and submitted to the Agency.
21
SECTION 10. Public Hearings Regarding Permit Applications
(a) If the Agency decides to hold a public hearing regarding an application for a permit to
conduct a regulated activity within an aquifer protection area, such hearing shall commence
no later than sixty-five (65) days after the receipt of such application.
(b) Notice of the hearing shall be published at least twice at intervals of not less than two (2)
days, the first not more than fifteen (15) days and not fewer than ten (10) days, and the last
not less than two (2) days before the date set for the hearing in a newspaper having a
general circulation in each city/town where the affected aquifer, or any part thereof, is
located.
(c) The Agency shall send to any affected water company, at least ten (10) days before the
hearing, a copy of the notice by certified mail, return receipt requested. Any affected water
company may, through a representative, appear and be heard at any such hearing.
(d) All applications, maps and documents relating thereto shall be open for public inspection.
(e) At such hearing any person or persons may appear and be heard.
(f) The hearing shall be completed within thirty-five (35) days of its commencement.
(g) The applicant may consent to an extension of the time frames in Subsections (a) or (f) of
this Section, provided the total extension of all such periods, including any extensions
provided in Section 9(c), totals sixty-five (65) days or less.
(h) In reaching its decision on any application after a public hearing, the Agency shall base its
decision on the record of that hearing. Documentary evidence or other material not in the
hearing record shall not be considered by the Agency in its decision.
(i) The applicant or permittee shall be notified of the Agency’s decision in accordance with
Section 9(k) of the APA Regulations.
SECTION 11. Bond and Insurance Relevant to Permit Applicants
(a) An applicant may be required to file a bond as a condition of the permit.
(b) Any bond or surety shall be conditioned on compliance with all provisions of these
regulations and the terms, conditions and limitations established in the permit.
22
SECTION 12. Best Management Practices
(a) Every regulated activity shall be conducted in accordance with the following:
(1) hazardous materials may be stored above ground within an aquifer protection area
only in accordance with the following conditions:
(A) hazardous material shall be stored in a building or under a roof that minimizes
storm water entry to the hazardous material storage area, except that a roof is
not required for a bulk storage facility as defined in Section 2 of the APA
Regulations,
(B) floors within a building or under a roof where hazardous material may be stored
shall be constructed or treated to protect the surface of the floor from
deterioration due to spillage of any such material,
(C) a structure which may be used for storage or transfer of hazardous material
shall be protected from storm water run-on, and ground water intrusion,
(D) hazardous material shall be stored within an impermeable containment area
which is capable of containing at least the volume of the largest container of
such hazardous material present in such area, or 10% of the total volume of all
such containers in such area, whichever is larger, without overflow of released
hazardous material from the containment area,
(E) hazardous material shall not be stored with other hazardous materials that are
incompatible and may create a hazard of fire, explosion or generation of toxic
substances,
(F) hazardous material shall be stored only in a container that has been certified to
meet state or federal specifications for containers suitable for the transport or
storage of such material,
(G) hazardous material shall be stored only in an area that is secured against unauthorized
entry by the public, and
(H) the requirements of this subdivision are intended to supplement, and not to
supersede, any other applicable requirements of federal, state, or local law,
including applicable requirements of the Resource Conservation and Recovery
Act of 1976;
(2) no person shall increase the number of underground storage tanks used to store
hazardous materials;
(3) an underground storage tank used to store hazardous materials shall not be replaced
with a larger tank unless (A) there is no more than a 25% increase in volume of the
23
larger replacement tank, and (B) the larger replacement tank is a double-walled tank
with co-axial piping, both meeting new installation component standards pursuant to
§22a-449(d)-1(e) and §22a-449(d)-102 of the Regulations of Connecticut State
Agencies, and with interstitial monitoring;
(4) no person shall use, maintain or install floor drains, dry wells or other infiltration
devices or appurtenances which allow the release of waste waters to the ground,
unless such release is permitted by the Commissioner in accordance with §22a-430 or
§22a-430b of the Connecticut General Statutes; and
(5) a materials management plan shall be developed and implemented in accordance with
the following:
(A) a materials management plan shall contain, at a minimum, the following
information with respect to the subject regulated activity:
(i) a pollution prevention assessment consisting of a detailed evaluation of
alternatives to the use of hazardous materials or processes and practices
that would reduce or eliminate the use of hazardous materials, and
implementation of such alternatives where possible and feasible,
(ii) a description of any operations or practices which may pose a threat of
pollution to the aquifer, which shall include the following:
(aa) a process flow diagram identifying where hazardous materials are
stored, disposed and used, and where hazardous wastes are
generated and subsequently stored and disposed,
(bb) an inventory of all hazardous materials which are likely to be or
will be manufactured, produced, stored, utilized or otherwise
handled, and
(cc) a description of waste, including waste waters generated, and a
description of how such wastes are handled, stored and disposed,
(iii) the name, street address, mailing address, title and telephone number of
the individual(s) responsible for implementing the materials management
plan and the individual(s) who should be contacted in an emergency,
(iv) a record-keeping system to account for the types, quantities, and
disposition of hazardous materials which are manufactured, produced,
utilized, stored, or otherwise handled or which are discharged or emitted;
such record-keeping system shall be maintained at the subject facility and
shall be made available thereat for inspection during normal business
hours by the Commissioner and the municipal aquifer protection agency,
and
(v) an emergency response plan for responding to a release of hazardous
24
materials. Such plan shall describe how each such release could result in
pollution to the underlying aquifer and shall set forth the methods used or
to be used to prevent and abate any such a release;
(B) when a materials management plan is required under either Section 8(c) or 9(d)
of the APA Regulations, such materials management plan shall be completed
and certified by a professional engineer or a certified hazardous materials
manager, or, if the facility where the regulated activity is conducted has
received and maintained an ISO 14001 environmental management system
certification, then the registrant may complete and certify the materials
management plan; and
(C) the materials management plan shall be maintained at the subject facility and
shall be made available thereat for inspection during normal business hours by
the Commissioner and the municipal aquifer protection agency.
(b) The development and implementation of a storm water management plan required for
regulated activities in accordance with Sections 8(c) and 9(d) of the APA Regulations, shall
be as follows: A storm water management plan shall assure that storm water run-off
generated by the subject regulated activity is (i) managed in a manner so as to prevent
pollution of ground water, and (ii) shall comply with all of the requirements for the General
Permit of the Discharge of Storm Water associated with a Commercial Activity issued
pursuant to §22a-430b of the Connecticut General Statutes.
SECTION 13. Other State, Federal and Local Laws
(a) Nothing in these regulations shall obviate the requirement for the applicant to obtain any
other assents, permits or licenses required by law or regulation by the Town of Plainville,
State of Connecticut and the Government of the United States including any approval
required by the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection and the U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers and the United States Environmental Protection Agency. Obtaining
such assents, permits or licenses are the sole responsibility of the applicant.
(b) No person shall conduct any regulated activity within an aquifer protection area which
requires zoning or subdivision approval without first having obtained a valid certificate of
zoning or subdivision approval, special permit, special exception or variance, or other
documentation establishing that the proposal complies with the Town of Plainville zoning
or subdivision regulations.
25
SECTION 14. Enforcement
(a) The Agency may appoint a duly authorized agent to act in its behalf with the authority to
issue notices of violation or cease and desist orders.
(b) If the Agency or its duly authorized agent finds that any person is conducting or
maintaining any activity, facility or condition which violates any provision of these
regulations, the Agency or its duly authorized agent may:
(1) Issue a notice of violation.
(A) The notice of violation shall state the nature of the violation, the jurisdiction of
the Agency, and the necessary action required to correct the violation including
without limitation halting the activity in the aquifer protection area.
(B) The Agency may request that the person appear at the next regularly scheduled
meeting of the Agency to discuss the unauthorized activity, and/or provide a
written reply to the notice or file an application for the necessary permit or
registration. Failure to carry out the action(s) directed in a notice of violation
may result in issuance of an order under Subsection (2) of this Section or other
enforcement proceedings as provided by law.
(2) Issue a written order.
(A) Such order shall be issued by certified mail, return receipt requested to such
person conducting such activity or maintaining such facility or condition to
cease such activity immediately or to correct such facility or condition. The
Agency shall send a copy of such order to any affected water company by
certified mail, return receipt requested.
(B) Within ten (10) days of the issuance of such order the Agency shall hold a
hearing to provide the person an opportunity to be heard and show cause why
the order should not remain in effect. Any affected water company may testify
at the hearing. The Agency shall consider the facts presented at the hearing
and, within ten (10) days of the completion of the hearing, notify the person by
certified mail, return receipt requested, that the original order remains in effect,
that a revised order is in effect, or that the order has been withdrawn.
(3) Suspend or revoke registration or permit.
(A) The Agency may suspend or revoke a registration or a permit if it finds, after a
hearing, that the registrant or permittee has not complied with the terms,
conditions or limitations set forth in the registration or the permit. Prior to
revoking or suspending any registration or permit, the Agency shall issue notice
to the registrant or the permittee, personally or by certified mail, return receipt
requested, setting forth the facts or conduct that warrants the intended action.
26
(B) The Agency shall hold a hearing to provide the registrant or permittee an
opportunity to show that it is in compliance with its registration or permit. The
Agency shall notify the registrant or permittee of its decision by certified mail
within fifteen (15) days of the date of its decision. The Agency shall publish
notice of a suspension or revocation in a newspaper having general circulation
in the Town of Plainville.
(c) An order issued pursuant to Subsection (b)(2) of this Section shall be effective upon
issuance, shall remain in effect until the Agency affirms, revises, or withdraws the order,
and shall not delay or bar an action pursuant to Subsection (b)(3) of this Section.
(d) A court may assess criminal and or civil penalties to any person who commits, takes part in,
or assists in any violation of any provision of the APA regulations in accordance with §22a-
354s(b) and §22a-354s(c) of the Connecticut General Statutes.
SECTION 15. Amendments
(a) These regulations may be amended, changed or repealed in accordance with §22a-354p(b)
of the Connecticut General Statutes.
(b) If a complete application is filed with the Agency which is in conformance with the APA
regulations as of the date of its filing, the permit issued shall not be required to comply with
any changes in regulations taking effect on or after the filing date. The provisions of this
Section shall not apply to the establishment, amendment, or change of the boundaries of the
aquifer protection area or to any changes in the APA Regulations necessary to make the
regulations consistent with Chapter 446i of the Connecticut General Statutes as of the date
of the Agency’s decision.
SECTION 16. Appeals
(a) Appeal of the Agency’s regulation, order, decision or action shall be made in accordance
with §22a-354q of the Connecticut General Statutes.
SECTION 17. Conflict and Severance
(a) If there is a conflict between the provisions of the APA Regulations, the provision that
imposes the most stringent standards shall govern. The invalidity of any word, clause,
sentence, section, part, subsection, subdivision or provision of these regulations shall not
affect the validity of any other part that can be given effect without such valid part or parts.
(b) If there is a conflict between the provisions of the APA Regulations and the Act, the
provisions of the Act shall govern.
27
SECTION 18. Registration and Permit Application Fees
(a) All fees required by these regulations shall be submitted to the Agency by certified check or
money order payable to the Town of Plainville at the time the registration or permit
application is filed with the Agency.
(b) No registration or permit application shall be granted or approved by the Agency unless the
correct registration/application fee is paid in full or unless a waiver has been granted by the
Agency pursuant to Subsection (f) of this Section.
(c) The registration or permit application fee is nonrefundable.
(d) Registration or permit application fees shall be based on the following schedule:
Fee Schedule
Facility Size
Small (< 1 acre) Medium (1-5 acres) Large (> 5 acres)
Registrations:
Industrial $100 $250 $400
Commercial $100 $250 $400
Other $100 $250 $400
Fee Schedule (continued)
Facility Size
Small (< 1 acre) Medium (1-5 acres) Large (> 5 acres)
Permits:
Industrial $200 $300 $400
Commercial $200 $300 $400
Other $200 $300 $400
Materials Management
Plan Reviews
$200 $300 $400
Storm water
Management Plan
Reviews
$200 $300 $400
Public Hearing $250 $250 $250
Facility
Inspection/Monitoring
$100/ea $250/ea $400/ea
Regulation Petition $100 $100 $100
Transfer Fee $50 $50 $50
(e) Boards, commissions, councils and departments of the Town of Plainville are exempt from
all fee requirements.
(f) The registrant or applicant may petition the Agency to waive, reduce or allow delayed
28
payment of the fee. Such petitions shall be in writing and shall state fully the facts and
circumstances the Agency should consider in its determination under this Section. The
Agency may waive all or part of the application fee if the Agency determines that:
(1) the activity applied for would clearly result in a substantial public benefit to the
environment or to the public health and safety and the registrant or applicant would
reasonably be deterred from initiating the activity solely or primarily as a result of the
amount of the registration or permit application fee; or
(2) the amount of the registration or permit application fee is clearly excessive in relation
to the cost to the City/Town for reviewing and processing the application.
(g) Extra Assessments
In the event that additional expenses, including but not limited to outside consultants,
experts, or legal advisors are incurred in processing the registration or permit application
the applicant/registrant may be assessed an additional fee not to exceed $ 5,000.00 to
cover said costs. Said fees are to be estimated by the duly authorized agent and submitted
with the application fee and held until the application is completely processed after which
time any residual funds pertaining to this assessment are to be returned to the
applicant/registrant.
For the purpose of this assessment, an “outside consultant” means a professional who is
not an employee of the Town of Plainville including but not limited to engineering,
environmental, hydrogeology and hazardous materials management professionals.
(h) The Agency shall state upon its record the basis for all actions under this Section.
SECTION 19. Effective Date of Regulations
The APA Regulations, APA boundaries and amendments thereto, shall become effective upon
(1) the Commissioner’s determination that such regulations are reasonably related to the purpose
of ground water protection and not inconsistent with the Regulations of Connecticut State
Agencies §22a-354i-1 through §22a-354i-10 and (2) filing in the Office of the City/Town Clerk.
Effective Date: October 14, 2008
Revisions
Section Date
Placeholder Placeholder