)
TOWN OF PRESTON
ORDINANCES
AND . '
SPECIAL ACTS
GRANTS OF OANACO
AND
CONNECTICUT GENERAL COURT
AS OF January 14, 2015
··.
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
) TOWN OF PRESTON
ORDINANCES & SPECIAL' ACTS
PAGE
TABLE OF CONTENTS NUMBER
A
AMBULANCE SERVICE- Charge Fees for Services 108
ANNEXATION 100
ANNUAL TOWN BUDGET & BOARD OF
FINANCE MEETING Budget Meeting & Public Hearing 141
ASSESSOR Appointment by Selectman 45
AGING -COMMITEE To Study Needs of 63
AGING PROGRAM FOR Establishing a Committee 114
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES Obtaining Permit Repeal 117
Also see Public Consumption 0
see Liquor Sales on Sunday
B
BAZAARS AND RAFFLES 19
BIDDING, PUBLIC Amendment 30
Amendment 31
Amendment 121
) BOARD OF FINANCE Referendum-$100,000 expenditure 113
BUILDING CODES 44
BUILDING PERMITS -FEES Fees 43
Amendment 132-143
BUILDING PERMITS -BUILDING ON Unaccepted Highways 39
c
CONSERVATION COMMISSION Establishment of Amendment 46
CONSERVATION INLAND/WETLAND
COMMISSION Amendment 114
CONSERVATION INLAND/WETLAND
COMMISSION Reorganization 125-126
CONNECTICUT COUNCIL OF
GOVERNMENTS Joining 96
CONSTABLES 107
COMMERCIAL WASTE 115-117
D
DEED OF OANACO Conveying Land 1
DOANE PARK OR DOANE GREEN 18
I
I
)
I
} TOWN OF PRESTON
ORDINANCES & SPECIAL ACTS
Page Two
PAGE
TABLE OF CONTENTS NUMBER
E
EAST SOCIETY, ANNEXED TO PRESTON
1786 4
EDUCATION, BOARD OF Increase in Membership 13
Term of Office 14
Ordinance to Define Annual Town 142
Budget and Board of Finance
ELECTIONS, BIENNIAL 12
ESTABLISHMENT OF BOARDS,
COMMISSION & COMMITTEES See Public Comment & Questions
EMINENT DOMAIN 119-120
ETHICS (See Preston Code of Ethics} I
F I
FARM BUILDINGS AND SEASONAL FARM
EMPLOYEE HOUSING Property Tax Exemption 145
FINANCE BOARD Establishment of 15
ORDINANCE -ANNUAL TOWN
FINANCE BOARD BUDGET 140-141
FISCAL YEAR Establishment Date 16
FIRE TRUCKS (see under trucks}
FIRE DEPARTMENT Establishment 123-124
G
GRANT OF THE GENERAL COURT OF CT 2
GRISWOLD, INCORPORATING THE TOWN 1815 4
H
Costs of Constructing Water
HAP PYLAND/DRAWBRIDGE System 97
HIGHWAYS, ACCEPTANCE By Board of Selectmen 38 & 38A
I
INLAND/WETLANDS Violations Fines 104-106
L
LANDFILL/TRANSFER STATION Adopted By Selectmen 99 LANDFILL Amendment 101
LANDFILL FEES 102
.
)
LANDFILL·
LEDYARD, ANNEXING
LIQUOR SALE ON SUNDAY
TOWN OF PRESTON
ORDINANCES & SPECIAL ACTS
Page Three
TABLE OF CONTENTS
M
MOTOR VEHICLE (Snow Plowing]
MUNICIPAL DEVELOPMENT &
INDUSTRIAL COMMISSION
MUNICIPAL PARK & RECREATION
N
NORTH STONINGTON
NORWICH STATE HOSPITAL
NUMBERING OF PROPERTIES
p
PARKS & RECREATION
PARKS & RECREATION COMMISSION
PLANNING & ZONING COMMISSION
PRESTON, ANNEXING PART OF
PRESTON CODE OF ETHICS
PRESTON-LEDYARD
PRESTON REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY
PRESTON REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY
PRESTON'S 300TH ANNIVERSARY
PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL FACILITIES
PUBLIC BIDDING -Revjsed
PUBLIC BIDDING
PUBLIC COMSUMPTION
PUBLIC HEATH NURSE
Leaves and Brush
Part of Preston
Interference With Snow Plowing
Amendments
Capital and Non-Recurring
Expense Fund
Annexing Part of -1831
Hazardous Materials
Establishment Of
Also see Municipal Park &
Recreation
Amendments
Establishment Of
see also Zoning & Planning
Amendments
To Norwich - 1901
Amended
Amendment
Amendment
Changing Division Line - 1872
Establishment Of
Former Norwich State Hospital
Amendment to Section-3 Power &
Duties
And Amendment
New ordinance see pg 148
Alcholic Beverages
Establishment Of
107
10
107
PAGE
NUMBER
42
69
60-62A
50
6
111
95
48
50&51
52
54 &56
8
118-119
122
137
150
8
131
131
135-136
66
71
103
148-149
0
16

For Board, Commissions &
) PUBLIC COMMENT AND QUESTIONS ·Committees 128-130
R
REFUSE, DISPOSAL OF 81
Amendment 91
REGIONAL PLANNING AGENCIES
ROAD, STREET, HIGHWAY, NEW ADDITON Amendment 33
36
TOWN OF PRESTON
ORDINANCES & SPECIAL ACTS
Page Four
TABLE OF CONTENTS PAGE
NUMBER
R (can't)
ROAD, STREET, BUILDINGS Approaches to 31&37
SNOW PLOWING see Motor Vehicle 63
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS
SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT & 93
RECYCLING
SOLICITORS, PEDDLERS, VENDORS Amendments 28
28
SPECIAL EVENTS 67
) T .,
TAX COLLECTOR-ONE PAYMENT Less Than $50.00 18
TAX EXEMPTION DATE OF CERTAIN
INSTITUTIONS 65
TAX REFUNDS LESS THAN $5.00 Less Than $5.00 147
TRANSFER STATION Additional Fees 117A
TOURISM DISTRICT, EST 45
TOWN CLERKJTAX COLLECTOR Combined 15
TOWN CLERK & TREASURER Location of Office 16
TOWN MEETING-VALIDATING RECORDS 1860 7
TRUCK-PANEL TRUCK FROM FIRE CO. #2 40
TANK TRUCK-FROM FIRE CO. #1 40
TANK TRUCK-FROM FIRE CO. #2 41
TANK TRUCK-FROM FIRE VOL FIRE CO. 41
RESCUE VEHICLE-FROM FIRE CO. #2 42
v
VETERANS EXEMPTION Additional Tax Exemption 142-144
VOTING DISTRICT, ESTABLISHMENT OF 1952 17
w
WASTE RECYCLING 84
WASTE RECYCLING Amended 112
WATER DISTRICT & WATER COMMISSION
) OF Norwich-1871 14
WATER DISTRICT & WATER COMMISSION 109&110
)
J z ZONING & PLANNING-ABSENCES
ZONING VIOLATIONS
From Meetings
See Planning & Zoning also
Fines
54
104&106
)
)
)
)
Public Consumption
Possession or consumption in public prohibited.
No person shall consume any alcoholic beverage or have in his or her possession or control an open
container containing any alcoholic beverage While he or she is within the bounds of any townowned
or controlled properties to include any park, green, beach, recreation area or school. 1bis
prohibition shall include any quasi-public property, which for purposes of this ordinance shall
mean.any area that is customarily open to and used by the public.
Authorized exceptions.
The consumption of alcoholic beverages and/or possession of an open container of alcoholic
beverage with the ir,ltent to consume within the boundS of any town-owned or controlled property is
permitted pursuant to a written permit issued by the director of public safety witb approval of the
Board of Selectmen. The application for a permit shall state the name and addresses of responsible
officials of the requesting group sponsoring the function. The specific area to be used for t)le
function and the dates and beginning and ending times of the function must be specified. The
applicant must provide estimated attendance and state whetber or not the event is open to the
public. Any group or individual granted a permit to consume or sell alcoholic beverages shall
provide proof of required insurances and execute an indemnification agreement indemnifying and
holding the Town of Preston hannless. ,,
Penalties for offenses.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this ordinance or who shall aid or abet in the
violation of any provision shall be fined not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than
ninety-nine dollars ($99.00) for each offense.
-0-
)
)
)
)
)
Date: November 1, 1995
SECRETARY OF THE STATE
30 TRINITY STREET
HARTFORD, CT 06106
860-566-5827
To: Name of Town, Town Clerk-
Re: 1996 Supplements to Compilation of Ordinances and Special Acts
Each town, city and borough is required by Section 7 -148a of the Connecticut General Statutes,
copy enclosed, to print and file with the Secretary of the State biennially, on or before March
first of each even-numbered year, a cumulative supplement to its original compilation of
ordinances and special acts.
This supplement is intended to cover allaip.endments to its ordinances, all new ordinances and
all special acts enacted since the last biennial supplement.
We1would appreciate your having this supplement printed and deposited in our office on or
before March 1. 1996. If there have been no changes since the 1994 biennial supplement, or if
your town consistently files new ordinances and special acts with this office, please notify us in
writing so that your town will not be considered delinquent.
We take this opportunity to remind you that you are also required by Section 7 -148a to deposit a
copy of your supplement in the State Library, 231 Capitol Avenue, Hartford 06106, in each bar
library in the Judicial District in which your municipality is located, and in the courthouse library
·of the court nearest to your municipality.
Very truly yours,
1J~&~J8~
Peter J. Bartucca, Manager
Records & legislative Services
PJB/rf
Enclosure
(
Sec. 7-148a. Compilations of ordinances and special acts; supplements. Each
town, city and borough in this state shall print and publish all amendments to its ordinances,
all new ordinances and all special acts adopted after June 1, 1962, on or before March first of
each even-numbered year as a cumulative supplement to the compilation of its. ordinances
and special acts. Such compilation and all supplements thereto shall be available for sale to
the public at the office of the clerk or other similar offi~~ in such municipality at a reasonable
cost to be determined by such municipality and a copy of each such compilation and supplement
shall be deposited by the clerk of the municipality in the office of the secretary of the
state, in.the state library, in each bar library in the judicial district in which such municipality
is located and in the courthouse library of the ~urt nearest to such municipality. If any town,·
· city or borough fails to comply with the provisions of this section, the secretary of the state
shall provide for the original compilation and publication of such ordinances and special acts
or of any supplement thereto and such town, city or borough shall be liable for the cost of
such compilation and publication.
(1959, P.A. 430; 1961, P.A. 66; 281; February, 1965, P.A. 249; P.A. 74-183, S. 175, 291; P.A. 76-436, S. 155, 681; P.A.
78-280,5.1, 127.)
History: 1961 acts set deadline of June 1, 1962, (formerly December 1, 1960) for completion of compilation; provided for
depoSiting copies in various libtaries, and required secretary of state to provide for compilation and publication of ordinances,
etc., if municipality fails to do so with municipality bearing responsibility for cos~ 1965 act deleted obsolete reference to )'
requirement that municipalities compile and publish ordinances and special acts before June !, 1962, and specified subsequent
ordinanees and special acts be printed and published on or before Man:h first ofc.ch even-numbered year; P.A. 74-183 replaced
, circuit court with court of common pleas; P .A. 76-436 deleted reference to specific court class, stating that books be placed in
nearest courthouse library, effective July 1, 1978; P.A. 78-280 substituted "judicial district" for "county".
Sees.;,. 51-19Th rc administrative appeals.
Deposit of compilation of town ordinances in county bar library is directive and failure to do so does not invalidate such
ordinance$. 29 CS 59.
)
)
)
DEED OF OANACO CONVEYING LANDS TO CAPT. JAMES'FITCH, ET AL
as recorded in Town of Preston Land Records, Volume 1, Page 1.
Know all men by these presents that I Oanaco Chief Sachem of Mohegan for
divers good reasons me moving herel.Ulto and in spetiall for and in consideration of
the full and just sum of flftie pounds in currant provisions or goods at currant prise
to be payed four years after date hereof: viz to be payed twelve pounds ten
shillings per annum unto the said Oanaco or his order at New Preston or New
London have and do by these presents give grant sell alleniate enforse and pass
over unto Capt. James Fitch Capt. Joshua Standish Thomas Parke Senior Jonathan
Tracy Thomas Tracy Joseph Morgan and all the rest living upon or interested
persons who have lands already layed out in the Town bounds now called New
Preston that will pay their part or proportion of the purchase of all the waste lands
as yet unlayed out in the bounds of the aforesayd Town the sayd lands with the
whole bounds of the. aforesayd Town being situate and lying between Stonington
and Norwich bounds and south eastwardly on New London bounds and northerly
to Norwich corner tree so eastward from thence five miles then a south line I the
aforesayd have and doe by these presents fully clearly and absolutely sell grant
pass over and confmn the aforesayd tract of waste land woods grass herbidy water
sources and springs with all the privileges and appurtenances thereunto belonging
unto the aforesayd gentlemen and interested persons as aforesayd they paying their
proportion of sayd purchase I the sayd Oanaco do hereby alienate enforce sell and
pass over all the sayd unlayed out land undisposed of before the signing hereof
which is contayned within the bounds of New Preston unto the above sayd
gentlemen and friends above sayd as interested persons in the sayd Town to them
there heirs executors administrators and assigns forever to have and to hold to
possess and enjoy quietly and peaceable without lett remonstrance molestation or
ejection of me my heirs executors administrators and assigns forever and I the sayd
Oanaco hereby acknowledge to have received full satisfaction in hand: viz the just
sum of ftftie pounds according to the genuine tenere of this present Deed and
thereby exonerate and discharge and acquit the aforesayd inhabitants of the Town
of New Preston from any further claims or demands upon the account of the
aforesayd tract of land and I the sayd Oanaco do hereby declare myself the true and
lawful proprietor of the aforesayd land as part of my inheritance before the signing
of this present deed and shall at times give more ample deed for the more sure
making of the a hove sayd bargayned premises as witness my hand and seale March
the 16: Anno Domini on Thousand Six Hundred and eightie six eightie seven in
the second year of the Reign of his majestie James King of England Scotland
France Ireland Defender of the fayth and c.
Witness
John Morgan
John Stanton
This deed entered February 7 1688
by me Jonathan Tracy Recorder
Oanaco. appeared and acknowledged the
above written deed before me
SamuelMason Offis
Stonington March the 17 1687
-1-
···,
GRANT OF THE GENERAL COURT OF CONNECTICUT
As recorded in Town of Preston Land Records, Volume 1, at page 2. Whereas the
General Court of Connecticut .have granted unto Mr. Tho Parke Tho Tracy Tho
Rose with the rest of those farmers that live on the east of Norwich and on the
north of Stonington and New London to make a plantation there and stated the
bounds thereof as followeth to begin at Norwich south east cortner tree by Thomas
Rose his house and from that tree to the line to run east abutting south on the New
9 London bounds three miles and a quarter to Stonington bounds then the line to
run north two miles and a halfe abutting on Stonington bounds on the east then
turning Stonington corner tree the line to run east abutting south on Stonington
bounds five miles to a red oak tree and then the lyne runs west to Norwich North
east comer tree,and whereas the proprietors inhabitants of the sayd plantation have
made application to the governor and company of the colony of Connecticut that
they have a patent for confmnation of the aforesayd lands to them so granted as
aforesayd and which that stand seized and quietly possessed of now for a more full
confmnation of the aforesayd tract of land as it is abutted and bounded unto the
present proprietors of the sayd Township. Know ye that the sayd governor and
company assembled in general court according to the commission and by virtue of
the power granted to them by our ate sovereign Lord King Charles the Second of
blessed memory in his letters patents baring date the three and twentyeth of April
in the fourteenth years of his 11lajesti~ reign have given and granted and by these
presents do give grant ratify and confmn unto Mr. Tho Parke Tho Tracy John
Avery Ephrim Minor Caleb Forbes and the resdt of the proprietors of the twonship
aforesayd and their heirs and assigns forever and to each of them in such
proportion as they have or shall agree upon according to direction of the committee
appointed by the general court for the division of what is not already' divided all the
aforesayd tract or parcel of land as it is bounded and butted together with all the
woods uplands arable lands madown pasture ponds waters rivers fishings huntings
fowlings mines minerals quarries and precious stones upon or within the said tract
of land with all other profits or commodities thereunto belonging or in anywise
appertaining and do also grant unto the aforesayd Tho Parke Tho Tracy Tho Rose
Captain Samuel Mason Benjamon Brewster John Plumbe John Stanton Jonathan
Tracy Hugh Amos Jonathan Rudd John Parke Thomas Avery Ephrem Minor
Caleb Forbes and the rest of the proprietors of the said new plantation their heirs
and and assigns forever and to the only proper use and behoof of the said ·Tho
Parke Tho Rose Captain Samuel Mason Benjamin Brewster John Plumbe John
Stanton Jonathan Tracy Hugh Amos Jonathan Rudd John Parke Tho Avery John
Avery Ephrim Minor CaleblForbes and the other proprietors and inhabitants of the
said new plantation their heirs and assigns forever according to the tenor of his
majestic manor of East Greenwich in the County of Kent in the Kingdom of.
England in free and common socage and not in capited nor by knight service then
yielding and paying therefore to our Sovereign Lord the King his heirs and
successors only the fifth part of all the oar of gold and silver which from time to
time and at all times hereafter shall be there gotten had or obtained in lieu of all
rents services duties and demands whatsoever according to charter in witness
-2-
)
whereof we have caused the seal of the Colony to be hereunto affixed this five
tenth day of February one thousand six hundred eighty and six in the third year of
\ the reign of our sovereign Lord Jam,es the Second by the Grace of God of England
J Scotland France and Ireland King defender of the fayth and c.
)
Robert Treat Gove
Recorder of the General Court of Connecticut
Signed John Allyn Secritye
Entered in the public record Lib. 6,fo:: 171:172
Feb 16 1688 by John Allyn
Secritye
-3-
SPECIAL ACTS PERTAINING TO THE TOWN OF
PRESTON ENACTED BY THE SENATE AND HOUSE OF
REPRESENTATIVES IN GENERAL ASSEMBLY , \.
CONVENED J
East Society annexed to Preston Passes May 1786
Resolved by this Assembly that the said East Society in Norwich be and the
same is hereby annexed to the Town of Preston which is bounded as follow viz
beginning at the Northeast Corner of the Town of Norwich and the Northwest
Corner of the Town of Preston thence westerly in Norwich line to Quinebaug River
thence down said river in the middle waters thereof to Shetucket River, thence
down said riv:er and the river Thames in the middle waters of said river until it
cOmes to Groton Town Line then eastwardly bounding on the Town of Groton to
the Southwest corner of said Prestbh and bounding on said· Preston to the bounds
ftrst mentioned, and the lands aforesaid and the inhabitants dwelling thereon shall
be and belong to saip Town of Preston and have and enjoy all the privileges as the
other inhabitants of said Preston and all Town and Freemen's meetings shall ever
hereafter be held alternatively one in the South Society and the other in the North
Society in said Preston. And said Town of Preston shall receive one James
Corning who is an inhabitant in said East Society now in Norwich and any such
poor persons as were legal inhabitan~ in said East Society now on Certillcates in
any other Towns if sent back to said Norwich, and said East Society shall pay their
proportion of all debts now due. from said Town of Norwich, and all taxes in )
proportion to their list and shall have and receive their proportion of all public
money debts and stores belonging to said Town of Norwich according to their lists,
and the inhabitants of said East Society shall have full power to assemble and vote
in Town Meeting in said Town of Norwich respecting the Settlement of, and
collecting all debts and taxes either due to or from the said Town of Norwich
which shall be collected in the same manner and by Collectors of said Town of
Norwich as though this grant had not been made.
RESOL VB INCORPORATING THE TOWN OF GRISWOLD
PASSED OCTOBER, 1815
Resolved by this Assembly, that all that part of Preston lying within the
following limits, viz: Beginning at the mouth of Broad Brook, so-called, thence a
true east course to the division line between the fll'St and second societies in said
town, thence in said division line to the town of North Stonington, thence on the
line of the town of North Stonington to the line of the town of Voluntown, thence
on the line of Voluntown to the line of the town of Plainfield, thence on said line to
the town of Canterbury, thence on said Canterbury to Quinebaug River, thence on
Quinebaug River to the place of beginning, together with all the inhabitants
residing in said limits, be, and the same hereby is, incorporated into a distinct town
-4-
t)
by the name of "Griswold", and the inhabitants thereof shall have and enjoy all the
powers, privileges, and immunities of other towns in this state, with the right of
sending one representative to the general assembly of this state, and said town of
\ Griswold shall pay its proportion of all charges, expenses, and· debts already
J accrued. by and now from said Town of Preston, also its proportion of the expense,
cost, , and charges of building one, and that the next new bridge over the
Shetucket River, as such t.ime and place as is or may be directed by the proper
authority, which proportions of the expenses, debts, costs , and charges, shall be
ascertained by the list of 1815, perfected in 1816. And the poor now supported by
said town of Preston, who belong to that part now incorporated into the town of
Griswold, shall be deemed inhabitants of said town of Griswold, and be maintained
accordingly.
And the town and freemen's meetings of said town of Griwold shall be holden
at the meeting-house in said limits belonging to the eeClesiastical society therein,.
and the collector of the state tax for the year 1815, already appointed by the Town
of Preston, is hereby authorized to collect of the inhabitants of said town of
Griswold their proportion of said tax, according to the list on which it was laid, in
the same manner as if this resolve had not been passed.
And the ftrst town meeting in said town of Griswold shall be holden at said
meeting-house on the last Tuesday of November next, and Andrew Huntington of
said town of Griswold shall be the moderator of said town meeting, and said town
shall have and enjoy at said ftrst town meetings, and at all other meetings, the
powers and privileges of other. towns, and the officers chosen at said flrst town
·) meetings shall hold their offices until the next ann.ual meeting, and said Andrew
. Hungtinton shall warn said ftrst meeting by setting up a notification thereof on the
public sign-post in said Griswold, at least eight days before said last Tuesday of
November, and in case of the absence, death, or incapacity of the said Huntington,
the duties hereby assigned to said Huntington may and shall be performed by
Moses Lester, Esq., o~ said town of Griswold.
,)
Provided always, that said town of Griswold shall be liable to maintain all such
town poor of said town of Preston as are or may be now absent therefrom, who
may hereafter be chargeable, provided such poor person or persons, when he, she,
or they left said town, resided or dwelt in such part of said town of Preston as is by
this resolve hereby incorporated.
-5-
RESOLVE ANNEXING A PART 0 FTHE SOCIETY OF
NORTH STONINGTON TO THE FIRST SOCIETY IN
PRESTON , -)
Passed May 1831
RESOLVED, BY TillS ASSEMBLY, That that part of the seventh school
district, and the whole of the eight school district, in the ecclesiastical society of
North Stonington, comprised and described within the following bounds and
limits, to Wit: Beginning on the east line of the said town of Preston, at a bound at
the head of Mr. Cyrus Punderson's mill pond; thence running southeasterly, so as
to strike the south side of Mr. Charles Swaim's dwelling house; thence northerly to
the east end of'•the dwelling house of Thomas Browning, Esquire; thence north to
the south line of said Preston, to be set off and the same are hereby set off from the
ecclesiastical society of North Stonington, and annexed to the said frrst society of
Preston; and that the territory so annexed be and continue to be a part of said first
ecclesiastical.society; and that the inhabitants of said territory enjoy the same and
equal privileges in all ecclesiastical and school matters and interests with the other
inhabitants of said fll'St ecclesiastical society.
SPECIAL ACT ANNEXING PART OF THE TOWN OF
PRESTON TO THE TOWN OF NORWICH ,
Upon the petition of John W. Stedman, S.T. Holbrook and others, inhabitants
of the town of Preston, in New London County, praying to be annexed to the town
of Norwich, in said county, as per petition on flle, dated April 20, A.D. 1857, more
fully appears:
RESOLVED BY THIS ASSEMBLY, That all that part of the town of Preston
lying within the following described limits, viz: beginning at a bound on the
southerly shore of the Shetucket River, near the comer of lands of Henry Bill and
Peleg Edwards, being a rock with an iron bolt in the same, thence south 34 deg. 30
min. east, over what is called Lanman's Chair, to a bolt in a ledge, on the highest
westerly sumniit of Lanman's hill; thence south 13 de g. 10 min. west, to a stone on
the southerly line of Cephas Stoddard's land, said course passing within about four
inches of the westerly side of a white oak tree marked with an X on its westerly
side, and standing upon a bluff on land of Cephas Stoddard; thence south 80 deg.
west on the southerly line of said Stoddard's land, to a stone set about five feet west
of the west rail on the railroad leading from Norwich to Allyn's Point; thence in a
·direct line to the southerly comer of the town of Norwich; thence by the line now
dividing the towns of Norwich and Preston to a point in the Shetucket River
directly opposite the frrst mentioned bound; thence easterly to the place of
-6-
)
j
' )
)
beginning; with all the inhabiianis thereof, be and the same hereby is annexed to
and incorporated with, and made part of said town of Norwich, and entitled to the
same rights, privileges and immunities as the town of Norwich.
RESOLVED, That said territory and inhabitants so annexed, shall pay such.
proportion of all debts and claims now existing against this town of Preston, as the
list of the same of 1856 bears to the whole list of the town of Preston, and that
William P. Nash, Esq. of Preston, and Samual H. Grosvenor, Esq. of Norwich, are
hereby authorized, and empowered to liquidate and adjust such debts and claims;
and also to determine the proportion of such indebtedness to be paid by said
territozy _and inhabitants, according to the provisions of this resolve; and they are
also authorized and empowered to make out a rate bill, bases on said list of 1856,
under their hands, containing the proportion which each individual is to pay of
such indebtedness, according to the .. provisions of this resolve; and shall apply to
some justice of the peace to issue a warrant for collecting such tax or assessment,
directed to the collector of taxes of the town of Preston, commanding and
empowering him to collect the same, and such justice shall issue. such warrant, and
said tax or assessment shall be due and payable on or before the flrst day of
September A.D. 1857, and the same shall be collected and paid into the treasury of
the town of Preston on or before the flrst day of October A.D. 1857.
RESOLVED, That the collectors of taxes of the Town of Preston, are hereby
authorized to collect the taxes of said town already laid, in the same manner as
though these resolves had not been passed.
Approved May 28, 1857.
SPECIAL ACT VALIDATING THE RECORDS OF A
TOWN MEETING IN PRESTON
Whereas, at the annual town meeting held in the Town of Preston, on the frrst
Monday of October, 1859, the town officers were duly elected, and the
proceedings of said meeting were truly recorded upon the records of said town, but
the person who then held the offlce of town clerk having deceased, without
attesting the same; therefore --
RESOLVED by this Assembly, that said record be established and confmned
as the legal record of the doings of said meeting, the same as if attested by said
clerk; and that the acts of the officers elected at said meeting be declared to be
legal and valid; provided, the same have been, in other respects, in conformity to
law. ·
Approved- June 20th, 1860
-7-
SPECIAL ACT CHANGING THE DIVISION LINE
BETWEEN THE TOWNS OF PRESTON AND LEDYARD
Whereas, a change in the division line between the town of Preston and Ledyard.
is desired by the inhabitants of both of said Towns and is required by reason of a
change in the layout of a highway across Poquetanuck Cove; and whereas, it has
been decided by a vote of each of said towns that said division line when changed
should be as stated in this resolution: therefore,
RESOLVED BY THIS ASSEMBLY: Section 1. That said Poquetanuck Cove,
from the division line between said towns at Shingle Point, so called, to the
channel of the'Thames River , shall be the division line between said towns, and all ·
that part of Lcllyard lying northerly of said cove is hereby set to and shall be a part
of the town of PrestoiL
Section 2. All votes passed in town meetings relative to a change in the layout and
construction of a highway and bridge across said Poquetaniuck Cove shall have the
same effect and be of the same binding force that they would have had and been,
had the division line between said towns at the time of their passage been where it
is established by this resolutioiL
Section 3. This resolution shall take effect from and after the date of its passage.
Approved-June 11, 1872
AN ACT ANNEXING A PART OF THE TOWN OF
PRESTON TO THE CITY AND TOWN OF NORWICH
BE it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives in General Assembly
convened:
SEC. I. All that portion of the Town of Preston enclosed between the following
described lines, to wit: Beginning on the southeasterly side of the Shetucket River,
at the presenLdividing line between the towns of Norwich and Preston, and
running southeasterly along said dividing line to the highest point on Lanman's
hill; thence southeasterly to a point on the northwesterly side of the highway
leading from Preston bridge to Poquetanuck, one hundred feet southwesterly from
the range of the southwesterly side of the house owned by James Conlan, measured
on the northwesterly side of said highway; thence northeasterly to a point on the
southwesterly line of the highway leading from Preston bridge to Hallville, two
hundred feet southeasterly from the range of the house owned by the estate of J.
Andrew Rossmark, measured on ·the southwesterly line of said highway; thence
northeasterly to a point in range with the northeasterly side of the house on the
-8-
)
)
)
southeasterly side of the coming road, owned and occupied by Hilrriet Davis, and
one hundred feet southeasterly from the easterly comer thereof; thence in the same
line, extended to its intersection with the range of the dividing line between the
lands of Irus W. Haxvey and James C. Spicer; thence northerly in said range and
along with dividing line between the land of said Spicer and the land called
Shetucket Heights to the westerly comer of said Spicer's land; thence northeasterly
to a point in range with the northeasterly side of the house on the southeasterly side
of Mechanic street, so-called, owned by the estate of Harvey Spalding, and one
hundred feet southeasterly from the easterly comer thereof; thence in the same line
continued till it intersects the southeasterly side of Mechanic Street; thence
northwesterly to the northwesterly bank of the Shetucket river, at a point in range
with the· southeasterly side of the packing house of Davis and Kinney; thence
southwesterly by the northwesterly bank .of the Shetucket river to the southerly
comer of the Greenville school district; ·thence southwesterly-to·the northwesterly
comer of the easterly abutment of the Preston bridge; thence southwesterly by the
southeasterly bank of the Shetucket river to the place of beginning, is hereby set
off from the town of Preston, and is annexed to and made a part of the city and
town of Norwich, and shall, with its inhabitants, be discharged from all liabilities
and obligations incurred by having been heretofore a portion of said town of
Preston, except as hereinafter provided.
SEC. 2. The said annexed territory shall be and remain a voting district in itself
and shall be known as the sixth voting district of the town of Norwich, and the
moderator at all elector's meetings held in said district after the pass11ge of this act
shall make his return to the moderator of the flrst voting district, and all electors of
and persons qualifled to vote in the town of Preston, residing in the territory so
annexed to the town and city of Norwich, shall be electors of and.voters in said
town and city of Norwich, and shall be qualifled to hold office and to be registered
and to vo'te in like manner as if said annexed territory had hitherto been a part of
said town and city. All inhabitants dwelling within the territory so annexed to said
city and town of Norwich shall have exercise, and enjoy the same rights,
privileges, immunities, and franchises, and be subject to the same duties, liabilities.
and obligations as if the territory so annexed had hitherto been a part of said town
and city, except as herein otherwise expressly provided.
SEC. 3. All paupers, chargeable and belonging to said town of Preston, who
have heretofore been committed to or are inmates of any state institution from that
portion of said town hereby annexed to said city and. town. of Norwich, and all
settled inhabitants of Preston residing in said territory so annexed who are or who
may become paupers, shall be held and deemed inhabitants of and belonging to
and chargeable to said town of Norwich. ·
SEC. 4. All unpaid taxes due and to become due to the town of .Preston or to
any school district therein and laid prior to the first day of January, 1901, shall
remain due to and collectible by said town of Preston or said district, and all tax
liens outstanding shall remain valid in favor of said town or said district in the
-9-
same manner and to the same extent as if this act had not been passed. Said tax
liens may be continued upon any real estate situated in the territory hereby annexed
by recording in the land records of the town of Norwich the certificates provided '· \
for in Section 3 896 of the general statutes and amendments thereto. }
SEC. 5. The territory hereby annexed shall be and remain two school districts
as now constituted and be known as The Long Society School District and The
Bridge School District respectively.
SEC. 6. There shall be assumed and paid by the town of Norwich the fifty
thousand dollars of the bonded indebtedness of the Town of Preston which falls
due in the year 1920, as the just proportion of the indebtedness of said town of
Preston should be paid by said Town of Norwich.
SEC. 7. This act shall take effect September 1, 1901.
Approved June 17, 1901.
AN ACT ANNEXING APART OF THE TOWN OF LEDYARD TO THE
TOWN OF PRESTON
BE IT ENACTED by the Senate and House of Representatives in General
Assembly Convened:
SECTION 1. All that portion of the Town of Ledyard inclosed within and
included in the tract of land hereinafter described is set off from the Town of
Ledyard and is annexed to and made a part of the Town of Preston, and shall, with
its inhabitants, be discharged from all liabilities and obligations incurred by having
been heretofore a portion of said Town of Ledyard except as hereinafter provided:
Beginning on the dividing line between the. Town of Preston and the Town of
Ledyard, a short distance easterly from the village of Poquetanuck, and where said
line crosses the southwesterly side of the road leading from Poquetanuck village of
Ledyard, and running thence south 80 degreeS, 10 minutes west; about seventeen
hundred feet to the center of a brook, and at the dividing line between land of the
State of Connecticut and the estate of Henry J. Gallup; thence northerly,.
northwesterly ·and westerly along the center of said brook and pond to the
Poquetanuck cove; thence northerly and northwesterly along said cove to the
present dividing line between the towns of Preston and Ledyard; thence
southeasterly along the present dividing line to the place of beginning.
SECTION 2. All unpaid taxes due and to beoome due to the Town of Ledyard,
laid on the list of October, 1928, and upon all prior lists, shall remain due to and .
collectible by said town of Ledyard; and all taxes liens outstanding shall remain
valid in favor of said town in the same manner and to the same extent as if this act
had not been passed. All tax liens in favor of the Town of Ledyard may be
-10-
)
I)
continued upon any real estate situation in the territory hereby annexed by the
recording in the land records of the Town of Ledyard of the certificates provided
for by the General Statutes.
) SECTION 3. All persons residing in the territory hereby annexed to the Town of
Preston whose names appear in the last voting lists of said Town of Ledyard shall
be added to the list of electors of the Town of Preston and such persons shall be
entitled to vote in the annual Town Meeting in the Town of Preston to be held on
the flrst Monday of October, 1929.
Approved June 12, 1929
)
-11-
HOUSE BILL NO. 524
AN ACT CONCERNING BIENNIAL ELECTIONS FOR \
THE TOWN OF PRESTON J
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of
Representatives in General Assembly Convened:
Sec. 1 At the annual town meeting of the Town of Preston in
October, 1981, the terms of office of all town officers whose term of office
are not effected by the vote of said town at a special meeting held on
September;6, 1980, which provided that the selectmeJ:?-1 the tax collector,
the agent of the town deposit fund, the grand jurors, the constables, the
registrars of voters . and the auditors, chosen at the annual town
meeting on the first Monday of October, 1980, should hold office for two
years and be elected biennially thereafter, and whose terms of office
shall expire on the first Monday of October, 1981, namely; the town
clerk, town treasUrer, two members of the school board, one assessor,
and one member of the board of relief, shall be filled by an8 election for
a term of one year or until their successors shall be elected and shall
have qualified, except the town clerk, who shall hold office for the term
of one year from the first Monday of January next succeeding his
election.·
Sec. 2 Town Elections in the town of Preston for aj.l town officers
required by law or by vote of the town to be elected by ballot shall be
held biennially beginning in October, 1982. All town officers shall hold
office for a term of two years from the date of their election or until
their successors shall be elected and shall have qualified except the
members of the board of relief and the board of assessors, one of each of
whom shall be elected for a term of six' years and one of each whom
shall be elected for a term of four years from the date of their election or
until their successors shall be elected and shall have qualified and,
commencing with the annual town meeting on the first Monday of
October 19.34 and biennially thereafter, one member each of the board
of relief aiid board of assessors shall be elected for the term of s six
years or until his or their successors shall be elected and shall have
qualified. There shall also be elected, at said biennial election in 1982
and biennially thereafter, a town clerk who shall hold office for a term
of two years from the First Monday of January next succeeding his
election.
Sec. 3 At the annual town meeting in 1981, two members of the
-12-
)
)
)
)
\
town school committee shall be elected for the term of qne year or until
their successors shall be elected and shall have qualified. Commencing
with the biennial town meeting in 1982 one member of the town school
committee shall be elected for a term of six years, one for a term of four·
years and one for a term of two years from the date of their election or
until their successors shall be elected and shall have qualified and,
commencing with the town meeting on the first Monday of October,
1984, and biennially thereafter, one member of the town school·
committee shall be elected for a term of six years or until his successor
shall be elected and shall have qualified.
Sec. 4 Any town office, the term of office of the incumbent of which
shall expire in the year 1988, shall be deemed vacant when such term
shall expire1 and any such vacancy :shall be filled in the manner
provided by law.
Approved-April29, 1981.
SUBSTITUTE FOR HOUSE BTI .I I NO 1051
AN ACT PROVIDING FOR INCREASE IN
IVIEMBERSHIP OF THE BOARD OF EDUCATION IN
THE TOWN OF PRESTON
Sec. 1 Section 3 of number 262 of the special acts 1931, concerning
biennial elections in the town of Preston, is repealed and the following
is substituted in lieu thereof: The membership of the board of education
of the town of Preston shall be increased from three to seven members,
the three present members to hold office until the expiration of their
terms.
Sec. 2 At the biennial election to be held in the town of Preston,
October, 1948, there shall be elected three members of the board of
education for a term of six years, one member for a term of four years
and one member for a term of two years, and biennially thereafter,
there shall be elected successors to those whose terms then expire, who
shall hold office for a term of six years from the date of election and
until their successors are elected· and have qualified.· ·
Sec. 3 Any vacancy occurring on the board may be filled by the
remaining members until the next biennial town election, at which time
such vacancy shall be filled and the ballots shall distinctly specify the
term of office.
Approved July 9, 1947
-13-
HOUSE BilL NO. 7840
SPECIAL ACT No. 77-56
AN Acr CONCERNING THE TERM OF OFFICE OF )
THE TOWN OF PRESTON BOARD OF EDUCATION
. Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives in
General Assembly convened:
Sec. 2-of number 468 of the special acts of 1947 is amended to
read as follows:
~·
At tfie. biennial election to be held in the Town of Preston (Oct.
1948) in 1977, there shall be elected (three) Two members of the board
of ecfucation for a term of (six) FOUR years (one member for a term of
four years and one member for a term of two years,) and (,) biennially
thereafter, there shall be elected successors to those whose terms then
expire, who shall· hold office for a term of (six) FOUR years from the
date of election and until their successors are elected and have
qualified.
ApprovedJune 10, 1977
SENATE BILL NO. 535
AN ACT CONCERNING THE BOARD OF WATER
COMMISSIONERS OF THE CITY OF NORWICH
Sec. 1-The Board of water commissioners of the city of Norwich
may lay mains and pipes and establish hydrants in the towns of Bozrah,
Franklin, Lebanon, Ledyard, Lisbon, Montville and Preston for the
distribution supply and selling of water in said towns; but said water
shall not be supplied to the detriment of the inhabitants of said city, nor
' at lower rates than are charged to persons within the city.
Sec. 2- Number 486 of the Special Acts of 1949 is repealed.
Sec. 3 The second sentence of section 89 of an act to revise and amend the .
Charter of the city of Norwich, Approved July 5, 1971 is repealed.
Approved July 5, 1951
-14-
,J
AN ACT COMBINING THE OFFICES OF' TOWN
CLERK AND TAX COl J ECTOR IN THE TOWN OF
PRESTON
Sec. 1- The Offices of Town Clerk and Collector of taxes of the
Town of Preston are hereby combined, and the duties imposed by the
general statutes upon said officers shall be performed by a single officer
of said· Town. The Town meeting, with the approval of the board of
finance1 shall determine the office hours and compensation of said
officer.
Sec. 2- Within thirty days after the passage of this act a special
election shall be held in the Town of Preston for the election of a town
clerk and collector of tax:es, who shalli hold office from the day. of his
election until the first: MondaY' of January, 1963; and his successors
shall thereafter be elected at the regular election of said town to held
office for two years from the first Monday of the succeeding January.
Nomination of candidates for the special election shall be made
according to party rules, as provided by section 9-88 of the general
statutes. ·
Sec. 3 The term of office of the town clerk and the collector of
.
) taxes of said town in office on the effective date of this act shall
terminate upon the election of their successor under this act.
)
. '
Approved-May 23, 1961
ORDINANCE PROVIDING FOR THE
ESTABLISHMENT OFA TOWN BOARD OF
FINANCE
At an Annual Town Meeting, duly warned and held in Preston
Town Hall on October 2, 1933, the legal voters approved the following
resolution:
"Be it Resolved: That the legal voters of the Town ofPreston at a
duly warned meeting held October 2, 1933, authorize the establishment
of a Town Board of Finance as provided in the Public Acts of the State
of Connecticut, Chapter 28, Section 413-422 of the Session o£1930.11
Reference:Town Meeting Book-Volume 6, Pg. 359
-15-
\
\
ORDINANCE ESTABLISHING DATE OF ENDING OF
NEW FISCAL YEAR i )
At A Town Meeting duly warned and held in Preston Town Hall on
October 8, 1955, the legal voters of the Town of Preston approved Item 4
in the warning, "to discuss and act on change of fiscal year to end on
JUNE 30." "It was voted to change to JUNE 30, 1956 instead of August
31, in accordance with Section 312 ofthe General Statutes."
Reference: Town Meeting Book, Volume 7, Pgs. 232-234.
ORDINANCE CONCERNING THE LOCATION OF
THE OFFICE OF THE TOWN CLERK AND
TREASURER
In an adjourned Annual Town Meeting duly warned and held in
Preston Town Hall on October 9, 1936, the legal voters "voted to make a
permanent office for the Town Clerk and Treasurer at the Town House,
with a fire-proof vault of sufficient capacity to care for the records of the )
Town."
Reference: Town Meeting Book Volume 7,Pg.23.
ORDINANCE PROVIDING FOR THE EMPLOYMENT
OF A PUBLIC HEALTH NURSE
In a Town Meeting duly warned and held in Preston Town Hall on
February 28, 1944, the legal voters approved Item 6 of the warning as
follows:
"To have a Public Health Nurse beginning July 1, 1944 and the
Board of Education and Selectmen be empowered to hire the nurse."
Reference: Town Meeting Book Volume 7, Pg 132
·16-
I )
ORDINANCE CONCERNING THE SALE OF LIQUOR
) ONSUNDAY . .
')
\)
At a Special Town Meeting, duly petitioned and warned and held in
Preston Town Hall on October 28., 1945, the legal voters of the Town
voted approval of a petition 11to permit Sunday Sale, of Liquor in the
Town of Preston." ' ' .
Reference: Town Meeting Book, Volume 7, pg 150
ORDINANCE PROVIDING FOR THE
ESTABLISHMENT OF A SINGLE VOTING DISTRICT
At a Special Town Meeting duly warned and held in Preston Town
Hall on April 28, 1952, the legal voters approved the following
resolution: "That the Town adopt one voting district, with the Town
House Designated as the polling place."
Reference: Town Meeting Book, Volume 7, Pg. 207
-17-
AN ORDINANCE ACCEPTING A GIFT OF A PIECE
OF PROPERTY FROM THE PRESTON HISTORICAL
SOCIETY , J
BE IT ORDAINED by the electors of the Town of Preston at a duly ·
warned meeting;
The Town of Preston accepts a gift of a piece of property at the
intersection of Old Rt. 165 and Rt. 164 known as Doane Park or Doane
Green, from the Preston Historical Society.
This Ordinance shall take effect fifteen (15) days after publication in
accordance with the General Statutes. ·
Reference: Town Meeting Book 9, Page 113.
AN ORDINANCE EMPOWERING THE TAX
COTJ,ECTORTO COIJ,ECT IN ONE (1) PAYiv.rnNT
TAXES LESS THAN FIFTY ($50.00) DOLLARS.
SECTION 1. That the Tax Collector of the Town of Preston be and
hereby is empowered to demand in single payment any tax due the
Town of Preston wherein said amount shall be Fifty $50.00) Dollars or
less.
SECTION 2. This Ordinance shall become effective Fifteen (15) days
after publication in accordance with the General Statutes.
References: Town Meeting Book 9, Pages 114 and 115.
-18-
)
-;
)
)
)
)
AN ORDINANCE CONCERNING BAZAAllli AND
RAFFLES
BE IT ORDAINED by the electors of the Town of Preston at a duly
warned town meeting, on October 20, 1988 the following Ordinance was
adopted.
SECTION 1. Sections 7-170 to 7-186 inclusive of the General Statutes
of the State of Connecticut as amended are hereby adopted.
Ch. 98 MUN!C!P AL POWERS 12:
(4) Whenever the executive director revokes a pennit issued pursuant to this section, h<
shall not issue any penni I to such pennittee for one year after the date of such revocation.
(P.A. 86-419, S. 7, 2.5; P.A. 68·363, S. 4, 7; P.A. 89·214, S. 2, 3, 26; P.A. 90-11.)
Histocy: P.A: 86-419, S. 7 effective-April. I, l987;·P.A·. 88.-363 amended (i) Sub!ee: (b)':to rcqutre rer.ewal of p«mi
a.Mullty, (2) Subdiv, (2) of Suhsec. (c) to delete one-year 1\rnilldon on ls.sut.no: of permits to organizations holding a club o
nonprofit dub permit and provl.slon that such or&aniutlon not be aulhoriud to conduct bingo, (3) SubdiV. (2) of Subw;. (c) t•
detetJ or.e-yeu limiu.lion, and (4) Subdiv. (4) of Sub$(;;. (h) to su\>sllt\lte ~pet «nt .. for "thlrty per cent"; P.A. 89-21•
amended (I) Subw:. (aX3) to permil sealed tickets to conuin. symbols or numbers, (2} Su~. (e), In Subdlvs. (l) a.r.d (2) I(
required th&t such pennlt be renewed annually, to add Subdivs. (3} and (4) re ls.sutnce or pennlt to eertlin organiutlons wh<
hold pennits to op«ate buam or games of tha.oc.c, (3) Subsec. (e) to add Subd.ivs. (3) and (4), permitting S«<ed tkkeu to lx.
sold, offered Cor sale oc dlspbyed during condu~ of bu.u.r oc opention of games of cflance and to allow pctmltt.ees to u.s.e
m«bsnlc.tl oc eloctronlc ticket dispensing m&d\lnoC$, (4) Subsec, (0 to subdivide Into thrte Subdivs,, specifying Coe.s Cor variout
orgtnintions, de&eted Subs«-. (&) re authority to revoke permit, relettering renalntng ~ubsoc. ~lngly and added new
Subscc. (h) as follows: (1) Subdiv. (I) authorizing ex«Ulive d.i.rcctor ~ immedi.uety suspend oc revoke any permit and \S$UC
ce.as.e and desist ookrs, (2) Su1xl.lv. (2) aulhoriting exco:utive dlw;tor to send f'Otk.e to any person violating any provision of this
section and specifying requiremenu Cor ftOtice, (3) Subdlv, (3) requiring executlve dlrectoc to hold a heuing upon th.a.rges nude
and aulhoci.Ung him to order lmposition of a civil penalty, and (4) Subdlv. (4) prohibiting executive dir«tor from Issuing any
permit for one year aft« date of revoea.tloa whenever be revoke$ permit; P.A. 90-11 amended Sub:div. (3) oC Subsec. (h) to
authorize executlve director to suspend or revoke pennit. .
Sec. 7-170. Bazaars and raffies; definitions. Wherever used in sections 7-171 to
7-186, inclusive, "bazaar" means a place maintained by a sponsoring organization for the
disposal of merchandise awards by means of chance; "raffle" means an arrangement for
raising money by the sale of tickets, certain among which, as determined by chance after the
sale, entitle the holders to prizes; and "applicant" means the sponsoring organization.
(19ll, s. 291d.)
Cited. 33 CS 169.
Sec. 7-171. Adoption of bazaar and raffie law. Any town, city or borough may, by
ordinance, adopt the provisions of sections 7-170 to 7-186, inclusive, and the chief executive
authority of any town, city or borough shall, upon the petition of at least five per cent of
the electors of such municipality as detennined by the last-completed registry list, submit the
question of adopting the provisions of sections 7-170 to 7-186, inclusive, to a vote of the
electors of such municipality at a special meeting called for such purpose within twenty-one
days after the receipt of such petition. Such petition shall contain the street addresses of the
signers and shall be submitted to the municipal clerk, who shall certify thereon the number of
names of electors on such petition, which names are on the last-completed registry list. Each
page of such petition shall contain a statement, signed under the penalties of false statement,
by the person who circulated the same, that each person whose name appears on such page
signed the same in person and that the circulator either knows each such signer or that the
signer satisfactorily identified himself to the circulator. The warning for such meeting shall
state that the purpose of such meeting is to vote on the adoption of the provisions of said
sections. Such vote shall be taken and the results thereof canvassed and declared in the same
manner as is provided for the election of officers of such municipality. The vote on such
adoption shall be taken by a "YES" and "NO" vo<e on the voting machine and the designation
of the question on the voting machine ballot label shall be "Shall the operation of bazaars
and raffles be allowed7"'and such ballot label shall be provided for use in accordance with
the provisions of section 9-250. If, upon the official detennination of the result of such vote,
it appears that the majority of all the votes so cast are in approval of such question, the
· provisions of said sections shall take effect immediately. Any town, city or borough, having
once voted on the question of allowing bazaars and raffles as herein provided, shall not vote
again on such question within two years from the date of the previous vote thereon. Any
subsequent vote thereon shall be taken at the next regular town, city or borough election
following the receipt of a petition as herein provided, which petition shall be filed at least
sixty days prior to such election, and s~l~~uestion may be so voted upon only at intervals of
124 MUNICIPALITIES Title 7
not less than two years. Any town, city or borough which, prior to October I, 1957, has
voted more than once on such question, shall, for the purposes of this section, be treated as
though it had voted only once thereon.
(1955, S. 292d; 1951, P.A, 378; 1971, P.A. 871, S, 59; P.A. 13·55, S. 1,.2; P.A ... 8~170, S. 4, 13; P.A. 87·320, S. 3.)
History: 1971 act robstituted ''false sll!.¢ment" for "perjury"; P.A. 13-SS added prO-futon Uu.t mWLiclp.a.lltks may adopc
provtsioiU of Sees. 7•170 to 7·186 by ocdlrwwc; P.A. 86--170 required th&t bll.lot label designation be In loon of q~tion; P.A.
87·320 tepetled clawo prohtbltins ab$enlee voting for a vou: tmdtt this 'section and requited petition for subsequent vote to be
ftxed a.t least dxty days, ln.s!Ud of twenty-one days, prior to such election.
Sec. 7-172. Qualifications for sponsorship of or participation In bazaar or raffie,
Ticket sale. No bazaar or raffle may be promoted, operated or conducted in any municipality
after the adoption of the provisions of sections 7-170 to 7-186, inclusive, unless it is
sponsored and conducted exclusively by (I) an officially recognized organization or association
of veterans of any war in which the United States has been engaged, (2) a church or
religious organization, (3) a civic or service club, (4) a fraternal or fraternal benefit society,
(5) an educational or charitable organization, (6) an officially recognized volunteer fue company
or (7) a political party or town committee thereof. Any such sponsoring organization
shall have been organized in good faith and actively functioning as a nonprofit organization
within the municipality that is to issue the penni! for a period of not less than one year prior to
its application for a penni! under the provisions of said section~. The promotion and operation
of a bazaar or raffle shall be confmed solely to the qualified members of the sponsoring
organization and no such member may receive remuneration in any form for time or effort
devoted to the promotion or operation of the bazaar or raffle. No person under the age of
eighteen years may promote, conduct, operate or work at a bazaar or raffle and no person
under the age of sixteen years may sell or promote the sale of any raffle tickets, nor shall any
sponsoring organization penni! any person under the age of eighteen to so promote, conduct
or operate any bazaar or raffle or any person under the age of sixteen to sell or promote the
sale of such tickets. Any sponsoring organization having received a permit from any municipality
may sell or promote the sale of such raffle tickets in that municip:ility and in any other
town, city or borough which has adopted the provisions of sections 7-170 to 7-186, inclusive.
All funds derived from any bazaar or raffle shall be used exclusively for the purpose
stated in the application of the sponsoring orgariization as provided in section 7-173.
(1955. S. 293d; 1957, P.A. 284; 1972. P.A. 127. S. 9. 2$1; P.A. 81·73; P.A. 86-419. S. 3. 2$.)
Hist<xy. 1972 acts changed age of majority to eighteen and allowed poll tical party or town committee to conduct bUW'S and
raffles; P.A. 81·73 replaced the requlrnnent that a sponsoring orga.nlz.ation function within the st.a.te for a period or at lu.st three
yean v.ith a requlrement that It function within the municipality tfut [s to lssuc the permit for at lu.st three yean: P.A. 86-419
detteued the period or time a sponsoring oiganiutlon 'shall be actively functioning as a nonprofit ocgtniz.a.don from three yean
to one year.
Sec. 7-173. Application for permit. Any organization desiring to operate a bazaar or
raffle in a municipality which has adopted the provisions of sections 7-170 to 7-186, inclusive,
shall make application in duplicate, duly executed and verified, to the chief of police of
any municipality having a police department or to the first selectman of any town in which
there is no police department, on a form to be prescribed by the executive director of the
division of special revenue, in which shall be stated (a) the name and address of the applicant;
(b) facts relating to its incorporation or organization; (c) the names, titles and addresses
ofits officers; (d) the kind of bazaar or raffle intended to be held, operated and conducted by
the applicant; (e) the place where such bai:aar or raffle is intended to be conducted by the
applicant under the permit applied for; (f) the date or dates and the time or times when such
bazaar or raffle is intended to be conducted by the applicant under the permit applied for; (g)
in the case of a raffle, the_ number and price of tickets intended to be sold; (h) the items of
expense intended to be incurred or"paid in coMection with the holding, operating and con-
-20-
)
)
Ch. 98 MUNICIPAL POWERS 125
ducting of such bazaar or raffle and the names and addresses ofthe persons to whom, and the
purposes for which, they are to be paid; (i) the items of merchandise offered, the price to be.
paid by the organization therefor or the retail value of any prize donated, and the names and
addresses of the persons from whom purchased or by whom donated; (j) the specific purposes
to which the entire net proceeds of such l;>azaar or raffle are to be devoted and in what
manner, and (k) any other infonnation which the executive director reasonably requires for
the protection of the public. In each application there shall by designated three active members
of the applicant under whom the bazaar. or raffle described in the application is to be
held, operated and conducted and to the application shall be appended a statement signed,
underpenalty of false statement, by such members so designated that they are electors of the
municipality in which the permit is sought and will be responsible for the holding, operation
and conduct of such bazaar or raffle in accordance with the tenns of the permit and the
provisions of said sections, and that the statements contained in the application are, to the
best of their knowledge and belief, true. Such chief of police or first selectman, as the case
may be, shall, at least five business days prior to the date of such bazaar or raffle, forward the
original copy of such· application to said executive director who shall review such application
to determine whether the applicanris qualified to hold, operate and conduct a bazaar or
raffle under the provisions of sections 7-170 to 7-186, inclusive, or any regulations adopted
pursuant thereto, and whether other requirements in said statutes and regulations have been
satisfied.
(1955, S, 296d; 1971, P.A. 871, S. 60; P.A. 77-614, S, 456, 610; P.A. 86-419, S. 8, 25; P.A. 89·214, S. 4, 26.)
Histocy: 1971 act substitut.ed "'false sUtement" for "pefjwy"; P.A. 77..{il4 substituted cornmis.siooer of public uf«y for
eontrnmlooec of $Ute pollee, effective Jan\W)' I, 1979; P.A. 86-4191ubstituted e.1;ecutivc dife.c1or of division of 1pecial revenue
for commis.sloner of pub!~ safety, effective (}ctot)ef I, 1987; P.A .. 89-214 required poUcc chief or fint ~lectmin to (OC"Hud
origUul copy of applk&llon to executive ditect.of who sht.ll review applicttioo lo det.ermln.e qu.alifiCI.lioos of apptiCUit to hold,
opente and conduct a buau or n.ffic.
Sec, 7-174, Investigation of applicant. Such chief of police or ftrst selectman, as the
case may be, shall, on behalf of the executive director of the division of special revenue,
make or cause to be made an investigation of the qualifications of the applicant and the facts
stated in the application and, if he determines that the applicant is'qualified to hold, operate
and conduct a bazaar or raffle under the provisions of sections 7-170 to 7-186, inclusive, that
the members of the applicant designated in the application to hold, operate or conduct such
bazaar or raffle are electors of such municipality, bonafide active members of the applicant
and persons of good moral character and have never been convicted of a felonY and that such
bazaar or raffle is to be held, operated and conducted in accordance with the provisions of
said sections, he shall, with the approval of the executive director, issue a permit to such
applicant. Upon issuing such permit, such chief of police or selectman shall forward to the
executive director the state's share of the permit fee, if any.
(1955, S. 298d; 1961, P.A. ll5, S. l; P.A. 77-614, S. 456, 610; P.A. 86-419, S. 9, 25; P.A. 89-214, S. 5, 26.)
Histocy: 1961 act tddcd wools "if any" to end of IISl s.eotence; P.A. TI-614 aubstituted commis.doner of public s.&fcty for
comrni.ssioouofstate police, effective Janw.ry I, 1979; P.A. 86-419 subttituled executive di.rec"tocof division of special revenue
foe commhsiooer of public s.Uety, effective October 1, 1987; P.A. 89·214 required police chid or flrst sdoctnun (I) to conduct
investigation of appllca.nt on beh.alf of exeo:utive director of division of special revenue, (2) to issue pemtit to appUCMlt with the
approval of executive dUector, and (3} to forward slltc's share of pennit foe to executive dire<:tor rather tfun application foe,
deleting requirement of forwarding duplicate of appli«tion.
Sec, 7-175. Kinds of permits, Permits under the provisions of sections 7-170 to
7-186, inclusive, shall be of six kinds. "Class No. l" pennits shall allow the operation of a
raffle which shall be consummated within three months of the granting of the perinit and the
aggregate value of the prize or pri2es offered shall be not more than fifteen thousand dollars.
"Class No. 2" permits shall allow the operation of a raffle which shall be consuinmated
within two months of the granting of the permit and the aggregate value of the prize or prizes
-21-
--·t::-.:-
126 MUNICIPALffiES Title 7
offered shall be not more than two thousand dollars. "Class No. 3" permits shall permit the
operation of a bazaar for a period of not more than ten consecutive days, excluding legal
holidays and Holy Days on which the bazaar is not functioning. Any bazaar held under the
authority of any such permit shall be held within six months of the granting of such permit.
"Class No. 4" permits shall allow the operation of a raffle which shall be consummated
within one month of the granting of the permit and the aggregate value of the prize or prizes
offered shall be not more than one hundred dollars. "Class No. 5" permits shall allow the
operation of a raffle which shall be consummated within six month,s of the granting of the
permit and the aggregate value of the prize or prizes offered shajl be not more than fiftY
thousand dollars. "Class No. 6" permits shall allow the operation of a raffle which shall be
consummated within nine months of the granting of the permit and the aggregate value of the
prize or prizes offered shall be not more than one hundred thousand dollars. No more than
one 11Ciass No. 1" permit, one "Class No. 3" pennit, one "Class No. 4" pennit", one 11Class
No.5" permit, one"Class No.6" permit or three "Class No.2" permits shall be issued to any
qualifying organization within any one calendar year. The aggregate value of prizes offered
under any of such permits shall represent the amount paid by the applicant for the prize or
prizes or the retail value of the same if donated.
(19ll, s, 294<1: 1961, P.A. Ill, S. 2: 1963, P.A. IIO;P.A. 76-81, S. I; P.A. 79·79; P.A. 81·383, S. 1: P.A. 82-462, S. I,
3: 82•172, S. 12, 183; P.A. 83·3l, S. 1: 83·l87, S. 9l, 96: P.A. 89-214, S. 6, 26.)
Histocy: l96llct crc.md "'Ow No. 4" permllj 1963 a.;t ~ aggrega.tc value of prlz.e$ under "'w No. I" pennlLS
from five thou..und to ~eventy·fivc hundred dol!an; P.A. 76-81 n1sed mulmum value of priru: offered under Clw I permits
from s-eventy-five h~ to ten thow.a.nddollus; P.A. 79-79 ra.tsed prizcUmit underCius l pennlu to fi.ftten thoustoddoll~.
under aa.s.s 2 pennlts from one to t;No lhousand dolltn apd uOOer aw 4 pennlu fropt fifty w ooc hundred dollars; P.A. 81-383
added "Ctus No. S' and "C1us No.6" penniu; P.A. 82-462 required aU Ous No. 6 permits to be obtained on or bcfote June
30, 1983 and expanded the U$C of the proceeds undet such permit ln provisions designated a.s Subdivs. (2) to (5); P.A. 82-472
truufetred, within the section, provision limiting lull1DOC of "''w No. 3" pe.rmll; P .A. 83-35 deleted refernK:C to Sundays u a
day on whkh aba.z.uriJ not operating u.ndettbe.Clus No.3 pennlts; P.A. 83-587 provided lhlt public a.;t 83-35 sh.all take effect )
July 1, 1983, ratherthm October I, 1983; P.A. 89-214 elimi.natcd tbe proviso uodet "'au No. 6" permit.s, rt$trlctlng time for
obulnlng pemUts a.nd usc of oet proceeds of raffles under roch permits In Subdivs. (I) to (5}, inclusive.
See Stc. 1·115• rc prlz.e$ under "Class No.6~ pen:nlti.
Sec. 7-175a. Marketability of title to real property as prize under "Class No. 6"
permit. Section 7-!75a is repealed.
(P.A. 82-462, S. 2, 3: P.A. 89-214, S. 25, 26.)
Sec. 7-176, Permit fees. The fees to be charged for permits shall be as follows: A
"Class No. I" permit, fifty dollars, twenty-fivedollars to be retained by the municipality and
twenty-five dollars remitted to the state; a "Class No.2" permit, twenty dollars, ten dollars to
be retained by the municipality and ten dollars to' be remitted to the state; a "Class No. 3"
permit, twenty dollars for each day of the bazaar, ten dollars to be retained by the municipal·
ity and ten dollars to be remitted to the state; a "Class No. 4'" permit, five dollars, to be
retained by the municipality; a "Class No. 5" permit, eighty dollars, forty dollars to be
retained by the municipality and forty dollars remitted to the state, and a "Class No. 6"
permit, one hundred dollars, fifty dollars to be retained by the municipality and fifty dollars
remitted to the state.
(19ll, S. 297d: 1961, P.A. Ill, S. 3; P.A. 00.297, S. 2, 20: P.A. 81·383, S. 2.)
History: 1961 a.ct &dded"CCus_No. 4" permit; P.A. 80-297 incrcued Class I permit fee {rom thirty-five to fiftydolllrS, Ous
2 foe from ten to twenty doUus and ctus 3 fee from flftoen 10 twenty dollm and raised proportiorute amoont of fee ICC'I'Uing to
llate; P.A. 81-383 added foes for "CCass No.5" and ><tlw No.6" pennits.
Sec. 7-177, Prizes. All prizes given at any bazaar or raffle shall be merchandise, tangi.
ble personal property or a ticket, coupon or gift certificate, which shall not be refundable or
transferable, entitling the winner to merchandise, tangible personal property, services,
transportation on a common carrier by land, water or air and to any tour facilities provided in
connection therewith, or to participation in a lottery conducted under chapter 226. Cash
-22·
)
)
Ch. 98 MUNICIPAL POWERS 127
prizes or prizes consisting of alcoholic liquor shall not be given nor shall any prize be redeemed
or redeemable for cash, except tickets for a lottery conducted underchapter226. For the
purposes of this section, coins whose trading value exceeds their face value and coins not
commonly in circulation shall not be deemed a cash prize.
(1955, S. 195<1: 1957, P.A. 328; P.A. 73·239, S. 2, 3: P.A. 81·383, S. 3: P.A. 89·214, S. 7, 26: P.A. 9<).15, S. I, 2.)
Hlstocy: P .A, 73·239 allowed~ to oonsUt of fo«ety tltkets; P.A. 81·383 added real property u a pc:nnluib\c prhe under
a~ No.6" pennJt; P.A. 89-114 deleted rcrmncc to prii.es of real property in the tuc or a ra.lfle eonduete<i under a "Clus
No. 6" p:cml~ P.A. 9<).15 allowed priuJ 10 corullt o[ gift «rtti'OC11C$ endlllng wlru><t 10 D>e«<undU<, Unglble per<O!Ul
property or s.ec'o"k:es and s:peclfied that cettaln colns wO'Jid not be OO:mcd a~ prlu.
Sec, 7-178. Equipment. Expenses. lnformatio~ required on raffle ticket. No
bazaar or raffle shall be conducted with any equipment except such as is owned absolutely or
used without payment of any compensation therefor by the permittee or as is rented from a
dealer in such equipment who (I) has a principal place of business in the state, and (2) is
registered with the executive director of the division of special revenue in such manner and
on such form as he may prescribe, which form shall be accompanied by an annual feeofthree
hundred dollars payable to the treasurer of the state of Connecticut. No item of expense shall
be incurred or paid in connection with the holding, operating or conducting of any bazaar or
raffle pursuant to any permit issued under sections 7-170 to 7-186, inclusive, except such as
are bona fide items of reasonable amount for goods, wares and merchandise furnished or
services rendered, which are reasonably necessary to be purchased or furnished for the holding,
operating or conducting thereof, and no commission, salary, compensation, reward or
recompense whatever shall be paid or given, directly or indirectly, to any person holding,
operating or conducting, or assisting in the holding, operation or conduct of, any such bazaar
or raffle. Each raffle ticket shall have printed thereon the time, date and place of the raffle,
the three most valuable prizes to be awarded and the total number of prizes to be awarded as
specified on the form prescribed in section 7-173.
(1955, S. 299d: P.A. 76:81, S. 2: P.A. 77492; 7;7-614, S. 486, 587, 610: P.A. 78·303,.S. 05, 136: P.A. 83·35, S. 2:
83·587, S. 95, 96: P.A. 86419, S. 10, 25: P.A. 89-214, S. 8, 26.)
Hisrocy: P.A. 76-81 tt;quircd tickets to b¢ printed with 1hrce most valuable priz.e.s and total number oC prius; P.A. 77.-492
.added exception to prohlbitlon of balun and raffle$ on Su..odly; P.A. 71~14 and P.A_. 1&-303 substltut.ed t.'OlD.Inl..s!ton« of
public ufety foccommisslooer or state pollee and made state pollee d¢p:utznent a division within tM depa.rtment of pubUc safety,
effective January I, 1979; P.A. 83-35 elimln&ttd lhe prohibition against Sunday balun or nftles; P.A. 83-587 provided that
public -act 8)-35 shall tate effect July l, 1983, nther thlft Octobe.r l, 1983; P.A. 86-419 substituted divisioo of spceial reveoue
for state police and executive director or said 4-ivlsioo foe ~loner or public s.af'ety, effective October 1, 1987; P .A. 89-214
(I) made romut c;ha.nges in sectfoa, lns«ting Subdivs. (I) tnd (2) and making tocluUcal changes u requlrtd; (1) required that
regi$trl.l.ion ron:n be aco:nn~ed by 11\f\Ual ree of thrt¢ hundred dolla.n payable to state tre&sucer; and (3) required tid:ets to be
printed with time of raffle thetton.
Cil<d. 196 c. 623, 630.
Sec. 7·179. Advertising restricted. No bazaar or raffle to be conducted under any
permit issued under the provisions of sections 7-170 to 7-186, inclusive, shall be advertised
as to its location, the time when it is to be or has been held or. the prizes awarded or to be
awarded, by means of television or sound truck or by means of billboards, provided one
sign, not exceeding twelve square feet, may be displayed on the premises where the drawing
or allounent of prizes is to be held and also where the prizes are or will be exhibited.
(1955, s. 300<1.)
Sec. 7-180, Change in facts on application to be reported, If there is any change in
the facts set forth in the application for a permit subsequent to the making of such application,
the applicant shall immediately notify ihe executive director of the division of special
revenueofsuchchange, and theexecutivedirectormay, if he deems such action advisable in
the public interest, revoke such penni!.
(t955, S. 30ld; P.A. 89-214, S. 9, 26.)
-23-
128 MUNICIPALITIES Title 7
Histocy: P.A. 89·214 1Ubsdruted "executive direct« of the dlvldoo of tp«:lal revenue .. for "wlhority gn..ntlng 1uch penult .. ,
mtkJng technical changes as neceuuy.
Sec. 7-181. Suspension or revocation of registration or permlt. Cease and desist
order •. Notice of violation. Hearing. Penalty. (a) Whenever it apj>ears to the executive
directorofthe division of special revenue after an investigation that any person is violating or
is about to violate any provision of sections 7-170 to 7-185, inclusive, or administrative
regulations issued pursuant thereto, the executive director may in hi~ discretion, to protect
the public welfare, order that any registration or pellllit issued pursuant to said sections be
·";:~immediately suspended or revoked and that the person cease and desist from the actions
'" constituting such violation or which· would constitute such violation. After such an order is
issued, the person named therein may, within fourteen days after receipt of the order, file a
written request for a hearing. Such hearing shall be held in accordance with the provisions of
chapter 54.
(b) Whenever the executive director of the division of special revenue fmds as the result
of an investigation that any person has violated any provision of sections 7-170 to 7-185,
inclusive, or administrative regulations issued pursuant thereto or made any false statement
in any application for a pellllitorin any report required by the provisions of said sections, the
executive director may send a notice to such person by certified mail, return receipt requested.
Any such notice shall include (I) a reference to the section or regulation alleged to have
been violated or the application or report in which an alleged false statement was made, (2) a
short and plain statement of the matter asserted or charged, (3) the fact that any registration
or pellllit issued pursuant to sections 7-170 to 7-185,. inclusive, may be suspended or
revoked for such violation or false statement and the maximum penalty that may be imposed
for such violation or false statement, and (4) the time and place for the hearing. Such hearing
shall be ftxed for a date not earlier than fourteen days after the notice is mailed. ·
(c) The executive director shall hold a hearing upon the charges made unless such person
fails to appear at the hearing. Such hearing shall be held in accordance with the provisions
of chapter 54. If such person fails to appear at the hearing or if, after the hearing, the
executive director finds that such person committed such a violation or made such a false
statement, the executive director mai, in his discretion, suspend or revoke such registration
orpellllit and order that a civil penalty of not more than two hundred dollars be imposed upon
such person for such violation or false statement. The executive director shall send a copy of
any order issued pursuanfto this subsection by certified mail, return receipt requested, to any
person named in such order .
. ,. . (d) Whenever the executive director revokes a pellllit issued pursuant to sections 7-170
""""to 7-186, inclusive, the issuing authority shall not issue any permit to such pellllittee for
· three years after the date of such violation.
(19SS, S. 302d; P.A. 89·214, S. 10, 26.)
Hbtory: P.A. 89-214 entirely repla.oed. previously cx4ting pcovisicxu: and insetted Subsec.s. (a) kl (d), inclusive, in lieu
theRXlf, u follows: (I) Sub~. (1) authorizing executive dittttor to inunedl.a.ttly suspend oc revoke any registration or permit
and i.uue cu.se and desist orden: (2) Subsec. (b) authorillng C.XCC'Utivc direaor to send notice to any persoa violating any
provision or s.ectlons 7·170 to,.7·18S, lncluslve. and 1pedfying requirements Cor notloc; (3) Subsec. (c) requiring executive
director to hold a hearing upon clwges made and authorizing him to suspend oc revoke regl.stndon or-pennlt and order lmposl·
tion of a civil p«Ulty; and (4) Subsec. (d) prohibiting ls.sulng authority from luuing any pennlt for three yean after date oC
violation whenever executive dinxtor revokes penni!.
Sec. 7-182. Report re receipts, number and price of tickets sold, expenses, profit
and list of prizes with a retail value of fifty doUars or more. Any sponsoring organization
which holds, operates or conducts any bazaar or raffle, and its members who were in charge
-24-
)
)
)
)
Ch. 98 MUNICIPAL POWERS 129
thereof, shall furnish to the chief of police of the municipality or to the flrst selectman, as the
case may be, a verified statement, in duplicate, showing (I) the amount of the gross receipts
derived from each bazaar or raffle, (2) in the case of a raffle, the number and price of tickets
sold, (3) each item of expense incurred or paid, and each Item of expenditure made or to be
made and the name and address of each person to whom ·each s~~h item has been or Is to be
paid, (4) the net profit derived from each bazaar or raffle and the I!SCS to which the net profit
has been or is to _be applied and (5) a list of prizes of a retail value of fifty dollars or more
. offered or given with the amount paid for each prize purchased or the retail value for each
prize donated and the names and addresses of the persons· to whom:the prizes were given.
Such report shall be furnished during the next succeeding month. The chlef of police or fl!St
selectman, as the case may be, shall forWard the original copy of such report to the executive
director of the division of special revenue, who shall keep it on me and available for public
inspection for a period of one year the~er. The sponsoring organization shall maintain
and keep any books and records that may be necessary to-substantiate the particulars of such
report, whlch books and records shall be preserved for at least one year from the date of such
report and shall be available for inspection. Such report shall be certified to under penalty of
false statement by the three persons designated in the permit application as being responsible
for the bazaar or raffle. ·
(1955, S. 303<1; 19<il, P.A. liS, S. 4; 1971, P.A. 871,S. 61; P.A. 77~14, S. 486, 610;P.A. 81·276, S. 2; P.A. 86-419, S.
11, 15; P.A. 89-214, S, II, 26.)
' llisto<y: 19<il act provid<d ninety insl<>d or thlrty-d.\y period. roc fllli>g ~<port 1M exoep«d "CCus No. 4" pennio from
~CqUtred «rtificatioo of report by ..:oou.nt.a.ot; 1971 act aubstituted "false statement" for ""pecjuty"; P.A. 71-614 wbstituted
comml.ssiooetofpublic u!ety forcom.rnls.sionerofsute pollee, effe-:tiveJanuuy I, 1979; P.A. 81·216 roqulredquuterly reports
i.r. rpocific times'by organiutioo..s apon.soring bazu.n nthcr tha.n "wilhln ninety days aitec the cooclu.sioo" of the bu.u.r or rUne;
P.A. 86-419 aubsdtuted executive director of division of apcdtl revenue f« commissioner or public ufety, effective Oo:tobec I,
1987; P.A. 89·214 (I) required reports by s:poo.soring org&niz.ad.ons "duri.ni the next sueoec:dlng month" rath¢f.tfw!. quuterly, (2)
required poUoe c.hlet or futt selectman to fcxward original copy of report to ew:utive direo:tor instud of duplicate, and (3)
eUrnlna.ted RqUlremeat that ao:ountant ce.rtify report. In the ,euc or "CLa.s.s No. I", "'Ous No. 2" and '"Ctus No. 3" penults.
Sec. 7-183. Examination of reports. Each such report shall be examined by the chief
of police or the fl!St selectman, as the case may be, and by the executive director of the
division of special revenue and shall be compared with the original application. The executive
director may refer any violation of sections 7-170 to 7-185, inclusive, or administrative
regulations issue<) pursuant U1ereto found therein to the office of the state's attorney having
jurisdiction over the municipality in whlch the organization is located and such office shall
investigate and take such action as the facts require.
(1955, S. 304<1; 1959, P.A. 24; 1961, P.A. 115, S. S; P.A. 77~14, S. 486, 610; P.A. 78-2&l, S. 13, 127; P.A. 86-419, S.
12, 25; P.A. 89·214, S. 12, 26.)
lllitory: 1959 act requlred rerem.l or vfolation or lta(lJtes or regulations to prosecutor in lieu of refem.J of "dlscn:paney";
1961 act made tecllnieal change re pros¢cuting attorney; P .A. 77..(, 14 su!»ti(llted commis.sioner or public uf«y Cor oommis.slonec
or state polloe, effective 1anUAIY I, 1979; P.A. 78·2&0 deleted rereru.oe to prosecuting attorney and nude violations rerenble to
offioe or ltlte'& attorney; P.A. &6-419 1ubstiruted exewtivc director or division or speo:ial revenue foe oommls.slooer of public
u!ety, effectiveOctobec I, 1987; P.A. 89-214 lpedfically penoltted exewtive directoc to refer. any violation of 5«$. 7-170 to
7-185, inclusive, 10 1tate's attorney, dekting rererenoe to "'7-186".
Sec. 7·184. Rescission of adoption. Any town, city or borough which has adopted the
provisions of sections 7-170 to 7-186, inclusive, may, by referendum in the same manner as
is provided in section 7· 171, vote to rescind its action in adopting the provisions of said
sections.
(1955, s. 30Sd.)
Sec. 7-185. Regulations. The executive director of the division of special revenue,
with the advice and consent of the gaming policy board, shall adopt, in accordance with the
provisions of chapter 54, such regulations as are necessary effectively to carry out the provisions
of sections 7-170 to 7-186, inclusive, in order to prevent fraud and protecl the public,
which regulations shall have the effect oflaw.
-25-
... ~-.--
130 MUNICIPALmES Tille 7
(19S5, S. »Sd; P.A. 77-614, S, .486, 610; P.A. 81-472, S. 13, 183; P.A. 86-419, S. 13, 15; P.A. 87-44, S. 1.)
HUtory: P .A. 77-61.4 subttittJtcd conunls.slooer or public ufety foe commluiooc. of sute police, c((ectlve January I, 1979;
P.A. 81-472 substituted reCerence toOl. 54 Coc rdercnce to repealed Seet . .._...I to 4.SO; P.A. &6-419 &ubstitutcd exeo:ulivc
director o( division o( spcda.l revenue Cor commls.slor.cr oC public ufcty, effective Octobu t, 1987; P.A. 87-44 Kqllirtd
executive director to &dopt regula.tions with advice and.consent o( gliDing policy boud.
Sec. 7-185a. Exceptlonsforcertalnorganlzatlons. "Money-wheel" games. "Fifty •.
flfty" coupon games. (a) Notwithstanding the provisions of sections 7 ·170 to 7-186, inclusive,
and the regulations adopted thereunder, anyorganized·church, volunteer frrecompany
or veterans organization or association conducting a bazluu'i:>rraffle, (I) may have the actual
drawing of the raffle in a municipality other .than the municipality which grants the permit,
provided the chief executive officer of the other murllcipality has in writing approved such
drawing; (2) may be permitted to redeem prizes in cash; (3) shall be exempt from the requirement
of preserving unsold raffle tickets beyond rllnety days after the conclusion of the holding,
operating and conducting of such bazaar or raffle and shall be permitted to dispose of
unclaimed prizes after such rllnety days; and (4) may file a reconciliation of expenditures and
receipts signed by an officer in lieu of an accountant.
(b) Notwithstanding the provisions of sections 7-170 to 7-186, inclusive, and the regulations
adopted thereunder, any sponsoring organization qualified to conduct a bazaar or
raffle under the provisions of section 7-172 and recognized as a nonprofit organization under
the provisions of Section 501 (c) (3) of the Federallnternal Revenue Code of 1986, or any
subsequent corresponding internal revenue code of the Urllted States, as from time to time
amended, may have the actual drawing of the raffle in amurllcipality other than the murllci-.
pality which grants the permit, provided the chief executi-,.e officer of the other municipality
has in writing approved such drawing.
·)
· (c) Notwithstanding the provisions of section 7-177, any organization or group sped- )
fled in section 7-172 conducting a bazaar may award cash prizes which shall not exceed
twenty-five dollars each in connection with the playing of a "money-wheel" game.
(d) Notwithstanding the provisions of section 7-177, any organization conducting a
bazaar may operate "fifty-ftfty" coupon games each day of a permitted bazaar event and may
award cash prizes of fifty per cent of"ftfty-ftfty" coupon game sales for each co.upon drawing
conducted. Not more than three scheduled drawings may be held on any day on which a
bazaar is permitted. A "ftfty-fifty" coupon game shall be operated from an authorized bazaar
booth, subject to the regulation of the executive director of the division of special revenue
and shall allow for the sale of "ftfty-ftfty" coupons at a predetermined urllform price. Each
''ftfty-ftfty" coupon shall be consecutively numbered and shall have a correspondingly numbered
stub. Each sponsoring organization shall provide different colored coupons for each
drawing and shall award one prize for each drawing held. Each organization conducting
such games shall conspicuously post, a teach bazaar booth at which such games are conducted,
a notice or notices which shall include the dates, times and places of any "fifty-fifty"
coupon drawings, as well as the prices and colors of coupons to be sold for each drawing.
The executive director shall prescribe the form of such notice which shall contain the following
statement: "Holders of coupons must be present to claim a prize." Each such organization
shall account for each coupon printed and sold for each drawing and shall announce the
amount of sales and the prize to be awarded immediately prior to each drawing. The sponsoring
organization shall preserve all sold and unsold coupons or stubs for a period of at least
one year from the date of the verified statement required pursuant to section 7-182. At the
conclusion of a bazaar, each organization conducting such games, and its members who
were in charge thereof, shall furnish to the chief of police of the municipality or to the first
-26-
)
)
Ch. 98 MUNICIPAL POWERS 131
selectman, as the case may be, a verified statement, prescribed by the executive director of
the division of special revenue, in duplicate, showing (I) the total number of coupons purchased
and sold for each "fifty-fifty" coupon game drawing and (2) the total number and
amount of prizes awarded and the names and addresses of the persons to whom the prizes
were awarded. Such report shall be furnished during the next succeeding month. The chief
of police or fust selectman, as the case may be, shall forward the original copy of such report
to the executive director, who shall keep it on file and available for public inspection for a
period of one year thereafter. Such report shall be certified to under pi:nalty of false state- .
men! by the three persons designated in the penni! application as being responsible for the
bazaar. · ...
(P.A. 73·54; P.A. 8~; 86-403, S. 129, 132; 8~19, S. 2; P.A. 89-211, S. 7:'89·21~, S. 13, 26; 89-282, S. 4, 5.)
History: P .A. 86-{i 1ubdivided lhe sectioa, adding Subs¢c. (b},,aulhorirlng ccrt.t.in charitable and educatlon.&l org&nlutioru to
have lct\lal raffle dnwing In a municipality not granting the permit; P.A. 86-403 changed effective due o( P.A. 86-6 from
October I, 1986, to July I, 1986; P.A. 86-419 added Subsoc. (c) to Permit 11\'jvolunteer fire company conducting a b.a.tur to
awud ca.sb prizes for "'money-whecl" games; P.A. 89-211 clarified ref«ence to the Int.emd Revenue Code of 1986 in Subsec.
(b); P.A. 89-214 amended Subsc>c. (c) to permit any .. organlz.ation or group rpoclfied tn Kctl.oo 7·172" conducting a bu.u.r to
award cash prizes for "money-whecl" games, deleting rpeo:-ilic rc(ere.noc to any "'volunteer flre company"; P.A. 89-2821oddc:d a
oew Subs«. (d), permitting any organiution conducting a bu.ur to opent.e ''fifty-fifty" coupon games.
Sec. 7-186. Penalty. Any person who violates any provision of sections 7-170 to
7-185, inclusive, or administrative regulations issued pursuant thereto, or who makes any
false statement in any application for a penni! or in any report. required by the provisions of
said sections shall be fmed not more than one thousand dollars or imprisoned not more than
one year or be both fined and imprisoned.
(1955, S. 307d; P.A. 89-214, s. 14, 26.)
Histcxy: P.A. 89-214 provided that violation of any provision of administrative regulations would rubjoct violator to penalty.
-27-
AN ORDINANCE REQUIRING PERMITS OF
SOLICITORS, PEDDLERS AND VENDORS
1. No Individual, association or corporation shall solicit, peddle,
vend, sell or offer to solicit, peddle, vend or sell any merchandise, goods
wares, or subscription in any street or from house to house in the Town'
of Preston without first obtaining a permit to do such from the Town
Selectmen.
2. Any individual, association or corporation, who desires a permit
as provided in paragraph 1, supra, shall apply for such to the Selectmen
of the Town or their agent upon. a form furnished by the Selectmen shall
issue a permit within twenty (2.Q)days after receiving the application for
such. -""'- ·
. 3. Any individuals, association or corporation who solicits, peddles,
vends or sells, or offers to solicit, peddle, vend or sell any of the articles
enumerated in paragraph 1, supra, without having been issued a permit
shall be f'med not more than fifty dollars for each offense. Each
individual sale or offer of sale is deemed to be a separate and distinct
offense ..
Reference: Town Meeting -November 15, 1965
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING AN ORDINANCE
REQUIRING PERMITS OF SOLICITORS PEDDLERS
AND VENDORS
Sec. 1: Said Ordinance is amended by adding the following
sections:
Sec. 2A: The following sums shall hereafter be paid for fees for
such licenses by the persons respectively receiving the same per
calendar year:
Auctions- $10.00 per year;
Peddlers of Goods, wares, and merchandise
where using vehicles ancVor trailer,-$200.00
per year for each vehicle and trailer;
Peddlers not using vehicles-$10.00 per year.
-28-
,-)
)
)
)
Sec. 2B . . This Ordinance shall not apply to:
a) Local school, political or civic organizations,
benevolent societies, service clubs or nonprofit
organizations which are organized
in and have a substantial membership in
Town.
b) Any pel'Son or sales exempted by the Statutes
of the State of Connecticut.
Sec.2C: In granting said llcenses, the First Sel~ct~~ or his Agent
shall consider the proposed location of the peddler's stands so that they
may not be so close together as to cause traffic congestion or hazards
and locations of stands shall not interfere with the use and enjoyment of
the residences of the adjoining land owners.
Reference: Town Meeting Book 11-Page 26 and 27
-29-
AN ORDINANCE CONCERNING PUBLIC BIDDING
Be it ordained by the electors of the Town of Preston at a duly
warned Town Meeting held June 4, 1962. ·
(1) All contracts entered into in behalf of the Town of Preston for
supplies, materials and services in excess of $1,000.00 (except contracts
for personal services of an individual) shall only be awarded after public
notice and bid.
This requirement may be waived in the event of an emergen~y
by agreement of a majority of the members of the Board of Finance.
(2) This Ordinance shall take effect fifteen (15) days after
publication.
Reference: To'wn Meeting Book 8.
AMENDMENT TO AN ORDINANCE
CONCERNING PUBLIC BIDDING ·
Be it ordained by the electors of the Town or Preston at a duly
warned Town Meeting held August 22, 1974: ·. ·
Sec.l_ of "An Ordinance Concerning Public Bidding" is hereby
amended by substituting $2,000.00 for for $1,000.00 so that Section 1 of
said ordinance shall read as follows: .
(1) All contracts entered into in behalf of the Town of Preston for
supplies, materials and services in excess of $2,000.00 (except contracts
for personal services of an individual) shall only be awarded after public
notice and bid. , '
This requirement may be waived in the event of an emergency by
agreement of a majority of the members of the Board of Finance.
This Ordinance shall take effect fifteen (15) days after publication
in accordance with the General Statutes.
Effective Date: September 10, 1974.
-30·
)
)
AN ORDINANCE TO AMEND THE ORDINANCE
CONCERNING PUBLIC BIDDING
Be it ordained by the electors of the Town of Preston and citizens
qualified to vote in Town Meetings at a duly warned Town Meeting held
May 14, 1987:
(1) S~ction 1 of "An Or?JnB.?c~ ~?nc~r:n~g Public Bidding11 is hereby
amended by substituting $3,500.00 for $2,000 and adding the following
clause at the end of the sentence; provided however that no bids for
expenditure to be paid from Town Aid Funds shall be necessary as long
as the price paid is equal to or less than the price to be paid by the State
for the same type of expenditures so that said ordinance shall read as
follows:
(1) All contracts entered into in behalf of the Town of Preston for
supplies, materials and services in exeess of $3,500.00 (except contracts
for personal services of an individual) shall only be awarded after public
notice and bid, provided however, that no bids for expenditures to be
paid from Town Aid Funds shall be necessary as long as the price paid
is equal to or less than the price to be paid by the State for the same
type of expenditure.
- ,.
This requirement may be waived in the event of an emergency by
agreement of a majority of the members of the Board of Finance.
Reference-Town Meeting Book 11, Pg. 125
ORDINANCE REGULATING BUILDING OF
APPROACHES TO ANY TOWN ROAD OR STREET
OF THE TOWN OF PRESTON_
1. Before building an approach or reconstruction of an existing
approach to any Town Road or street, a permit must be obtained from
the First Selectman or his agent.
2.. All necessary drainage pipes, culverts, headwalls and/or catch
basins and/or ditches must be installed where deemed necessary by the
First Selectman or his agent.
3. The holder of this permit shall be responsible for any damage
done to the Town Highway or street in the building or the approach.
-31-
The penalty for violation of this ordinance shall be a fine not to
exceed $100.00.
This Ordinance shall take effect fifteen (15) days after publication
·in accordance with the General Statutes.
Reference: Town Meeting Book 9, Page 4.
-32-
)
AN ORDINANCE REGULATING THE ADDITION OF
ANY NEW STREET OR HIGHWAY TO THE
HIGHWAY SYSTEM OF THE TOWN OF PRESTON
July 1, 1965
SECTION 1. DEFINITIONS:
STREET-Means a newly established project road or any abandoned
or legally closed highway or road being open for public use.
. .
. BOARD-Means the Board ofSelectmen.
SECTION 2. PROCEDURE FOR LAYOUT AND ACCEPTANCE: ·
1. LAYOUT- Whenever any street is proposed and before any
construction clearing or excavating is initiated, the owner or developer
shall present to the board, three certified copies of plans and profiles
prepared by a licensed Connecticut Engineer or Land Surveyor together
with a topography map of the area and a written application for
approval of .such street. The plans shall conform to the specifications
hereinafter stated and subject to Section 13-25 of the 1959 Supplement
to the 1958 revision of the General Statutes of Connecticut. Such plans
shall inClude all drainage needs, as prepared by a Certified Licensed
Connecticut Engineer, and culverts and catch basins.
The Board at a regular meeting shall discuss the proposed plan with
the owner, developer and/or agents and if approved, approved with
changes, or disapproved, shall return one copy of the plan with note of
its action to the owner within 30 days from the receipt of the
application. When approved by the Board, one copy of the plans shall
be filled with the Town Clerk.
2. ACCEPTANCE BY BOARD: Upon completion of construction of
proposed street and before acceptance by the· Board of said street into
the Town highway system, the owner or developer shall furnish a
certificate from a qualified engineer, certifying that (a) the work has
been completed according to the profile submitted and in accordance
with all specifications hereinafter stated. (b) The drainage system is
adequate for. the projected development. Upon receipt of such
certificate and the Town Meeting having voted to accept such proposed
road, such road may be finally accepted by the Board into the Town
Road system.
( ) 3. RECORD OF ACCEPTANCE" Final acceptance of all roads by
-33-
the Board of Selectman shall be entered into the minutes book of the
Town Clerk of the Town of Preston as proof of such acceptance.
SECTION 3. CONSTRUCTION SPECIFICATIONS
, 1. WIDTH: Any street shall contain a minimum "right of way" of
fifty (50) feet unless laid out with prior written approval of a majority of
the Board.. Such street shall be conveyed by Warranty Deed to the
Town of Preston. The road bed of any street shall have a minimum
width of twenty-four (24) feet. No dead end street shall be approved by
the Board except that a turn about of fifty (50) foot radius be
constructed. There shall be no brush, trees or boulders within six (6)
feet of the siOe of the road bed. Such road bed shall be excavated to a
depth of twelve inches and be freed of boulders and all ledge shall be cut
an additional twelve inches.
2. GRADEANDCONTOUR
(a) Streets shall be adjusted to the contour of the land but no grade
shall·be less than 0.5% or more than 12%, with exceptions subject to
written approval of the Board of Selectmen.
r}
(b) The profile of such new street shall have no abrupt change of
grade. 1)
(c) Slopes shall be finished in a neat manner and where streets are
cut or filled the side slope shall not be steeper than one foot vertical to
two feet horizontal, unless the permanence of the slope shall be
otherwise provided by the owner or developer to the satisfaction of the
Board.
3. DRAINAGE
(a) All shoulders two feet on each side of the road bed shall be so
constructed that control of surface, water and sub-surface water is
maintained;·. all shoulders and water-ways shall be surfaced with
bituminou13 concrete and compacted to two (2) inch thickness. · Catch
basins and culvert pipes of a minimum diameter of 15" shall be
installed at each corner of all intersections and catch basins at a
maximum of every three hundred (300) feet on each side of the road
except as may be varied by written permission of the Board. All catch
basins to be connected to cause a continuous flow of controlled surface
and sub-surface water to an ultimate destination of natural flow, brook, .
pond or river. All culvert pipe shall be reinforced concrete pipe.
4. CURBS~ Curbs of curb mix bituminous concrete shall be )
-34-
constructed at each side. of the road to a height of 6". Such clU'bs to be
uniformly constructed using compacting equipment identified as
) curbing machine.
5 .. DRAINAGE RIGHTS- All necessary drainage rights and/or
easements for maintaining drainage over or under adjoining lands to an
ultimate destination of natural flow as Paragraph three (3) "Drainage"
shall be procured by the developer at no cost to the Town of Preston.
6. UTILITIES- All utilities shall be in place before final grading and
compacting of streets.
7. GRAVEL- Gravel shall be uniformly applied to a compacted depth
of twelve (12) inches on all normal areas and in wet land to be a
compacted depth of twenty folll' (24) inches. All gravel shall be process
stone or gravel of a uniform size of not more than five (5) inches in
diameter for sub surface and not more than than two (2) inches for
finished application, top 4 inch course.
8. INITIAL SURFACING AND SEALING
(a) The road bed shall be graded with a crown on the average of
one fourth (V4) inch per square foot.
) (b) The final gravel fill, grading and application of tar at one
\ )
gallon per square yard, with a light sand coverage and brushed in and a .
second .coating of sand to prevent picking up. This shall be done under
the supervision of the board at the developer's or owner's expense.
(c) Seal Coat-Not less than sixty (60) days nor more than one
hundred and twenty (120) of the initial application of tar there shall be
applied to all surface of the road bed a uniform application of
bituminous concrete presently identified as formula 152, to a depth of
one and one half (1 1/2) inches, this application shall be applied with
patented machinery designed specifically for the handling of like
materials and this application shall be.compacted with a ten (10) ton
roller of the proper design for this specific material.
9. GUARD RAILS: Guard rail post and railing shall be installed as
directed by the Board.
10. ALL MATERIALS - All materials used ill the construction of any
street shall be in accordance with State of Connecticut, State Highway
Department Standard Specification for Roads, Bridges and incidental
Construction, except that portion that covers size of gravel.
-35-
11. NAMES OF STREETS· New Streets shall be named subject to
the approval of the Board of Selectmen.
12. SURETY BOND- The Board shall require that a surety Bond of
cash or collateral shall be deposited with the Town Treasurer in an
amount sufficient to cover any incomplete work before a certificate
pertaining to the status of such road can be issued by the Board of
Selectmen or any officer of the Town of Preston.
13. PREVIOUS STREET REGULATIONS AND/OR ORDINANCES-.
This Ordinance shall supplant any previous regulations ancl/or
Ordinances and shall become effective 15 days after its publication in a
local newspaper having circulation in the Town of Preston.
14. EXCEFTIONS- Any road over 50'Yo completed may be accepted by
the Board under the Town Policy in effect before the passage of this
Ordinance.
Reference: Town Meeting Book 9, Page 8
J
1. ORDINANCE TO AMEND AN ORDINANCE
REGULATING THE ADDITION OF ANY·NEW · .J
HIGii"W AY OR STREJ:£T TO THE HIGHWAY .SYSTEM
OF TOWN OF PRESTON JULY 1, 1965 AS AMENDED
BE IT ORDAINED by the voters of the Town of Preston.
SECTION 1. Subsection (C)· Seal Coat of Section 8 of said .
ORDINANCE is amended to read as follows:
· (C) ,Final application-Applications of (1) bituminous concrete
identified as~l.State of Connecticut specifications Class 4 binder to a
depth of 1 1/2 inches and (2) State of Connecticut specification Class 2
for the final1 12 inches for a total depth of 3 inches. These applications
shall be applied applied with a patented machine designed specifically
for the handling of like materials and this application shall be
compacted with a ten ton roller of proper design for this specific
material.
-36-
AN ORDINANCE REGULATING BUILDING OF
APPROACHES TO ANY ROAD OR HIGHWAY OF
THE TOWN OF PRESTON
Be it ordained by the electors of the Town of Preston and citizens
qualified to vote in Town Meetings:
Sec. 1- An Ordinance regulating building of approaches to any
town road or street of the Town of Preston adopted June 3, 1966 iS
hereby repealed. ·
Sec. 2- Before building an approach to any town road or highway,
a permit must be obtained from the First Selectman or his agent. This
permit will be valid for one year from the date of issuance by which
time all work necessary shall be completed.
In determining whether a permit shall be issued, the First
Selectman shall give due consideration of the effect of the proposed
approach upon the public safety, and to drainage needs.
Sec. 3- All necessary drainage pipes, culverts, headwalls and/or
'\ catch basins and/or ditches must be installed where deemed necessary
) by the First Selectman or his agent.
r)
The paving from the edge of the traveled roadway to the property
line shall consist of bituminous concrete compacted to a depth of at least
two (2) inches unless varies with the written permission of the First
Selectman.
Sec. 4- The holder of this permit shall be responsible for any
damage done to the town highway in the building of the appro• ach .
An applicant shall deposit with the Town Treasurer, security in the
form of a bond with sufficient surety or cash, in such amount as may be
required by the First Selectman sufficient to cover the completion of the
approach, including work required to repair the town highway.
Sec. 5- The penalty for violation of this ordinance shall be a fine
not to exceed $100.00.
Adopted February 9, 1989
-37-
AN ORDINANCE CONCERNING ACCEPTANCE OF
HIGHWAYS BY THE BOARD OF SELECTIVIEN
SECTION 1. Pursuant to Public Act 91-181 of the Connecticut General
Assembly, the Board of Selectmen is hereby authorized to accept public
highways within the Town of Preston at any regular or special meeting
of the board. Such acceptance shall be approved by a majority vote of
the board.
SECTION 2. No such highway shall be accepted by the Board of
Selectmen unless it conforms to. all of the requirements for streets and
roads as set' forth in the Town of Preston Planning and Zoning
Regulations and Sub-division Regulations.
Adopted January 9, 1992 at a Special Town Meetmg.
-38-
)
)
)
AN ORDINANCE CONCERNING ACCEPTANCE OF HIGHWAYS BY THE
BOARD OF SELEOMEN
BE IT ORDAINED by the voters of the Town of Preston:
SECTION 1: Pursuant to PA 91-181, the Board of Selectmen Is hereby authorized
to accept public highways within the Town of Preston at any regular or special
meeting of the board. Such acceptance shall be approved by a majority vote of the
board.
SECTION 2. No such highway shall be accepted by the Board of Selectmen unless
It conforms to all of the requirements for streets and roads as set forth·ln the Town
of Preston Plannh'lg and Zoning Regulations and Sub-division Regulations.
Adopted 1 /9/93- own Meeting Book 12
-38AAN
ORDINANCE TO PROHIBIT THE ISSUANCE OF
BUILDING PERMITS FOR ERECTION OF , -)
BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES ON LOTS ABUTTING
UNACCEPTED HIGHWAYS
1. No building permit shall be issued for the erection of buildings
or structures on lots abutting unaccepted highways or streets.
2. This ordinance shall not prevent the issuance of a building
permit for the construction of farm or accessory buildings which are not
in violation of any lawful zoning or building regulations of . the
municipality.
3. Any building erected in violation of this ordinance shall be
deemed an unlawful structure, and the municipality through the
appropriate officer may bring action to enjoin the erection of such
structure or cause it to be vacated or removed. ·,
4. Any person, firm or cor-Poration erecting a building or structure
in violation of this ordinance may be fined not more than two hundred )
dollars for each building or structure so erected in addition to the relief
herein otherwise granted to the municipality.
June 8,1989
-39-
)
AN ORDINANCE ACCEPTING A PANEL TRUCK
FROM PRESTON FIRE COMPANY #2 FOR USE AS
AN EMERGENCY VEHICLE
Be it Ordained by the electors of the Town of Preston at a duly
warned meeting:
Section One: The Town of Preston accepts a gift of a panel
truck from Preston Fire Company #2 for use as an emergency vehicle.
Section Twoi This Ordinance shall take effect fifteen (15) days
after publication in accordance with the General Statutes.
Reference: Town Meeting Book 9, Page 4.
AN ORDINANCE ACCEPTING A TANK TRUCK
·FROM PRESTON FIRE COMPANY #1
BE IT ORDAINED by the electors of the Town of Preston at a duly
warned meeting:
SECTION ONE: The Town ofPreston accepts a gift of a tank truck
from Preston Fire Company #1.
SECTION TWO: This ordinance shall take effect fifteen (25) days
after publication in accordance with the General Statutes.
Reference: Town Meeting Book Volume 9, Pg. 5
-40-
AN ORDINANCE ACCEPTING A GIFT OF A TANK
TRUCK
BE IT ORDAINED by the electors and those entitled to vote at a Town
Meeting in the Town of Preston at a duly warned Town Meeting:
Section 1. The Town of Preston accepts a gift of a tank truck from the
Preston Fire Company No. 2 for use by the Town for its general
purposes.
Section 2. This· Ordinance shall take effect fifteen (15) days after
publication in accordance with the General Statutes.
Reference Town Meeting Book, Vol. 9, Page 18.
AN ORDINANCE ACCEPriNG AN EMERGENCY
VEHICLE AND A TANK TRUCK FROM THE
PRESTON VOLUNTEER FIRE COMPANY
'J
The following Ordinance was adopted by the voters of the Town of
Preston at a Special Town Meeting held in Preston Towrt Hall on May )
16, 1967.
BE IT ORDAINED by the electors of the Town of Preston at a duly
warned meeting:
Section One: The Town of Preston accepts a gift of an emergency
vehicle from the Preston Volunteer Fire Company.
Section Two: The Town of Preston accepts a gift of a tank truck from
the Preston Volunteer Fire Company.
Section Three: This Ordinance shall take effect fifteen (15) days after
publication in accordance with the General Statutes.
Reference: Town Meeting Book 9, Page 62
-41-
)
AN ORDINANCE ACCEPTING A RESCUE VEHICLE
FROM POQUETANUCK FIRE COMPANY #2
BE IT ORDAINED by the electors of the of PRESTON, the Town of
Preston accepts the gift of a rescue vehicle (1969 CSO Chevrolet from
the Poquetanuck Fire Company #2.
Effective date: April 21, 1978
Reference: Town Meeting Book 10, Pg. 202.
AN ORDINANCE CONCERNING MOTOR
VEHICLES, TRAILERS AND OTHER OBJECTS
WHICH IMPEDE, OBSTRUCT ORINTERFERE WITH
THE REMOVAL OF SNOW OR ICE FROM TOWN
ACCEPTED ROADS
1. No Person shall park or leave stationary on any town accepted road
within the Town of Preston, any motor vehicle, trailer or other object so
as to impede, obstruct or interfere with the removal of snow or ice from
) such town accepted roads by the Town, its agents or servants.
)
2. The Town Selectmen or their agent may remove any motor vehicle,
trailer or object which impeded, interferes or obstructs the removal of
snow or ice from any town accepted road, and the cost of such removal,
including the cost of storage of any motor vehicle, shall be borne by the
owner of such motor vehicle, trailer or object. ·
3. The owner or operator of any motor vehicle, trailer or object which is
parked so as to impede,. obstruct or interfere with the removal of snow
or ice from any town accepted road shall be fined not more than fifty
dollars for each such offense.
Reference: Town Meeting Book9, Pgs. 27 and 28.
··'J : > ;·.
--~ :' ,, '
-42-
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING AN ORDINANCE OF
THE TOWN OF PRESTON BUILDING PERMIT FEES
1. BUILDING PERMIT FEES ARE AS FOLLOWS:
A. 1. RESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTION including:
a. House and living area )
b. ·Residential Accessory: )
1. Building (garage, shed, etc. )
2. Barns (poles, conventional) ))
8. Chicken Coops
4. Greenhouses )
5; ·Alterations & Additions )
6. Business Mercantile )
7. Assembly & Storage )
$6.00 per $,1000
of costs
2. ALL OTHER CONSTRUCTION $16.00 per $1,000
of costs
8. SWIMMING POOLS
(excluding wading pools)
4. DEMOLITION
$25.00
$10.00 permit reqliired
5. REMOVAL OR MOVING $10.00 a building from .
one location t6 another
on the premises. Portable
building excepted.
6. MOVING (Dwelling) $100.00 from out of town
or off premises.
7. MOVING OTHER BUILDINGS $50.00 from out of town
or off premises.
8. TRADE PERMITS FOR $4.00 per $1,000 of
REPAIRS OR RENOVATIONS estimated cost.
$10.00 Minimum.
9. PLAN INVOLVING COSTS OF No fee. Permit is
$500 OR LESS required before work
begins; No permit
required for small repairs
and normal replacement.
REVISED
-43-
)
r ' '
)
)
AN ORDINANCE CDNCERNING THE AOOPI'ION OF A FEE SCHEDULE FOR THE POCCESSING
OF LAND USE APPLICATIOt'lS (Adopted at a Special Town Meeting January 25, 1990)
BE IT ENACT80: REVISED
1. Pursuant to the prov1s1ons of S8-1c of the Connecticut General
Statutes, there is hereby established the following schedule of fees for
processing various land use·applications:
a. For an application to the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission,
$100. for an application requiring a Public Hearing; $25. for all - -··"·~
other applications.
b. For an application to the Zoning Board of Appeals, $50.
c. For an application seeking site plan approval or the granting .of a
Special Exception, $50. 1 plus a sum, to· be computed by a retained Town
Engineer, equal to three percent (3\l of the estimated cost of the
public improvements required by the approving Commission or Board to
be paid prior to the endorsement of the record ~tap.
d. For an application seeki!lg. <i special permit for amulti-family ~···
complex, the minimum fee shall be $100. for each application and the
maximum fee shall be $"35. per dwelling unit, plus a sum, to be
computed by a retained Town Engineer, equal to three percent (3\) ot,·
the estimated cost of the public improvements and public safety .. ~·
related community inprovements required by the approving Commission or
Bo.a rd to be paid prior to the endorse.m ent of the record map.
e. For an application seeking approval of a subdivision or resubdivision
plan, the minimum fee shall be $50. for each application and the
maximum fee shall be $25. for each lot within the proposed
subdivision/resubdivlsion, plus a sum, to be computed by a retained
Town Engineer, equal. to three percent (3\) of the es'timated cost of
the public improvements required by the approving Commission or Board
to be paid prior to the endor.sement of the record nap.
f. For any other application to the Planning and Zoning Commission, $50.
2. "Public Improvements" 1 ·for ·the· purposes of this ordi:nance, includes but
is not limited to the construction of nev roads, imprevements to existing
roads, storm drainage, water, sever and other utility lines, the setting
aside of open space and recreation areas, planting of trees or other
landscaping, the installation of retaining valls or· other structures and
erosion and sediment controls. ·
3. This ordinance shall take effect upon passage and publication according
to lav.
B. 1. No building permit fees are required for any Town of Preston
owned building or trade permits for repairs or renovations on
any mmed buildings.
c. l. On all building penn its issued by the Town of Preston on or after
February 1, 1990 for all buildings, structures, or other projects of such a
nature that the local building official is unable to perform a satisfactory
"BOCA" review and inspection of plans, specifications, and construction
without expert assistance and the building official deems it necessary
to hire an expert consultant, consultants in order to perform such a
review, there will be charged, in addition to the regular building permit
fee, a surcharge to cover such consultant's fees. The surcharge fees
will be equal to the fees charged by any expert consultants retained by
the Town to assist in the review and inspections for "BOCA" compliimce
and shall be due and payable at the time such charges are made
to the Town. The surcharge may be in addition to any surcharge for
"threshold" builditig reviews and inspections.
Adopted at a Special Town Meeting- January 25, 1990
At'l ORDINANCE ADOPTING THE STATE BUILDING CODE
AS THE BUILDING CODE OF THE TOWN OF PRESTON
BE IT ORDAINED by the electors of the Town of Preston at a duly warned Town
Meeting:
SECTION 1. The State Building Code is adopted as the Building Code of the Town
of Preston as provided by Sec. 19-395 of the General Statutes.·
-44-
)
J
()
APPOINTMENT OF THE ASSESSOR
A resolution \Vas made on June 22, 1981, that the Assessor of the
Town of Preston shall be appointed by the Board of Selectmen to
serve at the pleasure of said Board, and that the person holding such
position shall become qualified at the Town's expense, and that the
salary shall be detennined by the Annual Budget, effective at the
expiration of the present Assessor's term or when a vacancy occurs in
said office.
Reference: Town Meeting Book-Pages 315-316
AN ORDINANCE APPLYING FOR ADMISSION TO
THE SOUTHEASTERN CONN. TOURISM DISTRICT
BE IT ORDAINED by the electors of the Town of Preston at a duly
warned Town Meeting:
Section one- The town of Preston hereby applies for admission to the
Southeastern Conn. Tourism District for membership under provisions
of Sec. 7-330 & 7-332 of the General Statutes to implement Public
Act 81-417 for tourism development.
Section Two-The Town of Preston having a population of 4,644
according to the federal census of 1980 shall have two (2)
representatives on the district, who shall be appointed by the Board of
Selectmen. Initial terms shall be determined by lot by the Board of
Municipal District and shall thereafter be for a period of three years.
· Section Three-This Ordinance shall become etiective fitteen (15) days
after its publication.
Reference: Town Meeting Book 11-Page 68.
-45-
AN ORDINANCE ESTABLISHING A
CONSERVATION COMMISSION FOR THE TOWN
OF PRESTON r)
BE IT RESOLVED: That the following Ordinance was adopted:
An ordinance establishing a Conservation Commission for the Town of
PrestOn.
Be it Ordained by the electors of the Town of Preston at a duly warned
meeting
Section · 1. There is a Conservation Commission for the Town of
Preston under the provisions of Section 7-181a of the Connecticut
General Statutes 1958 Revision as amended.
Section 2. Said Commission shall consist of seven members:
One to serve until January 1, 1972
One to serve until January 1, 1978
One to serve until January 1, 1974
One to serve until January 1, 1975
One to serve until January 1, 1976 ~\.
One to serve until January 1, 1977 and until their successors are )
appointed and qualified.
Said members shall be appointed as provided by said Statutes.
February 1971
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING AN ORDINANCE
CONCERNING THE ADOPTION OF A
CONSERVATION COIVIlVIISSION ADOPTED
FEBRUARY 25, 1971.AS AlVIENDED
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE TOWN OF PRESTON:
Section 1. The ordinance establishing a Conservation Commission for
the Town of Preston is hereby amended by adding the following section:
The term of each member of the Conservation Commission shall be for
six years beginning on January lat. Each member shall serve until his
-46-
)
successor is duly appointed and qualified.
) Effective Date: February 8, 1972
Reference: Town Meeting Book 9, page 214.
J
J
-47-
AN ORDINANCE CREATING A PARKS AND
RECREATION COMMISSION FOR THE TOWN OF
PRESTON
BE IT ORDAINED by the people of the Town of Preston at a duly
warned Town Meeting:
Sec. 1, There is hereby created a Parks and Recreation Commission
for the Town of Preston, pursuant to the authority contained in Section
7-148, General Statutes of Connecticut, Revision of 1958 as amended.
Sec.2; The Commission shall have under its jurisdiction all
properties of the Town of Preston reserved for parks, playgrounds and
recreation facilities as shall be designated by resolution of the
legislative body of the town.
Sec. 3. Said Commission shall have the following powers and
purposes:
(a) To plan, establish, maintain and conduct parks, playgrounds,
swimming pools, gymnasiums,. recreation places and public gardens in
the Town of Preston on property of the Town under its jurisdiction ..
(b) To develop,. improve, maintain and expand parks and
recreation lands of the Town. . ~
(c) To acquire, erect, install maintain, improve, repair and
replace, park or recreation facilities and equipment.
(d) To develop, establish, improve and coordinate park and
recreation programs.
(e) To engage such employees as shall be necessary to carry out
said purposes within the budgetary limits of said Commission.
Sec.4. The Parks and Recreation Commission shall consist of nine
(9) members who shall be electors o the Town of Preston and who shall
'hold no salaried municipal office. Membership on any other Board,
Commission of Committee of the Town of Preston shall not preclude
membership on the Parks and Recreation Commission.·
Sec.5. (a) The members of the Parks and Recreation Commission
-48-
.)
shall be· appointed by the Board of Selectman within thirty (80) days
after the adoption of this ordinance, as follows: Three (3) members
) shall be appointed for for a term of five (5) years; three (8) members for
a term of four (4) years; one (1) member for a term of three (8) years;
one (1) member for a term of two (2) years; and one (1) member for a
term of one (1) year. .
(b) As each of the terms of the members shall expire the Board of
Selectmen shall appoint a successor for a term of five (5) years to fill
each vacant position.
(c) The members shall commence to serve their respective terms
immediatelyp)\lpon appointment and shall serve until their successors
have qualified.
(d) Any vacancy in the Commission other than by expiration of term
may be filled ·for the unexpired portion of the term by the Board of
Selectmen.
(c) The Commission shall armually elect a chairman and secretary
from its number. Regular meetings shall be held monthly. Special
meetings may be called by the Chairman or upon the written request to
the chairman by a majority of the members of said Commission. ·
/ -) Sec. 6. Any member of the Commission who is absent from three
(3) consecutive regular meetings and any ~tervening du1y called special
meetings shall be considered to have resigned from the Conimission and
the vacancy shall be filled as hereinbefore provided, except that the
Commission may vote to waive the requirements of this section in each
case where illness or other extenuating circumstances make it
impossible for a member to meet the attendance requirements of this
action.
Sec. 7 The Commission shall armually prepare a budget containing
its estimates of expenses to carry out its program and the purpose of
this Ordinance, and submit the same to the Board of Selectman for
inclusion in tlhe armual budget of the Town of Preston.
Sec. 8. This ordinance shall be come effective fifteen (15) days
after publication in accordance with the General Statutes. ·
Reference: Town Meeting Book 9, Pages 77 and 78.
-49-
AN ORDINANCE CREATING A MUNICIPAL PARK
AND RECREATION CAPITAL AND
NONRECURRING EXPENSE FUND FOR THE TOWN
OF PRESTON
BE IT ORDAINED by the people of the Town of Preston at a duly
warned Town Meeting:
Sec. 1. Pursuant to the Provisions of Public Act No 488 of the
General Assembly of the State of Connecticut, January session, 1967,
there is hereby established a special fund which shall be known as the
Park and Recreation Capital and Nonrecurring Expense Fund.
Sec. 2. There shall be deposited in said fund (1) all moneys
received by the Town of Preston, from whatever source and by whatever
means, as gifts for park or recreation purposes; (2) all moneys received
by the Town of Preston, from whatever source and by whatever means,
as governmental grants or loans for park or recreational purposes, and
( 4) all moneys appropriated to said fund by the Town of Preston.
Sec. 3~ Said fund shall be in the custody of the Treasurer of the
Town of Preston. All or any part of the moneys in said fund may, from \
time to time, be invested in any securities in which public funds may )
lawfully be invested. All income derived from such investments shall be
paid into the fund and become a part thereof. The moneys so invested
shall at all times be subject to withdrawal from such investment for use
as provided in Section 5 of this Ordinance.
Sec. 4. Annually, the Town Treasurer shall submit to the
recreation authority and the legislative body of the Town a complete
and detailed report of the condition of said fund, which report shall be
made a part of the annual Town Report.
Sec. 5. Upon authorization by the annual budget meeting of the
Town or upon authorization by a special' Tciwn .Meeting ,of the Town, the
moneys in said fund may be used for capital arid nonrecurring
expenditures incurred in any of the following: (10 Acquisition,
development, improvement, maintenance and expansion of park and
recreation lands; (2) acquisition, erection, installation, maintenance,
improvement, repair and replacement of park or recreation· facilities
and equipment; (8) Development, establishment and improvement of
park or recreation programs; ( 4) Any other capital or nonrecurring
expenditure incurred for park or recreational purposes.
-50-
' Sec. 6. No budget proposed or approved or appropriation made
for park or recreational purposes in the Town shall be reduced, ratably
) or otherwise, in consideration of any moneys in said fund.
Sec, 7. This Ordinance shall become effective fifteen (15) days
after publication in accordance with the General Statutes.
Reference: Town Meeting Book 9, page 79.
PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION ·
AMENDMENT
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING AN ORDINANCE
CREATING A PARKS AND RECREATION
COl\1MISSION FOR THE TOWN OF PRESTON
BE IT ORDAINED by the Voters of the Town of Preston at a duly
warned meeting:
) Sec. 1. An ordinance creating a Parks and Recreation
Commission for the Town or Preston is amended.
\)
(1) by adding at the end of Sec. 3 (a) the words 11including
the power to make and amend regulations, adopted after 15 days public
notice, to carry out said purposes11
, and
(2) by adding Section 3-A -Anyone who violates any
regulation adopted pursuant to this ordinance shall be fined not to
exceed One Hundred Dollars ($100.00). .
Effective date: May 15, 1977.
-51-
ORDINANCE CONCERNING THE ADOPriON OF
ZONING AND PLANNING IN THE TOWN OF ·~)
PRESTON, CREATING A PLANNING AND ZONING '·. __
COMMISSION AND PROVIDING FOR ITS
APPOINT:MENT AND ELECTION.
Sec J .. The Provisions of Chapter 124 (Zoning) of the General
Statutes of the State of Connecticut, Revision of 1958, as amended, are
hereby adopted.
Sec 2. A- There shall be a Zoning Commission of the Town of
Preston to consist of (5) members who shall be electors of the Town of
Preston and shall hold no salaried municipal office.
B. The Following are hereby appointed as the original members of
the Zoning Commission of the Town of Preston for the following terms ..
Valentine Sebastian and Henry J. Jesmouth until the biennial election
to be held on the 1st Monday of October, 1966; William Williams Jr., and
Clifford E. Allyn until the biennial election to be held on the 1st Monday
of October, 1964; and Philetus Watson until the biennial election to be
held on the 1st Monday of October, 1962.
Thereafter as the term of each member of the Zoning Commission
expires, the successor or successors shall be elected at the biennial
election of the Town of Preston to serve for a term of six (6) years.
C. In the even any member of the Zoning Commission shall cease
to be a resident of the Town of Preston, his office shall be deemed
vacant.
A vacancy from whatever cause arising shall be filled by the Zoning
Commission for the unexpired portion of the term by the appointment of
an elector of the Town of Preston of the same political party as his
predecessor.
Sec. 3 A.· There is hereby created a Zoning Board of Appeals
consisting of five (5) regular members and three (3) alternate members
who shall be electors of the Town of Preston.
B. Ernest A. Abrahamson and James E. Flood are hereby
appointed as regular members and Joseph M. Perrone is hereby
appointed as an alternate member of the Zoning Bo~ of Appeals until
1
)
-52-
the biennial election to be held on the first Monday of October 1966.
James A. Piela and Robert W. Moran are hereby appointed as regular
members and Clifford Oat Jr. is hereby appointed as an alternate
member of the Zoning Board of Appeals until the biennial election to be
held on the f1rst MonClay of October 1964; and Aldo Gasparino is hereby
appointed as a regular member and J. Gordon Smiley, Sr., is hereby
appointed as a regular member of the Zoning Board of Appeals until the
biennial election to beheld on the let Monday of October 1962; and
thereafter as the term of each regular or alternate member of the
Zoning Board of Appeals expires, the successor or successors shall be
elected at the biennial election of the Town of Preston to serve for a
term of six (6) years. · ··
Se¢.4- The Provisions of Chapter 126 (Municipal Planning
Commission) of the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut,
Revision of 1958 as amended, are hereby adopted.
The Zoning Commission of the Town of Preston is hereby
designated as the Planning and Zoning Commission of the Town of
Preston, and shall have all the powers and duties of both a Planning
Commission and a Zoning Commission as provided by the ·General
Statutes of the State of Connecticut, as amended. · ·
The Planning and Zoning Commission of the Town of Preston ·
shall col?-sist of sev.en. (7) me~bers who s~all be the .f'nle (5). !?-embers of
the Zonmg CommiSSioupreviOusly appomted and m additiOn thereto
Herbert J. Hamill and Charles K. Crary who shall serve for the term
until the biennial election to be held on the let Monday of October 1962
and thel'eafter, their successors shall be elected at the biennial election
of the Town of Preston to serve for a term of six (6) years.
Sec. 5- This ordinance shall take effect fifteen days after
publication in accordance with the General Statutes.
Reference: Town Meeting Book, Volume 8, Page 108.
-53-
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE ZONING AND
PLANNING ORDINANCE AS TO ABSENCES FROM
MEETINGS AS CAUSE FOR REMOVAL I )
BE IT ORDAINED by the voters of the Town of Preston as a duly
warned town meeting:
"Paragraph C of Section 2 of the Ordinance concerning the adoption of
Zoning and Planning is amended by adding the following paragraphs at
the end of the first paragraph of the present Paragraph C.
Absence of a member from three ,consecutive meetings of the
Commission shall be considered cause for the removal of said member
from the Commission.
The member who has been so absent shall be given notice that he may
appear before the Commission at a hearing to be held on the matter of
his removal from office for said caus.e. After said hearing said .
Commission shall take action on said removal."
This amendment shall take effect fifteen (15) days after publication in
accordance with the General Statutes.
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING AN ORDINANCE
CONCERNING THE ADOPriON OF PLANNlNG AND
ZONING IN THE TOWN OF PRESTON, ADOPrED
DECEMBER 19, 1961 AS AMENDED.
BE IT ORDAINED by the Town of Preston:
SECTION 1. Pursuant to Sec. 8-1b of the General Statutes of 1958 as
amended there shall be three alternate members of the Planning and
Zoning Commission to be elected for six year terms.
SECTION 2. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall appoint as
such alternates one elector of the Town of Preston to serve until the
1978 biennial election, one elector to serve until the 1975 biennial
election, and one elector to serve until the 1977 biennial election.
SECTION 8. At the biennial election to be held in 1978 one alternate
shall be elected for a six year term. Thereafter, one elector shall be
elected to serve for a term of six years.
-54-
)
·''
SECTION 4. A vacancy from whatever cause arising shalf be filled by
the Planning and Zoning Commission for the remainder of the terril by
) the appointment of an elector of the Town of Preston.
This Ordinance shall take effect fifteen (15) days after publication in
accordance with the General Statutes. .
Reference: Town Meeting Book 9, Page 229
)
)
-55-
ORDINANCE Alv.IENDING "AN ORDINANCE
CONCERNING THE ADOPTION OF ZONING AND
PLANNING IN THE TOWN OF PRESTON.
CREATING A PLANNING AND ZONING
COMMISSION FOR ITS APPOINTMENT AND
ELECTION" ADOPTED DECEMBER 20, 1961 as
AMENDED JUNE 1, 1972.
Sec. 1- The last clause of the third paragraph of Section 4 of 11 An
ordinance Concerning the Adoption of Zoning & Planning in the Town
of Preston, creating a Planning and Zoning Commission and Providing
for its. appointment and Election11 adopted December 20, 1961 is
amended by repealing the words 11 and thereafter their successors shall
be elected at the biennial election of the Town of Preston to serve for a
term of six (6) years.11
Sec.2- The successors to the members of the Planning and Zoning
Commission whose terms expire in November 1977, shall be elected for
a term of two (2) years.
Thereafter as the terms of the members expire, their successors shall be
elected for a term of four ( 4) years.
Sec.3.- Section 8 of the ordinance adopted June 1, 1972 amending
the ordinance concerning the adoption of Planning and Zoning adopted
December 20, 1961 is amended by repealing the last sentence of said
Section 3.
Sec. 4- The s~ccessor of the alternate of the Planning and Zoning
Commission whose term expires in 1977 shall be elected for four ( 4) .
years.
There after as the terms of alternates of the Planning and Zonin&"
Commission expire their successors shall be elected to serve for four ( 4)
years.
Sec. 5- The Last clause of Subdivision B of Section 3 of said 1961
ordinance is amended by repealing the words 11 and thereafter as the
term of each regular or alternate member of the Zoning Board of
Appeals expire, the successor or successors shall be elected at. the
biennial election of the Town of Preston to serve for a term of six (6)
years."
-56-
'J
. '
)
)
Sec.6. One suecessor of the regular members of the Zoning
-_--) Board of Appeals whose terms expire in 1977 shall be elected for a term
of four (4) years. The successor of the alternate member whose term
expires in 1977 shall be elected for four ( 4) years.
)
,)
Thereafter on the expiration of the term of each regular member
and alternate member of the Zoning Board of Appeals, the successor or
successors shall be elected at the biennial election of the Town of
Preston to serve for a term of four (4) years.
Effective -July 28, 1977
-57-
AN ORDINANCE CONCERNING REGIONAL ' -)
PLANNING AGENCIES
BE IT ORDAINED by the electors of the Town of Preston at a duly
warned meeting:
To adopt Sections 8-81a to 8-87a, inclusive, of the General Statutes
concerning Regional Planning Agencies and to provide representatives
to the Southeastern Connecticut Regional Planning Agency; one
representative to be appointed by the Preston Planning and Zoning
Commission one to be appointed by the Board of Selectmen.
Reference Town Meeting Book 9, Page 11
-58-
)
I)
'
)
)
AN ORDINANCE CONCERNING THE
ESTABLISHM:ENT OF A MUNICIPAL
DEVELOPMENT AND INDUSTRIAL COlY.Il\.1ISSION
AND PROVIDING FOR ITS APPOINTMENT AND
ELECTION
BE IT ORDAINED by the voters of the Town of Preston at a duly
warned Town Meeting:
Section 1 . The Town of Preston hereby established a Development
and Industilial Commission in accordance with Sections 7-186 of the
General Statutes (1958 Revision).
Section 2. The Commission shall conduct researches into business
and industrial conditions in the Town, shall seek to coordinate the
activities of unofficial bodies organized for such purposes, may
advertise, may prepare, print, and distribute books, maps, charts and
pamphlets which, in its judgment, will further its official purpose, and
generally may take such other action as it deems advisable to carry out
the general purposes of such Commission.
Section 3 (a) The Commission shall consist of five (5) members who
are electors of the Town of Preston.
(b) The five (5) members of the Commission shall be appointed by the
Board of Selectmen to serve until1 January 1969. On a January 1969,
the Board of Selectmen shall appoint one (I) member for a term of one
(1) year; one (1) member for a term of two (2) years; one (1) member for
a term of three (8) years; one (1) member for a term of four ( 4) years;
and one (1) member for a term of five (5) years.
Thereafter as the term of office of any member shall expire, his
successor shall be appointed for a term of five (5) years. All vacancies
shall be filled by the Board of Selectmen for the unexpired term.
Thereafter as the term of office of any member shall expire, his
successor shall be appointed for a term of five (5) years. All vacancies
shall be filled by the Board of Selectmen for the unexpired term.
(c) In the event any member shall cease to be a resident of the Town of
Preston, his office shall be deemed vacant.
-59-
Section 4. This ordinance shall become effective fifteen (15) days
after publication in accordance with law.
Reference: Town Meeting Book 9, Pages 98 and 99.
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING AN ORDINANCE
CONCERNING THE ESTABLISHlVIENT OF A
MUNICIPAL DEVELOPMENT AND INDUSTRIAL
COMMISSION AND PROVIDING FOR ITS
APPOINTMENT AND ELECTION
Section 1. Section 1 of said Ordinance is amended to read as follows:
"SECTION 1. The Town of Preston hereby establishes an Economic
Development Commission in accordance with Section 7-186 of the
General Statutes as amended." ·
Section 2. Section 2 of said ordmance is amended to read as follows: ·
"SECTION 2. The Commission shall have the powers and duties as
stated in said Section 7-186 ofthe General Statutes as amen.ded."
This Ordinance become ·effective fifteen (15) days after publication in
accordance with law. Effective date: June 14, 1979
Reference: Town Meeting Book 10, Pg. 287-238
-60-
'J
)
)
)
)
AN ORDINANCE CONCERNING THE
ESTABLISHMENT OF A MUNICIPAL
DEVELOPlVIENT AND INDUSTRIAL C01.\11v.IISSION
AND PROVIDING FOR ITS APPOINT:M:ENT AND
ELECTION
AN ORDINANCE TO AMEND AN ORDINANCE CONCERNING THE
ESTABLISHMENT OF A MUNICIPAL DEVELOPMENT AND
INDUSTRIAL COMMISSION AND PROVIDING FOR ITS
APPOINTMENT AND ELECTION AS ADOPI'ED AT A SPECIAL
TOWN MEETING ON JUNE 6, 1968 AND AS PREVIOUSLY
AMENDEDAT A SPECIAL TO'WN MEETING ON MAY 24, 1979.
~- .
The Proposed amendment to Section 3 of the ordinance to read as
follows:
SECTION 3. (a) The Commission shall consist of fifteen (15) members
who are electors of the Town of Preston.
(b) The fifteen (15) members of the Commission shall be appointed by
the Board of Selectmen to serve until January 1, 1993. On January 1,
1993, the Board of Selectmen shall appoint three (3) members for a
term of one (1) year; three (3) members for a term of two (2) years; three
(3) members for a term of three (3) years; three (3) members for a term
of four ( 4) years; and three (8) members for a term of five (5) years.
Thereafter, as the terms of office of any members shall expire, their
successors shall be appointed for a term of five (5) years. All vacancies
shall be filled by the Board of Selectmen for the unexpired term.
(c) In the event any member shall cease to be a resident of the Town of
Preston, his office shall be deemed vacant.
(d) In the event that fifteen electors who are willing and available to
serve as members cannot be located by the Board of Selectmen, then the
Board of Selectmen shall appoint as many members as electors who are
willing andcavailable to serve, except that the number appointed shall
always be an odd number. At any meeting of the Commission, a
quorum of at least five (5) members shall be necessary to transact any
business.
-61-
AN AMENDMENT . TO THE ORDINANCE
CONCERNING THE ESTABLISHMENT OF .A
MUNICIPAL DEVELOPMENT AND INDUSTRIAL ' )
COMMISSION AND PROVIDING FOR ITS
APPOINTMENT AND ELECTION
An amendment to the Ordinance concerning the Establishment of a
Municipal Development and Industrial Commission and Providing for
its appointment and Election as adopted at a Special Town Meeting on
June 6, 1968, and as previously amended at a Special Town Meeting on
May 24, 1979, the proposed amendment to Section 8 ofthe ordinance to
>'ARrl R Q j'r, J1r>'XTQ 0
..&. ._.L4U Lolo.'-' -I.V.L.1.V t f "-11
SECTION 8. The Commission shall consist of fifteen (15) members
who are electors of the Town of Preston.
(b) The fifteen (15) members of the Commission shall be appointed
by the Board of Selectmen to serve unti11 January 1998. On 1 January
1998, the Board of Selectmen shall appoint three (8) members for a
term of one (1) year; three (8) members for a term of two (2) years;
three (3) members for a term of three (8) years; three (8) members for a
term of four ( 4) years; and three (8) members for a term of five (5) years.
Thereafter as the terms of office of any members shall expire, their
successors shall be appointed for a term of five (5) years. All vacancies.
shall be filled by the Board of Selectmen for the unexpired term.
(c) In the event any member shall cease to be a resident of the Town
of Preston, his office shall be deemed vacant.
(d) In the event that fifteen electors who are willing and available to
serve as members cannot be located by the Board of Selectmen, then
the Board of Selectmen shall appoint as many members as electors who
are willing and available to serve, except that the number appointed
shall always be an odd number. ,At any meeting of.the Commission, a
quorum of at least five (5) members shall be necessary to transact any
business.
Adopted at a Town Meeting January 9, 1992.
-62-
)
)
)
AN AMENDMENr TO AN ORDINANCE CONCERNING THE ESTABLISHMENT OF A
MUNICIPAL DEVELOPMENT AND INDUSTRIAL COMMISSION
An Ordinance to amend an Ordinance Adopted June 6, 1968 and as previously
amended May 24, 1979, amends Section 3 to read as follows:
SECDON 3: · (a) The Commission shall consist of fifteen (15) members who are
electors of the Town of Preston.
(b) The fifteen (15) members of the Commission shall be appointed by the Board
of Selectmen to serve until 1 January 1993. On 1 January 1993, the Board of
Selectmen shall appoint three (3) members for a term of one ( 1) year: three (3)
members for a term of two (Z) years; three (3) members for a term of three (3)
years: three (3) members for a term of four (4) years: and three (3) members for a
term of five (5) years.
Thereafter as the terms of office of any members shall expire, their successors
shall be appointed for a term of five (5) years. All vacancies shall be filled by the
Board of Selectmen for the unexpired term.
(c) hi. the event any member shall cease to be a resident of the Town of Preston,
his office shall be deemed vacant.
(d) In the event that fifteen electors who are willing and available to serve as
members cannot be located by the Board of Selectmen, then the Board of
Selectmen shall appoint as many members as electors who are willing alid
available to serve, except that the number appointed shall always be an odd
number. At any meeting of the Commission, a quorum of at least five (5) members
shall be necessary to transact any business.
Adopted at a Town Meeting 1/9/93 -Town MeetlngBook 1Z
-6ZAAN
ORDINANCE AUTHORIZING PROPERTY TAX
EXEMPTION FOR SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS
I) Pursuant to Section 12-81 (56) of the General Statutes, as
amended, an exemption from property tax is authorized for a building
or addition to a building, the construction of which is corru:p.enced on or
after October 1, 1976 and before October 1, 1991, which is equipped
with a solar energy heating or cooling system as defined in Section 12-
81 (56).
2) The extent of the exemption is the amount by which the assessed
valuation of such real property equipped with such a-system exceeds the
assessed valuation of such real property equipped with the conventional
portion of the heating or cooling system, exclusive of any portion of such
system related to solar energy.
3) This exemption shall only apply to the first fifteen assessment
years following construction or such building or addition.
4) Application for such exemption must be filled in accordance with
Section 12-81 (56) within thirty days following the annual assessment
date.
Effective Date: June 23, 1977.
AN ORDINANCE ESTABLISHING A CO:MMITIEE
TO STUDY THE NEEDS OF, AND COORDINATE
THE PROGRAMS F.OR, THE AGING.
BE IT ORDAINED by the electors of the Town of Preston at a duly
warned Town Meeting: ·
I. There is hereby established a committee to study the needs of, and
coordinate the programs for, the aging under Section 7-127a of the
General Statutes of Connecticut.
2. Said Committee shall consist of five electors of the Town, to be
appointed by the Board of Selectmen:
(a) One member of the Clergy
(b) Two members of the Senior Citizens
(c) One member of the Parks and Recreation Commission \
(d) one elector j
-63-
)
3. Said member shall serve for one year terms from November 15th
in each year and until their successors are appointed and qualified.
Reference: Town Meeting
Book 10, Pages 128-131
Effective Date: October 15, 1976
-64-
AN ORDINANCE ESTABLISHING THE EFFECTIVE
DATE FOR EXElVIPTION OF PROPERTY ACQUIRED
BY CERTAIN INSTITUTIONS )
BE IT ORDAINED by the electors of the Town of Preston at a duly
warned town meeting:
Section 1. The property tax exemption authorized by Subsections (13),
(14), and (15) of Sec. 12-81 shall be effective as of the date of acquisition
of the property to which the exemption applies.
Section 2. Upon proof of the facts involved the Selectmen are
authorized to pay from their budget the amount of any tax paid by such
tax exemption for a period subsequent to said date and the amount paid
by the prior owner for a period subsequent to said date which such tax
exempt organization reimbursed such owner on the transfer of title, to
such tax exempt organization.
Section 3. This ordinance shall apply to any tax now a lien against
any property of such tax exemption organization formerly owned by a
prior owner hot eligible for tax exemption.
This ordinance shall take effect fifteen (15) days after publication in)
accordance with the General Statutes. _
Reference: Town Meeting Book 9, Page 164
~-)
-65-
". AN ORDINANCE TO ESTABLISH A COMMITTEE TO
1 CARRY OUT THE TOWN1S CELEBRATION OF THE
SOOth ANNIVERSARY OF ITS FOUNDING.
)
Be it Ordained by the electors of the Town of Preston at a du1y
warned Town Meeting.
Sec. 1-The Board of Selectmen are hereby authorized to appoint a
committee to carry out the Town's celebration of the 300th Anniversary
of its founding.
Said Committee shall elect a Chairperson, a Secretary and a Treasurer.
The Committee shall receive amounts requested by it from the Town
Treasurer from the appropriation made by the Town for said
celebration. '
The treasurer shall receive said sums and pay such flinds out on vote of
the committee for expenses incurred by the committee in carrying out
said celebration.
(In the last paragraph the word treasurer refers to the Committee
treasurer) ·
Reference: Town Meeting Book 11, Pg. 94
-66-
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE TOWN OF PRESTON:
SECTION 1. The regulation of Special Events and the supervision of
such events are hereby declared necessary for the protection of the
health, property, safety and welfare of the residents of the Town of
Preston.
SECTION 2. Definition of Terms: AB used in this ordinance unless
the context otherwise indicates;
(a) The term "Special Events" shall mean any public gathering of
more than five hundred (500) persons assembled at one time for one (1)
particular event. The term "Special Event" shall not be interpreted to
include the normal day-to-day operation of existing commercial
enterprises. This ordinance shall not apply to events of civic or social
organizations located in the Town of Preston existing on the date of
adoption of this ordinance. '
SECTION 8. License Required:
(a) No special event shall be held without a valid license.
(b) Application for such license shall be made to the First
Selectmen not later than thirty (80) days before the starting date of the
special event upon forms to be supplied by him for that purpose.
(c) Public notice of each application disclosing pertinent facts
concerning the event shall be made by the First Selectmen within seven
(7) days after application is received (cost of this notice shall be borne
by the applicant.)
(d) The Selectmen shall not grant or deny the license until at
least ten (10) days aftersuch public notice but not more than fourteen
(14) days after public notice.
SECTION 4. Application. The application for such a license shall
obtain the following information under oath:
(a) Name of applicants; if a partnership, names of all partners; if a
corporation, club or association, names of officers; .
(b) Residents of Applicants.
-67-
)
(c) Age of applicants?· if a corporation, club or association, date
') organized and under laws o what State. ·
(d) Type of business or activity.
)
)
(e) Whether applicants, or if a corporation, club or association,
officers have ever been convicted of a crime. ·
(f) Description of the type of event to be held.
(g) Location where event will be held.
(h) Anticipated maximum number of persons who will be
assembled at one time for the event. No persons in excess of this
number shall be permitted within the confines of the location of the
event.
(i) Plot plan or sketch of facilities and write-up demonstrating
adequate plans to meet local, state and other applicable standards for:
1. Parking 6. Fire Prevention
2. Food Service 7. Fire Protection
3. Drinking Water
4. Toilets
8. Refuse Disposal
9. Law Enforcement
5. Lodging 10. Medical Care
A£ may be required by the event must be submitted:
(j) The facilities for the event shall be subject to review by:
First Selectmen, Building Inspector, Fire Marshal, Director of
Health, and the Zoning Enforcement Officer, of the Town of Preston
within forty-eight ( 48) hours of the time the the licensed event will
begin.
(k) Dates and hours of said special events must be specified and no
licenses shalhbe valid for more than three 3) consecut~ye calendar days.
SECTION 5. Investigation of Applicants. The First Selectmen shall
investigate the character and record of the applicants and the location
wherein it is proposed to hold a Special Event described in the
·application and shall not approve said application or issue a license
unless he finds that the applicants are over twenty-one (21) years of age
and are persons of good moral character, and that the business or
activity in such location is a bona fide and lawful one. The Selectmen in
-68-
granting or refusing the license shall consider each of the sections of
this ordinance as well as all other valid concerns of the resident of the
Town of Preston brought before them during the ten (10) to fourteen \
(14) days following the public notice concerning the application. In any J
case of the denial or refusal to grant or renew a license, the Selectmen
shall notify the applicant in writing by Certified Mail, of their proposed
action and set a day and place for a hearing thereon, giving the
applicant reasonable notice in advance thereof and an opportunity to be
represented by counsel at such hearing, after which hearing the
Selectmen may reconsider their previous action.
SECTION 6. Prohibitions and Restrictions.
a) A license may not be transferred by the licensee to any other
person, corporation, partnership, club or association.
b) Each licensee shall pay for police officers as shall be deemed
required by the Selectman.
c) All state health regulations under State Health Code must be
met and documented under regulations of the State Board of Health.
d) All refuse must be cleaned up and disposed of at the expense
of the applicant.
e) Entrance and exit through property must be suitable to allow
passage of emergency vehicles. ·
f) No person shall camp on the premises.
g) The Selectmen may require a bond to be posted. The rate of
bond to be $15,000 per 1,000 people in attendance.
SECTION 7. Revocation of License. The Selectmen shall have the
power to revoke any license issued hereunder for cause, after due
notice. Cause shall be deemed to include, but shall not be limited to
false information in the application fort · a license ·knowingly given,
failure to show good intent to comply with the conditions under which
the license has been granted, any violation of this ordinance or
conviction of a crime involving moral turpitude subsequent to the
issuance of the license.
SECTION 8. Penalty. Any person, corporation, partnership, club or.
association violating any of the provisions of the ordinance shall be
fined not more than twenty-five (25) dollars for each offense.
-69-
)
\)
SECTION 9. Separability of Provision. Each separate provision of this
ordinance shall be deemed independent of all other provisions herein,
and if any provisions thereof shall remain valid and enforceable.
Effective date of this Ordinance ·July 25, 1971
-70-
AN ORDINANCE REGULATING PRIVATE SEWAGE
DISPOSAL FACILITIES
PRESTON, CONNECTICUT -)
SECTION 1: PURPOSE AND AU'IHORITY
1.1 Purpose. The Town of Preston is dependent upon private sewage
disposaf facilities, most commonly septic tank-leaching field systems,
for sewage treatment. The soils and topographic features of Preston are
complex. There are areas of the Town that are not suitable for a
concentration of sewage disposal facilities and areas where the sewage
disposal facilities, to operate properly, must meet high standards for
both installation and maintenance.
The State Health Code requirements for the installation of private
sewage disposal facilities is a minimum health requirement. This
ordinance supplements the State Health Code and its purpose is to
ensure that a general health problem does not develop as a result of the
failure of private sewage disposal facilities. Another major purpose of
this ordinance ·is to protect the Town's water bodies from sewage
pollution.
1.2 Authority. This ordinance is adopted under the authority of the
Public Health Code, Section 19-80 of the General Statutes of , .~).
Connecticut.
SECTION 2: DEFINITIONS
2.1 General. This section defines a number of important words and
terms used in this ordinance. Any word or term defined in the Preston
Zoning Regulations or Subdivision Regulations and used in this
ordinance, shall carry the same definition. The singular number shall
include the plural and the plural, the singular. .
2.2 Health Officer. The Health Director or the Sanitarian for the Town
of Preston.
2.3 Premises. A premise shall mean any house, building, structure,
tent, trailer, shelter, or vehicle or portion thereof which is occupied as a
home, residence, living or sleeping place for one or more human beings.
2.4 Dwelling. A dwelling shall mean. any house, building, structure,
tent, trailer, shelter, or vehicle or portion thereof which is occupied as a
home, residence, living or sleeping place for one or more human beings. ·
-71-
2.5 Person. A person shall mean a person or persons~ partnership,
firm or corporation owning or being responsible for the operation of c-) premises.
)
2.6 Sewage. Sewage shall mean any excreta, kitchen waste, laundry
waste, sink wastes, water closet or bathroom wastes, discharge . or
overflows from septic tanks, cesspools or dry wells or other offensive
related material which has not been so treated as to render it innocuous
and in no way prejudicial to health. ··
2.7 · Sewage Disposal Facilities. Sewage disposal facilities shall mean
privately owned and operated devices and structures for the collections,
treatment an~··disposal of sewage or industrial wastes.
2.8 Commission. Commission shall mean the Planning and Zoning
Commission of the Town of Preston.
SECTION 3. GENERAL PROVISIONS
8.1 Sewage Disposal Facility Required. It shall be unlawful to
maintain any premise without adequate facilities for disposal of sewage.
The construction or alteration of all sewage disposal facilities shall be in
accordance with this ordinance and the provisions of the State Public
Health Code.
8.2 Sewage Disposal Facility Permit Required. No person shall
construct a. dwelling, apartment, boarding house, hotel,· commercial
building or commercial camp and commercial camping facility unless
the sewage disposal facilities are approved by the Health Officer. No
person shall construct or alter any sewage disposal facility, unless the
Health Officer has issued a sewage disposal permit, pursuant to
Section 7-153 of the Connecticut General Statutes.
A sewage disposal facility permit shall be in effect for one year from the
date of issue. When work on the sewage disposal facility is not
completed within one year of the date of the permit issue, the permit
may be renewed, if there has been no significant change in the sewage
generating potential of the premises or a significant change in other
conditions that could effect the operation of the sewage disposal facility.
3.3 Expansion of Existing Premises or Dwelling. For any premise
which is not connected to a public sewage system no construction or
alternation of use, which will significantly increase sewage flow through
. expanded occupancy potential for a dwelling or adjusted use for nondwelling
structures, shall be permitted without the prior approval of the
Health Officer concerning the site's sewage disposal potential.
-72-
3.4 Maintenance. All plumbing fixtures and conduits intended to
receive and conduct sewage shall be maintained in good repair and
sound working condition.
3.5 Emergency Permit. The Health Officer may issue an emergency
sewage disposal facility permit which. will authorize temporary
measures to alleviate a health hazard or nuisance pending a thorough
investigation of the site and installation of an approved system as
provided for. Such emergency permit will be valid for a thirty-day
period and my be renewed at the discretion of the Health Officer for
additional thirty-day periods, as circumstances may warrant.
SECTION 4: PROCEDURE FOR EVALUATING FEASIBILITY OF
SUBSURFACE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM.
4.1 Individual Lots. In evaluating the feasibility for a subsurface
sewage disposal system on an individual lot, the Health Officer shall
take into consideration the following factors:
'J
4.1.1 Absorptive Characteristics. The soil absorptive characteristics
shall be determined by performance of one or more percolation tests in
the anticipated area of the sewage disposal facility. The percolation
tests shall be performed according to the standard practice required by
the State Public Health Code. Such tests shall be performed by the
Health Officer or by an engineer approved by the Health Officer. When .·)
the Health Officer is directed to run such tests, the owner shall dig all
test holes, if necessary supply any materials and equipment for the
administration of such tests, and shall compensate the Town in
accordance with Section 6.3 When such tests are performed by an
engineer, the Health Officer shall be notified in advance of the time the
tests are taken. At his discretion the Health Officer will be present
when the tests are taken.
4.1.2 Subterranean Characteristics. The subterranean characteristics
of the tract shall be documented by deep soil soundings, exploratory
cuts, visual observation of the terrain and appropriate reference to any
available documented data. Depending. upon the" extent of the proposed
development more detailed information may be required under this
section. For instance, a large commercial, industrial or multi-family
development would require substantial in-depth investigation that
would not be required for a single-family home. All such investigations
shall be completed at no cost to the Town and shall be performed only
as the need is indicated. At the discretion of the Health Officer, such
investigations shall be done in his presence, or the results therefrom
made available for his inspection.
-73-
)
,)
4.1.3 Decision. The health Officer shall render judgment on·applications for site
approval not later than six weeks after the submission thereof, provided that the
applicant cooperates in the digging of the percolation test holes and any other
required investigations. Except that the Health Officer may delay a decision under
the following guidelines:
(a) Minimum seepage rate should be one inch in 30 minutes or faster.
(b) Bottom of seepage trenches or leaching cesspools must be at least 18
inches above maximum groundwater level. If shallow three feet trenches are used,
maximum groundwater level must be at least 4.5 feet below surface.
4.2.1 General. An application for subdivision approval must submit a Health
Officer's Report to the Planning and Zoning Commission as part of a subdivision
application. The applicant shall cooperate with the Health Officer in the
preparation of this report. The applicant shall also submit a report from an
engineer, who is approved by the Health Officer and the Commission. This report
shall describe the plans for sewage disposal facilities in the proposed subdivision,
and be in accordance with the provisions of Section 4.2.3
4.2.2 Health Officer's Report. For a proposed subdivision the Health Officer shall
be required to submit to the Planning and Zoning Officer a report evaluating the
. feasibility for subsurface sewage disposal systems. Before the Health Officer can
undertake a report, the subdivision applicant must provide two (2) copies of the ,
proposed subdivision which shows the lots and general topography of the area. The
Health Officer's Report shall show the results of the following investigations;
4.2.2.1 Absorptive Characteristics
The Absorptive characteristics of the soil, as determined by the performance of one
percolation· test per lot or per acre in the subdivision, whichever is less. The
percolation tests shall be performed according to the standard practice required by
the State Public Health Code.
The percolation tests must be performed by the Health Officer or an engineer
approved by the Health Officer and the Commission, according to the provision of
Subsection 4.1.1
-74-
4.2.2.2 Subterranean Characteristics.
The subterranean characteristics of the soil shall be determined by the ' J
performance of deep soil pits. at the rate of one for each acre in the
proposed subdivision, except that the requirements may be reduced
where other investigation indicates well-drained soils are present.
Deep soil pits shall be dug a minimum of seven feet below the gr'ound
surface. The results shall be indicated on a test pit log as shown in
Appendix A. The applicant shall arrange for the digging of all
necessary deep soil pits and shall compensate the Town for each soil
appraisal performed by the Health Officer.
4.2.2.3 Other Considerations.
In preparing the report to the Commission, the Health Officer shall
take into consideration other factors that could effect the feasibility of a
subsurface sewage disposal system. These factors should include
topography, drainage pattern, groundwater level, ledge, rock etc.
4.2.3 Engineer's Report. The subdivision application, for a subdivision
that will be served by on-site sewage disposal system, shall include an
engineer's report on the feasibility for on-site sewage systems and the
plans for the system. The report shall discuss the following points;
4.2.3.1 Analysis of the subsurface soil conditions based upon required
subsurface investigation. Include the results of percolation tests and
deep soil pits, if performed by the applicant's engineer.
4.2.3.2 Describe the proposed sewage disposal facilities, indicating sizes
for various ground conditions, materials to be used and general layout
pattern to be used, etc.
4.2.3.3 Indicate special precautions that maybe necessary to provide
proper function of the proposed sewage disposal system.
4.2.4 Decision. The Health Officer's ,Report shall.be, submitted to the
Planning and Zoning Commission not later than six weeks from the
date of application, provided that the applicant cooperates in the
digging of percolation tests holes, deep soil pits and other required
investigations. The Health officer may delay submission of his report
under the guidelines specified under Subsection 4.1.3.
. ·.)
4.2.4.1 Disapproval of Subdivision. When a proposed subdivision is
served by neither a public sewerage system or a public water supply ,
the Health Officer may, after appropriate consultation with the J
-75-
Connecticut State Department of Health, decline to' approve the
proposed subdivision or resubdivision, if in his judgment , such a
) concentration of private on-site sewage disposal and private water
" supply facilities may result in bacteriological or chemical pollution of
said water supplies.
)
)
4.2.5 Review Final Plan. The Health Officer shall examine the final
subdivision plan to determine that the field data on which judgments
were based have not been altered in any way whicn could materially
affect the sewage disposal potential of any lot in the subdivision.
4.2.5 Subdivision Information used in Evaluating a Lot. Although a lot
is within a subdivision which has been generally approved as suitable
for development, said lot will be considered individually in light of the
specific soil conditions and proposed use, at the. time the owner seeds
permission to erect a structure or structures thereon. · However, any
available data which was developed in the process of evaluating a
proposed subdivision may be used in the evaluation of a specific lot, if
such data is, in the Health Officer's judgment, valid and applicable.
4.2.7 Exceptions for Existing Structures. In instances involving ·
premises existing on the effective date of this ordinance, where for
reasons of limitations of property, or for other valid pre-existing
circumstances, it is impossible to require compliance with the standards
of this ordinance regarding the size of the sewage disposal facility or
minimum separating distance requirements (Section 5.1), the Health
Officer may permit lesser standards thari allowed in this ordinance, but
no standard shall be less than established in the State Public Health
Code.
SECTION 5: LOCATION, INSTALLATION AND DESIGN OF
SEW AGE DISPOSAL F AGILITY
5.1 LOCATION. No part of any sewage disposal facility shall be
located within 75 feet of the high water mark of any tributary to a
drinking water supply or any other stream, pond, lake or tidal water.
5.2 INSTALLATION. All sewage disposal facilities shall be installed,
with reference to design and layout, in accordance with the terms of the
permit issued pursuant to this ordinance.
5.2.1 No Sewage disposal facility shall be installed such that the
bottom of the absorption or leaching porting of the system is less than
eighteen (18) inches above the maximum groundwater table and/or four
( 4) feet above any underlying impervious substratum.
-76-
5.2.2 Leaching systems shall not be located in fill placed over
impervious soil. When filling is allowable and necessary to render a
tract usable for on-site subsurface sewage disposal, the Health Officer
may require that any or all of the following measures be implemented:
the stripping and removal of loam, muck or other similar organic
matter from the area immediately beneath the proposed absorption ..
system area; the leveling and effective loosening of the sub-soil in the
stripped area, the filling of the requisite area to an appropriate
elevation with clean absorptive material; and the provision of suitable
perimeter embankments around the filled system area to prevent the
lateral escape of sewage through the walls of the embankment created
by the filling.
5.3 DESIGN The sewage disposal facility for dwelling shall be
designed according to the standards and specifications of the State
Public Health Code. For other types of premises sewage disposal
facilities shall be designed in accOrdance with the specifications
approved by the Health Offic·er.
SECTION 6: APPLICATION PROCEDURE, INSPECTION AND FEES
i )
/
6.1 APPLICATION PROCEDURE. The submission of applications,
issuance of permits conferring of approvals and other administrative
procedureh s shahll bealehxecuffted in accordance with the procedures '·)
establis ed by t e He t 0 icer.
6.2 Inspections. The Health Officer shall inspect the proposed site
prior to issuance of a permit. Upon completion of the sewage disposal
facility installation and the subsequent notification of the Health
Officer, the Health Officer shall inspect the facility to determine if it
has been installed in accordance with this ordinance, permit
specifications. and the pertinent State Public Health Code
Requirements. The Health Officer shall either approve or disapprove
the installation in writing and in the latter case, the reasons for
disapproval shall be recorded.
6.2.1 All portions of the completed installation are to remain exposed
for the Health Officer1s inspection and shall not be backfilled until
permission is granted by the Health Officer. No part of the sewage
disposal facility shall be used until it has been granted final approval
for backfilling by the Health Officer.
6.3 FEES The applicant for a sewage disposal facility permit shall pay
to the Town fees in accordance with the following schedule: . .
6.3.1 Percolation Test (if performed by the Health Officer)-fee included
I)
in permit fee.
6.3.2 Permit. Inspections ood Approvals- $20.00 for each installation.
6.3.2 Permit, Inspections ood Approvals - $20.00 for each installation;
6.3.3. Soil Appraisals (if performed by the Health Officer)- $10.00/pit or
boring.
6.3.4 Permit Renewal- $10.00
6.3.5 If the Health Officer is to perform the percolation test, the fee
under 6.3.2 is payable at the time of permit issuance; the fee under
6.3.3 is payable prior to the performance of the service; the fee under
6.3.4 is payable upon the renewal of any permit. .
SECTION 7: SUPPLEMENTARY LEGISLATION
7.1 All standards prescribed by the applicable section of the
Connecticut State Public Health Code not herein specifically stated
shall be applied by the Health Officer in regulating the disposal of
sewage and the construction, repair, or revised use of existing sewage
) disposal facilities, ·
.J
SECTION 8: ENFORCEMENT
8.1 It shall be the duty of the Health Officer to enforce this ordinance
and, when properly identified, he shall be granted access to all
properties and premises necessary to the discharge of this duty.
SECTION 9: SEVERABILITY
9.1 This ordinance and the various parts, sections, and clauses thereof
and hereby declared to be severable. If any part, sentence, section or .
clause is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid, it is hereby provided that
the remainderof this ordinance shall not be affected thereby.
SECTION 10: PENALTIES
10.1 Any person who violates any provision of this ordinance shall be
fined not more than on hundred dollars. Each day in which any such
violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
SECTION 11: EFFECTIVE DATE
This ordinance shall become effective on April 26, 1973.
-78-
SOIL TYPE
APPENDIX A
TYPICAL TEST PIT LOG
DEPTH SOIL TYPE DEPTH
______ -Ground Surface _______ Ground Surface
Loose, Black, Elevation 128.5 · Dense,Brown Elevation 410.2
Damp, Sandy Loam Damp, Clayey Loam
-1' 8"
Dense,Brown,Moist
Sandy Clay
------- -8' 0"
Medium Brown,
Damp
Clayey Sand
-------
~1' 4"
-4' 0"
Dense, Brown, Wet
Silt,Trace Clay -5' 9" Ground Moist
Water Table
:-=-----.-:---=--= -7' 0" Medium Brown, Wet
Sand, Trace Clay
--------8' 3"
TESTPIT#1
_______ 6' 3" Ground
Water Table
Dense, Red Sand,
Wet
-------
-Red Sandstone
TESTPIT#2
-7' 6" Refusal
NOTE: Test Pit Numbers refer to numbered locations shown on
subdivision plan.
-79-
--~-
)
)
)
)
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING AN ORDINANCE
REGULATING PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL
FACILITIES
Section 1 - Sec. 6.8.2 of said ordinance is amended to read as follows:
Permit Inspections and Approvals - $40.00 per each installation.
Section 2 - A new section is added to said ordinance as follows:
Section 6.8.6 - On site septic system inspection report, $10.00.
February 1988
-80-
AN ORDINANCE CONCERNING THE DISPOSAL OF
REFUSE )
BE IT ORDAINED by the electors of the Town of Preston and those
entitled to vote at Town Meetings, as follows:
1. The Town dump located on Ross Road in the Town of Preston shall
hereafter be the only approved dumping areain the Town. It shall be a
violation of this ordinance to dump refuse, garbage, rubbing, ashes,
building, food or industrial waste on any other Town property.
2. The Selectmen, or their agent, are hereby empowered to establish
within said dump and to provide one or more limited areas for one or
more types of refuse where dumping may be done and to designate such
areas by appropriate signs. It shall be a violation of this ordinance to
dump other than as directed by such signs.
3. The Selectmen are hereby empowered to establish hours when the
said dump shall be open for use. It shall be a violation of.this ordinance
to dump at any other time.
4. All materi~l transported to said dump shall be so loaded and )
carried that no refuse, garbage, paper or other waste is disposed on or
about the public highways in the Town of Preston.
5. No dead animals shall be disposed of in the Town dump.
6. No refuse, garbage, rubbish, ashes, building, food or industrial
waste belonging to non-residents of the Town of Preston shall be
disposed of in the Town Dump.
7. Any person, firm or corporation violating this ordinance shall be
fined not more than $25.00 for each offense.
8. This ordinance shall take effect fifteen (15) days after publication
in accordance with law ..
Reference: Town Meeting Book 9, Page 98.
-81-
)
AN ORDINANCE CONCERNING WASTE
RECYCLING AND REGULATING THE USE AND
OPERATION OF THE PRESTON REFUSE DISPOSAL
AREA
Sec. 1. DEFINITIONS:
This section indicates the meaning of the words Town, Refuse
Disposal Area, Persons, Refuse, Solid Waste Management Committee
and Solid Waste Manager used in this ordinance.
Sec. 11. DISPOSAL
Provided for decals for the vehicles used by residents and refuse
collectors and permits therefor with provision for non-residents with
refuse from operations in Preston.
Sec. 111. REFUSE PROHIBITED
Hazard wastes or material prejudicial to the operation of the
) disposal area, motor vehicles, whole or in part, and animal carcasses
are prohibited as provided.
)
Sec. 1 V. DISPOSAL AREA
Locations for disposal shall be designated by the Solid Waste
Manager.
Sec. V. HOURS OF OPERATION
Days and hours for Disposal Area to be open shall be determined
by Solid Waste Management Committee. ·
Sec. Vl. SCAVENGING PROHIBITED
Except in specially identified areas.
Sec. VII. TRESPASSING
Entrance only by permit and during open hours.
-82-
EXCEPI'IONS:
(1) Town Employees assigned to manage the area during scheduled 1 J
working hours.
(2) Persons under Ila and He with immediate disposal needs with.
the First Selectman's prior approval. .
-83-
)
)
)
AN ORDINANCE CONCERNING WASTE
RECYCLING AND REGULATING THE USE AND
OPERATION OF THE PRESTON REFUSE DISPOSAL
AREA
BE IT ORDAINED at a duly warned Town Meeting that an Ordinance
adopted on the 5th of June, 1980 entitled 11An Ordinance to Amend an
Ordinance Concerning the Disposal of Refuse11 is hereby repealed and
the following Ordinance is adopted and substituted in lieu thereof:
SECTION 1. DEFINITIONS:
For purposes· of the Ordinance, the following words and phrases shall
have the meaning ascribed to them in this Section.
(a) TOWN shall mean the Town of Preston, located in New London
County, the State of Connecticut.
(b) REFUSE DISPOSAL AREA shall mean any area of land owned
or leased by the Town or any facility owned by the Town which is
specifically set aside for the disposal of refuse.
(c) PERSON shall mean any individual, commercial waste collector,
institution, public corporation, partnership, association, or any other
entity, public or private, however organized.
(d) REFUSE shall mean solid wastes generated within the Town,
including but not limited to newspaper, books, magazines, scrap paper,
catalogs, cardboard, corrugated, bottles, cans_,.oil, ashes, tires, tin, steel,
iron, scrap metal, aluminum, building materials, waste, rubbish,
garbage, street cleansing, brush,grass clippings, and trees. Refuse shall
not include wastes that are toxic or hazardous as referenced in Section
III. .
(e) SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT COMMITTEE A committee
created by this ordinance, and appointed by the Board of Selectmen, to
oversee the solid waste management including the application of this
Ordinan.ce.
(f) SOLID WASTE MANAGER An employee of the Town under the
supervision of the First Selectman, who supervises the operation of the
Waste Disposal Area and carries out the policies of the Town.
-84-
SECTION II. DISPOSAL:
No person shall dispose of refuse in the Refuse Disposal Area, except
those persons who have obtained a permit decal and display said decal
on the motor vehicle used in transporting refuse for disposal, as follows:
W. A resident of the Town or a person having a place of business in
the Town, may secure a permit from the Solid Waste Management
Committee. Such permit shall be issued upon the satisfactory proof to
the. Solid Waste Management Committee that the applicant is either a
resident of the Town or has a place of business in the Town. The Solid
Waste Management Committee shall cause permit decal(s) to be affixed
to the applicants motor vbehicle(s) and said permit decal(s) shall not be
transferred to any other vehicle. The Solid Waste Management
Committee may, from time to time, require the renewal of permits
issued under this Subsection under the same procedure and standards
of proof as original permits. Residents and business owners who have
been issued a permit under this Subsection may only dispose of refuse
generated within the Town.
()
(hl A refuse collector, who is ill the business of collecting refuse of
persons in the Town may secure a permit from the Solid Waste
Management Committee. Such permit shall be issued for a period of
one (1) year upon satisfactory proof to the Solid Waste Management
Committee that the Collector has adequate equipment and that only . )
refuse of persons of the Town, generated within the Town, will be
collected for disposal in the Refuse Disposal Area. Such permit shall
include the maximum allowable volume of waste which the commercial
collector may dispose of annually. ·
Such volume shall not exceed the amount demonstrated to be generated
by customers residing or having places of business in· the Town.
Delivery records will be maintained by the Solid Waste Manager to
ensure conformance to this limit.
(ill A person who is a non-resident of the Town, whose refuse is a
direct result of work, operations, or business undertaken by him on
behalf of a resident of the Town or person having a business in the
Town, may secure a limited temporary permit from the First Selectman.
Such a permit shall be issued upon satisfactory proof, to the First
Selectman, that the refuse will be a direct result of work, operations, or
business in the Town on behalf of a resident or business in the Town.
Such permit will be issued for a specific purpose and length of time (not
to exceed one (1) week). The Solid Waste Manager will be notified by
the First Selectman of the issuance and nature of each temporary
permits.
-85-
)
CcD. The Solid Waste Management Committee may revoke any permit
in the event it finds, after a hearing and upon reasonable notice to the
permittee, that such a permit has violated the provisions of this
Ordinance.
SECTION III. REFUSE PROillBITED:
The disposal of any refuse, by any person, in the Refuse Disposal Area
which is tOxic or hazardous, within the meaning of Section 22a-115(1) or
Section 22a"151 of the Connecticut General Statutes or otherwise
hazardous to the public health, welfare, or safety is prohibited. Any
refuse which, in the opinion of the Solid Waste Management
Committee, would be prejudicial to the proper operation of the Refuse
Disposal Area, would substantially shorten the usable life of the Refuse
Disposal Area, and which could be disposed of by alternate means (as
specified by the Solid Waste Management Committee) shall be
prohibited. Large appliances are prohibited unless all doors have been
removed. Tires are only permitted under provisions of Section X of this
ordinance.
SECTION IV. DISPOSAL AREA:
Any perSon disposing of refuse in the Refuse Disposal Area shall
dispose of such refuse in specific locations designated by, and under the
supervision of, the Solid Waste Manager.
SECTION V. HOURS OF OPERATION:
Days and hours during which the Refuse Disposal Area shall be open
for the disposal of refuse shall be established by the Solid Waste
Management Committee.
SECTION VI. SCAVENGING PROHIBITED:
Scavenging at the Refuse Disposal Area without express written
permission by the Solid Waste Management Committee shall be
prohibited, except in separate area(s) ·specifically identified for this
purpose.
SECTION VII. TRESPASSING:
No person shall enter or be permitted within the Refuse Disposal Area
except with a permit and only during the hours when the area is open to
the public. Exceptions are: ·
(a) Town employees (during their scheduled working hours)
-86-
assigned to manage the Refuse Disposal Area.
(b) Persons qualifying under Section II( a) or II( c) of this Ordinance,
which have immediate disposal needs, may be allowed to use the
REFUSE Disposal Area, with the prior approval of the First Selectman,
during normally closed periods.
SECTION VIII. SEPARATION AND RECYCLING;
This Ordinance mandates that all persons separate and recycle all
refuse prior to delivery to the Refuse Disposal Area. The following
items are considered recyclables and will be accepted if separated and
delivered to specified locations in the Refuse Disposal Area:
(A) PAPER -including newsprint, magazines, lightweight cardboard,
all books (preferably with hard covers removed), craft paper (shopping
bags), stationery, computer paper, scrap paper, catalogs, and other
unsoiled paper goods.
(B) CORRUGATED -corrugated cardboard, such as that used in
cartons.
I )
''"- --
(C) CANS: including aluminum cans, steel cans, aluminum foil and
·aluminum trays. Cans, foil, ·and trays may have labels and minor
product residue. Does not include aerosol cans, composite cans )
consisting of paper with metal end caps, flammable or explosive
material containers, compressed gas containers, and oil filters.
(D) GLASS including bottles and jars (preferable unbroken)
regardless of shape and color. Lids and neck rings need not be removed;
labels and minor product residues are acceptable. Does not include
windows glass, plate glass, dishes, crockery, any ceramics, and mirrors.
(E) SCRAP METAL- including appliances, wheel rims, pots and
pans, water tanks, small powered· equipment, and similar all-metallic
items. Does not include compressed gas cyclinders.
(F) QIL.- lubricating oils and diesel oils only; does not include
hydraulic fluids, cutting oils, mineral spirits, paint thinners, gasoline,
and vegetable oils.
(G) BRUSH- including grass, leaves, and all brush and branches
two (2) inches in diameter or less. Does not include tree stumps (see
Section III- Refuse Prohibited).
-87-
)
(H) BULKY WASTE - including all demolition material, lumber and
building supplies. Does not include tree stumps, metals, mattresses,
box springs, and upholstered furniture.
(I) TIRES including vehicle tires without rims( see Section X-Fees).
All other trash, ashes, food spoils, waxed or spoiled papers, etc. are
to be considered unrecyclable garbage and are to be deposited in the
area(s) so marked. Collection and transportation of separated recyclable
trash by commercial collectors shall be arranged by the commercial
collectors.
SECTION IX. INSPECTION:
All waste delivered to the Refuse Disposal Area will be subject to
inspection to assure compliance with this Ordinance and State
Department of Environmental Protection regulations. Any waste found
not to be in accordance with this Ordinance and State DEP regulations
will be subject to rejection by landfill personnel.
SECTION X. FEES:
There is no fee for dumping at the Refuse Disposal Area, except that
persons will be allowed to dispose of no more than four ( 4) tires per year
·per household or business free of charge. All additional tires will be
subject to a fee bases on the current cost of disposal. Fees are to be
paid, in advance, to the Town Clerk at the Town Hall during normal
working house. A written receipt will be issued by the Town Clerk and
shall be presented at the Refuse Disposal Area before dumping
additional tires. Failure to do so will result in rejection of material or in
the penalties as set forth in Section XI of this Ordinance.
SECTION XI. PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS OF THIS
ORDINANCE:
(a) 1st. OFFENSE- Written Warning
·.:;-:'''''
2nd OFFENSE-
3rd OFFENSESuspension
of the use of the Refuse
Disposal Area will be imposed for a
period of three (3) months.
Suspension of the use of the Refuse
Disposal Area will be imposed for a
period of six (6) months.
-88-
(1) Upon determination that a person has violated the provision(s) of
this Ordinance the Solid Waste Management Committee may vote (and
pass by a simple majority) to issue a "Notice of Intent to Suspend Waste
Disposal Privileges". Such Notice will be delivered to the violator by
certified mail and will include the name(s) of the violator(s), the specific
provision(s) of this Ordinance violated, the dates upon which the
violation(s) occurred, the penalty which is to be imposed, and the
inclusive dates during which the suspension of privileges will be
effective.
(2) Ani( person issued a "Notice of Intent to Suspend Waste Disposal
Privileges ' may apply for an appeal of such suspension in writing to the
Solid Waste Management Committee within five (5)~calendar days of
the receipt of such notice, for reinstatement of the privileges to use the
Refuse Disposal Area. Filing of such an application will stay the
suspension until such time as the appeal hearing process described
below is accomplished. Failure to apply for an appeal within five (5)
calendar days of the receipt of such notice will cause the suspension to
take effect on the dates indicated in_ the Notice.
(3) · Within five (5) calendar days of the receipt of an appeal
application, the Solid Waste Management Committee shall set a date
for a hearing on the appeal, which date shall be within ten (10) calendar
days of filing of the appeal application, and shall give prior written ·_)
notice of the time and place of the hearing to the applicant. .
( 4) At such hearing, the appeal applicant may present testimony,
documents, or other evidence in support of their claim that their
privilege to use the Refuse Disposal Area should not be· suspended. The
person may be represented by an agent of their choosing and may
question any individual presenting testimony at the hearing.
(5) If the Solid Waste M~agement Committee decides, by a two
thirds (2/3) or greater majority of the entire Committee, based on
evidence presented at the hearing, that the appeal applicant's privilege
to use the Refuse Disposal Area . should be suspended, it should so
advise the applicant in writing. Notification Ofthe decision shall be
sent by certified mail within ten (10) calendar days following the date of
the hearing. The Notification shall include the name(s) of the
violator(s), the specific provisions of this Ordinance violated, the date(s),
upon which the violation(s) occurred, the penalty which is to be
imposed, and the inclusive dates during which -the suspension· of
privileges will be effective.
.RO.
)
4th OFFENSE AND EACH SUBSEQUENT OFFENSE 'fHEREAFJ'ER
A suspension of the use of the Refuse Disposal Area will
be imposed for a period of two (2) years.
The Town may also require the violator to remove the unauthorized
or unseparated waste from the Refuse Disposal Area. If a person
refuses to remove the subject waste or removal cannot be accomplished
in a timely manner, the Town will remove the waste at the violator's
expanse, either by employing Town Labor and equipment or with the
services,~f.,a private contractor.
If the first offense is of a major nature (i.e. significant volume,
hazardOliE'/toxic substance, or a deliberate act), the warning ·can be
disregarded and a suspension of all use of the Refuse Disposal Area will
be imposed for a period of three (3) months.
SECTION XII NOTICE. APPEAL. AND HEARING PROCESS:
The Solid Waste Management Committee may only suspend the
privilege ··of using the Refuse Disposal· Area to a violator of the
provision(s) of this Ordinance in the manner described as follows:
SECTION XIII. SPECIAL REGULATIONS AND CONSIDERATIONS:
(a) There shall be a grace period of three (8) months, from the date
this Ordinance takes effect, given to all persons for their familiarization
with the requirements of this Ordinance.
(b) Commercial collectors are solely responsible for ensuring that
the waste they deliver to the Refuse Disposal Area conforms to the
provisions of this Ordinance and are subject to the penalties and appeal
procedures defined in this Ordinance.
SECTION XIV. INVALIDITY:
If any provision of the Ordinance, or its application to any person,
situation, or circumstance, is held to be invalid, such invalidity shall not
effect any other provision or application of the same. ·
This Ordinance shall take effect fifteen (15) days after publication in
accordance with the Connecticut General Statutes. ·
-90-
AN ORDINANCE TO AMEND AN ORDINANCE
CONCERNING THE DISPOSAL OF REFUSE
BE IT ORDAINED by the voters of the Town of Preston.
SECTION 1. A new section is added to said ordinance as follows:
(a) The Selectmen subject to approval of the Board of Finance may
establish fees to be charged for receiving tires (more than four per day
per person) at the dump after securing proposals stating charges to the
Town for disposing of said tires.
(b) The Selectmen shall provkle the method for collecting the fees for
receiving the tires. ·
Effective date: February 14th, 1980
Reference: Town Meeting Book 10, Page 272
-91-
)
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING "AN ORDINANCE
CONCERNING WASTE RECYCLING AND
REGULATING THE USE AND OPERATION OF THE
PRESTON DISPOSAL AREA"
Said Ordinance is amended by adding to Section VIII of said ordinance
. the following\~ubsection following subsection i:
j. Plastic bottles and containers.
Town Meeting Book 11, Pg. 186- 6/14/89
· AN AMENDMENT TO THE RECYCLING
ORDINANCE
An amendment to the recycling ordinance adopted at a Special Town
) Meeting January'25, 1990, under the following Section:
)
SECTION X: FEES
Beginning fifteen (15) days from date of publication of this
Amendment:
There will be a fee of One Dollar ($1.00) per tire for tires up to sixteen
(16) inches and Five Dollars ($5.00) per tire for tires seventeen (17)
inches and larger.
There will be a fee of Two Dollars ($2.00) per pick-up truck load or
one Dollar ($1.00) per yard for all other containers (2.00) minimum) of
demolition/construction material for each load deposited at the landfill.
The Board of Selectmen will designate a person to collect such fees
and issue receipts which must be presented to the appropriate
attendant before disposal.
Failure to comply with this Ordinance will result in rejection of
material or in the penalties set forth in Section XI of this Ordinance.
Date of Publication: 2;3/90
-92-
AN ORDINANCE CREATING A SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT
COMMI'ITEE FOR THE TOWN OF PRESTON
Be it ordained by the People of the Town of Preston at a duly warned
Town Meeting.
Solid Waste Management Committeej
A committee created by this ordillance and appointed by the Board of
Selectmen to oversee solid waste management. Using this ordinance as
guidelines, the committee is ordered to continually monitor the
technological advances of solid waste management,' including recycling
methods and markets, in an effort to adhere to the intent of this
ordinance and fulfill the long range plans of the Town of Preston
landfill.
1. The Solid Waste Management Committee shall consist of five (5)
regular members and three (3) alternate members who shall be electors
of the Town of Preston and who shall hold no salaried municipal office.
Membership on any other board, commission or committee of the Town
of Preston shall not preclude membership on the Solid Waste
· Management Committee.
2. The members of the Solid Waste Management committee shall be )
appointed by the Board of Selectmen, within thirty (30) days after the
adoption of this ordinance, as follows:
Two (2) members shall be appointed for a term of three (3) years:
Two (2) members for a period of two (2) years:
One (1) member for a period of one (1) year:
The Alternate members shall be appointed to terms as follows:
One (1) member for a period of three (3) years:
One (1) member for a period of two (2)years:
One (1) member for a period of one (1) year.
3. As such of the terms of the members shall expire the Board of
Selectmen shall appoint a successor for a term of three (3) years to fill
each vacant position.
4. The members shall commence to serve their respective terms
immediately upon appointment and shall serve until their successors
have qualified.
-93-
I)
)
5. Any vacancy in the committee, other than by expiration of term,
shall be filled, for the unexpired portion of the term, by the Board of
Selectmen.
6. The Committee shall annually elect a Chairman, Vice-Chairman,
and Secretary from its members. Regular meetings shall be held on a
regular basis as established by the Committee and recorded with the
Town Clerk. Special meetings may be called by the Chairman or, upon
written request to the Chairman, by a majority of the members of said
Committee.
7. Aliy,,member who is absent from three (3) consecutive regular
meetings, and any intervening duly called special meetings, shall be
considered to have resigned from the Committee and the vacancy shall
be filled as herein before provided. The Committee may vote to waive
the requirements of this section in each case where illness or other
extenuating circumstances make it impossible for a member to meet the
attendance requirements of this ordinance.
8. The Committee shall annually prepare a budget containing its
estirnates-.. of expenses, to carry out its programs and the purpose of this
Ordinance, and to submit the same to the Board of Selectman for
inclusion in the annual budget of the Town of Preston.
-94-
An Ordinance Providing for a Uniform system of
numbering of Properties and Principal Buildings.
Adopted February 9, 1989
Sec. 1- Fjrst Selectman- Reference herein to the First Selectman shall
also include any agent, officer, official, or employee of the Town of Preston,
authorized by the First Selectman of Preston to perform any of the duties ·
authorized in this ordinance. . . .
Sec. 2- Assignment- The First Selectman may at his discretion assign to
each house, or any part of a house, or to each lot or any part of a lot fronting upon
any street within the town limits, a number by which it shall be known, and may
alter such numbers and renumber such houses, parts of houses, lots and parts of
lots, fronting upon any and all streets within the town limits.·. It shall be the duty of
the said FirSt Selectman, whenever hereafter a new street or highway is accepted,
to assign to the land abutting on such street or highwayi numbers at such measured
intervals or distance as in the opinion of said First Se ectman, the public interest
shall require.
'J
Sec. 3- Notification- Whenever the First Selectman acting in accordance
with the foregoing section, shall have · assigned numbers to, or shall have
renumbered any property fronting on any street as aforesaid, the said First
Selectman shall forthwith send to the owner or owners of each and all buildings
fronting upmi' said street a written statement and notice informing him or them of
such numbering, and directing the said owner or owners to affix to said building, if
it is within 100 feet of the road line, reflective figures indicating the number thereto )
assigned not smaller than 3 1/2 inches in height visible from said road . If the
building is further back than 100 feet from the road, said number shall be indicated
on both sides of the mail box serving said building. If said mail box is on the
opposite side of the road, iri addition to the number arrows shall be affixed adjacent
to said number indicating the location of the building so numbered.
Sec. 4- Penalties- Failure to post any number under the terms of this
ordinance shall be a inisdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of up to $5.00
Each separate day such violation is continued shall constitute a separate offense.
Sec. 5- Effective Date-This ordinance shall take effect fifteen days after
publication in a newspaper having a circulation in Preston pursuant to Section 12-
157 of the General Statutes.
-95-
t)
)
)
AN ORDINANCE TO JOIN THE SOUTIIEASTERN
CONNECTICUT COUNCIL OF GOVERNMENTS
WHEREAS, Southeastern Connecticut has entered a period of complex
challenges affecting the region's economy, its tax base, the demand for
services, and its infrastructure; and,
WHEREAS, dealing effectively with these challenges will require a high
level of intergovernmental cooperation; and,
WHEREAS, the Southeastern Connecticut Council of Governments, a
formal organization of municipal chief elected officials within Southeastern
Connecticut, has been established to facilitate intergovernmental
cooperation and collective public action at the regional level; now, therefore,
BE IT ORDAINED, that the TOWN OF PRESTON hereby adopt Sections
4-124i thrCiugh 4-124p of the Connecticut General Statutes, providing for the
formation of the Southeastern Connecticut Council of Governments, and
does hereby join such Council of Governments as such Council has been duly
established in accordance with said statutes, and the Secretary of the Office
of Policy and Management has certified that the Southeastern Connecticut
Council of Governments has been duly established.
When the transition period for the Council of Governments called for in
Section 4-1241 (b) of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended, has
been completed, the Town of Preston does hereby rescind the ordinance of
7/1/65 and any amendments thereto that created the Town's participation in
the Southeastern Connecticut Regional Planning Agency.
The Town Clerk is directed immediately to prepare and file with the
Secretary of the Office of Policy and Management a certified copy of this
Ordinance to join the Southeastern Connecticut Council of Governments.
Approved at a Town Meeting held 3/4/93 Town Meeting Book 12
-96-
AN ORDINANCE TO ASSESS PROPERlY IN TilE
HAPPYLAND/DRA WBRIDGE AREA OF PRESTON FOR TilE
COSTS OF CONSTRUCTING A MUNICIPAL WATER SUPPLY
SYSTEM IN SAID AREA
Be it ordained by the Electors of the Town of Preston at a duly warned Town
Meeting held May 13, 1993,
Section 1 . - Declaration of Policy. There is hereby established an
assessment policy and schedule of payments ("Policy") to be paid by each
owner of property which is served by water mains which the Town has
constructed and installed in the Happyland/Drawbridge area of the Town of
Preston, Connecticut between July 1, 1992 and June 10, 1993 (the "Project").
Section 2 - Assessment. The Town will borrow funds from the United
States Department of Agriculture, Farmers Home Administration
("FmHA"), to finance a portiort of the Project costs. The owner of any
property which is served by the project shall be assessed, and shall reimburse
the Town, for his portion of the share of the principal and interest that the
Town must repay the FmHA.
Section 3 - Lien. Said assessment shall be and remain a lien upon the
land in favor of the Town, and said lien may be foreclosed in the manner
provided by law.
Section 4. - Schedule of Payment. The owner of any property which is
served by the Project shall reimburse the Town no more than 1WO
HUNDRED SIX AND FIFTY-FIVE ONE HUNDREDTHS DOLLARS
($206.55) on Aprillst of each year beginningAprill, 1994 continuing until
and through April!, 2014. Said payments shall be in satisfaction of the lien
upon the property and said lien shall be discharged upon payment in full of
all amounts due under this ordinance.
· Section 5 - Optional and Mandatory Prepayment. The owner of any
property which is served by the project may prepay the amounts due under
)
this ordinance and obtain a discharge of the lien provided by this ordinance c)
at any time without penalty. The owner of any property which is served by -
-97-
Page two
the Project shall prepay the amounts due under this ordinance upon any
transfer of the property for monetary consideration. Prepayment would be
in an amount determined to be sufficient to pay the principal and interest on
the amount due FmHA over the time that said principal and interest
payments are due.
Section:;O.,-- Late Charge. If the payment due under this ordinance are not
paid when due, the amount due shall bear interest at the same rate as would
unpaid taxes and may be collected by the Town in the manner provided by
law.
THIS ORDINANCE IS EFFECTIVE FIFTEEN (15) DAYS FROM
DATE OF PUBLICATION.
ApproveCi at a Town Meeting May 27, 1993 Town Meeting Book 12
-98-
ADOPTED ,BY SELECTMEN CONCERNING TilE PRESTON
LANDFILVfRANSFER STATION
Persons qualified to use the Preston Landfill(fransfer Station are hereby
warned that any appliance requiring evacuation of freon, left at the landfill,
will be required to pay a fee of fifteen ($15.00) dollars per appliance,
Effective 7-15-93, by order of the Board of Selectmen June 24Jb, 1993.
-99-
)
ORDINANCE CONCERNING ANNEXATION
BE. IT RESOLVED AND ORDAINED: the Town of Preston 'through the Board of
Selectmen, shall oppose annexation of any kind In Preston by a tribe of
government entity, Including annexation by a tribe, pursuant to 25 CFR 151 of any
land located outside the boundaries of a tribes federally recognized reservation.
1'5: l/-'2-3''j''!,
Town Meeting November:l3. 1993 - Referendum-~93 -Town Meeting Book 12
-100-
ORDINANCE CONCERNING LANDFILL FEES
The Board of Selectmen of the Town of Preston are hereby Authorized at any
regular or special Selectmen's meeting to set any and all disposal fees for the
Preston Landfill. The Selectmen are authorized to set and change such fees at any
time that they deem necessary at their discretion. Prior to setting of any fees, the
proposed fee schedule will be posted with the agenda for any selectmen's meeting
at which It will be acted upon. After setting of any fees, the selectmen will within
ten days thereafter, post the new fee schedule In the Town Clerk's office, at the
landfill disposal area, and publish a copy of said schedule in a newspaper having
general circulation in the town }~f Preston.
Adopted 3/4/93-Town Meeting Book 12
-tot-
)
)
)
)
ORDINANCE TO AMEND AN ORDINANCE CONCERNING
LANDFILL FEES
The following changes have been made concerning the Landfill:
Demolition Material - Less than one yard - $2.00 Minimum;
One yard or more-$1 0.00 per Yard
Tires - All standard passeng£'r car and standard pick-up truck tlr~.s
wlll be $1.00 per tire. All other tires larger than 16 &. 1/2 Inches
wlll be $5.00 per tire. All tires with rims will be $5.00 per tire.
Adopted February 18, 1994
-102-
·'
ji.-•.
' .
Cotter, Greenfield, Manfredi & Lenes, P.C.
Attorneys at lAw
223 West Town Street
Norwich, Connecticut 06360
• john A. Cotter
Stt14rt B. Greenfield
Frank A. Manfredi
tTimothy P. Lenes
• A/ro admitted to the Bar of the District of Columbia
tAlro admitted to the Bar of New York and .Mastachusetii
Ms. Lucille Thoma
Treasurer, Town of Preston
389 Route 2
Preston, CT 06365-8830
Dear Lucille:
October 27, 1994
Reply To:
P.O. Box 6002
Yantic, CT 06389
Telephone (203) 887-1695
Fax (203) 889-4350
This will follow up your question regarding the ordinance
concerning public bidding. The ordinance requires that all
contracts in exGess of $3,500.00 be awarded only after public
notice and bid, other than for expenditures made from town aid
funds. It is my opinion that public notice and bid requires more .)
than calling vendors and getting quotes for the goods or services
in question. Public notice and bid require publication of the
contract requirements in a newspaper and receipt of closed bids
from the interested vendors. The ordinance does not require
awarding of the contract to the lowest bidder and the Town has
the discretion to award any contract to other than the highest
bidder if it determines in its discretion that it would be in the
best interests of the Town to do so.
If you have any other questions regarding this matter, please
let me know.
Very truly yours,
r·~ ' ~~K A. MANF E~I '
FAM/cg
.·ror
)
TOWN OF PRESTON
TOWN OFFICES
389 ROUTE 2
PRESTON, CONNECTICUT 06365-8830
Town of Preston
Notice of Amendment to Ordinance
Pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes 7-157, notice is hereby published that at a Special
Town Meeting held on April25, 1996, the Town ofPreston amended an "Ordinance Creating a Parks
& Recreation Commission for the Town of Preston" as follows:
Section 4. The Parks & Recreation Commission shall consist of nine (9) members and two (2)
alternates who shall be electors of the Town of Preston and who shall hold no salaried municipal
office. Membership on any other Board or Committee of the Town of Preston shall not preclude
membership of the Parks & Recreation Commission.
) Dated@ Preston, Connecticut this lOth Day of May, 1996.
Town Clerk
)
-103 (1)-
-LEFT BLANK INI'ENI'IONALLYI
)
)
\)
Town of Preston
An Ordinance Establishing Citation Procedures
And Fines for Zoning Violations
It is hereby ordained by the electors of the Town of Preston:
1. This Ordinance is hereby enacted pursuant to Section 8- 12a of the Connecticut General
Statutes. The Zoning Enforcement Officer is hereby authorized to issue citations for
violations of the Zoning Regulations of the Town of Preston to the extent and in the manner
provided by this Ordinance. Any such citation may be served either by hand delivery or by
certified mail, return receipt requested, to the person named in such citation. If the perso)l
named in such citation sent by certified mail refuses to accept such mail, the citation may be
sent by regular United .States mail. The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall file and retain an
original or certified copy of the citation.
2. That a citation may be issued for any violation of the Zoning Regulations ofthe Town of
Preston.
3. That the fine for each such citation sh!!ll be. one hundred and-Fifty Dollars ($ 150.00), payable.
to the Treasurer of the Town of Preston.
4. That any person receiving such citation shall be allowed a period of thirty (30) days frorfl his
or her receipt of the citation to make. an uncontested payment of the fme to the said Treasurer.
Ifthe citation has been sent by regular mail pursu~t to paragraph 1 of this Ordinance, the day
of receipt of the citation shall be deemed to be three (3) business days after the day of mailing
of the citation.
5. If a person who has been issued a citation does not make uncontested payment of the fine
specified in the citation to the said Treasurer within the time allowed under paragraph 4 of
this Ordinance, the Zoning Enforcement Officer shall send a notice to the person cited,
informing such person (1) of the allegations against him or her and the amount of the fines;
, (2) that the person cited may contest liability before a Hearing Officer appointed by the First ... ,
Selectman of the Town of Preston, as provided in paragraph 9 of this Ordinance, by
delivering, in person or by mail, within ten (10) business days of the date of the notice, a
written demand for a hearing; (3) that if the person so cited does not demand such a heaving,
an assessment and judgment shall be entered against him or her; and (4) that such judgment
may issue without further notice. ·
6. If the petson who is sent a notice pursuant to paragraph 5 of this Ordinance wishes to admit
liability for any alleged violation, he or she may, without requesting a hearing, pay the full
amount of the fme, either inpersonorby mail, to the Zoning Enforcement Officer. All fmes
shall be made payable to the treasurer of the Town of Preston. Such payment shall be
inadmissible in any other proceeding, civil or criminal, to establish the conduct of such
person or other person making such payment. Any person who does not deliver or mail
written demand for a hearing within ten (1 0) business days of the date of the notice described
104
in paragraph 5 of this Ordinance shall be deemed to have admitted liability, and the Zoning
Enforcement Officer shall thereupon enter and assess the fmes provided for by this Ordinance
and shall follow the procedures set forth in paragraph 8 of this Ordinance. r · -)
7. Any person who requests a hearing shall be given written notice of the date, time end place
for the hearing. Such hearing shall be held not less chart fifteen (15) nor more than thirty
(30) days from the date of the mailing of the notice, provided the Hearing Officer shall grant
upon good cause shown any reasonable request by an interested party for postponement or
continuance. The presence of the Zoning Enforcement Officer shall be required at the hearing
if requested by the person who was issued the citation. A person wishing to contest liability
shall appear at the hearing and may present evidence on his or her behalf. The Zoning
Enforcement Officer may present evidence on behalf of the Town. If the person who was
issued the citation fails to appear, the Hearing Officer may enter an assessment by default
against him or her upon a finding of proper notiGe and may determine thereby that the
appearance of such person is urmecessary. The Hearing Officer shall conduct the hearing in
the order and form and with such methods of proof as he or she deems fair and appropriate.
The rules regarding the admissibility of evidence shall not be strictly construed, but all
testimony shall be given under oath or affirmation. The Hearing Officer shall arm ounce his or
her deeision at the end of the hearing. If the Hearing Officer determines that the person who
received the citation is not liable, the Hearing Officer shall dismiss the matter and enter that
determination in writing accordingly; If the Hearing:Officercdetertnine:Wifatthe·-person~who .
received the citation is liable for the violation, the Hearing Officer shall forthwith enter and
assess the fines against such person as provided by this Ordinance.
8. If such assessment is not paid by the date of entry, the Hearing Officer shall send by first
class mail a notice of assessment to the person found liable and shall file, not less than thirty
(30) days nor more than twelve (12) months after such mailing, a certified copy of the notice
of assessment with the Clerk of the Superior Court for Geographical Area 21, together with
an entry fee of eight dollars. Further proceedings may then be held pursuant to the applicable
sections of the Connecticut General Statutes.
9. The First Selectman of the Town of Preston shall appoint one or more citation Hearing
Officers to conduct the hearings provided for by this Ordinance. Neither the Zoning
Enforcement Officer, the Building Inspector, nor any employee of any Zoning Authority of
the Town of Preston, nor any present member of any Zoning Authority of the Town of
Preston may be appointed as a Hearing Officer pursuant to this Ordinance. For purposes of
this paragraph, ''Zoning Authority" means any of the Planning and Zoning Commission, the
Zoning Board of Appeals, the Inland Wetlands Commission, the Plarming Commission or the
Zoning Commission. If any former member of any Zoning Authority sits as Hearing Officer
in a hearing. which concerns the same parties and substantially the same issues as any
proceeding before the Zoning Authority at the time the said former member was a member
and participated in, that Hearing Officer shall not sit as Hearing Officer in the said hearing.
I 0. This Ordinance shall take effect upon its enactment by a majority of the electors of the Town
of Preston.
105
Received For Record
At ,3:.'i3 f!li)
)
·, --
TOWN OF PRESTON
NOUCEQFADOPTION OF .ORDINANCES
: _;._.
, ) Pursuant to a vote at a Special Town Meeting of the Town of Preston on.November·20,
1997, Ordinances concerning citations procedures and fines fur Zoning Violations and
Inland/Wetland Violations were adopted and summaries of said Ordinances are
publlshe<l herein:
)
\)
S1.JMM'ABY OF ORDINANCE ESTABLISHING. CITATION PROCED_llm:S
AND FINES FOR /Nl ANDJWE:rl AND Vlt>LATION$
Pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes (22a-42g) the Inland/Wetland Officer is
authorized to Issue citations for violations of.lnland/Wetland RegulatiOns. Fines for
such violations shall be $1 ,000.00. Procedures adopted in accordance with
Connecticut General Statutes 7-152c include: payment of uncontested citations within
thirty (30) days to the Town Treasurer: appo.intment of a Hearing Officer to hear
contested violations; and procedures for the hearing of contested violations a.s set forth
in Connecticut General Statutes 7 -152c. The Ordinance also provides that 1lnes may
be assesse<l by the Hearing Officer and if not timely paid, may be entered as,judgments
by the Clerk of the Superior Court. Appeals procedures and deadlines are also set
forth in the Ordinance. Complete copies of the Ordinance are on file and available in
the Preston Town Clerk's Office. ·
_S_UMMARY OF. ORDINANCE ESTABLISHING CITATION PROCEDU8ES
ANilF.lNESEOR_ZONING :Vf_OJ.AILON.S
..
Pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes (S..12a) the Zoning Enforcement Officer is
.authorized to issue citations for violations of Zoning Regulations. Fines for suoh
violations shall be $150.00. Procedures adopted in accordance with Connecticut
General Statutes 7 -152c include: payment of uncontested citations within thirty (30)
days to the Town Treasurer; appointment of a Hearing Officer to hear contest~
violations; and procedures for the hearing of contested violations as set forth in
Connecticut General Statutes 7 -152c. The Ordinance also provides that fines may be
assessed by the Hearing Officer and if not timely paid, may be entered as jUdgments by
the Clerk of the Superior Court Appeals procedures and deadlines are also· set forth in
the Ordinance. Complete copies of the Ordinance are on file and available in the
Preston Town Clerk's Office.
Effective: Fifteen Days from Date of Publication
2z/tllb~ Hattie Wucik 1 C<!.M<!_,
Preston Town Clerk,
106
... ~ ,_; :' . ·. . ',,, ·.'
TOTAL P.03
TOWN OF PRESTON
TOWN OFFICES
389 ROUTE 2
PRESTON, CONNECTICUT 06365-8830
TOWN OF PRESTON
NOTICE OF ADOPTION OF ORDINANCES
The following ordinances were adopted at a Special Town Meeting held on
December 4th, 1997:
1) Pursuant to Connecticut General Statute 9-185, Constables in and for the
Town of Preston shall be appointed by the First Selectman.
!)
2) The Town of Preston will no longer accept any leaves or brush at the Preston )
Solid Waste Transfer Station.
The above Ordinances become effective fifteen days from date of publication.
*~~ Hattie Wucik
Town Clerk
12-11-97
i)
107
)
TOWN OF PRESTON
TOWN OFFICES
389 ROUTE 2
PRESTON, CONNECTICUT 06365-8830
TOWN OF PRESTON
NOTICE OF ADOPTION OF ORDINANCE
The following Ordinance was adopted at a Town Meeting held on July 16th,
1998:
"Be It Ordained that any ambulance service within the Town of Preston shall
be authorized to charge fees for services provided within the Town of Preston, upon
authorization by the Board of Selectmen and receipt of any permits required by State
Law."
The above Ordinance, as adopted, is effective fifteen (15) days from date of
publication. ·
Dated@ Preston, Connecticut this 24th Day of July, 1998.
~;f.#c~~
Town Clerk
-108-
AN ORDINANCE TO ESTABLISH A WATER DISTRICT AND WATER
COMMISSION FOR THE TOWN OF PRESTON
BE IT ORDAINED that the following ordinance shall be adopted by the Town of
Preston:
Section 1. Creation; Organization.
Pursuant to Section .7-148 and Chapter 102 of the Connecticut General Statutes,
the Town of Preston hereby establishes a Water District and a Water Commission. The
Water District is that area of the Town served by the Water System, as designated by
the Board of Selectmen. The Water Districtmay be expanded by the Board of
Selectmen to include other areas of the Town. The Water System is the public water
system owned by the Town, as designated by the Board of Selectmen. The Water
Commission shall consist of five (5) members, appointed by the Board of Selectmen,
and shall serve at the pleasure of the Board of Selectmen. ( * 5 Year Staggered
Terms)
Section 2; Purpose.
The Town may acquire, construct and operate the Water System. The Board of
Selectmen is authorized, subject to town meeting approval, to acquire one or more
water systems or land on which to build a Water System, to construct a new Water
System and/or to construct an addition to the existing Water System. The Water
Commission shall operate such Water System once acquired or constructed.
Section 3. Operation. )
The Water Commission shall oversee the operation, repair, replacement and
maintenance ofthe Water System.
(a) Benefit Assessment. The Water Commission may assess the cost for the
acquisition and/ or the construction of a portion of the Water System to those owners of
each lot or building which is benefited by that portion of the Water System pursuant to
Sections 7-137c and 7-137d of the Connecticut General Statutes.
(b) Rates By Contract. The Water Commission may, upon authorization by the
Board of Selectmen, negotiate a contract for rates for the furnishing of water or the use
of the Water System with any person or entity.
(c) Rates By Statute. The Water Commission shall annually develop and submit
to a town meeting a budget of expenses for operating and maintaining the Water
. District and a schedule of rates and charges. The Water Commission shall first hold a
public hearing at which all the users of the Water System and the owners of property
served or to be served and others interested shall have an opportunity to be heard
concerning such proposed rate or charge. Notice of such hearing shall be given, at
least ten (10) days before the date set for the 4earing, in a newspaper having a
circulation in the Town. Such notice shall set forth a schedule of rates or charges, and
a copy of the schedule of rates or charges established shall be kept on file in the office
of the Town Clerk and shall be open to inspection by the public. The rates or charges
so established for any class of users or property served shall be extended to cover any -J
additional premises thereafter served which are within the same class, without the .
. ,
-109-
)
.)
necessity of a hearing thereon. Any change in such rates or charges may be made in
the same. manner in which they were established, provided, if any change is made
substantially pro· rata as to all classes of service, no hearing shall be required.
After the public hearing by the Water Commission and after the Water
Commission has made its recommendation, the town meeting shall establish just and
equitable rates or charges for the use of the Water System based on those rates and
charges submitted by the Water Conunission, to be paid by the owner of each lot or
building which is connected with and uses such Water System, and may change such
rates or charges from time to time. Such rates or charges shall be sufficient in each
year for the payment of the expense of operation, repair, replacements· and maintenance
of such Water System and for other required payments.
(d) Water Commission Duties. The Water Commission shall annually
recommend to the Board of Selectmen any construction and expansion of the Water
System, any expansion of the Water District and any expenditure for the care,
maintenance, or reconstruction of the Water System. The Water Conunission shall also
administer the operations of the Water District, including the construction,
reconstruction, establishment, re-planning, restoration, enlargement, improvement,
removal, care, repair and maintenance of all water services. The Water Commission
may, upon authorization by the Board of Selectmen, negotiate any contract incident to
the provision of water services, such as contracts for the Water System repair or
expansion, but not including any labor contract or collective bargaining agreement.
(e) Liens. The rates or charges established pursuant to this Ordinance, if not
paid when due, shall constitute a lien upon the premises served and a charge against the
owners thereof, which lien and charge shall bear interest at the same ra:te as would
. unpaid taxes. A lien described in this section shall take precedence over all other liens
or encumbrances except taxes and may be foreClosed against the lot or building served
in the same manner as a lien for taxes.
The amount of any such rate or charge which remains due and unpaid for thirty
days may, with reasonable attorneys' fees, be recovered by the Town in a civil action
in the name of the Town against such owners; The Town shall be subject to the same
rates or charges under the same conditions as other users of such Water System.
(f) Accounts. A separate account shall be kept by the Town of the funds derived
from such Water System and of their disposition, which account shall be audited
annually by an independent auditor, and a report of such audit shall be open to public
inspection. The Treasurer shall be the custodian of such funds and shall give a bond to
the satisfaction of the Board of Selectmen for the faithful discharge of his or her duties.
Such funds shall be kept separate from other funds of the Town and shall be used for
such Water System and for no other purpose.
246755 v.Ol
Published:
Effective:
July 26th, 1999
August 9th, 1999
-110-
TOWN OF PRESTON
The following Ordinance was adopted at a Special Town Meeting held on December 4th,
2003:
AN ORDINANCE TO PROMOTE THE SECURITY OF THE CITIZENRY
FROM EXPOSURE TO HAZARDOUS MATERIALS FOUND TO EXIST
AT THE NORWICH STATE HOSPITAL (HEREINAFTER "SITE")
WHEREAS, The State of Connecticut is the current owner of the property known as the
"Site"; and,
WHEREAS, it has been documented in the "August 2001 Updated Phase 1
Enviromnental Site Assessment for the Norwich State Hospital prepared for the State of
Connecticut, Department of Public Works" (hereinafter "August 2001 Updated Phase 1")
report that there exists asbestos and lead paint on the "Site"; and,
WHEREAS, the Town of Preston recognizes the existence of such asbestos, lead paint,
fuel oil and other hazardous materials as constituting a hazardous condition; and,
WHEREAS, the "Site" . is presently abandoned and not being used by the State of
Connecticut; and,
WHEREAS, the Town of Preston has determined the "Site" to be dilapidated as to
constitute a matter of great concein for the health, public safety and welfare of its
Citizenry; and, · ·
WHEREAS, the Town of Preston recognizes the possibility of the State selling and or
leasing the "Site" and or any portion thereof; and,
WHEREAS, the current condition of the "Site" is developed, in whole, or in part without
first abating the asbestos and lead paint shall likely cause its Citizenry while within the
proximity of the "Site" to be exposed to a hazardous condition; now, therefore,
BE IT ORDAINED, pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes 7-148 that the Town of
Preston hereby sets forth and adopts this Ordinance as follows:
In the event of a sale, lease, or other transfer of the "Site" or any portion thereof, the
Town of Preston shall not, under any circumstance issue, or cause to be issued, a building
permit or allow to be constructed, erected, restored, created, or developed, any structure
of any kind whatsoever unless and until it has received, to its satisfaction documented
proof that all asbestos, lead paint, fuel oil and other hazardous material at the "Site",
including but not limited to those set forth in the "August 2001 Updated Phase 1" report
has been completely abated, with sufficient bond to satisf'y the Town of Preston or that a
plan to abate such conditions has been presented and approved by the Board of Selectmen .
and the Town Building Official.
Effective: December 23'd, 2003 (fifteen days from date of publication).
-111-
)
)
()
"/,. ·~··'?
I
I
I
~j
I.
·.I
TOWN OF PRESTON
SPECIAL 'IOWN MEIITING
NOVENBER 30, 1994
\
A Special Town Meeting was held on Wednesday, November 30 1994
at 7:30 P. M. at the Preston Plains School on Items 1-, 2 & 3 of·this
call: A Public Hearing was held on Item #4 following the Special Town
Meetwg.
A motion was made and seconded·to elect Parke Spicer as moderator.
In Favor: All Opposed: None foDITON CARRIED.
Thomas ~!aurer, Acting clerk read the call of the meeting as it
appeared in the legal notice in the, Norwich Bulletin.
A motion was made and seconded to discuss and vote on Item #1A
an Amendment to "Ail Ordinance Concerning Waste Recycling and Regulating
the Use and Operation of the Preston Refuse Disposal Area."
A. "Section VIII. Separation and Recycling: ~aragraph (6)''repealed,
and amended as follows: "On and after January 1, 1995 brush will no longer
be accepted at the Refuse Disposal Area". In Favor: All Opposed: None
MJITON CARRIED. .
A motion was made and seconded to discuss and vote on Item #1B
"Section VIII. Paragraph· H" is amended as follows: "On and after '
January 1, 1995 bulky waste, including all.demolition material lumber
and building supplies, will no longer be accepted at the Refus~ Disposal
Area, except that each household or business in the Town may dispose of
no m'?re than (1) one pick-up truck load of such materials per week".
In Favor: All Opposed: None MJITON CARRJEJ.
A motion was made and seconded to discuss and vote on Item #2A,
an Amendment to an "Ordinance Establishing A Conservation Comnissioii .
for the Town of Preston:
A. To change the name of the Conmission to the Conservation/InlandWetland
Corrrnission". In Favor: All Opposed: None MJ:riON CARRlll'h
A motion was made and seconded to discuss and vote on Item #2B,
to amend Section 2 of the ordinance as follows: "Said Coimtission shall
consist of seven members and ·two alternates·. The· terms of said
alternates shall be six years from date of appointment.
In Favor: .All Opposed: None MJ:riOO CARRJEJ.
A;.motion was made and seconded to discuss and vote on I tern #3, an
Amendment to an "Ordinance Establishing A Corrrnittee to Study the Needs
of 1 and Coordin,.te the Programs for the Aging" as follows: Section 2 is
repealed and.amended as follows: "Said Committee shall consist of five
electors of the Town, to be appointed by. th.e Board of Selectmen, (a) two
members of the·Senior'Citizens, and (b) three members Who are citizens
of the Town at large". .In Favor: All Opposed: None MJI'ION CARRJED.
A public hearing convened following the precee<li.ng votes on whether
to adopt the "Regional Plan to Improve Quality and Diversity in Educat~on
(known ·as the ''Regional Plan"), prepared by the Regional Forum pursuant
to Public Act 93-263.
Rosemary Rheaume made opening Comments as a brief overview of thei
regional Plan.
Al Covino and Rosemary Rheaume both members of Region 3 fol'Ulll were
present to answer questions 7on:erning the Plan as well as Dr. Donald Holden,
PAGE 112
)
TOWN OF PRESTON
TOWN OFFICES
·389 ROUTE 2
PRESTON, CONNECTICUT 06365-8830
TOWN OF PRESTQN
NOTICE OF ADOPTION OF ORDINANCES
The following Ordinances were adopted at a Referendum held on May 16, 1995:
1. The Annual Town Budget, as recommended by the Board of Finance, shall from the date
of the ordinance and each year thereafter, shall be put to a referendum vote.
2. Any individual expenditure of $100,000 or more, whether payable by short term or long ·
term, shall from the date of the ordinance and each year thereafter, be put to a referendum vote.
The above Ordinances, as adopted, are effective fifteen (15) days from date of publication.
Dated@ Preston, Connecticut this 25th Day ofMay, 1995.
~2/dlldJ Hattie Wuctk ·
Town Clerk
Page 113
)
)
)
TOWN OF PRES'fON
TOWN OFFICES
389ROUTE2
PRESTON; CONNECTICUT 06365-8830
TOWN OF PRESTON
NOTICE OF ADOPTION OF ORDINANCES
Notice: At a Special Town Meeting of the Town ofPreston, the following amendments and
ordinances were enacted by vote of the Town:
1. "Ordinance Establishing a Committee to Study theNeeds of arid Coordinate the Programs
for the Aging." Section 2 of said Ordinance is repealed and amended as follows: "Said Committee
shall consist of five electors of the Town, to be appointed by the Board of Selectmen; (a) two
metVbers of the Senior Citizens, and; (b) three members who are citizens of the Town at large."
2. "Ordinance Establishing a Conservation Commission for the Town ofPreston." To amend
said Ordinance by changing the name to "Conservation!Inland Wetland Commission and to amend
Section 2 of said Ordinance as follows: "Said Commission shall consist of seven members and two
alternates. The terms of said alternates shall be six years from date of appointment."
Adopted at a Special Town Meeting held November 30; 1994.
-114-
(j(~·tda&h
· Hattie Wucik
Town Clerk
December 6, 1995
TOWN OF PRESTON
TOWN OFFICES
389 ROUTE 2
PRESTON; CONNEC!ICUT06365-8830
TOWN OF PRESTON
NOTICE OF ADOPTION OF ORDINANCES
Pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes 7-157, notice is hereby published that the following
Ordinances were enacted by the Town ofPreston at a Special Town Meeting held on May 30, 1996:
1. An Ordinance concerning Disposal of Commercial Waste which would define "commercial . .
establislunents" and require all "commercial establislunents" to provide for disposal of waste located
or produced on such premises, including the payment of tipping fees; to permit such establislunents
to haul their own waste to the Preston Transfer Station without incurring tipping fees; l!nd, to require
that disposal of bulky waste at the Transfer ~tation be paid for by any business, resident, commercial
establislunent, farm or fann operation bringing such bulky waste to the Transfer Station.
2. An Ordinance which would prohibit the consumption of alcoholic beverages or possession
or c\mtrol of an open container of alcoholic beverage while in any town owned or controlled property
or quasi-public property; to establish a procedure for obtaining a permit for such consumption or
possession of alcoholic beverages; to provide penalties for violation of such ordinance.
A full text of the aforementioned Ordinances are on file for publiclnspection in the Office of the
Town Clerk.
The Ordinances become effective fifteen (15) days from date of publication.
Dated @ Preston, Connecticut this 6th Day of June, 1996.
-115-
<!)
)
)
)
Ordinance Concerning
Disposal of Commercial Waste
\
Be it ordained pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes 7-148(4)(H) that:
I. Conunencing July I, 1996 all conunercial establishments located within the Town ofPr~on
shall be responsible for the collection, removal and disposal of any garbage, trash, rubbish,
waste material and ashes located or produced on their premises, including payment of any
tipping fees.
2. Conunercial establislunents ineans any retail, professional, industrial, wholesale business or
business of any type located within the Town of Preston, including, but not limited to the
following:
I
• sand and gravel operations;
• saw mills and woodcutting operations;
• recreational campgrounds;
• · conunerCial reqreation facilities;
• aritique shops;
• convalesCent homes;
• grocery stores, variety stores, eating and drinking establishments;
• retail and wholesale stores;
• professional offices of engineers, architects, accountants, attorneys, dentists, doctors,
therapists and th.e like;
• day care centers; ·
· • personal services, such as barber shops, beauty salons and dry cleaners;
• repair services, such as radio, television, appliance and plumbing shops, upholstery
shops, shoe repair shops, automotive repair shops, including gas and diesel stations;
• storage facilities, trucking terminals and warehousing;
• funeral parlors and mortuary establislunents;
• automotive sales and service;
• package stores;
• video sales and rental stores;
• veterinary hospitals and kennels;
• manufacturing facilities;
• research facilities; :
• printing and publishing establishments;
• lumber, fuel and building material yards;
• carpentry and construction businesses and contractors;
• waste and· garbage collection and removal contractors.
3. Conunercial establishments do not include farms, farming operations or home businesses.
4. Conunercial establishments shall be allowed to bring their garbage to the Preston transfer
station and not incur tipping fees. Commercial establishments must haul their own garbage tO
the transfer station and place it into the Town's compacting equipment.
5. Commercial establishments, residents, farms, farming operations, and home businesses will be
required to pay for the disposal of bulky waste at the transfer station.
./
/
(
" ,, ----·--·--
•'
r TOWN OF PRESTON
,··SEAL···"'-'
(~)~ TOWN OFFICES
,;,· .. 1687.-~ 389 ROUTE2
\\' Vi;£"'C"'( \Ci PRESTON, CONNECTICUT 06365-8830
~''"""'~-
TOWN OF PRESTON
'.
NOTICE OF ADOPTION OF ORDINANCES
Pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes 7-157, notice is hereby published that the following
Ordinances were enacted by the Town ofPreston at a Special Town Meeting held on May/30, 1996:
I. An Ordinance concerning Disposal ofConunercial Waste which would define "conunercial ·
establishments" and require all "conunercial establishments" to provide for disposal of waste located
or produced on such premises, including the payment of tipping fees; to permit such establishments
to haul their own waste to the Preston Transfer Station without incurring tipping fees; and, to require
that disposal of bulky waste at the Transfer Station be paid for by any business, resident, commercial
establishment, farm or farm operation bringing such bulky waste to the Transfer Station. ·
2. An Ordina~ce whjch w<)uld prohibit the consumption of alcoholic beverages or possession
or control of an open container of alcoholic beverage while in any town owned or controlled property
or quasi-public property; to establish a procedure for obtaining a permit for such consumption or
possession of alcoholic beverages; to provide penalties for violation of such ordinance.
A full text of the aforementioned Ordinances are on file for public inspection in the Office of the
Town Clerk.
The Ordinances become effective fifteen (15) days from date of publication.
Dated @Preston, Connecticut tltis 6th Day of June, 1996.
-117-
rddtie/itbuh ~WuciiC
Town Clerk
)
)
Town of Preston
Notice of Additional Fees-Transfer Station
Pursuant to the Town's Ordinance concerning Landfill Fees, the Board of
Selectmen at a meeting held on February 20th, 2003 voted to set the following
fees for the disposal of Liquid Propane Tanks at the Transfer Station:
One Dollar ($1.00) each.for five (5) to twenty (20) lb. Tanks
Twenty Dollars ($20.00) each for thirty (30) to forty (40) lb. Tanks
The fees will become effective March 21't, 2003.
cf<o'o-u:C C®%dm
Robert Congdon ~
First Selectman
-117A-
(
--LEFT BlANK INTENriONAlLY-- )
)
REVISED
SEE PAGE 138
TOWN OF PRESTON
NOTICE OF ADOPTiON OF ORDINANCE
Pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes 1-157, the Town .of Preston hereby
gives notice of the adoption of the following ordinances:.
1.
"
At a Special Town Meeting, duly warned and held on October 20, 2005,
an ordinance entitled "Preston Code of Ethics" was approved by a vote
ofthe Town at said meeting. In summary, the ordinance provides for the
establishment of an Ethics Commission consisting of 5 regular members
and 3 alternates to be appointed by the Board of Selectmen. The
qualifications, te1ms of office, and structure of the commission are set out.
The purpose of the ordinance is to set forth standards of ethical conduct
for public officials, agents,and employees of the Town of Preston. The
commission is empowered to hear complaints regarding violations of
ethical conduct as set out in the ordinance, and to issue advisory opinions.
Specific definitions and rules for the conduct of public officials are set in the
ordinance.
A copy ofthe ordinance is available for inspection at the Preston Town Clerk's
office during regular office hours, and a copy will be mailed upon request,
at no charge, to any person requesting a copy.
This document( summary) is prepared for the benefit of the public, solely
for purposes of information, summarization and explanation. This
document does not represent the intent of the legislative body of the Town of
PreSton for any purpose.
Hattie Wucik, Town Clerk
The above ordinance shall become effective fifteen days from the
publication ofthis notice.
-118-
( )
TOWN OF PRESTON
NOTICE OF ADOPTION OF ORDINANCES
! ~ . ; ~- ·.• • .• ·:
Pur;uanf to Connecticut General Statutes 1-157, the Town of Preston hereby
gives notice of the adoption of the following ordinances:
1. At a Special Town Meeting, duly warned and held on October 20, 2005, an
ordinance entitled "Preston Code of Ethics" was approved by a vote of the Town at
said meeting. In summary, the ordinance provides for the establishment of an
Ethics Commission consisting of 5 regular members, 2 alternates and (1) one
investigator appointed by the Board of Selectmen. The qualifications, terms
office, and structure of the commission are set out. The purpose of the ordinance
is to set forth standards of ethical conduct and establish guidelines for ethical
conduct for public officials, agents, and employees of the Town of Preston.
The Commission is empowered to hear complaints regarding alleged violations
of ethical conduct as set out in the ordinance, and to issue advisory opinions.
Specific defmitions and rules for the conduct of public officials· are set out in
the ordinance.
A copy of the ordinance is available for inspection at the Preston Town Clerk's
office during regular office hours, and a copy will be mailed upon request, at no
charge, to any person requesting a copy.
This document( summary) is prepared for the benefit of the public, solely for
purposes of information, summarization and explanation. This document does
notrepresent the intent of the legislative body of the Town of Preston for any
purpose.
2. At a referendum, duly warned and held on November 1, 2005 "An ordinance
prohibiting the acquisition of certain property by eminent domain for privately
held or controlled economic development purposes in the Town of Preston" was
approved by vote of the Town.
The above ordinances shall become effective fifteen days from the publication of
this notice.
Hattie Wucik, CCMC
Preston Town Clerk
-119-
1/depled: /1-tJI/-tJ$
£ffa/:t/t?--' 11-lf -aC
)
AN ORQINANCE PROHIBITING EMINENT DOMAIN .
FOR CERTAIN PURI'OSES
BE IT ORDAINED by the voters of the Town of Preston at a duly wamed town meeting:
The acquisition of certain property by eminent domain tor privately held or controlled
economic development purposes In the Town of Preston Is prohibited.
The above ordinance shall become effective fifteen days from the publication of
this notice In accordance with the General Statutes.
-120-
)
\
'
TOWN OF PRESTON
NOTICE OF ADOPTION OF ORDINANC§
Pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes § H 57, the Town of Preston hereby ( J
gives notice of the adoption of the following ordinances:
j..J
1. At a Special Town Meeting, duly warned and held on June 15, 2006, an ordinance
entitled "Ordinance to Amend the Ordinaoce Concerning Public Bidding" was
· approved by a vote of the Town at said meeting.
The text of sald ordinance is as follows:
"All contracts entered into on behalf of the Town of Preston for supplies, materials
. and services In excess of $7,500.00 (except contracts for personal services of an
individual) shall only be awarded after public notice and bid, provided however that
no bid for expenditures to be paid from Town Aid Road funds shall be necessary as
. long as the price paid is equal to or less than the price to be paid by the State for
the same type of expenditure. Bid requirement may be waived by agreement of a
majority of the members of the Board of Finance."
The above ordinance shall become effective fifteen days from the publication of
this notice.
Hattie Wuclk, Town Clerk
-121-
)
'!'OWN OF PRESTON'
TOWN OFFICES
389 ROUTE 2
PRESTON, CONNECTICUT 06365-8830
NOTICE OF AMENDMENT OF ORDINANCE
Notice: At a Special Town Meeting of the Town of Preston, the
following amendment to the Ethics Ordinance was enacted by vote of
the Town.
1.- To amend Section 1.4A of the Preston Code of Ethics
Ordinance to provide for four (4) alternate members instead of
three (3), one of which shall be an unaffiliated elector of the
Town.
Adopted at a Special Town Meeting held AprilS, 2007.
' -) Dated at Preston, CT this 11th day of April 2007 .
•
)
Hattie Wucik, CCMC
Preston Town Clerk
Effective Date: April22, 2007
-122-
;'---
,_ )
)
\
TO\YN OF PRESTON
Town Ordinance Establishing Town of Preston Fire Department
Pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes 7-301 there is hereby established in the Town
of Preston a Town Fire Department which shall be known as the Preston Fire and Emergency
Services Department. Said Department shall be subject to the management, discipline and
control by the Board of Selectmen and the Board of Selectmen may make regulations for the
conduct of the fire department and may appoint, discipline and remove for cause shown ·all
employees of the department and purchase supplies and equipment necessary for its operation.
The Board of Selectmen may enter into any agreements appropriate for the conduct of fire and
emergency services in the Town of Preston with the Poquetanuck Volunteer Fire Department and
the Preston City Volunteer Fire Department.
The Department shall be responsible for the protection oflife and property within the
Town from the hannful effects of fire, explosion, medical emergencies, hazardous materials
release, structural collapse, man made and natural disasters. The fire and emergency services
department shall utilize personnel and resources pursuant to any agreements entered into by the
Board of Selectmen, of the Poquetanuck and Preston City Volunteer Fire Departmimis; The
department shall be under the command and control of the Fire Chief who shall be appointed by
the Board of Selectmen and report directly to the First Selectman. The Fire Chief shall be
responsible for the protection of life and property from fire and related emergencies and for
enforcement of all laws, ordinances, and regulations relating to fire prevention and fire safety
within the Towri of Preston. ·
The Fire Chief shall be responsible for managing and directing all fire suppression,
emerpency and rescue mitigation, emergency medical services and fire prevention activities in
the Town of Preston and shall have all authority set forth in Connecticut General Statutes 7-313e
when responding to or operating at a fire, service call, or other emergency within the Town of
Preston. In the absence of the paid fire chief at such a fire, service call, or other emergency, then
such authority shall be exercised by the highest ranking officer on scene from either of the
volunteer fire departments located within the Town ofPreston. However, if volunteer officers on
scene are of equal rank, the highest ranking officer from the assigned primary response district in
which the emergency is located shall exercise the authority set forth in Connecticut General
Statutes 7 -3!3e.
\
The duties of the fire cl)ief shall be established by the board of selectmen and shall
include but not be limited to planning; organizing, budgeting, sta,ffing, directing, and supervising
the emergency operations of the existing volunteer fire personnel, part time and full time paid
· .personnel, coordinating work with other departments, boards and comtnis~ions, maintaining
records and preparing reports. The fire chief shall be responsible for all fire apparatus, vehicles,
·fire fighting rescue and emergency medical equipment owned and/or purchased with Town funds
or obtained by the Town through grants. The fire chief shall establish standard operating
guidelines and a table of organization, which may be updated from time to time by the chief to
meet ihe needs of the community. The fire chief shall also serve· as Fire Marshal, Director of
Emergency Management and Open Burning Official.
-123-
)
Nothing in this ordinance shall alter the ownership of buildings and property currenily
owned by the volunteer fire departments, nor shall the fire chief have control over the volunteer
departments' non-profit social, fraternal, and/or benevolent corporations or organizations. Each
volunteer fire department may continue to operate under their respective by-laws, provided they
do not conflict with this ordinance, and maintain their respective identity. The Town of Preston
shall fund necessary operating expenses for the fire department to include the utility cost and
casualty and property insurance cost of the volunteer fire department buildings, which are used
specifically for the fire departments' purposes. The town shall also provide funding for injury
and death insurance policies for volunteer fire department personnel as currently in force in
addition to any workers' compensation insurance policies for volunteer and/or paid personnel.
This ordinance becomes effective fifteen (15) days from date.
of publication.
Dated@ Preston this 25th day of June, 2007.
-124-
Hattie 1-/b.aik
Preston Town Clerk
TOWN OF PRESTON
NOTICE OF ADOPTION OF ORDINANCE
At a Special Town Meeting of the Town of Preston, CT held on July 12, 2007, the
following ordinance was adopted:
AN ORDINANCE REGARDING THE REORGANIZATION OF THE
CONSERVATION/INLAND WETLANDS COMMISSION
BE IT ORDAINED BY THIS TOWN MEETING:
SECTION 1 - PURPOSE.
The purpose of this ordinance is to establish a conservation commission separate and
apart from the existing Conservation/Inland Wetlands Commission and to rename and
establish the existing Conservation/Inland Wetlands Commission as the Inland Wetlands
Commission for the Town.
SECTION 2- REORGANIZATION OF THE CONSERVATION/INLAND
WETLANDS COMMISSION.
The Conservation/Inland Wetlands Commission is hereby reorganized as follows:
(A) Repeal of Powers. The powers granted to the Conservation/Inland Wetlands
Commission to act as the conservation commission for the Town of Preston pursuant to
Connecticut General Statutes Section 7-131a, as provided in ordinances adopted at
Town Meetings held on February 25, 1971, January 13, 1972 and November 30, 1994,
are hereby repealed.
(B) New Title. The Conservation!Inland Wetlands Commission shall be named the
Inland Wetlands Commission.
(C) Powers and Duties. The Inland Wetlands Commission shall have all of the powers
and duties provided in the Connecticut Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Act
(Connecticut General Statutes Sections 22a-36 through 22a-45a, as amended from time
to time).
(D) Membership; Terms of Office: The Inland Wetlands Commission shall consist of
seven members and two alternate members. The term of office for each of the
members shall be six years, as follows:
Two to serve until January 1, 2008
One to serve until January 1, 2009
One to serve until January 1, 2010
-125-
\)
One to serve until January 1, 2011
One to serve until January 1, 2012
One to serve until January 1, 2013
The two alternate members shall each serve until January 1, 2013.
The members shall be appointed by the First Selectman. The First Selectman may
remove any member or alternate member for cause and may fill any vacancy.
The members of the Conservationllnland Wetlands Commission as of the date this
ordinance is adopted shall continue to serve as the members of the Inland Wetlands
Commission until their successors are appointed and qualified.
SECTION 3- ESTABLISHMENT OF THE CONSERVATION COMMISSION.
(A) Establishment. There is hereby established for the Town of Preston a conservation
commission to be known as the Conservation Commission.
(B) Power and Duties. The Conservation Commission shall have all of the powers and
duties of a conservation commission granted in Connecticut General Statutes Section 7-
13la, provided, however, that the Conservation Commission shall have the authority to
promulgate rules and regulations solely for the purpose of regulating the use of land
and easements acquired by the Conservation Commission in the name of the Town of
Preston. Such rules and regulations shall be adopted at a Town Meeting . •
(C) Terms of Office. :rhe Conservation Commission shall consist of seven members
and two alternate members.
The term of office for each of the members shall be six years, as follows:
Two to serve until January 1, 2008
One to serve until January 1, 2009
One to serve until January 1, 2010
One to serve until January 1, 2011
One to serve until January 1, 2012
One to serve until January 1, 2013
The two alternate members shall each serve until January 1, 2013.
The members shall be appointed by the First Selectman. The First Selectman may
remove any member or alternate member for cause and may fill any vacancy.
-126-
Hattie Wucik, Town Clerk
Town of Preston
TOWN OF PRESTON
NOTICE OF ADOPTION OF ORDINANCES
At a Special Town Meeting of the. Town of Preston, Connecticut held on
Thursday, September 27, 2007, the voters eligible to vote at Town Meetings adopted the
following ordinances: ·
1. AN ORDINANCE AUTHORIZING MUNICIPAL EMPLOYEES TO
SERVE ON LAND USE BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS, the purpose of which is to
authorize municipal employees, except those specifically prohibited by the Connecticut
General Statutes, to serve on the Town's land use boards and commissions.
2. AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE ORDINANCE CONCERNING
THE ADOPTION OF ZONING AND PLANNING IN THE TOWN OF PRESTON,
CREATING A PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION AND PROVIDING FOR
ITS APPOINTMENT AND ELECTION, the purpose of which is to authorize municipal
employees, except those specifically prohibited by the Connecticut General Statutes, to
serve on the Town's Planning and Zoning Commission.
Copies of the full texts of the Ordinances are on file and available for public
inspection at the Office of the Town Clerk, 389 Route 2, Preston, Connecticut. These
Ordinances will be effective 15 days after publication of this Notice.
TOWN OF PRESTON
By: Hattie Wucik, Town Clerk
485473 v.Ol •
R'ffee:I/.Je. dale: /0-1 J. -oVM -127-
)
-)
)
TOWN OF PRESTON
NOTICE OF ADOPTION OF ORDINANCE
At a Special Town Meeting held on March 6, 2008, the electors and those persons
eligible to vote in town meetings of the Town of Preston, Connecticut, adopted an
ordinance entitled "An Ordinance Regarding Public Comment and Questions at
Meetings of Town Boards, Commissions and Committees." The ordinance provides for
public comment and questions at all meetings of public agencies of the Town of
Preston. A copy of the full text of the ordinance is on file and available for public
inspection at the office of the Town Clerk and will be mailed by the Town Clerk to any
person that requests a copy.
The ordinance shall become effective fifteen days after the publication of this Notice.
This summary of the ordinance is prepared for the benefit of the public, solely for
purposes of information, summarization and explanation. This summary does not
represent the intent of the legislative body of the Town of Preston for any purpose.
Dated at Preston, Connecticut this ~ day of March, 2008.
499264 v.04 S2
-128-
Hattie Wucik
Town Clerk
Town of Preston
AN ORDINANCE REGARDING PUBLIC COMMENT AND QUESTIONS AT
MEETINGS OF TOWN BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES
BE IT ORDAINED BY THIS TOWN MEETING:
SECTION I PURPOSE:
The purpose of this ordinance is to require the agenda for meetings of all Town of
Preston Boards, Commissions, and Committees to provide for a public comment and
questions segment.
SECTION 2 ~DEFINITIONS:
"Agency or Agencies" is any public agency as defined in Section 1-200(1) of the
Connecticut General Statutes.
"Meeting" is any proceeding of an Agency as defmed in Section 1-200(2) of the
Connecticut General Statues.
SECTION 3 ~PROCEDURES FOR PUBLIC COMMENT AND QUESTIONS:
The following requirements and procedures shall be used for all Agencies to regulate
Public Comment and Questions during Public Meetings:
1. The agenda for public meetings of an Agency shall provide a 15-rninute time
segment devoted to Public Comments and Questions.
2. The moderator of the Agency may limit the amount of time a person is allowed to
speak provided that any individual wishing to address an Agency during a meeting
shall be permitted a minimum of2 minutes during the Public Comment and
Questions segment provided any public comment or question must be germane to
the business of that Agency.
3. No individual who has been recoguized by the moderator to address an Agency
may yield their allotted time to another individual.
4. Any Agency may set their own policy regarding responses to Public Comment and
Questions and the placement of agenda items.
5. To the extent ofthe law any Agency may limit Public Comment and Questions to
Preston residents or Preston taxpayers.
6. The Agency may from time to time limit or delete the Public Comment and·
Question segment fi·om its agenda.
)
(a) If the Public Comment and Question segment is limited or deleted from · .. :)
the agenda, the reason for limiting or deleting Public Comment and .
Question shall be identified in the agenda when it is posted.
-129-
)
(b) If the Public Comment and Question segment is limited or deleted at the
. meeting, the reason for limiting or deleting Public Comment and
Questions shall be identified and included in the minutes of the meeting.
7. The meeting moderator for each Agency may end Public Comment or Questions
to restore proper decomm.
8. Public Comment and Questions will not be permitted on matters exempt from
public discussion pursuant to the Connecticut Freedom of Information Act.
9. In an effort to provide public notice, individuals are encouraged to contact the
chairpersons of each Agency to have issues added to a public meeting agenda.
SECTION 4- DECORUM WHEN ADDRESSING AGENCIES:
Individuals wishing to address an Agency during Public Comment and Questions shall
adhere to the following criteria:
(a) Individuals may speak only when recognized by the meeting moderator.
(b) All comments and questions shall be addressed thru the meeting
moderator.
(c) Individuals may make one comment or ask one question until all other
individuals wishing to speak have had an opportunity before addressing
any Agency again.
SECTION 5- EXCEPTIONS:
This ordinance shall not apply when, in the determination of the Agency, it conflicts with
provisions of the Connecticut General Statutes.
SECTION 6- SUMMARY PUBLICATION OF ADOPTION:
Upon the adoption of this ordinance, a summary of the ordinance shall be published in
lieu of the complete text of the ordinance.
499264 v.04 Sl
-130-
TOWN OF PRESTON
NOTICE OF ADOPTION OF ORDINANCE
At a Special Town Meeting held on April30, 2009, the electors and those persons
eligible to vote in town meetings of the Town of Preston, Connecticut, adopted an
ordinance entitled "An Ordinance to Establish a Redevelopment Agency for the
Redevelopment of the Former Norwich State Hospital Property." The ordinance
provides for the establishment of the Preston Redevelopment Agency as the Town's
lead agency for the redevelopment of the former Norwich State Hospital property,
which was acquired by the Town on March 12, 2009, and specifies the powers and
duties of the Agency. A copy of the full text of the ordinance is on file and available
for public inspection at the office of the Town Clerk, is posted on the Town's website
at www.preston-ct.org and will be mailed by the Town Clerk to any person that
requests a copy.
The ordinance shall becoine effective fifteen days after the publication of this Notice.
This summary of the ordinance is prepared for the benefit of the public, solely for
purposes of information, summarization and explanation. This SUI1lll1ary does not
represent the intent of the legislative body of the Town of Preston for any purpose.
Dated at Preston, Connecticut this /sf day of May, 2009.
540100 v.Ol
;;14/:ve. -IC d3f~ al'!er
tu.b I/ aa/, O?t ~ -131-
Hattie Wucik
Town Clerk
Town of Preston
i)
)
)
.,...__
TOWN OF PRESTON
AN ORDINANCE TO ESTABLISH A REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY FOR THE
REDEVELOPMENT OF THE FORMER NORWICH STATE HOSPITAL
PROPERTY
BE IT ORDAINED BY THIS TOWN MEETING:
SECTION 1 - PURPOSE.
The purpose of this ordinance is to establish a redevelopment agency, pursuant to
Chapter 130, Part I of the Connecticut General Statutes (the "General Statutes"), for
the redevelopment of the former Norwich State Hospital property, which property was
acquired by the Town of Preston on March 12, 2009 and is shown on the attached map
(the "Property").
SECTION 2- ESTABLISHMENT OF THE PRESTON REDEVELOPMENT
AGENCY.
(A) Establishment. There is hereby established the Preston Redevelopment Agency (the
"Agency"). The Agency shall be a redevelopment agency of the Town pursuant to the
General Statutes and shall be the Town's lead agency for the redevelopment of the
Property. '
(B) Members; Terms of Office; Officers.
(1) The Agency shall consist of ten members who shall be electors resident in
the Town of Preston. The members shall be appointed by the Board of Selectmen with
the approval of a town meeting. Any person appointed shall serve at the pleasure of the
Board of Selectmen.
(2) The ten members first appointed shall be appointed as follows: two
members each sball serve for one, two, three, four, and five years, respectively, and
thereafter two members shall be appointed annually to serve for five years. Each
member shall serve until his or her successor is appointed and has qualified and any
vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term.
(3) Action by the Agency shall be taken only on the majority vote of all the
members.
(4) The Agency shall select from among its members a chairman and a vicechairman,
and may employ a secretary and such other officers, agents, technical
-/sUI~.
·'
consultants, legal counsel' and employees as it requires, subject to budgeted
appropriations or other sources of funding. No person shall cause any employee of the ·\
Agency to serve in any capacity for the purpose of promoting a political party or any }
member thereof.
(5) Members shall serve without compensation but may be reimbursed for
necessary expenses. '
SECTION 3-POWERS AND DUTIES. Except as otherwise provided in this
ordinance, the Agency shall have all of the powers and duties of a redevelopment
agency granted in the General Statutes.
(A) Preparation and Approval of Redevelopment Plan.
(1) The Agency shall prepare, or cause to be prepared, a redevelopment plan
for the Property and any redeveloper may submit a redevelopment plan
to the Agency.
(2) Before approving any redevelopment plan, the Agency ~all (i) transmit
such plan to the Preston Planniog and Zoning Commission'for its study
and for its written opinion, including a determination on whether the plan
is consistent with the Town's plan of conservation and development, (ii)
hold a public heariog on the plan, and (iii) after the P\'blic hearing, make
the findings required by the General Statutes. After the Agency has
approved the plan,, it ·shall be approved at a town meeting.
(3) The plan shall be effective for a period of ten years after town meeting
approval and may be llll\ended as provided in this Section and io
accordance with the General Statutes. The town meeting shall review
the pl,lll at least once every ten years after the initial approval, and shall
reapprove such plan or an amended plan at least once every ten years
after the initial approval in order for the plan or-amended plan to remain
in effect.
(B) Acceptance of Funds; Financing.
(1) For the purpose of carrying out or administering a redevelopment plan or
other functions authorized under this ordinance, the Town, acting by and
through the Agency, may accept grants, advances, loans or other
financial assistance from the federal government, the state or other
· source, and may do any and all things necessary or desirable to secure
such financial aid. To assist the Agency, the Town may, upon such
-13(-{3-
)
(
terms as it determines, 'furnish service or facilities, provide property,
lend or contribute funds, and take any other action of a character which
it is authorized to perform for other purposes.
(2) To obtain funds for the temporary and defUJitive financing of any
redevelopment project, the Town may, in addition to other action
authorized under this ordinance or other law, levy taxes and issue and
sell its tempora' ry loan notes, bonds or other obligations. Such
temporary loan notes shall be issued for a period of not more than three
years. Any such bonds or other obligations issued by the Town pursuant
to this subsection shall be in accordance with such statutory and other
legal requirements as govern the issuance of obligations generally by the
Town.
(C) Bonds; Authorization; Issuance by Connecticut Development Authority.
(1) For the purpose of carrying out or administering a redevelopment plan or
other functions authorized under this ordinance, the Town, acting by and
through the Agency, is authorized to issue bonds of the To)Vn, or to
issue bonds through the Connecticut Development Authority for a
specified project, which are payable solely from and secured by: (a) a
pledge of and lien upon any or all of the income, proceeds, revenues and
property of redevelopment projects; (b) taxes or pay,jllents in lieu of
taxes, or both, allocated to and paid into a special fund of the Town for
the payment of debt service, bond repurchases and other bonding costs
pursuant to the provisions of the General Statutes; or (c) any combination
of the methods in (a) and (b) of this subsection.
(2) Any bonds payable and secured as provided in this Section shall be
authorized by a resolution adopted by a town meeting.
(D) Acquisition or Rental of Real Property; Limitation on Use of Eminent
Domain.
(1) Within a reasonable time after its approval of the redevelopment plan,
the Agency may proceed with the acquisition or rental of real property
by purchase, lease, exchange or gift.
(2) The Agency may acquire real property, or interests therein, within the
. boundary lines of the Property by eminent domain with the approval of a
town meeting, provided:
- /31-t!-
--.....
(a) the acquisition shall comply with the procedures and
requirements in the General Statutes;
(b) the acquisition of any property, or interests therein, that would ~ -J
prohibit or restrict access to real property upon which there is
an inhabited residential structure shall be prohibited: and
(c) the ~cquisition of the properties labeled as "Privately Owned"
on the attached map shall be prohibited.
(3) The Town ordinance entitled "An Ordinance Prohibiting Eminent
Domain for Certain Purposes" as approved at the November 1, 2005
Town Meeting, shall not apply to the Agency's eminent domain
proceedings and acquisitions allowed under this ordinance.
(E) Transfer, Sale or Lease of Real Property.
(1) The Agency may sell, lease or otherwise transfer for such sums as are
agreed upon the whole or any part of the real property within a
redevelopment area to the redeveloper or, if the real property is to be
used for public purposes, to an appropriate public agency.
(2) Any contract for sale, lease or other transfer shall be approved by a town
meeting before its fmal approval by the Agency: ,
SECTION 4- SUMMARY PUBJJCA TION OF ADOPTION. Upon the adoption of
this ordinance, a summary of the ordinance shall be published in lieu of the
complete text of the ordinance.
This ordinance shall be effective fifteen (15) days after the date of publication.
-131-D-
)
)
Town of Preston, CT
~·onner Norwich State
Hospital Property ) .
)~
\
\
---jegend
ITIIIlii Privately Owned
c:J Former Norwich State Hospital
~ Proposed DOT Parcel
'.
\
___ LEFT BLANK INTENTIONALLY __ _
)
.-:_)
( )
)
Town of Preston
Notice of Adoption of Ordinance
Note: At a Special Town Meeting, of the Town of Preston the following amendment to
an Ordinance was enacted by vote of the Town.
1. An Ordinance amending an ordinance of the Town of Preston Building Permit Fees
(that shall become effective July 1, 2009).
A copy of the Current Fee Scheduled is on file with the Town Clerk's Office and the
Building Department.
Dated at Preston, Connecticut this 14th day of July, 2009.
Hattie Wucik
Preston Town Clerk
£Hed.'vo tY/-.9?'-oC/
;s-J-;y s "J-fie-r pah(u/:1771
Mled· .
II· tt/4k'.c£
·~r!ltth
-132-
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING AN ORDINANCE OF
THE TOWN OF PRESTON BUILDING PERMIT FEES
(effective date July 1, 2009)
BUILDING PERMIT FEES ARE AS FOLLOWS: )
A 1 RESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTION:
One and Two Family Dwellings
a New Construction $8.00 per $1,000
b Alteration/Addition/Renovation $8.00 per $1,000
c Residential Accessory Structures:
1. Detached Garages $8.00 per $1 ,ooo
2. Barns/Sheds/Storage (residential) $8.00 per $1,000
3. Above Ground Pools $45.00 above ground +building
permit fees as applicable for
fences, walks, outbuildings, etc
4. In Ground Pools $75.00 in ground + building permit
fees as applicable for fences,
walks, outbuildings, etc.
d Plumbing (Residential) $6.00 per $1,000 min $25.00
e Mechanical (Residential) $6.00 per $1,000 min $25.00
f Electrical (Residential) $6.00 per $1,000 min $25.00
2 AGRICULTURAL- FARMING: ) a Barns/Sheds/Storage Only $8.00 per $1,000
b Any Building under Planning & Zoning
Regulation Section 15.18.1-B or D
$16.00 per$1,000
3 COMMERCIAL (INCLUDING MUL Tl FAMILY)
a New Construction $16.00 per$1,000
b Alteration/Addition/Renovation $16.00 per $1,000
c Accessory Structures $16.00 per$1,000
d Plumbing (Commercial) $16.00 per $1,000
e Mechanical (Commercial) $16.00 per$1,000
f Electrical (Commercial) $16.00 per$1,000
4 DEMOLITION
$15.00 minimum for a shed
$45.00 for entire residence or barn type
structure
5 REMOVAL OR MOVING
MOVING (Residential/Residential Accessory within Town) $4.00 per $1,000
6 MOVING (Residential From Out of Town) -)
Applicable as new residential
7 MOVING (Commercial)
Applicable as new commercial
-133-
Notes:
1. Fee for reinspeclion of work when it is called in and not ready for inspection $25.00
(does not include rejected work)
2. Double permit fees when work is started without a permit
3. Expired Permit Fees minimum
Residential Accessory
Residential
Commercial
Minimum
$0.00
$250.00
$500.00
Maximum
Cost of remaining work
Cost of remaining work
Cost of remaining work
B. Town of Preston owned buildings will require Building permits, however, no building permit fees will be
collected for any Town of Preston owned building including trade permits for repairs or renovations on any
owned buildings, except as required by law.
C. On all building permits issued by the Town of Preston on or after February 1, 1990 for all buildings, structures,
or other projects of such a nature that the local building official is unable to perform a complete plan review
including plans, specifications and construction inspections without expert assistance and the building official
deems it necessary to hire an expert consultant(s} in order to perform such a review and inspections, there will
be charged, in addition to the regular building permit fee, a surcharge to cover such consultant's fees. The
surcharge fees will be equal to the fees charged by any expert consultants retained by the Town to assist in
the review and inspections, for compliance with the State of Connecticut Building Code, shall be due and
payable at the time such charges are made to the Town. The surcharge may be in addition for any surcharge
for "threshold" building reviews and inspections.
)
-134-
RECEIVED
PRESTON. CT.
zooq JUL 2 1 p 1: 53
_;\~~m~ TOqJ:tJoJ)v
TOWN OF PRESTON
NOTICE OF ADOPTION OF ORDINANCE
At a Special Town Meeting held on February 25, 2010, the electors and those persons
eligible to vote in town meetings of the Town of Preston, Connecticut, adopted an
ordinance entitled "An Ordinance Amending the Ordinance to Establish a
Redevelopment Agency for the Redevelopment of the Former Norwich State Hospital
Property." The revision to the existing ordinance provided as follow:
That the Town's ORDINANCE TO ESTABLISH A REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY
FOR THE REDEVELOPMENT OF THE FORMER NORWICH STATE HOSPITAL
PROPERTY, as adopted at the April30, 2009 Special Town Meeting, is hereby
amended to add, under SECTION 3 ·POWERS AND DUTIES, a new subsection (F)
to read as follows:
(F) Management and Finance Powers. In addition to the powers and duties
granted to the Agency by the General Statutes and other Town of Preston
ordinances, the Agency shall have the following additional powers and duties:
'
(1) The Agency may approve expenditures of non-tax derived funds up to
$500,000, contract commitments up to an award level of $1,000,000,
recommendations to the Town for major deviations in land use from the approved
Conceptual & Management Plan for the Redevelopment of Preston Riverwalk dated
February 2010 (the "CMP"), and approval of significant changes in supporting
plans for infrastructure or sequence of development.
(2) The Chairman of the Agency may approve individual expenditures of
appropriated funds received from the Preston General Fund not to exceed $5,000,
expenditures of non-tax derived funds up to $100,000, contract commitments up to
$250,000, submitted requests for funding/services grants and loans, and application
of non-tax derived funds to matching fund grants up to $100,000.
(3) The Agency's Director of Communications, Operations Manager and
Director of Marketing may authorize disbursements of up to $1,000.
All contract commitments and disbursement of Agency funds will be subject to the
Contract Management Procedures and Financial Controls described in Parts B and
C of the CMP.
Any expenditures or awarding of Contracts requires an individual majority Vote of
the Entire PRA Membership for approval as per Connecticut State Statute.
1406867vl
-135-
I )
)
)
The Agency, by a majority vote of its entire membership, may revise the powers
and duties given to its Chairman, Director of Co=unications, Operations Manager
and Director of Marketing as described j.f.) and (3) above, provided that the Agency
may not exceed its powers and duties described in (1) above.
The ordinance shall become effective fifteen days after the publication of this Notice.
Dated at Preston, Connecticut this ...J!day of March, 2010.
lffeolve Ne.: 03-lt-;.oto
'1fw
-136-
1406867vl
Hattie Wucik
Town Clerk
Town of Preston
'
•
,,
TOWN OF PRESTON
ADOPTION OF ORDINANCE
At a Special Town Meeting, of the Town of Preston, held on Thursday, September 16,
2010 the voters eligible to vote at Town Meetings adopted the following amended
ordinances: •
1. An Ordinance amending an Ordinance of the Town of Preston, titled "An Ordinance
Concerning the Adoption of a Fee Schedule for the Processing of Land Use
Applications," as adopted at the January 25, 1990 Special Town Meeting.
2. An amendment to the Preston Code of Ethics, (in accordance with the A'u gust 25,2010
)
proposed recommendations of the Preston Ethics Commission)-To ADD "Approved
September 16,2010 and which supersedes all previous versions to the cover page of the --_ )-
document.
Copies of the full texts, or the amended Ordinances, are on file and available for public
inspection at the Office of the Town Clerk, 3 89 Route 2, Preston, CT. These ordinances
will be effective 15 days after publication of this Notice.
Dated at Preston, Connecticut this 23'd day September, 2010.
(f(ttttzv~
Hattie Wucik
Preston Town Clerk
Effective Date: 10/08/20 10
-137-
,-)
I)
)
Page 1 of 2
AN ORDINANCE CONCERNING THE ADOPTION OF A FEE
SCHEUDLE FOR THE PROCESSING OF LAND USE APPLICATIONS
(Adopted at a Special Town M'e eting January 25, 1990}
The existing Ordinance adopted at the January 25, 1990 Special Town Meeting is
hereby rescinded and replaced with the following:
Fee schedules for all land use applications that appear before the Planning and
Zoning, Zoning Board of Appeals and the Inland Wetland and Watercourses
Commission sha.ll be as set forth in the respective regulations governing said
board or commission.
-138-
'·
I '
REVISED
AN ORDINANCE CONCERNING THE A!XlPTION OF A FEE SCHEDULE FOR THE PReCESSING
OF LAND USE APPLICATIONS (Adopted at a Special Town Meeting January 25, 1990)
BE IT ENACTED:
1. Pursuant to the provisions of SS-lc of the Connecticut General
Statutes 1 there is hereby established the following schedule of fees tor
processing various land use·applications:
a. For an application to the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission1.
$100. for an applicat(on requiring a Public Hearing; $25. for all - --~-·
other appllcations,
b. For an application to the Zoning Board of Appeals 1 $50.
c. For an application seeking site plan approval or the granting of a
Special Exception, $50. 1 plus a sum, to' be computed by a retained Tovn
Engineer, equal to three percent (3\) of the estimated cost of the
public improvements required by the approving Commission or Board to
be paid prioJ to the endorsement of the record map.
d. For an appli<:'a!:_i_on s~~k~l)g_ ~-special_ permit fo:r; a _ mu.lti:-fa!Jiily .... _
complex, the minimum fee shall be $100. for each applica~ion and. the
maximum fee shall be $'3~. per dwelling unit, plus a sum1 to be·
computed by a retained Tovn Engineer, equal to three percent (3\) at/·
the estimqted cost of the public improvements and public safety· . -•'
related community improvements required by the approving Commission or
B~ard to be paid prior to the endorsement of the record map.
e. For an application seeking approval of a subdivision or resubd' ivision
plan, the minimum fee shall be $50. for each application and the
maximum fee shall be $25. for each lot vithin the proposed
subdivision/resubdivision, plus a sum 1 to be computed by a retained
Tovn Engineer, equal to three percent (3\) of the es'timated cost of
the public improvements required by the approving Commission or Board
to be paid prior to the endor.sement of the record nap.
. .
f. For any other application to the Pla'nning and Zoning Commission, $50,
2. "Public Illlprovements "1 ·for :the· pur [loses o E tliis .o·.rd.i<nance, includes but
is not limited to the construction of nev roads, imprevements tq existing
·roads, storm drainage, vater, sever and other utility lihes, the setting
aside of open space and recreation areas, planting of trees or other
landscaping, the installation of retaining valls or other structures and
erosion and sediment controls.
3. This ordinance ·shall take effect upon passage and publication according
to laY.
./
. - 139-
)
TOWN OF PRESTON
NOTICE OF ADOPTION OF ORDINANCE
At a Special Town meeting, of the Town of Preston, held on Thursday,
October 21,2010 the voters eligible to vote at Town Meetings adopted the following
ordinance.
An ordinance entitled "An Ordinance to Define the Annual Town Budget Meeting and
Board of Finance Public Hearing."
A copy of the ordinance, is on file and available for public inspection at the Preston
Town Clerk Office, 389 Route 2, Preston, CT. during regular office hours and on the
Town's website at www.preston-ct.org.
This ordinance will be effective 15 days after publication of this notice.
Dated at Preston, Connecticut this 22nct day of October, 2010
Hattie Wucik
Preston Town Clerk
- 140- See 141 also
'
AN ORDINANCE TO DEFINE THE ANNUAL TOWN BUDGET MEETING
AND BOARD OF FINANCE PUBLIC HEARING
The purpose ofthis ordinance is to establish a fixed schedule for preparation and approval
of the annual budget for the Town of Preston in accordance with the requirements of
Connecticut General Statutes, Chapter 106,,Section 7-344.
A proposed General Government budget approved by the Board of Selectmen and a
proposed Education Budget approved by the Board of Education shall be submitted to the
Board of Finance no later than the first Tuesday in the month of March immediately
preceding the fiscal year and shall be submitted in ~lectronic and paper format.
The Annual Town Budget Meeting shall be held on the first Thursday of the month of May
immediately preceding the fiscal year.
The Board of Finance shall hold a public hearing not less than two weeks before the
Annual Town Budget Meeting. At such hearing, the Board of Finance will present
itemized estimates of the expenditures of the Town for the ensuing fiscal year' and shall
allow all persons to be heard with respect to such appropriations as they are desirous that
the Board of Finance should recommend or reject.
Following the public hearing, the Board of Finance shall meet to adopt a final budget
report to be submitted to the Annual Town Budget Meeting. The Board of Finance shall
submit such report to the Board of Selectman and the Town Clerk in a sufficiently timely
fashion to allow publication of the budget report five days prior to the date of the Annual
Town Budget Meeting.
Upon completion of any business that may properly come before the Annual Town Budget
Meeting and after an opportunity for discussion and action on the appropriations
recommended by the Board of Finance, the Annual Town Budget Meeting shall be
adjourned to a referendum to be held on a date that is not less than seven days nor more
than fourteen days thereafter.
This Ordinance shall take effect fifteen (IS) days after approval.
Effective: November 8, 2010
Attest- Hattie lvucik
Preston Town Clerk
-141-
~)
)
·)
J
J
TOWN OF PRESTON
NOTICE OF ADOPTION OF ORDINANCE
At a Special Town Meeting held on March 15, 2012, the electors and those persons
eligible to vote in town meetings of the 'Fown of Preston, Connecticut, adopted an
ordinance entitled "An Ordinance to Provide Additional Property Tax Exemption for
Veterans." The ordinance provides for an additional property tax exemption of$10,000
of the assessed value of property owned by an eligible veteran or an eligible surviving
spouse of a veteran if their qualifying income does not exceed the applicable maximum
amount specified in State law. The ordinance also details the application and application
renewal process for the additional exemption. A copy of the full text of the ordinance is
on file and available for public inspection at the office of the Town Clerk, is posted on
the Town's website at www.preston-ct.org and will be mailed by the Town Clerk to any
person that requests a copy.
The ordinance shall become effective fifteen days after the publication of this Notice.
This summary of the ordinance is prepared for the benefit of the public, solely for
purposes of information, summarization and explanation. This summary does not
represent the intent of the legislative body of the Town of Preston for any purpose.
Dated at Preston, Connecticut this 22nd day of March, 2012.
Effective Date: April61
\ 2012
22t9525vl
-142-
Hattie Wucik
Town Clerk
Town of Preston
See Also - 143 & 144
TOWN OF PRESTON
AN ORDINANCE TO PROVIDE ADDITIONAL PROPERTY TAX EXEMPTION FOR
VETERANS
'
BE IT ORDAINED BY THIS TOWN MEETING:
SECTION 1 - PURPOSE.
The purpose of this ordinance is to provide additional property tax exemption for
veterans as provided for in Com1. Gen. Stat. § 12-8lf.
SECTION 2- EXEMPTION.
Any veteran entitled to an exemption from property tax in accordance with Conn.
Gen. Stat. § 12-81 (19) shall be entitled to an additional exemption of $10,000 of such
assessed value applied to the assessed value of an eligible veteran's property, provided
such veteran's qualifying income does not exceed the applicable maximum amount as
provided under Conn. Gen. Stat. § 12-81/ and provided such veteran complies with the
claim and application procedures set forth in subsections (4) and (5) of this ordinance.
SECTION 3- EXEMPTION FOR SURVIVING SPOUSE.
Any veteran's surviving spouse entitled to an exemption from property tax in
accordance with Conn. Gen. Stat. § 12-81(22) shall be entitled to an additional exemption
of $10,000 of such assessed value applied to the assessed value of an eligible surviving
spouse's property, provided such surviving spouse's qualifying income does not exceed the
applicable maximum amount as provided under Conn. Gen. Stat. § 12-811 and provided
such surviving spouse complies with the claim and application procedures set forth in
subsections (4) and (5) of this ordinance.
SECTION 4- APPLICATION PROCESS.
Any such veteran or surviving spouse submitting a claim for such additional
exemption shall be required to file an application on a form prepared for such purpose by
the Town Assessor, no later than the assessment date which such additional exemption is
claimed, provided when an applicant has filed for such exemption and received approval
for the first time, such applicant shall be required to file for such exemption biennially
thereafter, subject to the provisions of subsection (5) of this ordinance. Each such
application shall include a copy of such veteran's or surviving spouse's federal income tax
return, or in the event such return is not filed, such evidence related to income as may be
required by the Town assessor for the tax year ending immediately prior to the assessment
)
date with respect to which such additional exemption is claimed. For purposes of this _ -)
2196784vl -143-
ordinance income is defined as income from all sources, including tax-exempt interest and
social se£urity payments.
· SECTION 5 - APPL!CA TION RENEWAL.
Any person who has submitted an application and been approved in any year for the
additional exemption under subsection (2) or (3) of this ordinance shall, in any year
immediately following approval, be presumed to be q1,1alified for such exemption. During
the year immediately following such approval, the Town assessor shall notify, in writing,
each person presumed to be qualified pursuant to this subsection. If any such person has
qualifying income in excess of the maximum amount allowed under said subsection (2) or
(3), such person shall notify the Town assessor on or before the next filing date for such
exemption and shall be denied such exemption for the assessment year immediately
following and any subsequent year until such person has reapplied and again qualified for
such exemption. Any person who fails to notify the Town assessor of such disqualification
shall make payment to the town in the amount of the property tax loss related to the
exemption improperly taken.
SECTION 6 ~SUMMARY PUBLICATION OF ADOPTION. Upon the adoption of
this ordinance, a summary of the ordinance shall be published in lieu of the complete text
of the ordinance. '
This ordinance shall be effective fifteen ( 15) days after the date of publication.
EFFECTIVE DATE: Aprif 6th, 2012
ATTEST:
21961&4vl
~laz0. -l,();;v£
attie Huc1.k
Preston Town Clerk
-144-
,,
TOWN OF PRESTON
NOTICE OF ADOPTION OF ORDINANCES
At a Special Town Meeting held on December 6, 2012 the electors and
those persons eligible to vote in Town Meetings of the Town of Preston,
Connecticut, adopted an ordinance entitled:
Property Tax Exemption for Farm Buildings
and Seasonal Farm Employee Housing
§121-21. Property Tax Exemption for Farm Buildings and Seasonal Farm Employee
Housing.
Pursuant to Section 12-91(c) of the Connecticut General Statutes, any building used
actually and exclusively in farming as defined in Section 1-1, or for any building used to )
provide housing for seasonal farm employees shall be exempt from property tax. The
amount of such exemption shall not exceed twenty one thousand dollars ($21,000.00) of
assessed value for each eligible building. Such exemption shall not apply to residence of
the farmer and shall be subject to the application and qualification process provided in
Section 12-91(d) of the Connecticut General Statutes, commencing with the October 2012
Grand List.
This ordinance shall become effective fifteen days after the publication of this notice.
Effective Date: 12/24/2012
Hattie Wucik
Preston Town Clerk
-145-
--)
)
TOWN OF PRESTON
ADOPTION OF ORDINANCE
A Special Town Meeting, of the Town of Preston, held on Thursday
January 23,2014 the voters eligible to vote at Town Meetings
adopted the following amended ordinance to Section 4D.(l) of the
Preston Code of Ethics:
I. Set forth that a majority of those voting and present shall be required for
action, unless otherwise provide in the Code of Ethics.
2. Require the Commission to meet no less than annually.
Copies of the full texts, or the amended Ordinance, are on file and available for
Public inspection at the Office of the Town Clerk 3S9 Route 2, Preston, CT
This ordinance will be effective in 15 days.
Dated at Preston, Connecticut the 24111 day of January, 2014.
Effective Date: February 9, 2015.
Hattie Wucik
Preston Town Clerk
·'--.___/.
TOWN OF PRESTON
LEGAL NOTICE
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING AN ORDINANCE CONCERNING THE
ESTABLISHMENT OF A CONSERVATION COMMISSION ADOPTED
FEBRUARY 25, 1971 AS AMENDED
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE TOWN OF PRESTON:
That hereinafter, the Conservation Commission for the Town of Preston shall be
known as the Conservation and Agl'icultural Commission for the Town of Preston.
Effective Date: : Q 9- 2 6 , 2014
L )
Reference: Town Meeting Book JS.., Page 11..
Dated at Preston, this 11th day of June, 2014.
ct/tlltzu~ ~£)
Hattie Huclk
Preston Town Clerk
J
)
)
Town of Preston
Legal Notice
AN ORDINANCE EXEMPTING THE TOWN OF PRESTON FROM
MAKING TAX REFUNDS IN AMOUNTS LESS THAN FIVE DOLLARS
Be it ordained by the Town of Preston that:
1. The Tax Collector of the Town of Preston is hereby authorized to retain payments
in excess of the amount of taxes due provided the amount of the excess payment is
less than (5) dollars. ·
. 2. This authority is established pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes § 12-129
This ordinance shall become effective fifteen days after the publication of this
notice.
Effective Date: January 6, 2015
Hattie Wucik
Preston Town Clerk
.'
ORDINANCE CONCERNING PUBLIC BIDDING
,'
.____,e it ordained by the electors of the Town of Preston at a duly warned Town Meeting held
December 18, 20 14 that all existing bidding ordinances are deleted and replaced with:
1. All contracts and requisitions for goods or services, exceeding ten thousand dollars . )
($1 0,000), shall require sealed bids, based upon specifications p.. repared by the requisitioning
department, or their designee, as applicable.
2. Invitations to bid shall be published in a newspaper having a substantial circulation in the
region and in such other publications as the Town may choose at least 14 calendar days prior to
the opening of said bids.
3. Sealed bids shall be filed by bidders and shall be opened and read aloud at a place, date, and
time specified in the invitation to bid.
4. All bid invitations must state that the Town may reject any and all bids, in whole or in part,
or the Board of Finance may waive any formalities in the bid if, in its opinion, it is in the best
interest of the Town to do so.·
. "' If the lowest bidder meets all specifications, is responsive, and if applicable, qualified, but )
~·
the bid is not acceptable to the requisitioning department, the matter must be referred to the
Board of Selectmen for its decision on whether to reject all bids, to accept a higher bid, or to
take such other action as may be in the best interest of the Town.
6. Bulk items such as road salt, fuel, oil, clerical supplies, construction materials, and other
similar items, which may be delivered at intervals, may be bid on a unit measure basis.
7. The requisitioning department may obtain bids of hourly rates for equipment and labor from
contractors. Each such rate schedule shall be binding upon the submitting contractor for up to
one (1) fiscal year or until another bid is requested.
8. Purchases, having a dollar value of $2,000.00 to $5,000.00 shall be made by an authorized
purchase order and shall require informal bids in the form of verbal quotations. from a
minimum of three (3) vendors or suppliers as feasible unless waived by the Board of finance.
Purchases having an estimated dollar value of more than $5,000 and not more than $10,000
shall be made by an authorized purchase order and shall require competitive bids ·in the form
of documented written quotations from a minimum of three (3) vendors or contractors.
Waivers of Bid Requirements:
J
1. If the State of Connecticut, Department of Administration Services, Bureau of Purchases has
awarded contracts for goods or services to bidders who warrant to the State that the prices, .
t~rms, and conditions will be extended to all political subdivisions within the State or to certain~.,
- )ricts or counties within the State of Connecticut, the Board of Selectmen may authorize the
purchase ofthose goods or services without bid. If there is more than one vendor listed for the
same item the Town shall quotes from all listed vendors.
· 2. The Board of Selectmen may authorize the purchase of goods or services, with or without
bid, in conjunction with other municipalities or regional government purchasing entities.
3 .. The Board of Finance may waive the provisions of the Section pertaining to bid
requirements and may authorize a negotiated contract or a shortened notice schedule if deemed
by it to be in the best interest ofthe Town. Such waiver shall be in writing and filed with the
final purchase order/invoice. The Board of Finance may also authorize the requisitioning
department to negotiate a contract with a vendor or vendors or to conduct bidding utilizing a
restricted or prequalified list of bidders if deemed in the best interest of the Town.
4. In the case of licensed professionals, such as, but not limited to, architects, lawyers and
engineers, bidding shall not be required; their services and fees shall be negotiated.
'i. An invitation for bid or other solicitation may be canceled, or any and all bids may be -~-
)ected in whole or in part as may be specified in the solicitation, when it is for good cause an. .
in the best interests ofthe town. The reasons shall be made part ofthe contract file. Each
solicitation issued by the town shall state that the solicitation may be canceled and that any bid
may be rejected in whole or in part for. good cause when in the best interests of the town. Notice
of cancellation shall be sent to all businesses solicited. The notice shall identify the solicitation,
explain the reason for cancellation and, where appropriate, explain that an opportunity will be
given to compete on any re-solicitation or any future procurements of similar items. Reasons for
rejection shall be provided upon request by unsuccessful bidders.
Dated at Preston, CT this 301
h day of December, 2014
This ordinance will be effective 15 days after publication of this notice.
Effective Date: January 15, 2015
Hattie Wucik
Preston Town Clerk
)
TOWN OF PRESTON
ADOPTION OF ORDINANCE
At a Special Town Meeting, of the Town of Preston, held on Thursday, December 18, 2014.the
voters eligible to vote at Town Meetings adopted the following amended ordinance:
An amendment to the Preston Code of Ethics, to:
1. Remove items 1 thru 5 from section 4, Subsection B -Qualifications
2. Renumber items 6 and 7 of Section 4, Subsection B -Qualifications as items 1 and 2.
3. 'Add the following to Section 4, Subsection B-Qualifications as item 3: "However, if an
Ethics Commission member is also a member of a Town Board, Commission or Agency or
employed by the Town or Board of Education and a complaint is filed against one of the
aforementioned or any member thereof, that member must recuse himself or herself.
Copies of the full texts, or the amended Ordinances, are on file and available for publiC
inspection at the Office of the Town Clerk, 389 Route 2, Preston, CT. These ordinances will be
effective 15 days after publication of this Notice.
Dated at Preston, Connecticut this 30th day December, 2014·.
Effe'ctive Date: January 14, 2015·
Hattie Wucik
Preston Town Clerk
)

Preston Zoning Regulations
Approved with the following modifications:
1. All grammatical errors be corrected as recommended by the Codification Company “General Code” .
2. Lettering and numbering be corrected as recommended by the Codification Company “General Code”.
3. Insert a table of content.
4. Insert date of approval of the regulations in approprioate locations throughout. Approval date February 26, 2019 Effective date March 18, 2019.
5. Add the following for clarification purposes to Section 16.7.2: Agricultural uses are not necessarily considered an accessory use and may be permited as a principal use.
Approved on February 26, 2019
Effective date March 18, 2019
2
3
ZONING REGULATIONS
TOWN OF PRESTON, CONNECTICUT
SECTION 1 - TITLE, AUTHORITY, PURPOSE
1.1 Title. These Regulations shall be known as the “Zoning Regulations for the Town of Preston, Connecticut,” and are herein referred to as “these Regulations.”
1.2 Authority. These Regulations are prepared and adopted pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 124 of the General Statutes, 1958 Revision, as amended.
1.3 Effective date. These Regulations were first adopted on April 4, 1964 and were effective on April 13, 1964. Amendments and revisions are listed in the beginning of the document. The most recent comprehensive revision to these regulations was adopted on February 26, 2019 and have an effective date of March 18, 2019.
1.4 Purposes. The purposes of these Regulations are to: encourage the most appropriate use of land throughout the community; promote health and the general welfare, secure safety from fire, panic, flood, and other dangers; provide adequate light and air; prevent the overcrowding of land and the undue concentration of the population; lessen congestion in the streets through implementing “complete street” concepts as defined by the Connecticut Department of Transportation, ensure that each use is consistent with the character of the neighborhood; facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, and other public requirements; conserve the value of land and buildings; protect existing and potential public surface and ground drinking water supplies; provide that the proper provision be made for control of erosion and sedimentation; encourage the preservation of historically and architecturally important features; encourage the use of solar and other forms of renewable energy.
SECTION 2 – DEFINITIONS
2.1 For the purposes of these Regulations, certain terms or words shall be defined as follows: words in the present tense include the future and words in the singular number include the plural and vice versa. The term “person” includes a partnership or corporation, and the word “used” means designed, intended or modified for use. Words not specifically defined shall have commonly accepted definitions.
Accessory Use or Building. A use or a building customarily incidental and subordinate to the principle use or building and located on the same lot as such principal use or building, or on a contiguous lot under the same ownership.
.
Accessory Apartment: A set of rooms in a single-family dwelling with separate housekeeping facilities permitted in accordance with Section 16.6 of these Regulations, including separate bathroom and kitchen and subordinate to the principal dwelling.
4
Accessory Farm Businesses (AFB): An accessory farm business, as identified in Section 5.2.14, is a farm business located within the boundaries of a farm property that has a minimum of twenty-five (25) acres of which a minimum of five (5) acres shall be for the growing of produce or crops or pasture for farm animals. AFBs shall be operated as part of a farm based on the filing of an IRS Schedule F 1040 approved by the Assessor.
Affordable Housing District (AHD): A proposed housing development in which, for at least forty (40) years after the initial occupancy of units within the proposed development (a) not less than fifteen percent (15%) of the dwelling units will be conveyed by deeds containing covenants or restrictions, or leased pursuant to leases containing leasehold covenants which will require that such dwelling units be sold or rented at, or below, prices which will preserve the units as affordable housing, as defined in Connecticut General Statute Section 8-30g, for person or families whose income is less than or equal to eighty percent (80%) of the area median income or the statewide median income, whichever is less; and (b) not less than fifteen percent (15%) of the dwelling units shall be conveyed or rented in the same manner to persons or families whose income is less than or equal to sixty percent (60%) of the area median income for Preston or the statewide median income, whichever is less.
Affordable Housing Unit. A housing unit within an Affordable Housing Development for which persons and families pay thirty percent (30%) or less of their annual income for principal, interest, taxes and insurance, or rent, whichever is applicable, where such income is less than or equal to eighty percent (80%) or sixty percent (60%), as applicable, of the lesser of the area median income for Preston or the statewide median income, as determined by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development.
Assisted Living Facility. A managed residential development with limited care and is designed for senior citizens who need some assistance with daily activities but do not require care in a nursing home or building that is restricted, to the extent allowed by State and Federal law, to persons who are fifty-five (55) or more years of age or disabled, and, provides: residents with supervision of self-administered medication, a transition between independent living and skilled nursing care, three (3) meals per day, personal care services, transportation, and housekeeping services. Assisted Living Facilities do not typically provide skilled-medical services. Staff members typically oversee and monitor residents and are available twenty-four (24) hours a day to meet residents’ unscheduled needs. They develop individualized service plans tailored to the needs of each resident. A nurse is on call twenty-four (24) hours a day. Furthermore, it is a housing facility or community that fully complies with the provisions of the United States Fair Housing Act 42 Sec. 3601, et. seq. CGS 46a-64b, as they pertain to Housing for Older Persons.
Bed and Breakfast Inn. An accessory use of an owner-occupied residential building, having eight (8) or less guest rooms, without their own separate kitchen facilities, in which overnight accommodations and breakfast only are provided to guests for a daily fee. Such Bed and Breakfast includes peer-to-peer online marketplace.
Board or ZBA. The Zoning Board of Appeals of the Town of Preston, Connecticut.
5
Building. Any structure having a roof and intended for the shelter, housing or enclosure of person, animals, poultry or materials. Any other structure, including an accessory structure to a permitted use, and including generators, fuel tanks such as propane or oil tanks exceeding 100 gallons, and fences and walls which are more than eight feet (8’) high, shall be considered as buildings. Building and structure are used interchangeably.
Building Height. The vertical distance from the finished grade at any point under consideration to the highest point of flat or mansard roofs including the top and ridge for gable, hip, or gambrel roofs. A flat roof is one whose pitch has a rise of less than three inches (3”) in one foot (1’) of run.
Building Line. The inner line of any required yard or required setback and the corresponding parallel property line. Except as specifically provided by these regulations, no portion of any building or structure may be extended to occupy any portion of the lot area between the building line and the parallel property line.
Camper Unit. A tent or a vehicle designed, used or intended for use temporarily for camping, recreation, travel and vacationing, and is or can be mounted on wheels and may be self-propelled, but shall not include a mobile home and shall not exceed four hundred (400) square feet.
Congregate Housing. As defined in CGS Section 8-119e.
Class A Housing. Housing in which thirty percent (30%) of the units are affordable; with fifteen percent (15%) of the units restricted to persons or families whose income is less than or equal to eighty percent (80%) of the area median income or statewide income, whichever is less, and fifteen percent (15%) whose personal or family income is less than or equal to sixty percent (60%) of the area median income or the statewide income, whichever is less.
Class B Housing. Housing in which when forty percent (40%) of the units are affordable; with twenty-five percent (25%) of the units restricted to families whose income is less than or equal to eighty percent (80%) of the area median income or statewide income, whichever is less, and fifteen percent (15%) whose personal or family income is less than or equal to sixty percent (60%) of the area median income or the statewide income, whichever is less.
Clean Fill. “Clean fill” means (1) natural soil (2) rock, brick, ceramics, concrete, and asphalt paving fragments which are virtually inert and pose neither a pollution threat to ground or surface waters nor a fire hazard and (3) polluted soil as defined in subdivision (45) of subsection (a) of Section 22a-133k-1 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies which soil has been treated to reduce the concentration of pollutants to levels which do not exceed the applicable pollutant mobility criteria and direct exposure criteria established in Sections 22a-133k-1 through 22a-133k-3 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies and which soil is reused in accordance with R.C.S.A. subdivision (3) of subsection (h) of Section 22a133k-2 of such CGS.
CGS. Connecticut General Statutes.
6
Commercial Recreational Facility. Such facility is operated on a commercial basis and maybe indoors or outdoors, open to the public for a fee, for purposes of public recreation, such as skating rink, skateboard park, bicycle course, bowling alley, indoor recreational facility (soccer, baseball, tennis, basketball), swimming pool, golf course and other similar uses as determined to be acceptable to the Commission pursuant to Section 18.13 of these Regulations.
Commercial Vehicle. Any motor vehicle designed or used to carry freight, passengers for a fee or merchandise or used in conjunction with a business.
Commission. The Planning and Zoning Commission of the Town of Preston, Connecticut.
Complete Street. A street program that provides safe access for all users by providing a comprehensive, integrated, connected multi-modal network of transportation options.
Day Care. A program of supplementary care provided to one (1) or more persons on a regularly recurring, but part-time basis, in a place other than the recipients own dwelling.
Day Care Center. Is as defined in CGS Section 19a-77.
Family Day Care Home. Is as defined in CGS Section 19a-77.
Group Day Care Home. Is as defined in CGS Section 19-77.
Day Visitor. Any individual or group of individuals who, for a fee, use any of the facilities, programs or events of a recreation campground, but who do not stay overnight at the facility. Day visitors may be, but do not have to be, guests of an overnight camper at the facility, and shall be registered through the use of a visitor pass, wristband, ticket, vehicle pass, or other methods of control. The total number of day visitors shall not exceed six (6) day visitors, at any given time per each developed campsite, but in no event shall the total number of day visitors exceed three thousand (3,000) or as permitted by the Director of Health, Town Sanitarian, or Fire Marshal, whichever is less.
Department of Energy & Environmental Protection or DEEP. The Department of Energy and Environmental Protection means and refers to the State of Connecticut Department of Energy & Environmental Protection.
Deposit of Fill. The deposit of material, including earth materials, clean fill which total more than one hundred (100) cubic yards of material in a single calendar year, except in connection with (a) a bonafide construction project for which a zoning permit has been issued; (b) a subdivision approved by the Commission, and (c) a bonafide landscaping or farming activity on the same property provided no more than two thousand (2,000) cubic yards of material are so deposited within a single calendar year.
Developable Acres is defined as raw land excluding a) designated wetland and watercourses as defined in the CGS; b) areas subject to utility easements; c) areas over five thousand (5,000) square feet that have slopes in excess of twenty-five percent (25%) (Predevelopment).
7
Driveway. An access way for vehicles providing a connection from a public street (defined herein) to either individual single-family residences or to a parking area serving multifamily residences; commercial businesses; recreational, institutional, office, or industrial land uses.
Dwelling, Multi-family. A building designed for and occupied as a residence by three (3) or more families living in separate dwelling units, and includes Elderly Active Adult Housing, Assisted Living, Life Care, Condominiums, and Town Houses. The definition of multifamily does not include accessory apartments pursuant to Section 16.6 of these Regulations.
Dwelling, Single-family. A building that may include an accessory apartment pursuant to Section 16.6 of these Regulations, other than a mobile home, designed for and occupied exclusively as a residence for only one (1) family, except for accessory apartments, and having no party wall in common with an adjacent building.
Dwelling Unit or Residence. A structure other than a mobile home, intended for human habitation erected on a solid foundation, using permanent weatherproof exterior materials, connected to a safe water supply with adequate sanitary sewage disposal facilities, equipped with at least one (1) furnace or other customary form of heating apparatus, and constructed with ceilings and walls finished on the inside according to State Building Code Specifications, forming a separate, independent, housekeeping unit and containing independent cooking and sleeping facilities. Such dwelling or residence may have more than one (1) kitchen, provided the additional kitchen is open to the residence and is not separated by a doorway having the ability to be locked.
Elderly Active Adult Housing. A managed residential development where the occupancy of which is limited, as permitted by state and federal fair housing laws, to those aged fifty-five (55) and over.
Elderly Housing. “Housing for the Elderly” shall mean housing restricted for those persons sixty-two (62) years of age and older. In a multiple occupancy dwelling at least one of the occupants must be sixty-two 62 years of age or older.
Excavation. The excavation, grading, or removal of earth material, including, but not limited to, topsoil, sand, gravel, clay or stone, which involves more than one hundred (100) cubic yards of material in a single calendar year, except in connection with: (a) a bonafide construction project for which a zoning permit has been issued; (b) a subdivision approved by the Commission; or (c) farming conducted on the same property or adjacent property, provided no such material is sold to another and no more than four hundred (400) cubic yards of material is removed in any one (1) calendar year.
Family. Any number of individuals related by blood, marriage, or legal adoption, or not more than four (4) persons not so related, living and cooking together as a single not for profit housekeeping unit.
8
Farm. A farm shall equal at least five (5) contiguous acres of land or more under one (1) ownership under cultivation or used for livestock and poultry and may contain buildings which are mainly used for and incidental to farming,. An IRS Schedule F 1040 form shall be filed annually and approved by the Assessor in order to be considered a farm.
Farm, Commercial Livestock. The keeping of livestock for breeding, boarding, and/or instruction for commercial purposes, and in accordance with Section 5.1.4 of these Regulations.
Farm, Commercial Poultry. A farm for the keeping of poultry over two hundred fifty (250) birds in accordance with Sections 5.2.13 and 18.21 of these Regulations.
Farm-to-table Cuisine. The serving of local food at restaurants and school cafeterias, preferably through direct acquisition from the producer which might be a winery, cider mill, brewery, fishery, or other type of food producer which is not strictly a "farm.”
Farm Winery, Cider Mill and other similar farm fruit facility. Any place or premises, located on a farm with land area that equals five (5) acres or more provided a minimum of two (2) acres of the parcel shall be used for the growing of grapes, or other fruit, for which wine or other fruit drink is manufactured and sold in accordance with Section 18.18 of these Regulations. Such wineries are permitted in R-120, R-80, R-60, R-40, C-1, PI, RC, TRD, the Preston City Village District, and Poquetanuck Village District.
Farm Vineyard, Winery, Cider Mill and other similar farm fruit facility - Large Acreage. Any place or premise located on a farm with land area that equals at least twenty-five (25) acres or more provided there is a minimum of five (5) acres of planted vineyard or orchard or more for which wine or other fruit drinks are manufactured and sold in accordance with Section 18.19 of these Regulations. Such winery with vineyard and cider mills with orchards are permitted in R-120, R-80, R-60, R-S, R-40, C-1, PI, RC, TRD, the Preston City Village District, and Poquetanuck Village District by special exception pursuant to Section 18.19 of these Regulations.
Farming. The act of cultivation of land for the growing of vegetables, grains, grasses, trees, herbs, fruit, or other horticultural products; the raising of livestock, farm animals, poultry and birds, the producing of milk, and other similar pursuits except gardens, livestock or fowl grown mainly for home use and in accordance with Section 5.1.5 and 5.1.6 of these Regulations shall not be classified as farming.
Floating Zone. A zone that is to be used for a designated purpose and that is approved as to particular characteristics (as size and type of buildings) but whose location is to be determined in the future. Floating zones can be used to plan for future land uses that are anticipated or desired in the community, but are not confirmed, such as affordable housing, shopping centers, and urban development projects, as noted in the Thames River Overlay Development District.
Floor Area. The total area contained within the interior of apartments and the exterior dimensions of single-family homes, excluding garages, breezeways, or other appurtenant structures.
9
Gasoline/Fuel and Filling Station. A facility that sells fuel and engine lubricants for motor vehicles. Such facilities may contain other uses such as a convenience store, restaurant or café.
Gross Leasable Area. The total floor area designated for tenant occupancy and their exclusive use, expressed in square feet, measured from the center lines of joint partitions and the inside face of exterior outside .
Harmonious Creative Design. A design that is the arrangement of elements such as colors, shapes, and symmetry that creates a pleasing image that works together.
Historic Country Inn. An Inn pursuant to Section 18.22 of these Regulations that has ten (10) or less guestrooms. Inns may serve breakfast, lunch and dinner and provide spa services to registered guests only. Registered guests may stay no longer than three (3) weeks in a three-month period. All inns shall be within a historic structure as listed on the Preston Historic Inventory.
Home Office. The use of part of a dwelling, not to exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the floor area of the structure, for occasional business use such as billing, computer work, and involving no employees or customers. No permit is required from the Commission or ZEO for such home offices.
Home Occupation. Low impact, low volume business within a portion of a residence or out-building pursuant to Section 16.8 of these Regulations.
Impervious Surfaces. Surfaces that do not permit the penetration or passage of water, such as, but not limited to, roof tops, driveways, parking areas, tennis courts, sport courts, basketball courts, patios and other impenetrable materials such as asphalt, concrete, brick, pavers, stone, etc.
Improved Town or State Road. Roads that are paved or have an impervious surface that protects the road form eroding and are maintained by the Town of Preston or the State of Connecticut.
Junk Yard. Any property or portion thereof used for the outside storage, keeping or abandonment of worked out, cast-off, scrap, or discarded articles of materials ready for destruction, collected, recycled, stored for salvage or conversion to some use.
Life Care Facility. A congregate housing facility that is planned, designed and operated to provide a full range of accommodations and services for elderly or disabled residents, including independent living, and assisted living.
Living Space. Habitable finished floor areas of a residence that excludes garages, porches or non-finished floor areas.
Livestock. All cattle or animals of the bovine species; all horses, mules, burros and animals of the equine species; all goats or animals of the caprine species; all swine or animals of the porcine
10
species; llama, alpaca and animals of the camelidae species, and all sheep or animals of the ovine species.
Lot. A contiguous plot or parcel of land, other than entirely submerged land, identified by one (1) or more deeds, occupied or capable of being occupied by one (1) principal building or use and the accessory buildings or uses customarily incidental to it.
Lot Coverage. The percentage which the aggregate building area of all buildings on the lot bears to the area of the lot.
Lot Depth. The mean distance from the street line of the lot to its rear line measured in the median direction of the side lines of the lot.
Lot Frontage. The distance between lot sidelines measured contiguously along the street line.
Lot Line. The property lines bounding a lot as defined herein.
Lot Line, Front. In the case of a lot abutting upon only one (1) street, the line separating the lot from the street. In the case of a lot fronting on more than one (1) street, the owner shall, for the purpose of this regulation, have the privilege of electing any street lot line as the front lot line.
Lot Line, Rear. The lot line which is generally opposite the front lot line; if the rear lot line is less than ten feet (10’) in length, or if the lot comes to a point at the rear, the lot line shall be deemed to be a line parallel to the front line not less than ten feet (10’) long, lying wholly within the lot and farthest from the front lot line.
Lot Line, Side. Any lot line, which is not a front lot line or a rear lot line, as defined herein.
Lot, Rear (Flag Lot). A lot created in accordance with Section 16.5 of these Regulations of which the buildable area is located generally to the rear of other lots having frontage on the same street as said lot and having access to the street via a strip of land that is included as part of the lot (owner of land by title).
Lot, Minimum Width of. The distance between the side lot lines measured in a straight line at right angles to the mean direction of such side lot lines, which line of measurement shall touch, but not in front of, the building line. In the case of a corner lot, the minimum width shall be similarly measured and, for the purpose of this measurement only, the front lot line and the lot lines adjacent thereto shall be considered as side lot lines.
Medi-pods. Temporary health care structures for persons fifty-five (55) and over or special needs adults as defined and permitted in the CGS.
Microbrewery. An establishment, distinct from restaurants and brew pubs, that manufactures beer with approval from the State of Connecticut Liquor Control Commission and may include such activities as both wholesale and retail sales of sealed products brewed on site, tasting rooms, tours, events and educational classes.
11
Mobile Home. A building mass-produced in a factory as an individual unit or a module for combination with other elements, designed for long-term residential use when connected to required utilities, and designed and constructed on a chassis for transportation to a site for use. A mobile home shall be construed to remain a mobile home, subject to all regulations applying thereto, whether or not wheels, axels, hitch or other appurtenances of mobility are removed and regardless of the nature of the foundation provided. A mobile home shall not be construed to be a camper unit. Other factory-manufactured buildings, such as modular homes, not meeting the above criteria shall not be construed to be mobile homes.
Non-Conforming Building or Structure. A building or structure which does not conform to all the provisions and design criteria that may be noted in a specific district regulation and/or does not comply with the dimensional requirements Section 15 of these Regulations for one or more of the following reasons: it does not meet minimum floor area, it exceeds the building height, it exceeds the allowable square footage for lot coverage or extends over the building setback lines.
Non-Conforming, Legal. The situation where a nonconforming use, activity, building, structure, or lot existed or was lawful at or prior to the time these Regulations became effective or an amendment hereto which created the nonconformity became effective.
Non-Conforming Lot. A lot that does not meet the dimensional requirements for the lot area and frontage.
Non-Conforming Use. A use of land, building, or premises, which is not permitted pursuant to the permitted uses or special permitted uses, noted in the specific zoning district where such land, building, or premises is situated.
Non-Exhaustive List of Uses. Uses that are not necessarily listed in Section 16.8.1 the home occupation section of these Regulations. Uses that may not be identified in the regulations, but would be permitted after careful consideration by the Commission and based on the use having no impact on the residential character of the neighborhood.
Nursing/Convalescent Home. A facility licensed by the State of Connecticut to provide a full range of direct medical, nursing, and other health services on a twenty-four (24) hour basis to residents.
A peer-to-peer or P2P marketplace. A market place that has an online platform that connects people in need of a product temporarily with people who have that product, but are not using it.
Personal Service Activity. A personal-service activity is any business enterprise with the primary purpose of providing personal services activities encompass a wide range of professions, including law, medicine, engineering, design, finance, accounting and even performing arts.
Plan of Conservation and Development. The Plan of Conservation and Development is a blueprint for how the Town wants to develop over the next ten (10) years and is a guide to local decision making in areas such as natural resources preservation, economic development, housing, land use and public services.
12
POCD. Plan of Conservation and Development.
Principal Building. A building containing the principal use of a property. In the case of a farm, the residence, if any, shall be the principal building.
Public Utility Building. A building owned or used by a public or private agency whose primary function is providing the public with potable water, sewage disposal, or electricity. This definition is not intended to include a facility for the disposal or processing of solid waste, regardless of any related purposes of such activity.
PZC. Planning and Zoning for the Town of Preston.
Recreation Campground. Recreational Campgrounds is area, whether privately or publicly owned, used on a daily, nightly, weekly, or longer basis for the accommodation of tents or recreational camping vehicles are intended to be occupied by recreational vehicles or tents for seasonal lodging. Campgrounds shall conform to the applicable requirements of the Connecticut Public Health Code, Section 19a-2a-29, the Connecticut Fire Safety Code, and the Building Code; however, it is not the intent of these Regulations to duplicate (or enforce) the above noted codes, but to supplement them. All definitions noted herein take precedence over the noted codes. If there is an inconsistency between any of the codes and the Zoning Regulations, the more restrictive code or regulation shall apply.
Restaurant. Any business establishment whose principal business is the sale of food cooked on the premises and/or beverages typically served by waiters/waitresses on the premises to the customer in a ready-to-consume state, in individual servings, or in non-disposable containers, and where the customers consumes these foods while seated at tables or counters located within or outside the building.
Restaurant - Fast Food. Any establishment whose principal business is the sale of prepared or rapidly prepared foods, confections, or beverages to the customer in a ready-to-consume state, and whose method of operation is such that customers normally order the product at a central location separate from the tables or counters used for consumption. Cafeteria service establishments in which a customer serves oneself while passing along a food-service line are also considered fast food restaurants.
Retail Box Department Store. A big-box store (also supercenter, superstore, or megastore) is a physically large retail establishment, usually part of a chain of stores and by extension, to the company that operates the store.
Retail Store - Specialty. An independently owned retail store in which one differentiates itself from department type stores (and other large generalists) through specialization in product category and/or services. Specialty retail stores focus on specific categories. Typically, product knowledge is a value-added component of products sold, and these stores serve a smaller personalized service market. Examples include general store, antiques, boutiques, etc.
13
Right-of-Way. A right-of-way is an easement granted to a person or persons (grantee) for passing and re-passing over land of another (grantor) to and from the land of the grantee.
Saw Mill - Portable. A motorized machine tool run by a gasoline motor, diesel motor, electric motor or chainsaw that is capable of being carried or moved about, and used by individuals, trades people or professionals in producing limited volumes of boards cut from logs for personal use or profit.
Separate Ownership. A parcel of land is owned separately, under a different name and separate deed.
Smart Growth. Is economic, social and environmental planning that concentrates growth in compact walkable centers to avoid sprawl. It advocates compact, transit-oriented, walkable, bicycle-friendly land use, including neighborhood schools, complete streets, and mixed-use development with a range of housing choices.
Special Events. A public gathering of more than five hundred (500) people assembled at one (1) time at any single location for a particular event. The term “Special Event” shall not be interpreted to include the normal day-to-day operation of existing commercial enterprises. A license shall be obtained from the Board of Selectmen in accordance with the town ordinances.
Specialized Agricultural Building. The use of a building for intensive farming and farming-related activities that involve:
a) Processing or packaging of farm products or by-products.
b) Shelter for more than one hundred fifty (150) cattle or ten thousand (10,000) fowl; or,
c) Workplace for more than twenty-five (25) non-family employees.
Street (street and road are used interchangeably).
a) Any improved right-of-way dedicated for public use, accepted for public use by Town Meeting, and maintained by the Town of Preston for automobile travel; or,
b) Any proposed street shown on the subdivision plan under consideration, or on one previously approved by the Commission; or,
c) State of Connecticut Routes 2, 2A, 12, 117, 164, 165 and 605 (Old Shetucket Turnpike).
Vendor Permit. A permit issued to an individual, association, or corporation to solicit, peddle, vend or sell merchandise, goods, wares from any street or from house to house in the Town of Preston for which a permit is issued by the Board of Selectmen in accordance with the Town Ordinances.
Video Game Arcade. Three (3) or more video game machines in the same place, location or premises.
Video Game Machine. A coin-operated machine or device which, whether mechanical, electrical or electronic, shall be ready for play by the insertion of a coin, and may be operated by the public for use as a game, entertainment or amusement, the object of which is to achieve either a high or low score, which by comparison to the score of other players whether playing
14
concurrently or not, demonstrates relative skill or competence, or indicates in any other way competitive advantage of one (1) player or team over another, regardless of skill or competence. It shall include devices such as pinball machines or any device, which utilizes a video tube or reproduces symbolic figures and lines intended to be a representative of real games or activities.
Yard. An unoccupied open space on the same lot with a building or use which lies between said building or use and the nearest lot line. In measuring a yard, as hereafter provided, it shall be deemed to mean the space between the lot line and a line parallel to and at the required distance from said lot line. Such measurement shall be taken at right angle from the lot line.
Yard, Front. A yard extending across the full width and/or length of the lot and lying along the front lot line.
Yard, Rear. A yard extending across the full width of the lot and lying along the rear lot line.
Yard, Side. A yard along the side line of a lot and extending from the front yard to the rear yard, or, in the absence of either such yards, to the front or rear lot line, as the case may be.
ZEO. Zoning Enforcement Officer for the Town of Preston.
SECTION 3 - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND PROCEDURES
3.1 Enforcement. These Regulations shall be enforced by the Zoning Enforcement Officer, who is empowered to inspect any building or land and order in writing for any violation of these Regulations to be corrected or terminated.
3.2 Classification of Use. Use of land or buildings is herein classified as Permitted Uses or Special Exception Uses.
3.3 Permitted Use. Use of land or building that is allowed by right in a zoning district after the issuance of a permit by the Planning and Zoning Commission or Zoning Enforcement Officer, as applicable.
3.4 Special Exception Use. Use of land or building that is permitted only after meeting the special provisions of Section 18 of these Regulations and any other provisions noted in the regulations under the particular use.
3.5 Unspecified Use. Use of land or building not listed as a permitted use or as a special exception use in the various districts is prohibited. However, the Planning and Zoning Commission may determine that an unspecified use is similar to a specified permitted/special permitted use, and, thereby, is also a permitted/special permitted use. When the status of a use has been so determined, such determination shall, thereafter, have general applicability to all uses of the same type.
3.6 Principal Use. Only one (1) principal use or building is permitted in all residential districts on one (1) lot, except as otherwise prescribed by these Regulations.
15
3.7 Prohibited Uses. No uses shall be permitted which by reason of noise, vibration, smoke fumes or odors are offensive and detrimental to nearby property or users thereof. The following specific uses are prohibited:
a. Manufacture or storage of explosives, including the manufacturing of binary exploding targets. a. Fertilizer manufacture.
b. Fat rendering in the manufacture of tallow, grease and oil.
c. Refining and recovery of products from fish, animal, refuse, or offal.
d. Commercial gas manufacture and storage by other than a public utility. Nothing shall prevent the storage for use on the premises of liquefied petroleum gas when installed and used in accordance with applicable State laws.
e. Junk yards, salvage yards.
f. The disposal or processing of hazardous waste, as defined in Section 22a-115 (1) of the CGS.
g. Ash landfills and sanitary landfills, other than any officially designated Town of Preston landfill.
h. Pawn Shops
i. Abattoir, meat packing, distillation of bones, offal, or rendering or dumping of dead animals.
j. Blast furnaces or smelting of copper, iron, lead, tin, zinc.
k. Coal or petroleum distillation or derivation of by-products. Manufacture of cement, lime, gypsum or plaster of paris, or chlorine, or carbolic, hydrochloric, nitric, picric, or sulfuric acid.
3.8 Multiple Uses in Commercial/Industrial Districts. More than one (1) permitted non-residential building or use may be permitted on the same lot in any commercial or industrial district, including the Preston City Village District and the Poquetanuck Village District, provided all such buildings or uses are planned as a unit, with integrated parking, access, building design and landscaping, and provided all other requirements for the zone are in compliance.
3.9 Building Permit. No building permit shall be issued by the Building Inspector for a building, use, or structure without the issuance of a Zoning Permit from the Zoning Enforcement Officer that such a building, use, or structure is in conformity with these Regulations and/or any plan subject to the property approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission and/or Zoning Board of Appeals.
3.10 Zoning Permit. No building shall be erected, demolished, moved, structurally enlarged or changed to another use, nor shall any use be established or changed in any area of the Town of Preston without the issuance of a Zoning Permit from the ZEO.
3.10.1 Application for Zoning Permit. Application for a zoning permit shall be made on a form provided for that purpose and obtainable in the Planning and Zoning Office. A zoning permit after review by the Planning and Zoning Commission and/or the Zoning Enforcement Officer, shall be approved or modified and approved certifying that such permit complies with these Regulations and/or any applicable approved site plan, special exception or variance or may be denied.
3.10.2 Plot/Site Plan. A plot or site plan shall be submitted as part of a Zoning Permit. The Planning and Zoning Commission or ZEO may require said plan to be prepared by a Connecticut licensed Land Surveyor and to an accuracy level acceptable to the Commission or the ZEO, as applicable. There shall be three (3) levels of Zoning Permits, as follows:
16
a. Residential/Minor Zoning Permit/Renewal Permit. This permit is issued by the ZEO for the following following uses:
1. Single family resident home
2. Additions to residences and minor accessory uses not requiring approval by the Commission.
3. Residential accessory structures
4. Temporary permit for a fixed time for mobile home for a field office pursuant to Section 16.11(d).
5. Uses and any other permits not requiring Planning and Zoning Commission approval such as renewal permits or commercial/industrial uses exempt from site plan approval in accordance to Section 19.10 including a change in use; however such applications exempt from Site Plan Application pursuant to Section 19.10 shall require approval by the Town Planner prior to approval and issuance of a zoning permit by the ZEO.
b. Special Issue Zoning Permit. This permit is for properties located in residential areas, but have special issues for which the Planning and Zoning Commission desires to have oversight, but does not require a site plan or special exception application. These permits are to be reviewed and approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission prior to the issuance of a Zoning Permit by the Zoning Enforcement Officer. These special residential uses are as follows:
1. Home Occupation pursuant to Section 5.1.2 and Section 16.8.
2. Public utility building or structure pursuant to Section 5.1.10.
3. Accessory apartment pursuant to Sections 5.1.13 and 16.6.
4. Retail sales for commercial nursery pursuant to Section 5.1.12.
c. Commercial Zoning Permit. This permit is issued by the Zoning Enforcement Office after the Planning and Zoning Commission approves a Site Plan or Special Exception.
d. Commercial Renewal Permit. This permit requires review by the Commission to ensure compliance with an approved special exception.
3.11 Application Process for Site Plan and/or Special Exception
a. Application for Site Plan. A Site Plan Application shall be submitted in accordance with Section 19 of these Regulations three weeks prior to the regularly scheduled Planning and Zoning Commission meeting. The Commission shall approve, modify and approve such application after finding that all proposed uses and activities conform to the stated purposes of these Regulations, or the Commission shall deny the application if found to be in non-compliance with these Regulations.
b. Application for Special Exception. A Special Exception Application shall be submitted in accordance with Section 18 of these Regulations and other applicable sections at least (3) three weeks prior to the regularly scheduled Commission meeting. The Commission shall approve, modify and approve or approve with condition(s) the application after finding that all aspects of the proposed uses conform to the stated purposes of these Regulations or shall deny such application if found to be in non-compliance with these Regulations.
17
3.12 Certificate of Zoning Compliance. It shall be unlawful for any newly erected structure or addition for which a Zoning Permit has been issued to be occupied or used, or for any existing building or lot or part thereof to be converted or changed from one type of use or occupancy to another involving human occupancy or for a Certificate of Occupancy to be issued by the Building Inspector until a Certificate of Zoning Compliance has been issued by the Zoning Enforcement Officer.
3.13 Previously Approved Applications. Nothing in these Regulations shall require any change in plans, construction, or designated use of any building on which actual construction was begun under a permit issued prior to the effective date of these Regulations.
3.14 First Split, Property Line Adjustment, Lot Access and Driveways.
3.14.1 First Split. When a new lot is formed by the division of an existing lot, not requiring subdivision approval by the Commission, it is recommended that the Zoning Enforcement Officer review and approve the division of said lot to ensure compliance with the Zoning Regulations. A zoning permit shall not be issued for any lot thus created as a first split unless the size, yards, and uses comply with these Regulations and provided the lot is approved by the Town Sanitarian for compliance with the public health code.
3.14.2 Property Line Adjustment. A change in the location of an existing property line approved by the Zoning Enforcement Officer in a manner that does not create any of the following:
a. An additional building lot;
b. A condition that violates any of the dimensional requirements outlined in Section 15 of these Regulations;
c. An increase in any existing nonconformities of the dimensional requirements outlined in Section 15 of these Regulations;
d. A reduction or change of land dedicated as approved open space and approved as part of a subdivision.
e. An unbuildable lot based on the State of Connecticut Public Health Code.
Two (2) copies of the property survey prepared by a Land Surveyor shall be submitted with a request for the adjustment. The survey shall be referred to the Town Sanitarian for review and approval to ensure compliance with the Public Health Code. After receiving approval from the Sanitarian and the Zoning Enforcement Officer, a mylar copy of the survey shall be submitted for signature by the Zoning Enforcement Officer. The survey shall be subsequently filed in the Town Clerk’s Office.
3.14.3 Lot Access and Driveways.
a) Every lot developed for residential purposes shall have a driveway access from an improved and accepted town street or state numbered highway.
b) No drive shall have drainage that is directed to the town street unless approved by the Town Engineer and/or Director of Public Works.
c) The applicant/owner shall pay for any costs for review by the Town Engineer of the driveway installation.
d) Any section of a new driveway having slopes greater than eight percent (8%) grade must be paved or surfaced with an acceptable alternative that will prevent erosion.
18
e) A shared driveway shall not be permitted unless within a multifamily or commercially planned development.
3.15 Zoning Map. The map bound into the rear of this document and entitled “Zoning Map, Preston Connecticut,” is hereby declared to be a part of these Regulations. The Zoning Map shows the boundaries and zoning designations for each district of the Town of Preston. Use and dimensional requirements for each of the districts shown on the map are found in these Regulations.
a. All district boundaries shown on said Zoning Map are intended to follow the centerlines of streets or lines drawn parallel to and at specified distances from street centerlines, unless otherwise specifically shown thereon.
b. Where any uncertainty exists as to the correct location of any zoning district boundary shown on the zoning map, it shall be the duty of the Commission to establish the correct location thereof according to the intent of these Regulations.
3.16 Amendments. Changes in these Regulations or the Zoning Map may be made only by majority vote of all of the regular sitting members of the Commission, after public hearing, except that if a protest against a proposed change is filed at or before the required hearing, signed by the property owners of twenty percent (20%) or more of the area of the lots included in such proposed change or of the lots within five hundred feet (500’) in all directions of the property included in the proposed change, such change shall not be adopted except by a vote of two-thirds (2/3) of all regular members or sitting members of the Commission.
a. All petitions requesting a change in regulations or zoning district boundaries shall be submitted to the Commission on a form provided by the Commission and shall describe in detail the nature of the change, the reasons for it, and suggested new wording, where appropriate. Where a change in a zoning district boundary is proposed, a map shall be submitted having sufficient detail and scale to clearly show existing and proposed boundaries relating to the change. The Commission may require the boundaries of the Zone Change be prepared by a Licensed Surveyor at an acceptable scale and accuracy level to the Commission.
b. Hearings and decisions on proposed amendments to the text or map shall be in accordance with the provisions of Section 8-7d of the General Statutes.
c. Changes in regulations or boundaries shall become effective at a time fixed by the Commission, provided a copy of the change is filed with the Town Clerk and a notice of the Commission’s decision shall have been published in a local newspaper before the effective date.
d. Not less than ten (10) days prior to any hearing concerning a petitioned change of any zoning district boundary, a copy of the legal notice relating to the hearing shall be mailed to owners of record at the last address known to the tax collector of lands adjoining and directly across the street from the area of the proposed zone change. Responsibility for mailing notices shall be the applicants, and mail receipts shall be presented to the Commission prior to or at the hearing.
19
3.17 Fees. The application fees for the various land use applications shall be as follows:
Application
Fee
Zoning Permit
$20
Site Plan
a) Buildings 5,000 square feet or less
b) Buildings over 5,000 square feet
$250 $500
Special Exception
$150
Coastal Site Plan
$50
Regulation/Map Change
$300
Variance
$300
3.17.1 Fees for Town of Preston Applications: All application fees as noted in the chart above are waived for Town of Preston. Engineering or consultant fees and public hearing fees as applicable and noted below in Section 3.17.2 will not be waived.
3.17.2 Additional fees:
a) A State Fee shall be collected in accordance with Section 22a-27j of the CGS.
b) An application shall include an engineering fee or any other consultant fee as requested by the Planning and Zoning Commission or the Zoning Board of Appeals. The applicant shall pay all such fees. The Engineering/Consulting fee shall be one hundred fifty percent (150%) of a cost estimate provided by the engineer/consultant. Any fee remaining after the completion of the project will be returned to the applicant at their request.
c) For each application that requires legal notices for a public hearing, the fee to cover the cost of said legal notices shall be paid by the applicant based on a process established by the Zoning Board of Appeals and/or Planning and Zoning Commission for their respective applications.
SECTION 4 - ZONING DISTRICTS
4.1 Purpose. In order to provide a variety of living and development opportunities in the Town of Preston, the following zoning districts are established.
4.1.1 R-120 Residential - This district is intended to maintain a very low intensity of use. The R-120 zone locations include areas that have shallow depth to bedrock soils, ledge outcrops, steep slopes and other significant sensitive natural resources.
4.1.2 R-80 Residential - This district is intended to maintain a very low intensity of uses and is intended for watershed areas or areas having the potential to provide reservoir or public water supply wells.
4.1.3 R-60 Residential - This district consists primarily of scattered residences, agricultural-related, and undeveloped woodlands. Soils in these areas frequently pose problems for the proper operation of subsurface sewage disposal systems, suggesting a need for low intensity use.
4.1.4 Special Resource Protection Overlay (SRPO)/Amos Lake Watershed Area and Poquetanuck Cove Area - This overlay district provides protection for the Amos Lake Watershed Area and Poquetanuck Cove Area. The uses and requirements are intended to limit
20
intensive activities, which might produce surface runoff and groundwater contamination that could harm the lake or cove.
4.1.5 R-40 Residential - This district is intended to be used primarily for single-family detached dwellings in conventional subdivisions; however, does allow for multi-family uses by special exception. The district is aimed at encouraging, stabilizing and protecting family life in residential neighborhoods and serving these areas with adjacent non-residential services and facilities.
4.1.6 Commercial (C-1) - This district provides opportunities for a variety of retail and personal service activities to serve the residents of both Preston and the surrounding area. Selection of these areas and the standards relating to them are intended to make them as compatible as possible with nearby residential uses.
4.1.7 Planned Industrial (PI) - Activities in this district are intended to provide opportunities for uses that will broaden the Town’s non-residential tax base without resulting in undesirable impacts on the physical and social environment.
4.1.8 Resort Commercial (RC) - The purpose of this district is to promote tourism-oriented commercial development along portions of State Route 2 or in the future may include other state highways. Such development should incorporate engineering and planning techniques, which promote traffic safety.
4.1.9 Thames River District (TRD) - The purpose of this district is to promote the commercial use and re-use of property at Preston Riverwalk and the surrounding area utilizing the area’s unique locational characteristics and site amenities.
4.1.10 Preston City Village District (PCVD) - This district contains Preston City which is a National Register Historic District. It is an exceptionally well preserved entity containing a high concentration of historic contributing buildings and sites dating from the late seventeenth to the twentieth centuries.This is a mixed-use development district that encourages the enhancement of its historic character.
4.1.11 Poquetanuck Village District (PVD) - This district contains Poquetanuck Village, which is a National Register Historic District, is an exceptionally well-preserved historic area containing a high concentration of historically contributing buildings and sites dating from the late seventeenth to the twentieth century. This is a mixed-use development district that encourages the enhancement of its historic character.
SECTION 5 - R-120 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
5.1 Permitted Uses. The following uses are permitted By Right:
5.1.1 Single-family dwelling.
5.1.2 Home occupation in accordance with Section 16.8 of these Regulations.
5.1.3 Farm including seasonal and other accessory farm businesses, such as, corn mazes, farm rides, and similar, not listed in Section 5.2.14 of these Regulations.
5.1.4 Commercial Livestock Farm (CLF). No livestock may be raised or bred commercially except on a CLF and provided:
21
a) The premises shall not be less than ten (10) acres and having one (1) acre of pasture land per livestock.
b) Buildings housing animals and areas of concentrated storage of animal waste shall be not less than two hundred feet (200’) from any lot line and not less than one hundred feet (100’) from any designated wetland or watercourse.
5.1.5 The keeping of livestock or poultry for pleasure and not for commercial purposes on parcels not less than three (3) acres, shall be permitted provided:
a) There are no more than twenty-five (25) poultry.
b) For each livestock, one acre of pasture land shall be provided.
c) The livestock must be owned by the resident or leasee of the property.
d) An adequate building, secure from the weather, shall be provided to house the livestock.
e) Concentration of animal waste shall be stored on any premises at the point farthest from existing houses under separate ownership and shall not exceed approximately two (2) cubic yards in bulk.
f) Although these properties are not considered a “farm” the sale of eggs from a farm stand is permitted.
5.1.6 Up to six (6) chickens may be kept for domestic use on any lot provided:
a) The chickens are located within an enclosed area such as a pen that shall be no closer than twenty feet (20’) to any property line.
b) There shall be a maintained coop to house the chickens.
c) No roosters may be kept on said property.
d) If there are any complaints regarding noise or odor resulting from the keeping of the chickens on the property, the complaint shall be resolved to the satisfaction of the Zoning Enforcement Officer.
5.1.7 The slaughtering of livestock and poultry raised on a farm and as an accessory use to such farm is permitted, but the slaughtering of livestock or poultry not raised on the property is only permitted by home occupation pursuant to Section 16.8 of these regulations. All animal remains must be disposed of to the satisfaction of the Health Officer.
5.1.8 Roadside stand is permitted when accessory to the premises on which they stand for the sale of farm produce provided seventy-five percent (75%) of the produce must be produced on the site, or by the owner thereof. Such stand shall not be more than two hundred (200) square feet, with not more than two (2) signs aggregating twelve (12) square feet in area, advertising such produce. Such stand and signs shall not be less than ten feet (10’) from any street line and not less than fifty feet (50’) from any street intersection.
5.1.9 Buildings used for storage of farm vehicles on a farm (as defined in Section 2) may have any number of registered motor vehicles and equipment when such vehicles and equipment are owned by the resident thereof and are used in connection with the operation of that farm.
22
5.1.10 Public utility buildings or structures, without a service yard or outside storage of supplies or equipment, providing the structure is in general harmony with the surrounding area, as determined by the Commission.
5.1.11 Accessory buildings and uses.
5.1.12 Commercial Plant Nursery: An operation conducted for retail or wholesale sales of plants grown by a plant nursery. A nursery may include a structure for the retail sale for items other than nursery stock, but not power equipment such as lawn mowers and farm implements. Any such structure used for the retail sale of accessory items, shall not exceed five thousand (5,000) square feet and shall require a site plan to be submitted to the Commission in accordance with Section 19 of these Regulations.
5.1.13 Accessory apartments or conversion of a residence to include an accessory apartment may be permitted in accordance with Section 16.6 after approval by the Commission.
5.2 Special Exceptions. The following uses are permitted provided they meet the conditions of Section 18 of these Regulations:
5.2.1 Antique shops in accordance with Section 18.8 of these regulations as an accessory to a residential use and provided said use does not exceed five thousand 5,000 square feet in area.
5.2.2 Excavations and deposits of fill in accordance with Section 18.9 of these Regulations.
5.2.3 Saw mill or other temporary woodcutting operation in accordance with Section 18.10 of these Regulations.
5.2.4 Recreation Campgrounds in accordance with Section 18.11 of these Regulations.
5.2.5 Commercial Recreation Facility in accordance with Section 18.13 of these Regulations.
5.2.6 Specialized Agricultural Buildings in accordance with Section 18.15 of these Regulations.
5.2.7 Philanthropic, governmental, educational, recreational or religious use by a duly incorporated non-profit body or governmental unit, excluding convalescent homes and sanitaria; a building used as a bonafide club, lodge, or fraternal organization not operated for profit, provided that objectionable noise cannot be detected off the premises. No temporary or permanent residence shall be established in connection with any of these uses.
5.2.8 Bed and Breakfast Inn in accordance with Section 18.17 of these Regulations.
5.2.9 Farm Vineyard, Winery, Cider Mill and other similar farm fruit facility - Large Acreage in accordance with Section 18.19 of these Regulations.
5.2.10 Farm Winery in accordance with Section 18.18 of these Regulations.
23
5.2.12 Veterinary hospitals in accordance with Section 18.20 of these Regulations.
5.2.13 Commercial Poultry Farm pursuant to Section 18.21 of these Regulations
5.2.14 Accessory Farm Businesses (AFB) as noted here within, provided such farm property has a minimum of twenty-five (25) acres of which a minimum of five (5) acres shall be for the growing of produce or crops or pasture for farm animals. AFBs shall be operated as part of a farm based on the filing of an IRS Schedule F 1040 approved by the Assessor. All ASBs shall have adequate off-street parking designed with an acceptable pervious surface. AFBs shall have adequate screening to any adjacent residential property.
a) Farm Catering and Banquet Facility. Farm-to-table cuisine made from local ingredients that may be served on or off site and include:
1. Closed Farm Banquet Events. These events are not open to the general public, such as weddings, private parties, and similar provided:
i. Alcoholic beverages may be served provided a valid liquor license is obtained in accordance with the CGS.
ii. There shall be no more than three (3) such events per week. At the discretion of the Commission, the number of events may be reduced based on a determination of the facility’s compatibility with the capacity of the road, density of the neighborhood and other quality of life concerns.
2. Special Public Farm Promotional Events. These events are opened to the general public, as follows:
i. Six (6) events are permitted throughout a calendar year.
ii. Farm to table meals, finger foods and/or pastries may be served for such events. A farm to table meal is defined as a diversified selection of food of which some of the produce or meat must be grown or raised on the farm.
3. Event Permits. At least fourteen days prior to such event, a Zoning Permit application shall be submitted to the Zoning Enforcement Officer, who shall send copy to the First Selectman. The applicant shall provide the type of event(s), date and number of estimated guests. The Zoning Enforcement Officer may deny the request to conduct the event if the application is not filed timely or lacks the information required herein.
4. Closed Farm Banquet Events and Special Public Farm Promotional Events. Such events shall not occur on the same day.
b) Retail Farm Building for the sale of farm products and other accessory farm products provided that fifty percent (50%) of the products are produced on the premises or are farm produce such as vegetables, fruit or dairy products. The building shall not exceed five thousand (5,000) square feet.
c) Farm to Table Public Restaurants may be permitted by the Commission provided:
i. There are no more than forty (40) seats.
24
ii. There shall be a farm connection by either providing some of the produce or meat grown or raised on the farm and provides the theme for the restaurant.
iii. Alcoholic beverages may be sold on the premises provided a valid liquor license is obtained in accordance with the CGS.
d) Sale or Repair of Farm Equipment for commercial purposes provided the repair and/or retail area is located within a farm building and the retail area may not exceed five thousand (5,000) square feet.
e) Historic Country Inn, as defined in Section 18.22, and provided the Inn involves the use of an historic structure (and any addition thereto) as identified in the Historic Inventory prepared by the Preston Historical Society.
f) Tack Shop provided the building does not exceed 5,000 square feet.
5.2.14.1 Accessary Farm Business Renewal Permit. A renewal permit is to be submitted March 1st of each year and is obtained from the Zoning Enforcement Officer. Said renewal permit is comprised of three (3) components, as follows:
a) Review for compliance with the original special exception issued by the Commission.
b) Notification of IRS Schedule F 1040 approval by the Assessor.
c) Verification that a minimum of five (5) acres are being used for the growing of produce, crops or pasture for and with farm animals and/or livestock.
If such renewal permit is not submitted or if the Zoning Enforcement Officer finds that the terms of the special exception are not being met and/or the property is not verified as a farm based on the IRS Schedule F 1040, the ZEO shall not renew the permit due to non-compliance.
5.2.15 Solar Farms in accordance with Section 18.24 of these Regulations.
SECTION 6 - R-80 AND R-60 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
6.1 Permitted Uses. The following uses are permitted By Right:
6.1.1 All the uses permitted in Section 5.1 of these Regulations.
6.2 Special Exceptions. The following uses are permitted provided they meet the conditions of Section 18 of these Regulations.
6.2.1 All uses permitted in Section 5.2 of these Regulations.
SECTION 7 - R-40 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
7.1 Permitted Uses. The following uses are permitted By Right:
25
7.1.1 All uses permitted under Section 5.1 of these Regulations.
7.2 Special Exceptions. The following uses are permitted in R-40 Districts provided they meet the conditions of Section 18 of these Regulations:
7.2.1 All uses permitted in Section 5.2 of these Regulations
7.2.2 Elderly housing in accordance with Section 18.12 of these Regulations.
7.2.3 Convalescent homes, Assisted Living Facilities, and Continuing Care retirement communities that provide accommodations for independent living, assisted living, and nursing home care and offering residents a continuum of care in accordance with Section 18.5 of these Regulations.
7.2.4 Nursery school or day care facility serving more than six (6) children.
7.2.5 Multifamily residential uses pursuant to Section 18.14 of these Regulations.
SECTION 8 - C-1 COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
Land and water areas shall be used and buildings or structures shall be erected, altered, enlarged or used for one (1) or more of the uses or use categories listed below of special exception uses.
8.1 Permitted Uses. The following uses are permitted By Right:
8.1.1 Retail businesses, such as grocery stores, drug stores, apparel stores, variety stores, antique shops, sporting goods stores.
8.1.2 Restaurants, microbreweries, eating and drinking establishments.
8.1.3 Business services, such as banks, real estate and insurance offices.
8.1.4 Professional offices of engineers, architects, accountants, attorneys, dentists and the like.
8.1.5 Adult and child Day Care Centers of seven (7) or more individuals.
8.1.6 Personal services, such as barbershops, beauty salons, dry cleaners and wellness centers.
8.1.7 Repair services such as radio, television, appliance and plumbing shops, upholstery shops
8.1.8 Shoe repair shops.
8.1.9 Indoor display and storage of material for use or installation off the premises, including, but not limited to, home and business improvement supplies and fixtures.
26
8.1.10 Funeral parlors and mortuary establishments.
8.1.11 Theaters, bowling alleys, assembly halls, and buildings for public recreation.
8.1.12 Hotels and motels.
8.1.13 Town hall, library, museum and similar municipal or cultural facility of a non-commercial nature.
8.1.14 Accessory buildings and uses as determined to be appropriate and acceptable to the Commission, i.e. storage area for a retail use, laundry for a hotel.
8.1.15 Single-family dwellings that existed prior to the adoption of these Regulations on March 18, 2019 are allowed to be modified as if located within a residential district and are afforded all the uses and requirements Sections 5.1 and 5.2 of these Regulations.
8.1.16 Farms as defined in Section 2 of these Regulations and Accessory Farm Businesses pursuant to Section 5.2.14 of these Regulations.
8.2 Special Exceptions in C-1 Districts. The following uses are permitted in accordance with Section 18 of these Regulations:
8.2.1 Automobile sales provided the conditions of Section 18.6 are met.
8.2.2 Gasoline/Fuel and Filling Station in accordance with Section 18.6 of these Regulations.
8.2.3 Package/liquor stores.
8.2.4 Video game arcades.
8.2.5 Liquid propane gas storage for retail sale.
8.2.6 Drive-thru window as an accessory use to a permitted principal use where it can be demonstrated that such an activity will not adversely impact surrounding areas with noise or fumes from idling vehicles uses or cause a traffic hazard. Drive-thru window installation is not exempt from the submission of a site plan application pursuant to Section 19.10.
27
SECTION 9, 10, 11,12, and 13 - SPECIALIZED DISTRICTS
The purpose of these districts is to foster a climate favorable for economic development and diversification. These areas have special conditions that warrant special attention. Each of the areas have been identified in the POCD as “Areas of Special Interest”.
SECTION 9 - PI - PLANNED INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
Land and water areas shall be used and buildings or structures shall be erected, altered, enlarged or used only for one (1) or more of the uses or use categories in the list below – Permitted Uses Section 9.1 or by Special Exception - Section 9.2. In order to enhance the quality of the land use within the district, the design and standards outlined in Sections 10.5 and traffic in Section 10.6 shall be met.
9.1 Permitted Uses. The following uses are permitted By Right:
9.1.1 Hotels and motels.
9.1.2 Indoor recreation and cultural facilities, such as bowling alley, tennis court, swimming pool, game room, skating rink, art gallery, museum, movie theater, but not including night clubs.
9.1.3 Retail businesses, such as grocery stores, drug stores, apparel stores, variety stores, antique shops, and sporting goods stores.
9.1.4 Professional offices of engineers, architects, accountants, attorneys, dentists and the like.
9.1.5 Business services, such as banks, real estate and insurance offices.
9.1.6 Repair services, such as radio, television, appliance, small equipment, upholstery, provided there is no outdoor storage of equipment or materials.
9.1.7 Shoe repair shops, tailor or similar.
9.1.8 Restaurant for dine-in patrons, microbrewies, cafes. Take out service of food may be allowed as an accessory use as determined by the Commission, provided the suitability of the site with regard to traffic safety. Drive-thru windows as an accessory use are only permitted as a special exception pursuant to Section 18 of these Regulations.
9.1.9 Accessory buildings and uses as determined to be appropriate and acceptable to the ZEO or the Commission, as applicable.
28
9.1.10 Outdoor Commercial recreation facilities and outdoor amusements, such as golf courses, tennis and racquet courts, swimming pools, country clubs, miniature golf, and equestrian facility. The uses may include a clubhouse that serves food.
9.1.11 Research laboratories.
9.1.12 Printing and publishing establishments.
9.1.13 Automotive supply and parts stores.
9.1.14 Drive-in theater, bowling alleys, indoor commercial recreation establishments.
9.1.15 Funeral parlors and mortuary establishments.
9.1.16 Veterinary hospitals.
9.1.17 Farms and Accessory Farm Businesses as defined in Section 2 and as provided in Section 5.2.15 of these Regulations.
9.1.18 Specialized agriculture building in accordance with Section 18.15 of these Regulations.
9.1.19 Single-family dwellings that existed prior to the adoption of these Regulations on March 18, 2019 are allowed to be modified as if located within a residential district and are afforded all the uses and requirements Sections 5.1 and 5.2 of these Regulations.
9.1.20 Public utility buildings.
9.1.21 Indoor display and storage of materials for use or installation off the premises, including, but not limited to, home and business improvement supplies, furniture and fixtures.
9.1.22 Recreation equipment sales, including the sale of camper units.
9.1.23 Post Office and other governmental uses and services.
9.1.24 Bed and Breakfast Inn, in accordance with:
a) The minimum finished floor area of the building shall be at least one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet.
b) The building must be of adequate size to accommodate all proposed guest bedroom, guest dining area and guest bathrooms.
c) Off-street parking spaces shall include at least two (2) for the residents of the property and one (1) for each guest room.
d) The Commission may require fencing, earth berms, evergreen vegetation, or other buffers to reduce visual conflicts with neighboring uses. No outside storage of any maintenance equipment or supplies shall be permitted.
29
e) Registered guests may stay no longer than three (3) weeks in a three-month period.
f) Exterior alterations should be made to preserve a valuable historic property.
g) Special Functions or Events; Special Functions may be held at a Bed and Breakfast Inn subject to local laws by permit.
9.2 Special Exceptions. The following uses are permitted provided they meet the conditions of Section 18 of these Regulations:
9.2.1 Gasoline/Fuel Service and Filling Stations provided that aboveground and underground gas tanks are a minimum of three hundred feet (300’) to any property used for residential use, church, or school pursuant to Section 18.6.
9.2.2 Automobile sales provided the conditions of Section 18.6 are met.
9.2.3 Package Liquor Stores in accordance with Section 18.7 of these Regulations.
9.2.4 Excavations and deposits of fill in accordance with Section 18.9 of these regulations.
9.2.5 Saw mill or other temporary woodcutting operation in accordance with Section 18.10 of these Regulations.
9.2.6 Video game arcades in accordance with Section 18.16 of these Regulations.
9.2.7 Specialized agriculture building in accordance with Section 18.15 of these Regulations.
9.2.8 Construction Company Storage Yard. Building materials sale and/or contractor's storage yards. Such storage yard may be used for the storage and collection of construction material. Although no building or parking may be proposed, a Site Plan Application shall also be submitted in accordance with Section 19 and is not exempt pursuant to Section 19.10 of these Regulations.
9.2.9 Warehouses, storage facilities, and storage of vehicles for wholesale distribution excluding processing or storage of oil, gas, or coal for distribution.
9.2.10 Retail lumber and building material yards, and contractor’s equipment storage, provided that all material is kept in a building or within a solid enclosure not less than six feet (6’) high, such enclosure shall be behind the front building setback line. A Site Plan application shall be submitted to the Commission pursuant to Section 19 showing all storage areas and screening and is not exempt pursuant to Section 19.10 of these Regulations.
9.2.11 Automotive, farm, marine, equipment, service, and repair establishments, provided major repairs are conducted within a building or otherwise screened from view. There shall be no more than twenty (20) vehicles stored on site, such vehicles shall be screened from view from abutting properties and streets or stored to the rear of the building. The Commission may at their discretion, allow the storage of more than
30
twenty (20) vehicles if there is no impact onto an adjacent property and the vehicles cannot be viewed from the public street.
9.2.12 Automotive sales provided that aboveground and underground gas tanks are a minimum of three hundred feet (300’) to any property used for residential use, church, or school.
9.2.13 Trucking terminals and warehousing.
9.2.14 The manufacture, processing and packaging of foods, beverages, candy, cosmetics, pharmaceuticals and drugs.
9.2.15 The manufacture and processing articles made from the following material: cellophane, canvas, cloth, cork, felt, feathers, fiber, fur, glass, hair, horn, leather, paper, plastics, shell, stone, textiles, tobacco and wood.
9.2.16 The finishing and assembling of articles made from metals but excluding processes employing the use of drop hammers.
SECTION 10 RESORT COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
10.1 Purpose. The purpose of this district is to promote tourism-oriented commercial development which may also contain activities that will serve a wide range of needs for area residents. It is intended that such development be located and designed to enhance the qualities of both the site on which they are proposed and the Town.
10.2 Procedures. Any application for development within this district shall be accompanied by a Site Plan as stipulated by Section 19 of these Regulations. Activities permitted as a Special Exception shall also be subject to the requirements of Section 18 of these Regulations. In addition, applicants shall submit drawings showing buildings and structures, and materials to be used in enough detail to show compliance with these regulations.
10.3 Permitted Use In Resort Commercial District. The following uses are permitted By Right in this district:
10.3.1 Hotels and motels;
10.3.2 Indoor recreation and cultural facilities, such as bowling alley, tennis court, swimming pool, billiard room, skating rink, art gallery, museum, movie theater, but not including night club.
10.3.3 Outdoor Commercial recreation facilities and outdoor amusements, such as golf courses, tennis and racquet courts, swimming pools, country clubs, miniature golf, and equestrian facility. The uses may include a clubhouse that serves food.
10.3.4 Restaurant for dine-in patrons, microbrewies, cafes. Take out service of food may be allowed as an accessory use only after approval by the Commission attesting to the
31
secondary nature of the activity and the suitability of the site with regard to traffic safety. Drive-thru Windows as an accessory use are only permitted as a special exception in accordance with Section 18 of these Regulations.
10.3.5 Business services such as banks, real estate, and insurance offices.
10.3.6 Professional offices of doctors, engineers, architects, accountants, attorneys, dentists and the like.
10.3.7 Post Office.
10.3.7 Single family dwellings that existed prior to the adoption of these regulations on March 18, 2019 are allowed to be modified as if located within a residential district and are afforded all the uses and requirements Sections 5.1 and 5.2 of these Regulations.
10.3.8 Accessory uses and buildings.
10.3.9 Grocery stores, drug stores, or apparel stores.
10.3.10 Bed and Breakfast Inn provided the following conditions are met:
a) The minimum finished floor area of the building shall be at least one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet.
b) The building must be of adequate size to accommodate all proposed guest bedroom, guest dining area and guest bathrooms.
c) Off-street parking spaces shall include at least two (2) for the residents of the property and one (1) for each guest room.
d) The Commission may require fencing, earth berms, evergreen vegetation, or other buffers to reduce visual conflicts with neighboring uses. No outside storage of any maintenance equipment or supplies shall be permitted.
e) Registered guests may stay no longer than three (3) weeks in a three-month period.
f) Exterior alterations should be made to preserve a valuable historic property.
g) Special Functions or Events may be held at a Bed and Breakfast Inn subject to local regulations by permit.
10.4 Special Exceptions in Resort Commercial District. The following uses are permitted, provided they meet the procedures and conditions of Section 18 of these regulations:
10. 4.1 Convention Centers, Stadiums, or Sports Arenas provided that access is from a state highway. The Commission may approve a building height in excess of fifty feet (50’) provided:
a) Prior approval is granted by the Town Fire Marshal.
b) The Commission finds that the feature would enhance the function of the project.
c) Such features will not be aesthetically detrimental to adjacent use;
d) The applicant shall prove that there will negligible impact on emergency services, or if impacted will be mitigated to the Commission’s satisfaction.
32
10.4.2 Rental of automobiles, motorcycles, and the like. Automotive service and repair. Gasoline/Fuel Service and filling stations, in accordance with Section 18.6 of these Regulations.
10.4.3 Transportation facilities, including public or private mass transit, bus or taxi service, and the like.
10.4.4 Package liquor store, with the additional conditions outlined in Section 18.7 of these Regulations.
10.4.5 Video game and electronic game arcades, with the additional conditions outlined in Section 18.16 of these Regulations.
10.4.6 Nursery school or day care center serving more than six (6) children.
10.4.7 Public utility buildings, substations, storage yards and vehicle parking areas, provided the storage yards are screened from public view by solid fencing or equivalent screening.
10.4.8 Specialty stores with retail items distinctive and characteristic of tourism, e.g. sporting goods, antiques, arts, crafts, or other types of memorabilia, not to include Pawn Shops. In addition, typical retail box department stores are not permitted.
10.4.10 Drive-thru windows as an accessory use to a permitted principal use where it can be demonstrated that such an activity will not adversely impact surrounding uses or cause a traffic hazard.
10.4.11 Vacation Resort, which is a compound of buildings and facilities, providing lodging, and entertainment, to people on vacation, and may include a Recreational Campground in accordance with Section 18.11. A vacation resort attempts to provide for all or most of a vacationer’s wants while remaining on the premises, such as food, drink, lodging, sports, entertainment, and shopping. Such vacation resort units may be owned as a condominium, timeshare, or fractional ownership. No unit shall be occupied by the same party for more than ninety (90) days within a twelve (12) month period.
10.4.12 The Commission may permit multi-story parking structures to serve a permitted use or special permitted use provided the structure does not exceed, by more than twenty percent (20%), the parking required in accordance with Section 20. Any request for a greater number of parking spaces shall be supported by an analysis prepared by a Traffic Engineer and subject to approval by the Commission. Parking structures shall be no higher than the principal building(s). The parking structure shall be located to the rear or underneath any principal building(s), unless approved by the Commission using a configuration and/or creative design technique that accomplishes the design goals and objectives intended for the Resort Commercial District
10.4.13 The Commission may permit buildings or structures greater than fifty feet (50’) in height provided a view-shed analysis is prepared by the applicant to determine that there is not adverse impact on residential neighborhoods. The Fire Marshal shall approve any building greater than fifty feet (50’) in height.
33
10.4.14 Rental of small boats and fishing gear and any ancillary docks and buildings supporting such rental of small boats and fishing gear.
10.4. Farm Vineyard, Winery, Cider Mill and other similar farm fruit facility - Large Acreage in accordance with Section 18.19 of these Regulations.
10.5 Design Standards. All buildings and uses in the Resort Commercial District shall be subject to the design standards set forth in this Section. These design standards should include the following:
10.5.1 Multiple Buildings. A lot may be occupied by more than one permitted principal building(s), provided that the entire lot is under the same ownership and all dimensional requirements set forth in Section 15 shall be satisfied. Separating distance between individual buildings shall be adequate to complement the natural and man-made features of the site and surrounding area. Separating distance between buildings may be used for vehicle or pedestrian access or be landscaped. Such separating distance shall be a design component reviewed by the Commission for vehicular and pedestrian safety, compatibility with site features, as well as complement adjacent buildings. At no time shall any separating distance conflict with any federal, state or local code requirement.
10.5.2 Important existing site features, such as stonewalls, large trees and other features shall be preserved and incorporated into the new design to the maximum extent possible and consistent with the proposed use.
10.5.3 The materials, textures, and colors used on the exterior walls and roofs of new and renovated buildings shall be associated with traditional New England architecture. Preferred building material shall be brick, stone and wood, including narrow wood siding, clapboards or wood shingles. Metal, dryvit, unfinished concrete block, vinyl and asphalt siding are discouraged. Tarpaper, sheet metal, or plastic roofing materials are also discouraged.
10.5.4 Architectural details, characteristic of the particular architectural style and period, should be incorporated in the design for any new construction and should relate harmoniously to adjacent buildings to the best extent possible. It is not intended that architectural details of old buildings be duplicated, but they should be regarded as suggestive of the extent, nature and scale of the details that would be appropriate on new buildings or alterations.
10.5.5 The design, proportion and placement of signs should complement the building’s composition and architectural details. The design shall consist of materials and be limited to colors that are appropriate to the design and materials and shall use lettering styles, sizes and composition which relate to architectural styles within the district.
10.5.6 Parking areas shall be attractively landscaped, with planting strips between all parking bays and separating driveways from parking bays. Parking areas shall have lights that do not exceed twenty feet (20’) in height and which are designed to project light downward.
10.5.7 Off-street parking shall be located in the rear of buildings when possible.
34
10.5.8 No building or parking area shall be permitted within any required setback area.
10.5.9 A landscaped buffer strip with a minimum width of twenty feet (20’), planted with evergreens (or may use other appropriate screening techniques) shall be provided between RC developments and all abutting residentially zoned properties. The buffer shall adequately screen the residential property from the commercial development This buffer strip shall be in addition to the required setbacks of the RC District.
10.5.10 Where the proximity, nature, and intensity of abutting residential uses are such that the minimum buffer width would not provide adequate protection from noise, headlight glare, and visual intrusion to residential dwellings, the Commission may require an increase in the minimum buffer width.
10.6 Access and Traffic.
10.6.1 The Commission may require that all vehicular access be on Route 2 or onto a roadway which serves only properties located in the RC District.
10.6.2 In order to reduce possible traffic conflict points, the Commission shall require driveways to be located so that they will provide common access to adjacent parcel(s) when it is determined that common use would be appropriate for traffic safety. The Commission shall also require common interior drives to serve more than one (1) parcel, where appropriate for traffic safety. Such requirements may stipulate reserved right-of-ways in lieu of actual construction depending on present use of adjacent parcels. Where shared driveways are required and constructed, a written agreement for the common use and maintenance of a shared access must be recorded in the Town Land Records.
10.6.3 The Commission may require certain minimum sight line distances depending on present or anticipated traffic conditions, posted speed limits and surveyed average vehicular speeds.
10.6.4 Wherever possible, each development shall be limited to one (1) access point per property.
10.6.5 The applicant must demonstrate that the site design makes proper provision for pedestrian access and safety. All site plans shall provide for pedestrian walkways and circulation in and around buildings.
10.6.6 Any permit may be denied by the Commission if, after review and evaluation, no reasonable modification can be required which will insure that the proposed use will not create or further aggravate vehicular and/or pedestrian traffic safety problems.
35
11 Thames River District ("TRD")
11. 1 Purpose: The purpose of this district is to promote an energy efficient, pedestrian friendly, planned mixed-use development that includes a variety of commercial uses and will in its design consider the zones' unique locational features such as the campus setting, historic assets, and proximity to State Highways, rail line, the Thames River, natural resources, public utilities, and area attractions.
11.2 Procedures: A site plan application in accordance with Section 11.7.4 and Section 19 shall be submitted for all permitted uses enumerated in Section 11.3 of these Regulations. Applications for zone changes and master plan approval pursuant to the Special Thames River Overlay Development District (“TRODD”) shall be submitted in accordance with the provisions of Section 11.7.2 of these Regulations. All applications proposing development within the TRD for property that is not the subject of a Property Disposition and Development Agreement between the Town of Preston and the applicant (“PDDA) and that is within the redevelopment area shall be submitted to and reviewed by the Preston Redevelopment Agency (PRA). The Commission shall not act on any application for development within the redevelopment area that is required to be submitted to the PRA without receiving recommendations and an advisory report from the PRA; provided, however, that in the event the PRA does not submit review comments within thirty-five (35) days of submittal of such application to the PRA, the Commission may act on such application absent of review comments from the PRA. All such reports and recommendations shall be considered by the Commission, but shall be advisory only.
11.3 Permitted Uses: The following uses are permitted in the TRD As of Right, but subject to receiving site plan approval from the Commission in accordance with the standards contained in these Regulations:
11.3.1 Professional Offices; Personal Service Activity.
11.3.2 Daycare Center, including adult daycare and nursery schools; Family Daycare Home; Group Daycare Home.
11.3.3 Financial Offices, such as banks, insurance offices and financial planning offices.
11.3.4 Health and Fitness Centers: which are facilities that provide for such activities as swimming, tennis, racquetball and/or aerobics.
11.3.5 Dine-in Restaurants.
11.3.6 Retail businesses, such as grocery stores, drug stores, apparel stores, variety stores, antique shops, and sporting goods stores less than thirty thousand (30,000) square feet.
11.3.7 Hotels and Inns.
36
11.3.8 Single-family dwellings that existed prior to the adoption of these regulations on March 18, 2019 are allowed to be modified and are afforded all the uses and requirements of Sections 5.1 and 5.2 of these Regulations, including dimensional requirements.
11.3.9 Accessory buildings or uses.
11.3.10 Marinas, boatyards or docks and other similar water dependent uses.
11.4 Environmental Protection:
a. Coastal Area: The TRD includes property regulated under the Coastal Management Act (the “Act”). The Act establishes special requirements and procedures that ensure the impacts of proposed activities on both coastal resources and water dependent development activities are acceptable. A coastal site plan application pursuant to Section 17 – Coastal Area Management of the Regulations is required for activities located within the coastal boundary.
b. Stormwater: Landscaping and stormwater drainage associated with site development shall be of a design and layout to minimize potential water quality impacts of non-point source runoff, including hydrocarbons, fertilizers and pesticide applications. Stormwater drainage shall be designed to relate harmoniously with the adjacent landscape and structures. All drainage design shall be developed in accordance with the State of Connecticut Stormwater Quality Manual, latest edition.
c. Conservation/Public Access Easements: The Commission may require deeded conservation easements to the Town or any other 501(c)(3) recognized conservation entity approved by the Commission to protect coastal and natural resources and to allow public access to coastal or other natural resources and/or historic resources, where appropriate and available. The Commission shall make this determination during the coastal site plan review process and/or the site plan review process, whichever may be applicable.
11.5 Design Standards: These design standards are provided to ensure harmonious creative design that allows flexibility to achieve the overall goal of a well-planned and well-designed New England style development. All applications for development within the TRD shall be submitted with a general plan illustrating how the project coordinates, complements and fits with the overall plans for the comprehensive development of the TRD.
a. Multiple Buildings and Uses: A lot may be occupied by more than one (1) permitted principal building or use. The separating distance between individual buildings shall be adequate to complement the natural and man-made features of the site and surrounding area. Separating distance between buildings may be used for pedestrian or vehicle access or be landscaped. The Commission for vehicular and pedestrian safety and compatibility with site features shall review building separation distances. At no time shall any building
37
separation distance conflict with any federal, state or local building or fire code requirement.
b. Special Features: Important existing site features, such as stonewalls, large trees, and other features shall be preserved and incorporated into the new design to the maximum extent feasible.
c. Building Design: All structures and projects should be consistent with the Thames River Design Guidelines, hereinafter referred to as the Design Guidelines (which are an addendum to these Regulations).
d. Lot Coverage and Building Height: Structures shall not cover more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the property. The Commission shall consider impacts on vistas and solar access when reviewing the height of structures within the District and may establish height limitations based on such impacts as vistas and solar access.
e. Sign Design: The design, proportion and placement of signs shall complement the buildings’ composition and architectural details. The design shall consist of materials, colors, and lettering styles and sizes that relate to the architectural styles in this District. Additional sign requirements are stipulated in Section 21 of these Regulations. Any site plan submitted to the Commission for approval of development within the TRD shall include a signage plan delineating the location of all proposed signage, the size, shape, lighting and conceptual design of all proposed signage within the property that is the subject of the site plan application.
f. Parking: Off-street parking shall meet the requirements of Section 20, unless otherwise specified in Section 11.5 (m) of the Regulations. All parking areas shall be attractively landscaped with planting strips between bays and planting strips separating driveways from parking bays. No parking shall be located in front of the building served by such parking area, but may be located to the side and rear of the building.
g. Buffers: A landscaped buffer strip shall be provided to adequately screen all abutting residentially zoned properties and/or cemeteries. Such buffer shall provide a physical separation that screens any vehicular head light glare, on-site lighting glare, or other visual intrusion into the adjacent residential zone or cemetery. The Commission may forward copies of the plans to the cemetery association(s) for review and comment. The Commission may also require a buffer strip to provide visual separation from other redevelopment areas within the District where the incorporation of such buffer strip adds to the overall aesthetic character of the District. Off-street parking is prohibited within these areas.
h. Noise: No development or project shall produce decibel levels that exceed the State of Connecticut recommended noise levels.
i. Lighting: The site plan shall show all proposed exterior lighting in enough detail for the Commission to assess the impact of the lighting on the surrounding area. In no case shall
38
the lighting be located such that its height, direction, intensity or conditions pose a nuisance to surrounding uses. The Commission may require a lighting plan prepared by a licensed professional engineer to determine compliance with this requirement.
j. Dimensional Requirements: Other than those separating distances required to comply with other code requirements (building, fire, etc.) there shall be no minimum dimensional requirements within the TRD. Side and rear building set back lines, distances from the centerline of the roads, and building height shall be subject to approval by the Commission. In exercising its discretion, the Commission shall only approve setback lines, the height of structures, and distances that are designed to create a well-planned community thereby allowing the sharing of resources, parking and utilities. In considering building height, the Commission shall consider safety, impact on vistas and on the potential use of solar energy.
k. Energy Efficiency and Sustainability: In formulating each site plan for development in the TRD, consideration shall be given to create a development that minimizes the impact on ecosystems and water resources, promotes smarter use of water to reduce both potable and non-potable water consumption, promotes better building energy performance through innovative strategies, encourages the use of sustainable building materials and reduces waste, promotes improved indoor air quality and access to daylight and views, promotes walkable neighborhoods with efficient transportation options and open space, emphasizes compact, walkable, vibrant, mixed-use neighborhoods with connectivity to nearby communities, and/or reduces the environmental consequences of the construction and operation of buildings and infrastructure.
l. Access and Traffic: All development within the District shall comply with the following standards, as applicable:
1. In order to reduce possible point of traffic conflict, the Commission may require access drives to be located along a side property line so that with the development of the adjacent property, the access drive could be widened onto that adjacent property, to create "one" access drive to serve two (2) or more properties. The Commission may also require common interior drives to serve more than one (1) parcel, where appropriate for traffic safety and when connecting to a public road/street. The Commission may require the incorporation into any site plan of reserved rights-of-ways together with an obligation to construct in locations in which the Commission deems interparcel access to adjacent public streets reasonably necessary to enhance traffic flow and to prevent congestion and traffic conflict on existing municipal and state streets and highways. Where common access drives are approved by the Commission as a component of a site plan approval, a written agreement for the common use and maintenance of shared access facilities, subject to the approval of the Preston Town Attorney (not to be unreasonably withheld), shall be executed and recorded in the Preston Land Records prior to the issuance of zoning permit for the approved development.
2. The Commission shall require minimum sight line distances depending on present and anticipated traffic conditions and current engineering design standards.
39
3. Since it is the intent of the Regulations to create a walkable community, the applicant must demonstrate that the site design makes proper provision for pedestrian access and safety problems.
4. Any permit application may be denied by the Commission if, after review and evaluation, no reasonable modification can be made to ensure that the proposed use will not create or further aggravate vehicular and/or pedestrian traffic safety problems.
5. The applicant is responsible for obtaining all other required access and traffic permits from the ConnDOT or Office of State Traffic Administration or other, as required by applicable regulations. The status of such permit activity shall be included with any application for development within the TRD. In the event that any such permit or authorization is granted subsequent to the date that the Commission issues its site plan approval, which permit requires material modifications to the proposed street layout, intersection design or traffic controls incorporated into the site plan approval, the applicant shall submit such amendments and modifications to the Commission for approval and the Commission shall evaluate such modifications and amendments in an application for modification of site plan approval applying the parameters set forth in these Regulations.
m) Off-Street and Off-Site Parking: The amount of off-street parking for buildings and uses in the TRD shall either (i) be as stipulated in Section 20 of these Regulations for each of the permitted uses or (ii) be based upon an evaluation of the parking needs for the applicable uses delineated on the site plan or Master Plan, as applicable, prepared by a professional engineer with experience in parking and traffic circulation design, whose recommendations may be adopted by the Commission and incorporated into the Master Plan or site plan approval.
In addition, proposed development activities may provide for off-street parking to be located off-site under the conditions 1) thru 4) below:
1. The off-site parking shall be easily accessible and located within a practical distance from and appropriately located to serve the principle building as illustrated by the applicant and determined to be acceptable by the Commission. The Commission shall also determine that the location of the proposed off-site parking facility will not hamper current or future development opportunities or represent a public safety concern.
2. An agreement, providing for the use and maintenance of such parking facilities, shall be submitted with the application, and subsequent to approval, executed by the applicant and filed in the Preston Land Records.
3. A separate lot used for off-site parking for a developed parcel shall not be included in calculations when determining compliance with any dimensional requirements of the principal developed parcel, including lot coverage for the parcel on which the principal use is located. An off-site parking garage shall meet lot coverage restrictions for the
40
parcel on which it is located. For uses requiring a significant number of parking spaces, several smaller interconnected parking areas separated by landscaped islands are encouraged rather than a single large parking lot for aesthetic and drainage purposes.
4. Alternating work shifts can be considered when calculating the parking, as deemed acceptable by the Commission.
o) View Shed Protection: The Commission may consider the impact of the development on the view shed of the Thames River.
11.6 Non-Conforming Buildings/Residential Density Limitations: Any single-family residence existing at the time of the Effective Date of Section 11 of these Regulations and located within the TRD shall be exempt from Section 22.2.3 of these Regulations which prohibits the expansion of non-conforming buildings. In addition, such existing single-family residences shall not be taken into consideration in the determination of the maximum residential density in the TRD or any TRODD.
11.7 Thames River Overlay Development District (TRODD): The purpose of this floating overlay district is to encourage and permit variety and flexibility in land use that will augment creative design development within the TRD. This Section 11.7 sets forth the procedures and criteria for the Commission to rezone one or more portions of the TRD to TRODD, in conjunction with the approval of a master plan for redevelopment; and eventually to approve a site plan for one or more segments of a TRODD as they are proposed for development and construction. Section 11.7 is organized into five subsections: Section 11.7.1 – Permitted Uses Within TRODD; Section 11.7.2 - Procedures For Rezoning To TRODD; Section 11.7.3 – Criteria And Standards for Rezoning to TRODD; Section 11.7.4 – Site Plan Approval Requirements for TRODD; and Section 11.7.5 - Modifications. The TRODD allows the Commission to approve a project with uses that are in addition to those permitted as of right in the TRD and to allow the use of specific development and use related criteria and requirements in lieu of the development and use criteria and requirements set forth in Section 3.14.3, Sections 11.1 through 11.6 and Sections 15, 16, (excluding Section 16.15), 18, 19, 20, 21 and elsewhere in these Regulations, which shall not apply to the TRODD. In exercising its legislative discretion in considering an application for an TRODD, the Commission shall consider the recommendations contained in the Preston Plan of Conservation and Development, Preston Riverwalk Plan of Conservation and Development and the Design Guidelines. In furtherance, once a parcel is established as a TRODD, the criteria and requirements set forth in the master plan approved by the Commission will become the zoning requirements for that specific parcel.
11.7.1: Permitted Uses Within TRODD
The following is a non-exhaustive list of uses allowed within the district. Any uses not listed must be reviewed and approved by the Commission and determined to meet the spirit of the district and the design standards and the POCD.
11.7.1.1 Uses permitted in the TRD, as set forth in Section 11.3.
41
11.7.1.1 Convention Center.
11.7.1.2 Nursing /Convalescent Home
11.7.1.3 Research Hospital and/or laboratories; medical/dental clinics and offices, including storefront medical facilities; veterinary hospitals and offices; pet daycare and hotel facilities.
11.7.1.4 Retail Use with no size limitation, including shopping centers, drug stores, apparel stores, variety stores and sporting good stores.
11.7.1.5 Gasoline/Fuel Service and Filling Stations.
11.7.1.6 Package liquor store facilities.
11.7.1.7 Restaurants, including restaurants with drive-thru service; fast food and casual restaurants; coffee shops, diners, cafes, pubs, bars, taverns, snack bars and food trucks.
11.7.1.8 Movie Theater and drive-in theater.
11.7.1.9 Colleges or private schools, which are defined as public or private institutions of higher learning offering a course of studies leading to a degree or certification in a specific profession, vocation, or technical field. Such institutions may include accessory uses and structures to support the principal instructional institution. Examples of such accessory uses are: residential facilities for staff or students; sports fields or other structures for institutional events.
11.7.1.10 Transportation facilities: Such facilities shall allow travelers to change from one mode of transportation to one or more other modes of transportation and also include buildings and amenities such as telephone, restrooms, and other services for such travelers including not more than one helistop. A gondola tram system providing transit from one location to another shall be considered a permitted transportation facility. Parking lots or garages with limited services such as a shelter and pay phone, which could be classified as a typical bus stop, are prohibited as principal uses.
11.7.1.11 Indoor Theater or a building or part of a building for dramatic, musical, or other live performances.
11.7.1.12 Studios for recording, production, and broadcast of music, television, radio and motion pictures, including transmitters, antennae, and ancillary equipment.
11.7.1.13 Indoor and outdoor family oriented recreational/cultural facilities such as a theme park, video game arcade, ski slope, waterpark, adventure course, trampoline center, go kart track, golf course or an outdoor theater; Commercial Recreation Facility.
42
11.7.1.14 Intensive agriculture and aquaculture activities such as greenhouse nurseries, tank culture, and hydroponic facilities, provided there are no adverse environmental impacts, including odor.
11.7.1.15 Farms, Farm Commercial Livestock, Farm Commercial Poultry; Specialized Agricultural Building, Farm Vineyard, Winery, Cider Mill and other similar farm fruit facility - Large Acreage ; agricultural tourism facilities, including production facilities, a portion of which will be open to the public for tours and may include educational events, retail facilities and sales of products produced on the premises including food and drink products and on-premises restaurants; farmer’s markets.
11.7.1.16 Museums, riverwalk, art and entertainment areas.
11.7.1.17 Water-dependent uses, such as marinas and water taxis.
11.7.1.18 Wedding and banquet facilities.
11.7.1.19 Spas, timeshare facilities and hotel condominiums.
11.7.1.20 Camping areas, including recreational vehicle parks and including accessory uses such as toilet and shower facilities, utility hook-ups, community center-type facilities; dining facilities and other related ancillary uses.
11.7.1.21 Multi-Family Dwelling, including Elderly Housing, Elderly Active Adult Housing, Assisted Living Facility, Nursing Home/Convalescent Home and Life Care Facility; provided that any residential component shall not exceed twenty percent (20%) of the gross square footage of all approved development in the TRODD. For purposes hereof, a residential component shall not include hotel, motel or interval ownership uses or Elderly Housing, Elderly Active Adult Housing, Assisted Living Facilities, Nursing Homes and Life Care Facilities. Any multi-family development that is a residential component shall be limited to multi-family rental or ownership units located within a mixed-use development that contains commercial or business uses on the first floor with residential units located only above the first floor. In no event shall any multi-family unit that is a residential component contain more than two (2) bedrooms.
11.7.1.22 The sale and consumption of alcohol in bars, nightclubs, pubs, cafes, coffee shops, diners, taverns, entertainment facilities, recreational facilities, sports venues and restaurants (all types), whether from a service bar or otherwise, The sale of alcohol in packaged form at licensed package liquor stores and of beer in grocery stores.
11.7.1.23 Microbrewery, cheese making and other specialty food product manufacturing such as gourmet sauces, home-made pasta, olive oil, soap and other personal products.
11.7.2 Procedures for Rezoning to TRODD
43
An application for rezoning to TRODD shall follow the procedures of Chapter 124 of the CGS and Section 3.18 of these Regulations, and shall include a Master Plan as set forth in Section 11.7.2.4 c below.
1. A pre-application review shall be allowed, but is not required, to provide the applicant with the opportunity to discuss with the Commission the conceptual plan for the project without extensive details. Any pre-application shall be submitted to the Commission for consideration a minimum of two (2) weeks prior to a regularly scheduled meeting of the Commission. Upon receipt, if the property that is the subject of the pre-application is not covered by a PDDA, the pre-application shall be referred to the PRA for review and recommendation. The PRA shall provide a report to the Commission within thirty-five (35) days of receipt. The report submitted by the PRA shall address the economic benefits or detriments, as the case may be, of the proposed TRODD to the community and region, including job creation.
2. The pre-application review and the informal consideration of the conceptual plan shall not be deemed to constitute any portion of the official and formal procedure of applying for a change of zone or a Master Plan approval. In the event that an applicant utilizes the pre-application review process, neither the applicant nor the Commission shall be in any way bound by statements made in such informal discussions, their purpose being only to minimize delay, expense and inconvenience to the public, the applicant and the Commission upon the future receipt of a formal application for a zone change to TRODD and Master Plan approval. Since the pre-application review is an informal, non-binding process, the applicant’s submission shall be of such content and detail as will enable the Commission to provide comments on areas of concern or interest to the applicant. The level of detail of information submitted by an applicant for a pre-application review shall be at the applicant’s discretion. However, the more complete information and plans submitted for discussion will result in more meaningful feedback from the Commission.
3. Formal Application: Any owner of property located within the TRD may apply to the Commission for a change of zoning district classification from the TRD to the TRODD. The applicant need not own all land within the proposed TRODD, and failure to own all land within such proposed district shall not prevent the Commission from hearing or granting any such application; provided, however, that the owner of each parcel delineated on the Master Plan for which TRODD approval is requested consents in writing to the filing of the application for the TRODD. The application shall be submitted to the Commission on a form prescribed by it and accompanied by all applicable application fees for a zone change in accordance with the Zoning Regulations of the Town of Preston. The Commission shall have the right to retain third party consultants as deemed necessary by the Commission for the review of the technical aspects of the zone change and Master Plan application, which may include, but are not limited to: engineering, legal, planning, historic, archaeological, architectural, landscape, environmental. The applicant shall be responsible for paying the reasonable costs of such third party consulting services. In connection therewith, the Commission shall obtain a not-to-exceed fee estimate for the cost of the consulting services for such third party consultant(s). The Commission shall advise the applicant of said fee in writing. If the applicant disagrees with fee estimate, the
44
applicant may negotiate with the Commission and the third party consultant regarding the estimate or the applicant may propose an alternate consultant that is acceptable to both the applicant and the Commission. Upon conclusion of said negotiations and selection process, the applicant shall deposit with the Town the total amount of said consultant fees. The actually incurred fees of the consultant, up to the not-to-exceed amount, shall be paid to the consultant by the Town after receipt from the consultant of itemized bills for the same, which shall be subject to the reasonable review of the applicant. The Commission shall use the consultant fees deposited with the Town solely for expenses associated with the technical review of the application and for no other purposes. Consultant fees shall be charged only by consultants who are not otherwise salaried employees of the Commission or the Town. All remaining fees after the completion of the project shall be returned to the applicant. The foregoing consulting fee process shall be in lieu of that set forth in Section 3.17.2(b).
4. The following information shall be submitted with an application for zone change to the TRODD:
a. A Project Narrative that includes:
1. The specific types of proposed uses within the TRODD and the approximate square footage of each use;
2. The methods by which site utilities will be provided;
3. The proposed timetable for development, including a description of phases, if any;
4. A list of all licenses, permits, and approvals that will be required for the proposed development, together with a delineation of the agency responsible for the issuance of such permits, licenses, and approvals;
5. The open space, archaeological, coastal or recreational resources of the site, and the amount of open space to be retained, and the method of preservation thereof;
6. The pattern/method of ownership and maintenance of any interior roadways, public facilities and other common elements;
7. With respect to any residential component of the project, an identification of the type of residential housing proposed; i.e. age restricted, affordable, independent living, assisted living, etc., a schedule of bedrooms per dwelling unit, total number of units and the total number of affordable units if any;
8. A statement delineating how the TRODD supports and creates a livable, pedestrian, green development which benefits the Town of Preston; and
45
9. How the proposed development is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan of the Town of Preston, the Plan of Conservation and Development of the Town of Preston and the Preston Riverwalk Plan of Conservation and Development.
b. A property boundary survey, prepared to Class A-2 standards, suitable for filing in the Office of the Preston Town Clerk, indicating the area of the proposed zone change relative to existing property boundaries, and the names of all property owners owing property located within the proposed TRODD and the names of all abutting property owners of record, including property owners located directly across the street from the TRODD. Abutting property owners shall be determined by the most recent records of the Assessor of the Town of Preston as of the date of filing of the zone change application for the TRODD. Said survey shall include a key map.
c. A Master Plan that shall be drawn clearly and legibly at a scale of 1" = 100' or less unless the area of the application is such that the entire property cannot be shown on one sheet, in which case a larger scale may be used. Sheet size shall not exceed 24" by 36" and the plan shall be drawn by a professional engineer, architect, landscape architect or land surveyor registered in the State of Connecticut. The Master Plan shall contain the following:
i. Key Map. A key map at a scale of 1" = 1,000' showing the location of the proposed development and its relationship to existing town and state roads.
ii. Property Included. The boundaries of the subject parcel or parcels to be rezoned and/or developed and owners of these parcels; owners of adjacent parcels and boundaries, structures and land use on adjacent parcels (including those located across a street) located within 100’ feet of the boundary of the property that is the subject of the application.
iii. Existing Site Features. Existing structures, roads, land uses, topography at a contour interval of two feet (2') or less, major and unique natural, scenic and historic and open space features of the parcel and their relationship to the proposed development.
iv. Proposed Land Uses. Project layout showing the individual development areas on the site, if applicable, and a land use chart indicating the proposed land uses for each of the development areas.
v. Proposed Buildings. Proposed preliminary project layout, showing the general location of the following:
? Buildings and their use, and the location of uses not contemplated within buildings.
? Parking areas.
vi. Circulation. The general location of roads, parking and pedestrian circulation including interconnections with existing town and state roads.
46
vii. Stormwater. A general stormwater quality and management plan that will present the applicant’s proposal for addressing stormwater management on site and how it will incorporate low impact development techniques and processes.
viii. Erosion Control. A statement that all erosion and sediment control measures shall comply with the latest edition of the Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control.
ix. Wetlands and Watercourse. The location of any tidal and/or inland wetlands and watercourses as defined by Chapter 440 of the CGS and the Preston Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations.
x. Signage Plan. A general signage plan delineating the types, size limitations and design of all signage within the TRODD, including directional signage.
xi. Landscape Plan. A general landscape plan showing the locations of landscaped areas (and criteria for certain development areas) within the TRODD.
d. Traffic Impact Study. A traffic impact analysis prepared by a Connecticut licensed professional engineer specializing in traffic engineering, evaluating the capacity of the existing streets and highways to accommodate the projected traffic which will be generated by the TRODD uses and traffic circulation within the TRODD.
e. Water Supply Study. The name of the water company or utility which will supply water to the TRODD, a projection of the number of gallons to be consumed on a daily basis by all uses in the TRODD together with a letter from the designated water company or utility committing to provide sufficient water to meet the needs of all uses within the TRODD.
f. Sewage Disposal Study. The proposed method for the collection and disposal of all sanitary waste, together with a letter from the utility that will provide sanitary sewer service evidencing the fact that such utility has the ability to provide sanitary sewer service for all uses within the TRODD.
g. Surface Water Quality. A statement indicating the quality of existing watercourses through or near the TRODD and containing an analysis of how the development of the TRODD will be consistent with the maintenance of surface water quality required by these Regulations.
h. Pedestrian Study. An analysis prepared by a Connecticut licensed professional engineer evaluating the movement of pedestrian traffic within the TRODD and between the TRODD and adjacent uses, which analysis shall incorporate recommendations to facilitate pedestrian use and movement both within the TRODD as well as between the TRODD and adjacent uses.
47
i. Parking Analysis. The parking analysis for the TRODD prepared by a licensed professional engineer experienced in parking needs and design, which analysis shall determine the amount of parking required for the individual uses contemplated within the TRODD. The recommendations of the parking analysis shall be incorporated into the Master Plan by the applicant's licensed professional engineer.
j. Constructability Review. A review of the design of the TRODD prepared by a licensed professional engineer to determine that the Master Plan, as formulated, is constructible giving due consideration to stormwater drainage, environmental constraints, archaeological resources, soil conditions, utility layout and availability of access.
k. Scheduling. A schedule of proposed development in terms of time and site development area for all proposed phases of the TRODD.
l. General Design Criteria. General design criteria for the buildings and other structures to be constructed on the site including any development limits or substitute criteria for items such as (but not limited to) coverage, setbacks, buffers, landscaping, maximum height of buildings and structures and other bulk and area requirements, sign criteria, parking requirements and similar items that will apply to the specific development areas within the TRODD. Separate criteria may be established by the Commission for each development area.
m. Economic Analysis. For projects that are not the subject of a PDDA, an economic model that indicates that the uses contemplated by the Master Plan will provide more of an economic benefit to the town than a project using the underlying District. The analysis must provide a description on how the project will be developed in accordance with "Smart Growth Principals" that protect the environment, improve public health, create jobs, expand economic opportunity, and improve overall quality of life.
11.7.3: Criteria and Standards for Rezoning to TRODD
In acting on an application for change of zone and master plan approval for an TRODD, the Commission is performing a legislative function and shall be allowed the discretion granted to zoning commissions acting in a legislative capacity by Connecticut law. The Commission shall, in acting upon a zone change to TRODD and approval of a master plan submission, consider the comprehensive plan of the Town of Preston, the Plan of Conservation and Development adopted by the Commission and the Preston Riverwalk Plan of Conservation and Development.
1. General Findings:
In general, the Commission shall consider the following in any decision to approve an TRODD:
i. The compatibility of the proposed location and uses with the recommendations of the adopted Plan of Conservation and Development, the Preston Riverwalk Plan of Conservation and Development and the Design Guidelines and considertation of view shed.
48
ii. The existing and future character of the district in which the TRODD is located. Particular attention shall be paid to the character and uniqueness of the natural, historic and archaeological resources of the District and the character and use of the existing highway facilities.
iii. Traffic circulation within the TRODD. The amount, access and location of parking and loading facilities, and the quantity and composition of traffic generated by the proposed uses and the use of alternative modes of transportation proposed to minimize traffic impacts. Development shall be located so as to provide direct primary access to a state owned and maintained arterial highway and to discourage increased traffic loads through residential neighborhoods.
iv. The quality of the natural resources within the proposed TRODD and the affect that the proposal will have on such resources and the impact the proposal may have through the treatment and disposition of stormwater runoff.
v. The TRODD shall be suitable for development in the manner proposed without causing hazards to persons or property on or off the site from flooding, erosion, slipping of soil, or other harmful or inconvenient effects. Conditions of soil, groundwater level, drainage and topography must be suitable to adequately accommodate the pattern and nature of the land use intended.
vi. The availability of water to the TRODD and the adequacy of capacity in the delivery system to the wastewater treatment plant and in the wastewater treatment plant itself providing sewer service to uses within the TRODD. Sufficient water shall be available to the site to supply the needs of the proposed uses. The proposal shall not impose upon the town any obligation to effect improvements to water lines, water supplies, wastewater collection systems or a wastewater treatment plant, unless funded by the applicant.
vii. Safeguards to protect neighboring properties and the neighborhood in general from disturbance through the use of appropriate landscaping and siting of uses and facilities.
viii. For projects that are not the subject of a PDDA, the economic impact on the Town of Preston with particular attention to the potential property tax revenue from the TRODD.
ix. For projects that are not the subject of a PDDA, the economic impact of the development on municipal and regional economies. Economic impact calculations shall take into consideration the value of secondary spending using recognized multipliers to calculate such benefits.
11.7.4: Site Plan Approval Requirements for TRODD
Site Plan Application: Subsequent to approval of the zone change and Master Plan, a site plan application shall be submitted for approval in accordance with Section 19 of these Zoning Regulations for all development in the approved TRODD and shall comply with the following additional requirements.
The following information shall be submitted with a site plan application for a site within an approved TRODD:
49
1. Property boundary survey, prepared to Class A-2 standards, suitable for filing in the Office of the Preston Town Clerk.
2. Development Plan: The development plan shall be drawn clearly and legibly at a scale of 1” = 40’ or less horizontal and T-2 vertical, with contour intervals not to exceed 2’. Sheet size shall not exceed 24” by 36” and the plan shall be drawn by a professional engineer and land surveyor registered in the State of Connecticut with, if required, the additional design expertise of a landscape architect and/or architect. The development plan may comprise several plans for separate phases of the development of the TRODD and shall contain the following:
a. Key Map. A key map at a scale of 1” = 1,000’ showing the location of the proposed development and its relationship to existing town and state roads, general soil conditions and zoning districts of all properties located within one thousand feet (1,000’) of the TRODD.
b. Adjacent Land Uses. The boundaries of the subject parcel or parcels to be rezoned and/or developed, owners of these parcels and adjacent parcels, roadways, structures and land uses.
c. Existing Site Features. Existing structures, roads, land uses, topography at a contour interval of two feet (2’) or less, major and unique natural, scenic and historic and open space features of the parcel and their relationship to the proposed development.
d. Site Layout and Zoning Chart. The proposed land uses intended in the development including a zoning chart setting forth the number of units or other applicable measurement, such as square feet, of residential, commercial and other types of development, and the amount of land to be devoted to each land use including the amount and general location of proposed open space, recreational areas and facilities, parking, walkways and other amenities.
e. Proposed Buildings. The height, bulk, use and location of buildings, including conceptual elevations of each building.
f. Circulation. The design, ownership, utilities and drainage of roads, parking and pedestrian circulation areas, interconnection points with existing town and state highways and public utility facilities, and provisions, if applicable, for the interconnection of said infrastructure in multi-phased TRODDs.
g. Utilities. The layout and method for addressing water, sewer, gas, telephone, electric, cable and stormwater required to accommodate the uses and development within the TRODD.
h. Surface Water and Groundwater Quality. A statement indicating the quality of existing watercourses through or near the application parcel and containing an analysis of how the proposed development will be consistent with the maintenance of surface water quality and groundwater quality required by these Regulations, including, the design of all stormwater quality treatment facilities incorporated into that phase of the TRODD, the maintenance plan for the maintenance of the same and verification that the water quality measures incorporated into the design will comply with the requirements of the 2004 State of Connecticut Stormwater Quality
50
Manual, latest edition, and the low impact design addendum, both published by the State of Connecticut Department of Energy and Environmental Protection.
i. Erosion Control. An erosion control plan delineating the erodibility of the soils and the location and design of all erosion and sediment control measures incorporated into the development plan for that phase of the TRODD to control the migration of sediment and to prevent erosion during the construction phases of the development. All erosion and sediment control measures shall comply with the latest edition of the Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control.
j. Signage Plan. A general signage plan delineating the location, type, size, height and design of all signage within the proposed development, including directional signage, or establishing criteria for the same. No freestanding sign shall exceed thirty feet (30’) in height.
k. Scheduling. A detailed schedule of development in terms of time and site development area for the proposed development.
l. Landscape Plan. A landscape plan showing the use of native vegetation (where possible) and existing and proposed topography.
3. The applicant shall submit the following reports as part of the site plan application:
a Traffic Impact Study. A traffic impact analysis prepared by a Connecticut licensed professional engineer specializing in traffic engineering, evaluating the capacity of the existing streets and highways to accommodate the projected traffic which will be generated by the proposed uses; which traffic impact study shall be a refinement of the study required in conjunction with the Master Plan approval and which traffic impact study shall delineate areas of potential traffic congestion and conflict anticipated to arise from the proposed uses and incorporate solutions to ameliorate those anticipated impacts on existing state and municipal highways, roads and intersections.
b. Pedestrian Impact Study. An impact analysis prepared by a Connecticut licensed professional engineer evaluating the movement of pedestrian traffic within the proposed development and between the proposed development and adjacent uses, which impact analysis shall incorporate recommendations to facilitate pedestrian use and movement both within the proposed development as well as between the proposed development and adjacent uses.
c. Parking Plan. The parking plan for the proposed development prepared by a licensed professional engineer with experience in parking needs and design, in accordance with the requirements of Section 11C.7b(3)(i) of these Regulations, which parking plan shall be in compliance with the Parking Analysis required in conjunction and approved with the Master Plan application.
d. Stormwater Report. A report, containing both pre-development and post development calculations analyzing the stormwater runoff impact of the proposed development as well as the water quality impacts of the proposed development and incorporating the necessary measures to mitigate any adverse impacts disclosed by said analysis.
51
11.7.5: Modifications: Upon approval of the zone change and Master Plan, and the filing of the same with the Preston Town Clerk, any material changes to the Master Plan shall be submitted to the Commission as an amendment to the Master Plan, which amendment shall require approval utilizing the same procedural formalities as were required for a Master Plan approval. Any non-material changes to the TRODD shall be submitted as an amendment to projects through the site plan approval process.
For purposes of the preceding paragraph, a material change is:
a. Any increase in the gross square footage of all buildings in the TRODD by more than ten percent (10%).
b. Any substantial change in the general layout and arrangement of uses and neighborhoods in the TRODD which would alter the general character of the TRD, as determined by the Commission.
52
SECTION 12 –VILLAGE DISTRICTS
12.1 Intent. It is the intent of these Regulations to preserve the unique village areas, enhance their sense of place, and promote a thriving attractive environment for small scale businesses that are appropriate for the village areas. Development of these villages with mixed residential and limited business uses with detailed design review will add an incentive for investments in measures to protect the historic qualities of the village including its historic buildings.
The Regulations have been enacted pursuant to Section 8-2j of the CGS to allow for creative and complementary development techniques. As an addendum to these regulations, the Commission has prepared separate guidelines that will include property ratings for each village property (this prioritizes a property for its significance archictecturally and physically), and general design techniques for the specific village. These guidelines are to reflect the unique character of the specific village (for example, “Preston City Village Design Guidelines” will reflect the design techniques that complement the character of Preston City Village), and shall be used to aid the intent of the regulations and the specific objective for the specific village.
For the purpose of this section, a historic building is as listed on the “National Register of Historic Places Registration Form” as a contributing building for either the Preston City Village Historic District or the Poquetanuck Village Historic District.
12.2 Village Districts (listed)
a) Preston City Village District. Preston City, part of which is a National Register Historic District, is an exceptionally well preserved entity containing a high concentration of contributing historic buildings and sites dating from the late seventeenth to the twentieth centuries. This truly authentic New England village has a distinct character that reflects the rural atmosphere of the Town. Historically, Preston City has functioned as an agricultural, social and business center. The district is located within the watershed area for Amos Lake, a prominent and significant natural and recreational resource. In order to protect this significant resource and its watershed, development within this district is subject to Section 13 of these Regulations.
b) Poquetanuck Village District. Poquetanuck Village is listed on the National Register of Historic Places. Similar to Preston City, Poquetanuck Village has traditionally housed a mixture of land uses at a higher density. The village, settled in the 17th century, was the site of early settlement with coastal trading, lumber production, iron making, and shipbuilding, as the major industries. The village generally encompasses a winding portion of Route 2A that extends from the bridge over Halls Brook to the intersection with Route 117 with 2 intersecting roads, Brickyard Road and Cider Mill Road. The village is bordered by the sensitive natural and archaeological resources of Poquetanuck Cove. In order to protect the significant Cove resources and its watershed, development within this district is subject to Section 13 of these Regulations.
12.2.1 Objective: Preston City Village and Poquetanuck Village from their inception to the present, contain both residential and non-residential uses.
53
They are recognized as special places and assets of the Town as evidenced by its inclusion in the National Register of Historic Places as Historic Districts. For these reasons, Preston City Village District and Poquetanuck Village District were created.
The objective is to improve upon the village character by creating more cohesive and defined villages that reflect the small town rural atmosphere, complements the Preston City and Poquetanuck Village National Register Historic Districts, promotes social and economic vitality, and enhances sense of community and place thereby resulting in an improved quality of life for the residents and taxpayers of the Town of Preston.
Promoting development of Preston City and Poquetanuck Village with mixed uses is part of the approach to meet this objective. How property is used within the districts will depend upon the specific characteristics of the property as noted in the Property Rating Description. Business uses shall be developed when such development adds to the overall village character. It is not the intent to allow business development “as of right”, nor is it the intent to create conventional or strip commercial development. Business development is permitted when a conversion or new construction is developed in a manner that visually meets the intent and objectives of these Regulations. In addition, it is critical that new construction for single-family homes also comply with the criteria as outlined in the Regulations. The design guidelines, property rating description and the review of a Historic Architect or other experts on historic architecture are to be used as tools to aid in the visual layout and aesthetic improvements to existing and new structures and other physical improvements to the property.
12. 3 Review of applications: The Commission shall review all proposed applications, including zoning permits with the exception of permits for:
a) Single family home
b) Additions to single family residences and accessory buildings provided the changes do not change the single family character of the structure.
c) Farming, not including commercial nurseries or accessory farm businesses.
12.3.1 Service of a Historic Architect/Expert. The Commission may hire a historic architect or an expert on historic architecture to assist in the review of applications, for the following:
a) All applications for permitted uses, unless the use is listed as an exception as noted above in Section 12.3 a),b), and c).
b) Special permitted uses as noted in Section 12.3.4.
c) The expertise of the historic architect/expert shall be made available to the applicant for the review of any permit that is exempt from these Regulations.
12.3.2 Commission considerations: The Commission shall consider the design guidelines, property rating and comments from the historic architect/expert in addition to the review criteria or special exception criteria in the review of each application.
12.3.3 Permitted uses:
a) All uses permitted in Section 5.1 of these Regulations.
12.3.4 Special Exception uses:
54
The following list of uses permitted by special exception allows for a variety of complementary uses that strengthen village neighborhoods, aesthetically, culturally, economically and socially.
12.3.4.1 Specialty retail stores (see definitions - Section 2);
12.3.4.2 Restaurants, eating establishments, microbreweries. Fast food restaurants or drive-thrus are not allowed;
12.3.4.3 Business or professional office, including real estate, insurance, legal, accounting, consulting, engineer, architect, medical, veterinerian, and the like;
12.3.4.4 Bed and Breakfast Inn pursuant to Section 18.17;
12.3.4.5 Historic Country Inn pursuant to Section 18.22;
12.3.4.6 Ice cream shops, coffee shops with no drive-thru component;
12.3.4.7 Bank and financial institutions with no drive-thru component;
12.3.4.8 Arts and cultural facilities such as play houses, museums or similar, but excluding tattoo parlors;
12.3.4.9 Specialty crafts and services, such as, clock making and repair, jewelry making and repair, pottery making, tailor, or woodworking - providing chemical treatment of wood and chemical storage is prohibited;
12.3.4.10 Nursery and Day Care;
12.3.4.11 Special Exceptions permitted in Section 5.2 of these Regulaions
12.3.5 Special Exception criteria: The design standards and property ratings shall be established for each specific village. The Commission, in their review of all special exception applications, shall consider these standards and other pertinent factors such as the type and style of exterior windows, doors, light fixtures, signs, above ground utility structures, mechanical appurtenances, type and texture of building materials, and hours of operation. All applications shall be subject to the requirements of Section 19 site plan review, the general criteria established in Section 18 for special exception applications and the following:
a) New buildings shall be comprised of one and one-half or two stories, or externally appear to be such, however the Commission may allow a portion of the structure to be single story if it is consistent with the historic and architectural character of the area. Such architectural styles shall be consistent with that of the National Register Historic District.
b) Renovations to historic buildings (all historic buildings are identified on a district map and property rating) should be consistent with spirit and intent of the Secretary of Interior Standards for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings, as amended.
55
c) Proposed buildings or modifications to existing buildings shall be in keeping with their surroundings, the terrain and to the use, scale and architecture of the existing buildings in the vicinity that have a functional or visual relationship to a proposed building or modification.
d) All spaces and structures shall be designed to add to the visual amenities of the area consistent with those of the village district in and around the proposed building or modification.
e) The color, size, height, proportions of openings, roof treatments, building materials and landscaping of property and any proposed signs and lighting shall be compatible with the local architectural motif and the maintenance of views, historic buildings, monuments and landscaping.
f) Removal or disruption of historically significant structures or architectural elements or distinguishing landscape features such as specimen trees and stone walls shall be minimized.
g) Arrangement and orientation of any proposed building or site improvement shall be similar to that of the immediate neighborhood including the front yard setback.
h) Layout and construction of buildings and parking lots shall reinforce existing buildings and streetscape patterns, and the placement of buildings and parking lots shall create no adverse impact on the immediate neighborhood. Parking lots shall be located so that they are not closer to the road than the front of the structure. In all situations, the parking lot shall be screened from the road using a variety of low growing shrubs as well as street trees. The plantings shall not interfere with sight line for the driveways. In areas where a parking lot abuts a property used for residential purposes or is zoned residentially, there shall be a landscape buffer strip with staggered evergreen trees and shrubs adequate to create a solid screen preventing view of such parking lot from the residential property.
i) The lot coverage shall include all parking, whether pervious or impervious, and all other impervious surfaces. The total lot coverage shall not exceed thirty (30) percent of the lot area.
j) Parking to serve the development shall not be located on the street. The Commission may waive the number of parking spaces required for a development in accordance with Section 20 of the Zoning Regulations, if the applicant can prove that the total number of spaces is unnecessary based on professional publications from the American Planning Association or other similar professional organizations. The applicant shall, show on the plan submitted, an area reserved for the parking that would meet the regulations. If the installation of the additional parking is required at a later date, the Commission may require the applicant to install such spaces. The Commission will determine whether the additional spaces are necessary based on violations to this section, which may include the use of on-street parking.
k) Open space and green space of the proposed development shall reinforce open/green space patterns of the immediate neighborhood in form and siting.
l) Locally significant features of the site, such as distinctive buildings or vistas, shall be integrated into the site design.
m) Landscape design shall complement the neighborhood’s landscape patterns and reinforce functional qualities.
n) Exterior signs, lighting and accessory structures shall support a uniform architectural theme and present a harmonious relationship with the surrounding neighborhood. Signage shall be designed to be consistent with the design guidelines for the specific district. Lighting provided must be non-glare (so not to glare onto any residential adjacent property).
o) The scale, proportions, massing, and detailing of the proposed building shall be in proportion to the scale, massing and detailing in the neighborhood, but in no case shall a building exceed three thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet. Conversion of existing structures in excess of
56
three thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet may be permitted if the building existed at the site as of the date of these Regulations March 18, 2019; however, if an addition is proposed to an existing building, the cumulative square footage of the building shall not exceed three thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet. The Commission may, by two-thirds vote, permit development of new buildings or existing buildings and their additions in excess of three thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet provided that the scale of the structure is in keeping with the neighborhood. This may be accomplished by incorporating eels or wings in the building design to minimize massing of the main portion of the structure.
p) Ramps shall be harmonious to the design of existing structures.
q) Minimum lot requirements: Lot size shall be sixty thousand (60,000) square feet; frontage shall be one hundred fifty feet (150’); however, the Commission may reduce this to one hundred twenty five feet (125’) in the event driveway access for a commercial development is shared with an abutting property and provided that proof of proper legal easements for use and maintenance is provided to the Commission.
r) All applicants shall demonstrate that they have considered the use of green or pervious parking lots for parking lots that exceed five parking spaces. Such lots shall be designed using current technical standards as developed by the University of Connecticut.
s) Protection of Natural Resources: It is a goal of the Commission to minimize off-site runoff from parking lots, roads, driveways, and sidewalks, so that water is allowed to infiltrate rather than runoff. All plans shall incorporate methods that help accomplish this goal. Examples of methods include developing landscaped islands for stormwater management and installing porous parking lots. Applicants shall implement Best Management Practices for the design of the project. Development shall be consistent with Section 13 “Special Resource Protection Overlay District: Amos Lake Watershed Area and Poquetanuck Cove Watershed Area. The developer shall:
1. Show the location of the development within the watershed.
2. Minimize the disturbance of natural grades and vegetation.
3. Protect natural wetland and stream buffers.
4. Maximize infiltration of stormwater.
5. Minimize impervious surfaces.
t) All such development shall be designed in accordance with the “Preston City Village and Poquetanuck Village Design Criteria” and property rating system.
u) Public hours of operations for commercial establishments shall be between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
v) Temporary real estate signs shall not exceed three feet (3’) by three feet (3’) in size.
12.3.5 Prohibited uses within the district:
a) Installation of temporary garage or storage structures.
12. 3.6 Variance: When a variance is sought from the Zoning Board of Appeals for any property located in this district, the Zoning Board of Appeals must refer the application to the Commission for review. The Commission must provide a report to the Board on this matter within thirty (30) days. If a report is not provided within that time period, it will be assumed the Commission has no concern with the matter.
57
SECTION 13– SPECIAL RESOURCE PROTECTION OVERLAY DISTRICT AMOS LAKE WATERSHED AND POQUETANUCK COVE AREA
13.1 Special Resource Protection Overlay Districts
13.1.1 Purpose. The purpose of this section is to facilitate the adequate provision of clean water by managing land uses that can contaminate water resources and by regulating other land uses that may have the potential to contaminate or down grade existing water resource quality.
13.1.2 Amos Lake is Preston’s largest lake being about 105 acres. Its watershed encompasses about 920 acres. The lake is entering into a “marginal eutrophic status” (eutrophic or eutrophication refers to the natural and artificial addition of nutrients to a lake, stream, etc.).
13.1.3 Poquetanuck Cove is a 2-mile long cove extending northeast from the Thames River. It offers nearly pristine brackish water wetland and is the most extensive wetlands on the Thames River south of Norwich. The shoreline is dominated by an attractive mix of conifers and deciduous trees.
Conditions for non-residential development:
a) All chemical and fuel shall be stored above ground and within an impervious diked system containing one hundred ten percent (110%) storage capacity.
b) All accommodations of manure, fertilizer, pesticides and herbicides shall be stored under a roof and contained in a liquid-tight diked floor with no drains other than a sump pit and located so that the surface water runoff drains away from the storage area.
c) Storm water runoff management shall promote pretreatment of runoff prior to discharge. All commercial development runoff shall be treated to remove particulate and dissolved pollutants associated with road and parking lot runoff prior to discharge. Open vegetated basins, depressions and buffer strips are the preferred method of infiltrating stormwater runoff from paved surfaces.
d) Dumpsters and waste receptacles shall have covers or shall be located within roofed areas and shall be placed on impervious surfaces away from storm drains.
e) Underground tanks are not permitted.
f) Above ground tank installation requirements should include a roofed secondary containment area with a cleanout sump, or a "tank within a tank" secondary containment alternative design.
13.2 Permitted uses within the Special Resource Protection Overlay District Amos Lake Watershed and Poquetanuck Cove Area:
a) All uses noted in the underlying zoning district.
13.3 Special Exceptions.
a) All uses listed as a special exception but not including saw mills pursuant to Section 18.10.
58
13.4 Emergency Response Plan. Upon the submission of a zoning permit, site plan or special exception application, all non-residential uses shall be required to provide an emergency response plan that includes the following information:
a) A list of hazardous materials. Upon request by the Commission, an annual updated list may be required.
b) How the material will be stored, handled and disposed of.
c) Locations and design of all septic systems and grease traps.
d) The expected types and amount of hazardous discharge to the septic area.
e) Emergency containment and clean up provisions to detect and control hazardous materials, leaks and spills including, but not limited to inspections, emergency containment and clean up provisions.
f) Location(s) of all chemical or fuel storage (which must be above ground) and details for containment areas. All containment areas shall be designed with an impervious, structured diked area that will contain any leaks or spills and shall have no drains other than a sump pit, and suitably covered to prevent precipitation accumulation.
g) Details showing all new or enlarged sites for the accommodation of manure, fertilizer, pesticides and herbicide storage which shall be stored under a roof to prevent precipitation from coming into contact with these materials, have a liquid-tight, diked floor with no drains other than a sump pit and be located so that surface water runoff drains away from the storage area.
h) Low Impact Development (LID) drainage techniques and Best Management Practices (BMP) shall be implemented, including, but not limited to the following:
i. Permeable pavement choices
ii. Bio-retention structures/residential rain gardens
iii. Rainwater harvesting
iv. Vegetative filter strips/level spreaders
v. Grassed drainage swales
vi. Maintain or restore predeveloped vegetation by type
vii. Encourage sheet flow versus channelization of storm water
viii. Replanting with trees, underbrush, groundcovers, and flowerbeds.
13.5 Prohibited Activities and Uses:
a) Waste processing systems such as floor drains, dry wells or other leaching structures intended to convey waste or spillage to the groundwater. Septic systems may only receive domestic sanitary waste and non–contaminated roof drainage.
b) Underground storage tanks for petroleum liquids or hazardous materials as defined in Section 22a-448 of the CGS.
c) Any facility for the primary storage (excluding small handling), loading or handling of pavement deicing materials.
13.6 Emergency Response Plan. The Commission may require, after the review of any emergency response plan, an applicant to submit as part of its plan, documentation of appropriate liability insurance to ensure the cleanup of any contamination created from the use. The Commission or its authorized agent may inspect any site where hazardous materials are stored to establish compliance with the provisions of these Regulations.
59
13.7 Voluntary Action. Residents are encouraged to take additional voluntary actions to protect the quality of the watershed areas by incorporating the following practices, including but not limited to:
a) Proper maintenance and pump-out frequency of on-site wastewater disposal systems (septic systems),
b) Consider installation of septic tank effluent filters when service is performed,
c) Use of sand fill materials with a phosphorus attenuation capacity exceeding 0.01 kg P / cubic ft when constructing or repairing septic system leaching fields,
d) Design leaching field geometry to maximize down-gradient soil contact volume and avoid intersecting septic groundwater plumes,
e) Avoid the use of septic system additives,
f) Maximize phosphorus removal from wastewater by approved innovative designs,
g) Only use fertilizers that have low, or no phosphorus content made available at local vendors.
Section 14 – AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT
14.1 Purpose and Intent. There is a need to provide an alternative and creative method to diversify housing opportunities within the Town of Preston in order to encourage affordable housing opportunities within the municipality with the goal of achieving the affordable housing threshold of ten percent (10%) of the total housing units in the Town of Preston. The Planning and Zoning Commission desires to encourage affordable housing with the Town of Preston in a manner that will achieve the following objectives:
a) to allow, on a long term basis, for the development of diverse housing types, including affordable housing to help address identified housing needs within the Town of Preston,
b) to encourage the construction of housing that is both affordable as defined by Connecticut General Statute Section 8-30g et. Seq. and is consistent with design and construction standards present in the community;
c) to promote housing choice, including, affordable housing for low and moderate income households;
d) to efficiently utilize infrastructure and promote neighborhood planning by providing, where infrastructure support is available, a mix of housing types, densities, sizes and prices while also providing public and private open space and recreational areas;
e) to guide development complying with the criteria established in this regulation in a manner consistent with the statutory purpose of protecting the public health, safety, convenience and property values; and
f) to encourage energy-efficient patterns of development, the use of solar and other renewable forms of energy, and energy conservation. It is therefore the intent of this regulation to create, within the Town of Preston, Affordable Housing Development Districts (AHD).
The AHD will be a Floating Zone governed by a Master Plan prepared in accordance with these Regulations. The Master Plan will be subject to review and approval by the Commission as a zone change, subject to a public hearing and all other applicable terms and conditions of these
60
Regulations. It is recognized that the Master Plan may require fluidity in order to accommodate market changes that may dictate the need for changes in the design of the affordable housing project during the course of completion of development of the project. In the event that there is any substantial and material change proposed for the Master Plan as determined by the Commission, the change will be subject to the same procedural requirements for a zone change as required by the original zone change application adopting the AHD. Once enacted, the AHD will supersede all pre-existing zoning, and any development on the zoned property will be subject to the specific AHD requirements set forth herein.
14.2 Applicability: An Affordable Housing District (AHD) may be permitted in any residential district within the Town of Preston, and must contain a minimum of ten (10) developable acres (see Section 2 for definition). A waiver from the minimum developable acreage requirement may be granted by the Commission if the project meets the purpose of Section 1 “Purpose and Intent” as noted above, but in no case shall the total acres of the parcel be less than ten (10) acres. The applicant shall comply with all other provisions of these Regulations and the Subdivision Regulations of the Town of Preston. Applications to create affordable housing districts under Section 14 of these Regulations may only be filed with the Commission during periods of time in which less than ten percent (10%) of the aggregate housing units in the Town of Preston fail to qualify as affordable housing units pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 126a of the CGS.
14.2.1 Primary Uses and Structures permitted.
a) Single-family detached dwellings (on either common interest ownership property or subdivided lots, or as rental units).
b) Multi-family (condominium, rental, common ownership property).
c) Accessory uses and buildings, such as recreational/community buildings and clubhouses, swimming pools, athletic fields, walking trails, bicycle routes, tennis courts, basketball courts, utility structures, playgrounds and picnic areas, and other ancillary buildings or uses as determined as accessory by the Commission.
14.2.2 Density and Dimensional Requirements.
The density standards shall be as follows:
a) Multi-family: If public water and sewer or public water and a private on-site wastewater treatment system approved by the Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) is provided:
i. Eight (8) units per Developable Acre may be permitted provided a Class A (see Section 2 Definitions) affordable housing component is provided.
ii. Ten (10) units per Developable Acre may be permitted of Class B (see Section 2, Definitions) affordable housing.
b) Multifamily Development: If served by on-site sewer and on-site water:
i. Two (2) Class A multifamily units are permitted per acre if public sewer or water is not available.
c) Single Family served by public water and public sewer or public water and a private on site wastewater treatment system approved by the DEEP are provided, the density standards shall be as follows:
i. Lot area: twelve thousand five hundred (12,500) square feet per lot.
61
ii. Minimum lot frontage on a road and lot width: one hundred twenty five feet (125’), unless otherwise approved by the Commission; however, such frontage and lot width shall not be reduced to less than one hundred feet (100’). In order to permit a reduction of road frontage to less than one hundred twenty five feet (125’), the plan shall show adequate landscaping and/or other natural features to visually separate adjacent lots. The minimum lot width within the area of the lot development shall be one hundred feet (100’) at the primary building location. The Commission may permit lot width reduction to not less than fifty percent (50%) on curves and cul-de-sacs, provided at the front yard building setback line, the lot meets the 100/125 lot width requirement and provided that adequate area is provided for snow removal.
iii. Setback from the centerline of a town road is thirty feet (30’) and fifty feet (50’) from a state highway, unless otherwise approved by the Commission as part of the overall development.
d) Single-family development served by on-site septic and on-site well: each lot or unit area shall contain a minimum of forty thousand (40,000) square feet.
i. Rear lots may be reduced to eighty thousand (80,000) square feet and shall contain a minimum rectangle of eighty thousand (80,000) square feet with a minimum dimension of two hundred fifty feet (250’).
ii. Minimum lot frontage on a road and lot width: one hundred twenty five feet (125’), unless otherwise approved by the Commission; however, such frontage and lot width shall not be reduced to less than one hundred feet (100’). In order to permit a reduction of road frontage to less than one hundred twenty five feet (125’) the plan shall show adequate landscaping and/or other natural features to visually separate adjacent lots. The minimum lot width within the area of the lot development shall be one hundred feet (100’) at the primary building location. The Commission may permit lot width reduction to not less than fifty percent (50%) on curves and cul-de-sacs, provided at the front yard building setback line, the lot meets the 100/125 lot width requirement.
iii. Setback from the centerline of a town road is thirty feet (30’) and fifty feet (50’) from a state highway, unless otherwise approved by the Commission as part of the overall development.
14.2.3 Open Space and Recreation Use Area:
a) Within any AHD subdivision not less than ten percent (10%) of the gross land area shall be set aside as open space; with the form of ownership thereof subject to the approval of the Commission. Any of the following forms of ownership shall be deemed to satisfy the requirements hereof:
i. Ownership by the Town of Preston
ii. Ownership by a Land Trust whose charter requires that the land be maintained as open space in perpetuity
iii. A Homeowner’s Association formed under the Connecticut Common Interest Ownership Act subject to covenants requiring that it be maintained as open space/recreation area for the duration of the affordability plan.
62
iv. This set aside land shall contain no more than fifteen percent (15%) wetland area and no more than fifteen percent (15%) of the area with slopes over twenty-five percent (25%). It shall be contiguous, with not less than seventy percent (70%) of the open space land with a dimension of one hundred feet (100’) or more.
b) With any multifamily development a minimum of twenty percent (20%) of the land shall set aside for open space and will be required to be improved for active recreation such as a playscape, swimming pool or other active recreation facilities. Ownership of the open space/recreation area shall be subject to the approval of the Commission and shall be either in a form authorized pursuant to the provisions of Section 14.2.3 a) hereof, or by a single entity responsible for the maintenance and repair of the same and subject to covenants requiring that it be maintained as a recreational area for the duration of the Affordability Plan. This set aside land shall contain no more than fifteen percent (15%) wetland area and no more than fifteen percent (15%) of the area with slopes over twenty-five percent (25%). It shall be contiguous, with not less than seventy percent (70%) of the recreation land with a dimension of one hundred feet (100’) or more.
14.2.4 Traffic. Given the fact that many of the town roads are narrow, having drainage problems or other similar issues, the applicant must demonstrate that the road infrastructure is adequate to handle all traffic that will result from the affordable housing development to ensure safe conditions for the project and the residents within the area. The road infrastructure providing access to an Affordable Housing Development shall be adequate to handle (i) anticipated background traffic two (2) years subsequent to the date of filing of the Affordable Housing Development Application and (ii) the anticipated traffic generation from the Affordable Housing Development in a safe and efficient manner. The Applicant shall be required to demonstrate the adequacy of the road infrastructure providing access to an Affordable Housing Development by submitting a traffic impact analysis prepared by a Connecticut licensed professional engineer with a concentration of practice in traffic design. The Commission may require off-site improvements to the road infrastructure in locations required in order to provide safe and efficient travel to and from, and within the highway system adjacent to, an Affordable Housing Development, such improvements to be constructed at the expense of the Affordable Housing Developments Applicant.
14.2.5 Fire Protection. The application shall provide measures to ensure adequate fire safety for each Affordable Housing Development. The Commission shall require a written report from the Fire Marshal regarding the adequacy of fire protection and necessary water supply.
14.2.6 Process. In order to foster communication and improve the overall project, the Commission is establishing a three or four step process that includes informal meetings and the submission of preliminary and final applications.
a) Informal meeting with the Commission. This shall include concept information only, number of units, basic layout of the site, utility supply.
b) Zone Change Application / Master Plan Layout / Subdivision. A master plan shall be provided that contains the following information:
1. A-2 survey of the parcels to be rezoned at a scale of 1” = 100’.
63
2. Properties within five hundred feet (500’), portrayed on a map at 1” = 100’ scale depicting:
i. Parcels to be rezoned, the existing zoning of parcel to be rezoned, the existing zoning of adjacent land and properties within five hundred feet (500’). Names and addresses of owners of all parcels within the subject zone change area and within five hundred feet (500’) of the zone change area.
3. A-2 survey showing the limits and boundaries of the area for which the zone change is requested and showing all adjacent properties and owners thereof at a scale of 1” = 40’ or other acceptable scale, containing the following information:
i. A -2 survey showing existing and proposed contours at two foot (2’) intervals. Identify all land area in excess of twenty five percent (25%) slopes.
ii. Location of all wetlands and watercourses and the regulated area (as mapped by a soil scientist) flood plains, tidal wetlands and the regulated area, easements, stone walls, right of ways.
iii. Soil types identified on the plans based on the New London County Soil Survey. Soil testing as necessary to determine suitability of soils for on-site septic areas.
iv. Easements, right of ways, tree lines, agricultural lands and any other significant resources.
v. A conceptual site development plan showing building and infrastructure locations, the relationship of project infrastructure to adjacent highways and utilities, parking and conceptual building elevations.
vi. A conceptual landscape plan shall be submitted with the plan that shows appropriately scaled street plantings, sidewalks and other pedestrian connections, buffering and grading.
vii. Utility Plan showing conceptual layout of public sewer or water or on-site septic and well, and electric utilities, together with a written commitment from each utility provider demonstrating capacity for and an agreement to provide utility service to the Affordable Housing Development.
viii. Conceptual grading and drainage plan.
ix. Traffic evaluation in accordance with Section 14.2.4 of these Regulations.
4. Subdivisions. Show the configuration of lots that will be developed within the subdivision. Provide a conceptual lot layout for the subdivision within the property showing the house, driveway, septic, and well locations or site plan showing the multifamily units, proposed roads, sidewalks, and recreation area, or open space areas.
5. Site Plans for Multi-family or Single-family on common ownership property/condominium. Show the conceptual layout and number of multifamily units. Show parking, recreational areas, open space areas, and any other uses and accessory structures.
64
6. A preliminary “Housing Affordability Plan” in accordance with CGS 8-30g, section 8-30g-1 et seq. of the Regulations of Connecticut State agencies and the “Housing Affordability Plan Requirements” as adopted by the Commission and as the same may be amended from time to time.
c) Submission of Final Plan. The following information shall be submitted with the final application and plans.
Subdivisions/site plans for Multi-family or single-family condominiums.
1. All materials as noted in Section 5 of the Subdivision Regulations (Required Subdivision Content) shall be provided for subdivisions or site plan requirements prescribed in Section 19 of the Zoning Regulations for site plans. Additional plan details shall also be provided as follows:
i. Detail grading plan. In addition to providing a typical grading plan, the project designer may look to grading techniques coordinated with the landscaped plan to provide physical separations and to achieve project cohesiveness, which could enhance the rural character of the area and country setting.
ii. A comprehensive landscape plan prepared by a landscape architect licensed in the State of Connecticut. Landscaping will become an important component to such developments by creating cohesiveness, rural consistency, and improved aesthetic appearance. The Commission reserves the right to require the involvement of a landscape planner or design for the preparation of the plans. A landscape plan shall include the following:
a. Use indigenous plants to establish continuity with the surrounding areas and a self-sustaining environment. Avoid unusual cultivars. No invasive species, as identified by DEEP, are permitted.
b. Integrate mature vegetation into the design where possible.
c. Identify local flora, fauna and choose plant species that enhance and retain their habitat.
d. Use plan materials as designed features and not exclusively as buffers.
e. Utilize plant materials transitional edges between open spaces, public agricultural land, and adjacent forested areas.
f. Vary plant material heights and widths and integrate open space when buffering an adjacent site.
g. Balance the quantity of on-site landscaping with the scale of the development.
h. Landscape around proposed building areas, especially on narrow width lots to soften the harshness of regrading and proximity of homes.
i. Trees should be planted around public areas and along streets in sufficient numbers and spacing to create
65
canopies at maturity for environmental quality and to soften aesthetic impact.
j. Choose plant materials that have year round interest (deciduous color, spring flow, fruits or branching patterns as well as their form, texture and shape).
k. Protect and incorporate significant quantities of existing trees as design elements, and avoid excessive tree clearing.
l. Landscaping shall not impact sight distance.
iii. Building designs – subdivisions/multi-family. The design for all single-family homes: all homes shall be designed to be similar in size and detail whether they are affordable or market rate housing. They shall be designed to fit the rural character of the town.
iv. Trash Removal – provide information about the number, location and screening of dumpsters or trash receptacles at community facilities and for servicing dwelling units. For individual units, the Final Plan and, if applicable, a Subdivision Plan shall make adequate provision for trash storage and removal.
v. Pedestrian connectors. Sidewalks, trails shall be provided in suitable locations to create a cohesive and pedestrian friendly development.
vi. Lighting. Lighting shall be provided to create safe conditions for pedestrian and vehicular movement, while screening lighting from residences. Details of lighting shall be provided and shall be aesthetically pleasing as determined by the Commission.
vii. Street Lighting. Street lighting shall be provided along all new streets and at intersections of town roads and as required by the Commission.
viii. Utilities. All utilities shall be underground. The Commission may waive this requirement for a subdivision where lots are located on an existing town or state road.
ix. Recreation Improvements. The plan shall show any proposed bicycle paths and pedestrian paths, all active recreation improvements, and any other improvements proposed to be made to the open space area in accordance with Section 14.2.3 of these Regulations.
x. Traffic. Traffic study prepared by a licensed engineer including, if off-site traffic improvements are proposed or required, a schematic plan with existing and proposed conditions and any off-site improvements.
xi. Fire Protection. All measures including water tanks and hydrants to be used for fire protection acceptable to the fire marshal.
xii. Health – Sewer/Water Facilities. Evidence from the town sanitarian or the State Health Department or DEEP that adequate water supply and sanitary system exists to serve the development.
xiii. Drainage. Drainage and grading plan acceptable to the Town Engineer.
66
xiv. Affordable Housing Plan. A “Housing Affordability Plan” in accordance with CGS 8-30g and section 8-30g-1 et seq. of the Regulations of Connecticut State agencies and the “Housing Affordability Plan Requirements” adopted by the Commission and as the same may be amended from time to time shall be provided.
xv. Lot Layout Plan. Lots shall be laid out to encourage the use of open space by the residents of the development as deemed appropriate, and to take advantage of passive solar energy.
xvi. Street Design. All design standards shall comply with the requirements for conventional Subdivisions with the exception of the following; subject to the approval of the Town Engineer:
1. Curbing and formal closed drainage systems are to be held to a minimum except as noted herein. Curbing shall be required where a road is in a cut situation with surrounding land pitching toward the road, at a low point in the road with catch basins to collect storm water runoff, and where a closed drainage system is required. Curbing is not required where land generally has flat slopes, where the road is in a fill situation and sheet flow away from the road is advantageous, and where no closed drainage system is required. For purposes hereof, a closed drainage system is required where drainage structures are necessitated by site conditions and good engineering practice.
2. Dead end streets shall be designed with a cul-de-sac, however, there shall be no more than six (6) lots having access from the cul-de-sac. There shall be areas reserved for snow storage at the cul-de-sac.
2. Annual certification of continuing compliance with affordability requirements. Noncompliance. The developer, owner or manager of an affordable housing development, developed pursuant to subparagraph (B) of subdivision (1) of subsection (a) of Section 8-30g of the CGS that includes rental units shall provide annual certification to the Commission that the development continues to be in compliance with the covenants and deed restrictions required under said section. The Commission may inspect the income statements of the tenants of the restricted units upon which the developer, owner or manger bases the certification. Such tenant statements shall be confidential and shall not be deemed public records for the purposes of the Freedom of Information Act, as defined in section 1-200 of the CGS. With respect to all other affordable units, the Affordability Plan Manager shall provide annual certifications to the Commission demonstrating continuing compliance with the requirements of 8-30g et.seq. of the CGS and the regulations of Connecticut state agencies promulgated thereunder.
67
SECTION 15 - Dimensional Requirements
Zoning District
Letters under the district identify corresponding
Requirements noted below.
15.1 Lot Area
15.2 Lot Frontage on Street
15.3 Front Yard setback (from front property line)
15.4 Side yard
15.5 Rear yard
15.6 Building Height
15.7 Lot Coverage
R-120
120,000 sq.ft.
250 ft
50 ft
20 ft
40 ft
30 ft
10 %
R-80
80,000 sq.ft.
200 ft
50 ft
20 ft
40 ft
30 ft
15 %
R-60
60,000 sq.ft
200 ft
50 ft
20 ft
40 ft
30 ft
15 %
R-40
40,000 sq.ft
150 ft
50 ft
20 ft
25 ft
30 ft
20 %
C-1
40,000 sq.ft.
150 ft
50 ft
12 ft
25 ft
30 ft
30 %
PI
80,000 sq.ft.
200 ft
75 ft
30 ft
25 ft
40 ft
25 %
RC
200,000 sq.ft.
500 ft
100 ft
30 ft
40 ft
50 ft
25 %
TRD
Requirements are listed is Section 11.5
VD
(PCVD and PVD)
60,000
sq.ft.
150 ft
Consistent with the existing buildings
20 ft
20 ft
30 ft
25%
Access ramps for the handicapped may be extended into any required yard setback, subject to the approval of the ZEO, upon demonstration by the applicant that there is no other reasonable alternative.
Lot Area (A) Rear lots permitted in accordance with Section 16.5 must contain a minimum of three (3) acres in area excluding access drive and the lot shall have the ability to obtain a three hundred foot (300’) by four hundred foot (400’) rectangle.
Frontage on a Street and Lot Width
(B) All lots shall have a minimum width at the front building line equal to or greater than the frontage required for the district.
(C) The frontage requirement may be reduced by fifty percent (50%) on lots fronting on the circular turn-around at the end of a dead-end (cul-de-sac).
(D) Frontage for rear lots may be reduced to a minimum of twenty-five feet (25’) in accordance with Section 16.5.
68
(E) In the Thames River District, Commercial, Resort Commercial District, Village Districts, Planned Industrial District, the Commission may permit a fifty foot (50’) wide non-exclusive right-of-way to provide access to properties when access is utilized by two or more properties and such right of way is approved by the Commission after considering its location and construction. In no case shall a fifty foot (50’) wide right-of-way be closer than three hundred fifty feet (350’) to another such access as measured along properties road frontage.
Front Yard Setback
(F) On a corner lot, setback requirements shall be met for both street frontages, except in Resort Commercial Districts the front setback from the street centerline may be reduced by fifty percent (50%) for the secondary street, under the following conditions:
1. The secondary street is not a state road.
2. The property across the street from the secondary street is not zoned residential,
3. Landscaping appropriate to comply with the separating of the required setback is provided in lieu of the setback distance.
(J) In any residential district where the average setback of at least two (2) developed lots within one hundred fifty feet (150’) of the lot in question and within the same block is less than the minimum setbacks prescribed elsewhere in these Regulations, the required setback on such lots shall be modified so that the setback shall not be less than the average setback of the lots; or in case of a corner lot, the setback on the lot immediately adjoining lots.
(K) An addition may be made to a building that does not conform to the setback requirements of these Regulations, provided the addition extends no closer to the street than the existing building.
Side Yard Setback
(L) In RC, C-1, and PI Districts, the side yard requirements made be waived by the Commission between two (2) or more commercial or industrial establishments within the same zone where the Commission determines that a more desirable development will occur and where such waiver is agreeable to abutting property owners.
(M) No building shall be established for industrial use within seventy (70) feet of a residential district boundary.
(N) Sheds that are less than two hundred (200) square feet may be ten feet (10) to the side property line.
Rear Yard Setback
(P) No building shall be established for industrial use within seventy feet (70’) of a residential district boundary.
(Q) Sheds that are less than two hundred (200) square feet may be ten feet (10’) to the rear property line.
Building Height
(R) In the RC District for Convention Centers and Sports Arenas and in the TRD District, maximum building height is fifty feet (50’). However, this requirement may be waived by a two-thirds vote of the commission, provided the following conditions are met:
1. The building height is approved by the fire marshal
2. The increase in height will not detrimentally impact the adjacent properties and uses.
(S) Exceptions to Height Limits. Maximum building heights prescribed in these Regulations may be exceeded for such features as steeples, antennas, water towers, chimneys, silos and barns, provided permission is obtained from the Commission after determining that no threat to public safety will result from the structure.
Miscellaneous Requirements
69
(T) Thames River District dimensional requirements are outlined in Section 11.
(U) Minimum floor area in a residence:
1. Single-family dwelling shall contain a minimum of nine hundred (900) square feet for a single-story structure and one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet for a multi-level house.
2. A dwelling without a cellar shall provide an area of two hundred (200) square feet for storage space in addition to the above minimum floor area requirements. Cellar space shall not be counted in computing floor area requirements.
(V) In the Resort Commercial District, where Resort Commercial district boundaries or the Town line intersect a parcel of land, the district boundary or town line shall be considered a parcel boundary for the purposes of compliance with these Regulations, unless the Commission determines that the adjacent zoning district is compatible with the Resort Commercial district.
70
SECTION 16 - SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS
16.1 Visibility At Intersections. On a corner lot in any district, no fence, wall, hedge or other visual obstruction more than three feet (3’) high shall be erected, placed or maintained within the triangular area formed by the intersecting street lines and a straight line adjoining said street lines at points fifty feet (50’) distance from the point of intersection, measured along said street line.
16.2 Public Utility Buildings. Public utility buildings and uses may be located on lots that do not meet the area and width requirements of these Regulations, provided the yard requirements are met and there is no visible storage of supplies and equipment, including vehicle parking other than parking of vehicles owned by employees, as viewed from any adjacent residential district.
16.3 Buffers. As a condition of approval of any use other than a single-family residence, the Commission may require a landscaped strip along the property line and/or road frontage, suitably planted with trees and shrubs to provide an effective buffer, in order to minimize any adverse effects that the proposed use might have on the neighborhood. Said buffer shall not impact sight distances from the driveway along the road.
16.4 Access Between Zoning Districts. The Commission may restrict pedestrian or vehicular access to a permitted use located in a less restricted district through property situated in a more restricted district unless over public roads which have been accepted and are maintained by the Town or State roads.
16.5 Rear Lot Development. Rear lots are permitted on a lot not having the required frontage on a street to be used for a residence provided the noted conditions, below, are met. It is the intent of this subsection to permit limited use of backland that would otherwise become unusable.
a) Any such lot shall contain at least three (3) acres and shall be of such shape that it can contain a rectangle with minimum dimensions of three hundred feet (300’) by four hundred feet (400’), wherein the principal building would be located.
b) Such a lot shall be accessible to a street by way of a driveway owned as part of the lot and consisting of a strip of land not less than twenty-five feet (25’) in width throughout. The strip providing access shall not be included in the three-acre lot size requirement.
c) The Commission shall determine that the location of the driveway will not impede future development or use of the land through which it passes and will have the least possible harmful impact on natural features.
d) The access driveway cannot be used for access to any other property except for agricultural purposes and that the Town of Preston shall not be required to plow, maintain, assume ownership of or provide school bus service or garbage collection service along the driveway access to such lot.
e) Where the driveway strip for any rear lot meets the street, it shall be determined not to endanger public safety by reason of poor sight distance or some other condition, but in no case shall such driveway be located closer than one hundred feet (100’) from more than one (1) other existing or approved driveway on the same side of the street.
f) Rear lots are permitted only to the rear of lots fronting on streets and not behind other rear lots that front on the same street.
71
g) Accessory uses and buildings on rear lots shall conform to all dimensional requirements of these Regulations.
h) Front setback shall be from the front property line that is parallel to the street line and shall be a minimum of fifty feet (50’).
i) If a driveway exceeds five hundred feet (500’) in length, a driveway plan may be required to be reviewed by the Fire Marshal to ensure the driveway is adequate for emergency vehicle access.
16.6 Accessory Apartments.
16.6.1 Accessory Apartments. The purpose of these provisions is to permit the use of a set of rooms in an existing or new single-family dwelling to be used as a separate living unit to:
a) Provide independent living arrangements for in-laws, or other families that allow privacy.
b) Provide homeowners with a means of obtaining rental income.
c) Provide housing units for moderate-income individuals.
d) Provide housing units for small households.
16.6.2 The Commission may permit an accessory apartment in an owner-occupied single-family dwelling or on a lot, provided that the following standards and criteria are met:
a) Only one (1) accessory apartment will be created on a lot.
b) An accessory structure not part of the residence, such as a second story of a garage or barn, may be used for a accessory apartment. The accessory structure shall not have the appearance of a second residence.
c) In the event the accessory apartment is constructed as part of new construction of a single
family home, such residence shall have the
appearance of a single family dwelling, i.e.
side by side front door are not permitted.
d) Any modifications to the exterior of an
existing single family structure shall not
change the single-family appearance of the
residence
e) The owner(s) of the residence in which an
accessory apartment is created shall
occupy at least one (1) of the dwelling
units, except for bona fide temporary
absences.
This picture illustrates the design of a home with two doors but giving the appearance of a single family home.
Examples of accessory apartments within an accessary building. The accessory apartment shall not give the appearance of a second home.
72
f) The minimum floor area of an apartment shall be four hundred fifty (450) square feet and shall not exceed thirty percent (30%) of the total floor area of the living space (excludes garages, porches, or non-finished floor area) of the dwelling except the Commission may allow said accessory apartment to exceed thirty percent (30%) of the total floor area of the living space if the apartment is the entire basement, attic or similar, but shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the total living area of an existing residence built prior to the adoption of these regulations dated March 18, 2019. In calculating the square footage of the residence, the accessary apartment is used in the total calculation. For example:
1. Total square footage of the living space = 3,000 square feet
2. Accessory apartment = 900 square feet
3. Primary residence = 2,100 square feet
g) The apartment shall meet all applicable standards of the State of Connecticut health, building and fire codes.
h) Off-street parking must be provided as required by these Regulations with at least two (2) spaces for the primary residence and two (2) parking spaces for the accessory apartment.
i) Certification must be received from the Town Sanitarian that an adequate water supply is available and the sewage disposal system is adequate to meet the Public Health Code or the property is able to accommodate a new sewage disposal system to meet the Public Health Code.
j) Any other appropriate or more stringent conditions deemed necessary by the Commission to protect public health, safety, welfare and the single family character of the neighborhood shall be met.
16.6.3. Application for an accessory apartment shall include:
a) A notarized letter of application from the owner(s) stating that he/she will occupy one of the dwelling units except for bona fide temporary absences; in the event the residence is not owner occupied, the building shall be converted back to a single-family dwelling.
b) A floor plan of the building at a scale acceptable to the Commission that clearly shows the building and sizes of rooms. This floor plan shall list the total floor areas of both dwelling units.
c) A site plan of the property, to scale, showing all existing and proposed structures, off-street parking, and utility systems.
d) A written report from the Town Sanitarian indicating that the existing and/or proposed water supply and sewage disposal systems will adequately serve the proposed use.
16.6.4 The effective period of a permit shall be one (1) year. A renewal permit shall be granted by the Zoning Enforcement Officer after inspection and upon written certification from the owner that all of the conditions met at the time of the original application remain unchanged. Renewal permits shall be submitted annually to the ZEO on August 1.
16.7 Accessory Buildings. The following regulations apply to accessory buildings:
16.7.1. No accessory building or private garage shall be built on any lot in a residential district unless the lot is improved with a dwelling or other principal building or use.
73
16.7.2 No accessory building shall be larger in ground floor area than the principal building, except in connection with an agricultural use. Agricultural uses are not necessarily considered an accessory use and maybe permited as a principal use.
16.8 Home Occupation. Low-impact, low-volume activities conducted shall be permitted in residential districts by vote of the Commission, provided they meet the requirements of this section.
16.8.1 The activity must be clearly secondary to the use of the premises for the permanent residents of the dwelling, and, when conducted within the dwelling or permitted accessory building, it shall occupy no more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the living space of the dwelling. However, the Commission may permit the home occupation to exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the living space of the residence provided such home occupation is located within the basement or an accessory structure. The purpose of this is to allow the entire basement or the entire permitted accessory building to be used, but in no case shall the home occupation exceed fifty percent (50%) of the living space (which includes the home occupation). The following is a non-exhaustive list of uses (see definitions) which may be conducted as home occupations within the limits established in this section.
a) Art, handicraft, music, writing, photography or similar studios.
b) Direct sale product distribution (Amway, Avon, Tupperware, etc.).
c) Dressmaker, seamstress, tailor.
d) Hair cutting and styling.
e) Computing services.
f) Mail-order sales.
g) Medical, dental, veterinary offices or similar.
h) Professional, medical, veterinary, and other similar offices.
i) Repair services for small appliances, small engines, office machines, cameras and similar small items.
j) Telephone sales, telemarketing and order-taking.
k) Tutor, music teacher, and other types of instruction.
l) Tourist Home that involves the letting of no more than two rooms to the same guests for not more than two weeks within a given three (3) month period. Each such tourist home shall be owner occupied. Upon the submission of each renewal permit, the applicant shall provide the Zoning Enforcement Officer with the number of guests, their length of stay, and certification that the same guests have not stayed for more than two (2) weeks within a three (3) month period.
m) Limited automobile repair as defined in 14-51(a)(4) of the CGS provided no more than two (2) cars are parked at the premises during repair and a certificate of location is obtained from the Zoning Board of Appeals pursuant to the CGS Section 14-54 prior to the review of the home occupation by the Commission.
16.8.2 The activity shall not change the residential character of the property in any visible manner.
16.8.3 The activity shall not result in objectionable odors, noise, vibrations, obnoxious or unsightly conditions noticeable from off the premises, or interfere with radio television, or telephone reception.
74
16.8.4 The activity shall not generate traffic in excess of an average of twenty (20) business visits per day or twenty (20) clients/customers a day in order to prevent a noticeable increase in traffic in the neighborhood.
16.8.5 The activity shall not create a health or safety hazard.
16.8.6 No more than two (2) non-residents shall be employed in the home occupation.
16.8.7 There shall be no trading of merchandise and no retail sales of goods other than those manufactured on the premises by the occupation, except for the following:
a) Repair shops are exempt from this requirement provided repair parts sold are installed in the repaired equipment by the home occupation.
b) Incidental retail sales may be made in connection with the home occupation. For example, a beauty shop would be allowed to sell hair products.
c) Mail order provided the home occupation has no clientele or customers
16.8.8 All activities shall be conducted inside the dwelling or within an accessory building. There shall be no outside storage or display of materials associated with the home occupation.
16.8.9 No external alterations or construction features that are inconsistent with the residential character of the property are permitted, for example a second front door.
16.8.10 Commercial vehicles are permitted in accordance with Section 16.10 of these Regulations.
16.8.11 The activity shall not generate a need for more than four (4) automobile parking spaces for employees and clients/customers in excess of those used by the residents of the dwelling. All parking spaces shall be located off-street to the rear of the building line shall have an all-weather surface. Home occupations that do not have clients/customers at the residence do not need to provide additional on-site parking spaces for clients/customers.
16.8.12 Under no circumstances shall any of the following activities be considered a home occupation: restaurant, automotive body shop, dry cleaning.
16.8.13 Home occupations occasionally become successful to the point that they have an adverse impact on the residential character of the neighborhood and/or the residential use becomes secondary to the home occupation. For this reason, permits shall be renewed annually by the Zoning Enforcement Officer. Renewal permits shall be submitted by August 1. After inspection, provided conditions have not changed substantially and the occupation is being conducted in a satisfactory manner in accordance with the approved application, the Zoning Enforcement Officer shall issue said renewal permit. In addition, the ZEO or the Commission shall have the authority to revoke, suspend or amend the home occupation permit at any time if the ZEO or Commission determines the use is not consistent with the approved application and these regulations.
16.8.14 A Home occupation permit is non-transferable.
75
16.9 Farming. Farming shall be a permitted use in any Zoning District provided that the tract contains a minimum of five (5) acres as defined in Section 2 of these Regulations.
16.10 Residential District Requirements. The following requirements apply to all residential districts:
a) The parking of not more than one (1) commercial motor vehicle is permitted per dwelling unit, provided the vehicle is self-propelled, and is owned or operated by the owner or occupant of the dwelling unit.
b) No wrecked or junked vehicle or more than one (1) unregistered vehicle, including Recreational Vehicles (RV) or boats, but excluding canoes, kayaks and rowboats, except farm equipment on an active farm, shall be stored or parked on any part of any lot in a residential zone.
c) No machinery parts, scrap metal, rubbish or similar unsightly material, except for farm equipment on an active farm, shall be stored or parked on any part of any lot in a residential zone.
d) Stockpiled topsoil and other earth materials shall not be kept closer than one hundred fifty feet (150’) from a residence on an adjacent lot. The Commission may require that such material be graded, seeded or otherwise stabilized to prevent dust, erosion or unsightly appearance.
e) Garage, yard and cellar sales not to exceed two (2) consecutive days shall be permitted twice in any one (1) calendar year on any one (1) piece of property. A permit must be procured for each sale from the Zoning Enforcement Officer. In the event an auction is being conducted, the ZEO shall review the availability of on-site parking. Auctions or estate auctions are not included in this section and are permitted by the First Selectman’s Office pursuant to an “Ordinance Requiring Permits of Solicitors, Peddlers and Venders”. f) Only one (1) intermodal container for shipping and storage, such as a Conex box, metal storage box, pod or trailer is permitted on a lot and shall not be stored on the lot for more than one (1) sixty (60) day period in a one (1) year period. A zoning permit from the Zoning Enforcement Officer shall be required for the use of said container, etc. The Town shall be listed in the rental contract as an additional contact to enable the Town to notify the company to remove the container in the event of non-compliance; in addition, a bond in an amount of two hundred dollars ($200) or an amount adequate to ensure the removal of the container as noted in the rental contract shall be posted to ensure the removal on the container after the sixty (60) day period. g) Containers that are located on properties that have an active construction or reconstruction project are permitted and only during the term of such construction and shall be removed sixty (60) days after the end of construction. A bond in an amount of two hundred dollars ($200) or an amount adequate to ensure the removal of the container as determined by the ZEO shall be posted to ensure the removal on the container after the sixty (60) day period. h) No zoning permit may be issued on a property for which a blight citation has been issued pursuant to Town of Preston Blight Ordinance until the blight citation has been abated and and all associated penalties, fines, and costs have been paid, and any blight liens have been released.
76
16.11 Mobile Homes, Camper Units, and Boats. The following regulations apply to all mobile homes and to camper units not located in mobile home parks or recreation campgrounds.
a) Mobile homes, regardless of whether or not they are occupied, shall be permitted only on locations occupied by a mobile home on April 13, 1964, and continuously thereafter. Except that where a building permit for a dwelling is granted, a zoning permit for the placing of a mobile home on the same lot for a period not exceeding one (1) year may be granted, provided said mobile home is removed within the one (1) year period or sixty (60) days of the issuance of an Occupancy Permit for the dwelling constructed, whichever comes first, and provided the owner shall post a bond in a form satisfactory to the Zoning Enforcement Officer and made payable to the Treasurer of the Town of Preston in an amount approved by the Zoning Enforcement Officer, but not less than one thousand ($1,000), as sufficient to guarantee the removal of said mobile home. Applications for mobile homes, either as replacements of existing units or as temporary units during the construction of a dwelling, shall be reviewed and approved by the Zoning Enforcement Officer.
b) Application for replacement of a mobile home on locations occupied by a mobile home on April 13, 1964, and continuously thereafter, shall be accompanied by documentation of such continuous occupancy. The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall, as a condition of approval of such replacement, require that the sewage disposal system meets current standards and that the mobile home is maintained in the same location of the yard and setback requirements of these Regulations are met.
c) No mobile home shall have attached to it at any time any cabanas, awnings, other addition unless such cabanas, awnings or other addition are a product specifically manufactured for mobile home use, or the plans for the same have been approved by the Zoning Enforcement Officer.
d) The Commission may grant a temporary permit for a fixed time for the use of a mobile home as a field office or related use in connection with a bonafide construction operation and provided the cost for the removal of said temporary field office (mobile home) shall be included in the bond posted with the Commission.
e) One (1) camper unit may be parked and occupied on a parcel or lot not to exceed three (3) weeks provided written permission of the Director of Health and the Zoning Enforcement Officer is obtained.
f) Only one (1) camper unit may be parked or stored on a lot in a residential district for a period exceeding three (3) weeks, except in an authorized recreation campground. Such unit shall be parked or stored to meet the dimensional yard requirements pursuant to Section 15 of these Regulations.
g) Only two (2) power or sailboats may be stored outdoors on a lot in a residential district.
16.12 Animal Wastes. No animal or poultry waste shall be stored within two hundred feet (200’) from a property line, within three hundred feet (300’) of a watercourse or on sloping land which may drain onto another property or into a watercourse or wetland.
16.13 Swimming Pools and Tennis Courts. Swimming pools are permitted as accessory uses on residential lots in all districts provided no part of the pool or associated decking, filtering equipment, bathhouse or other feature, is closer than twenty feet (20’) from any side or rear property line, and shall be to the rear of the front building line, or fifty feet (50’) from the front property line whichever
77
setback dimension is less. In addition to the above, all pools shall conform to the requirements of the Public Health Code and the Building Code.
Any swimming pool installed prior to the effective date of this regulation shall in no way be considered as a violation of these Regulations. However, any swimming pool, terrace, deck, or other appurtenance to such pool, shall not be replaced or expanded in any manner other than to conform with these Regulations, as amended; ladders, linings and filter are exempt from this requirement.
16.14 Wind Energy Conversion System (WECS). A WECS is any mechanism designed for the purpose of converting wind into mechanical or electrical power intended for use on the premises. WECS will be approved by the Commission only if, after review of the site plan for the proposed WECS, the Commission is satisfied that it will not pose a threat to the health, safety, and general welfare of people living and working in the vicinity. The following minimum requirements shall be met by all proposed WECS:
a) No WECS shall be permitted on a lot containing less than forty thousand (40,000) square feet.
b) The maximum height of any support tower for a WECS shall be eighty feet (80’). Any protruding rotor blades shall not extend closer than fifteen feet (15’) to the ground surface.
c) No part of a WECS structure shall be located closer than twenty-five feet (25’) to a property line.
d) The support tower for a WECS shall be set back from all property lines a distance equal to the sum of the tower height plus the rotor blade length.
e) The supporting structure for a WECS shall not be attached to any structure containing a dwelling unit.
f) Each WECS shall be equipped with a braking device that will prevent the rotor blades from turning faster than a rate produced by a forty (40) mile per hour wind.
g) A WECS shall not cause interference with telephone, radio or television reception. If such interference is detected, the property owner shall be required to take whatever measures are necessary to end the interference, including relocation or removal of the WECS.
h) No WECS shall be approved until the application shows evidence that the plans have been reviewed and found to be satisfactory by the public utility responsible for providing conventional electric power to the property. Wiring shall be installed by a certified electrician.
i) The maximum permitted noise level of a WECS shall be forty-five (45) decibels, as measured on the DBA scale, and as detected at any point on the property line.
j) Climbing access to the WECS support tower shall not begin lower than twelve feet (12’) above the ground.
k) The support tower for a WECS shall be used solely for supporting the WECS and shall be removed when the tower ceases to be used for such purposes.
l) Such WECS may be located on a lot that contains another use, such as a residence or a commercial building; however, no building shall be located within the fall zone of such WECS.
16.15 Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA) Requirements. The Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA) includes all areas identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in its
78
Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for New London County, Connecticut, dated July 18, 2011, and accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM), dated July 18, 2011, and other supporting data applicable to the Town of Preston, and any subsequent revisions thereto, are adopted by reference and declared to be a part of these regulations. Since mapping is legally adopted by reference into this regulation, it must take precedence when more restrictive until such time as a map amendment or map revision is obtained from FEMA. The area of special flood hazard includes any area shown on the FIRM as Zones A and AE, including areas designated as a floodway on a FIRM. Areas of special flood hazard are determined utilizing the base flood elevations (BFE) provided on the flood profiles in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for a community. BFEs provided on a Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) are only approximate (rounded up or down) and should be verified with the BFEs published in the FIS for a specific location.
The degree of flood protection required by this regulation is considered the minimum reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering consideration and research. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This regulation does not imply or guarantee that land outside the Special Flood Hazard Area or uses permitted in such areas will be free from flooding and flood damages. This regulation shall not create liability on the part of the Town of Preston or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this regulation or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. The Town of Preston, its officers and employees shall assume no liability for another person’s reliance on any maps, data or information provided by the Town of Preston.
The following requirements are intended to reduce the threat to public safety and loss of property value resulting from periodic flooding and to ensure eligibility for continued participation by the Town of Preston in the National Flood Insurance Program. In cases where conflicts occur between the requirements of the underlying zoning district and these SFHA requirements, the more restrictive provision shall prevail. The following regulations apply within the SFHA.
16.15.1 All applications for zoning permits or special exceptions for new development shall include base flood elevation data for that portion of the development located within the SFHA on the Town’s FIRM. The Commission shall utilize flood elevation data on the FIRM, or, where this is not available, the Commission shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a Federal, State or other sources as criteria for requiring that new construction, substantial improvements, or other development in the SFHA, meet the standards of these Regulations. Where base flood elevations are available, but before a floodway is designated, no new construction, substantial improvement, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted which will increase base flood elevations more than one foot (1’) at any point along the watercourse when all anticipated development is considered cumulatively with the proposed development. In the event that floodway data from sources other than the FIRM are utilized, the Commission shall select and adopt a regulatory floodway based on the principle that the area chosen for the regulatory floodway must be designed to carry the waters of the base flood, without increasing the water surface elevation of that flood more than one foot (1’) at any point. (12/15/91)
79
Within the SFHA for all applications of areas designated A or AE shall address the following, as applicable:
a) Equal Conveyance. With the floodplain, except those areas which are tidally influenced, as designated on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for the community, encroachments resulting from filling, new construction or substantial improvements involving an increase in footprint of the structure, are prohibited unless the applicant provides certification by a registered professional engineer demonstrating, with supporting hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice, that such encroachments shall not result in any (0.00) feet increase in flood levels (base flood elevation). Work within the floodplain and the land adjacent to the floodplain, including work to provide compensatory storage shall not be constructed in such a way so as to cause an increase in flood stage or flood velocity.
b) Compensatory Storage. The water holding capacity of the floodplain, except those areas that are tidally influenced, shall not be reduced. Any reduction caused by filling, new construction or substantial improvements involving an increase in footprint to the structure, shall be compensated for by deepening and/or widening of the floodplain. Storage shall be provided on-site, unless easements have been gained from adjacent property owners; it shall be provided within the same hydraulic reach and a volume not previously used for flood storage; it shall be hydraulically comparable and incrementally equal to the theoretical volume of flood water at each elevation, up to and including the 100-year flood elevation, which would be displaced by the proposed project. Such compensatory volume shall have an unrestricted hydraulic connection to the same waterway or water body. Compensatory storage can be provided off-site if approved by the municipality.
c) Above-ground Storage Tanks. Above-ground storage tanks (oil, propane, etc.) which are located outside or inside of the structure must either be elevated above the base flood elevation (BFE) on a concrete pad, or be securely anchored with tie-down straps to prevent flotation or lateral movement, have the top of the fill pipe extended above the BFE, and have a screw fill cap that does not allow for the infiltration of flood water.
d) Portion of Structure in Flood Zone. If any portion of a structure lies within the Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA), the entire structure is considered to be in the SFHA. The entire structure must meet the construction requirements of the flood zone. The structure includes any attached additions, garages, decks, sunrooms, or any other structure attached to the main structure. Decks or porches that extend into a more restrictive flood zone will require the entire structure to meet the standards of the more restrictive zone.
e) Structures in Two Flood Zones. If a structure lies within two or more flood zones, the construction standards of the most restrictive zone apply to the entire structure (i.e., V zone is more restrictive than A zone; structure must be built to the highest BFE). The structure includes any attached additions, garages, decks, sunrooms, or any other structure attached to the main structure. Decks or porches that extend into a more restrictive zone will require the entire structure to meet the requirements of the more restrictive zone.
f) No Structures Entirely or Partially Over Water. New construction, substantial improvements and repair to structures that have sustained substantial damage cannot be
80
constructed or located entirely or partially over water unless it is a functionally dependent use or facility.
g) Fencing. Solid board fencing is prohibited within flood hazard areas due to the damage that can be done in times of flooding.
16.15.2 Within the SFHA, (i) all new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures shall have the lowest floor elevated to or above the base flood elevation (BFE) and (ii) all new construction and substantial improvement of non-residential structures shall have the lowest floor elevated or above the base flood elevation or in lieu of being elevated, non-residential structures may be dry flood-proofed to or above the BFE, provided that together with all attendant utilities and sanitary facilities the areas of the structure below the required elevation are water tight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and use structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall review and/or develop structural design specifications and plans for the construction and shall certify that the design methods of construction are in accordance with acceptable standards of practice for meeting the provisions of this subsection. Electrical, plumbing, machinery, or other utility equipment that service the structure must be elevated to or above the BFE. Such certification shall be provided to the Building Official.
16.15.3 New construction or substantial improvements of elevated building that include fully enclosed areas formed by foundation and other exterior walls below the base flood elevation shall be designed to preclude finished living space and designed to allow for the entry and exit of floodwaters to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls. Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria:
a) Provide a minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding;
b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot (1’) above grade;
c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in both directions;
d) Electrical, plumbing, and other utility connections are prohibited below base flood level; and,
e) Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow for parking of vehicles (garage door) or limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises (standard exterior door) or entry to the living area (stairway or elevator).
16.15.4 Prior to the issuing of a zoning permit for new development within the SFHA, the Commission shall review and determine whether proposed buildings will be reasonably safe from flooding, review plans for such development to determine that it will be consistent with the needs to minimize flood damage within the flood prone area, and shall advise the applicant that all necessary federal and state permits must be received, and that: (i) new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, shall be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage, and shall be
81
constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; (ii) on-site waste disposal systems are located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding; and (iii) electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; (iv) new and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system and discharges from the system into flood waters; and (v) on-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
16.15.5 Any manufactured home (including a recreational vehicle or mobile home placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer) to be placed or substantially improved on a site in the SFHA shall be elevated so that the lowest floor is above base flood elevation. This includes a manufactured home located outside a manufactured home park or subdivision, in a new manufactured home park or subdivision, in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, or on a site in an existing park which a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as a result of a flood. It shall be placed on a permanent foundation which itself is securely anchored so that it will resist flotation, lateral movement, and hydrostatic and hydrodynamic pressures. Anchoring may include, but not be limited to, the use of over-the-top frame ties to ground anchors. It shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage, providing adequate access and drainage, piling foundations (when used) no more than ten (10) feet apart, and reinforced of any piers more than six (6) feet above ground level. Recreational vehicles placed on sites within a SFHA shall either be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days and be fully licensed and ready for highway use, or meet all the standards of Section 16.15.3, including the elevation and anchoring requirements of this section. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions.
16.15.6 Within the floodway as shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map, all encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements to existing structures, and other development, are prohibited unless certification with supporting technical data, by a Connecticut registered professional engineer is provided by the applicant demonstrating, through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineer practice that such encroachment shall not result in any (0.00 feet) increase in flood levels during a 100-year flood. No manufactured home shall be placed within the area of the floodway. Fences in the floodway must be aligned with the flow and be an open design.
16.15.7 Applicants for development within the SFHA on the Town’s FIRM shall submit with their applications, assurances that the flood-carrying capacity is maintained within any altered or relocated portion of any watercourse.
16.15.8 The Commission shall notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the CT DEEP Inland Water Resources Division, prior to approving any alteration or relocation of a
82
watercourse, and shall submit copies of such notice to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
16.15.9 The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall (i) record the elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor of all new or substantially improved structures, or the elevation to which such structures have been flood-proofed, in accordance with Section 16.15.3 above; (ii) advise the applicant that additional federal or state permits may be required; and (iii) require and file copies of such additional permits as they are obtained.
16.15.10 For the purposes of this subsection of these Regulations relating to SFHA requirements, the following definitions shall apply:
a. Base flood means a flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
b. Substantial improvement means any combination of repairs, reconstruction, alteration or improvements to a structure, taking place during a one (1) year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure. The market value of the structure should be either the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or, in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. For the purpose of this definition, “substantial improvement” is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include any project for improvement of a structure required to comply with existing health, sanitary or safety code specifications that are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions.
c. Start of construction includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of a structure (including a manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation or placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footing, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as a dwelling unit or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimension of the building.
d. Lowest floor means the top surface of the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building’s lowest floor.
83
e. Manufactured home means a structure transportable in one or more section, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term also includes recreational vehicles, camping vehicles, park trailers, and similar transportable structures placed on a site in the SFHA for one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days or longer and is intended to be improved property.
f. Manufactured Home Park or subdivision means a parcel, or contiguous parcels, of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
g. Mean sea level means the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 or other datum, to which base flood elevations on the FIRM are referenced.
h. Development means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, the construction of buildings or structures; the construction of additions, alterations or substantial improvements to buildings or structures; the placement of buildings or structures; mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment; the storage, deposition, or extraction of materials; and the installation, repair or removal of public or private sewage disposal systems or water supply facilities.
i. Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot (1’). (12/15/91)
j. Base flood elevation (BFE) means the elevation of the crest of the base flood or 100-year flood. The height in relation to mean sea level expected to be reached by the waters of the base flood at pertinent points in the floodplains of coastal and riverine areas.
k. Basement means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.
l. Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, as a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before March 4, 1985, the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by the community.
m. Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufacturing homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
n. Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) means the federal agency that administers the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP).
o. Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from either the overflow of inland or tidal waters, or the unusual and rapid accumulation/runoff of surface waters from any source.
p. Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) means the official map of a community on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has delineated both
84
the special flood hazard areas (100-year floodplain) and the insurance risk premium zones applicable to a community.
q. Flood Insurance Study (FIS) means the official study of a community in which the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has conducted an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations.
r. Functionally dependent use or facility means a use or facility that cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and shipbuilding and ship repair facilities. The term does not include seafood processing facilities, long-term storage, manufacturing, sales or service facilities.
s. Historic structure means any structure that is: (a) Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; (b) Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historic significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; (c) Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or (d) Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: (1) by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or (2) Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
t. New Construction means structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after March 4, 1984, the effective date of the floodplain management regulations, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
u. New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after March 1985, the effective date of the floodplain management regulation adopted by the community.
v. Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is (a) built on a single chassis; (b) four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; (c) designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and (d) designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as a temporary living quarter for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
w. Special flood hazard area (SFHA) means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in any given year. SFHAs are determined utilizing the base flood elevations (BFE) provided on the flood profiles in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for a community. BFEs provided on Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) are only approximate (rounded up or down) and should be verified with the BFEs published in the flood Insurance
85
Study (FIS) for a specific location. SFHAs include, but are not necessarily limited to, the land shown as Zones A and AE on a FIRM. The SFHA is also called the Area of Special Flood Hazard.
x. Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, including a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank, or other man-made facilities or infrastructures.
y. Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure, whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its pre-damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
z. Variance means a grant of relief by a community from the terms of the floodplain management regulation that allows construction in a manner otherwise prohibited and where specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship.
aa. Violation means failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community’s floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without required permits, lowest floor elevation documentation, flood-proofing certificates or required floodway encroachment calculations is resumed to be in violation until such time that documentation is provided.
bb. Water surface elevation means the height, in relation to the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas.
cc. Cost, means, as related to substantial improvements, the cost of any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, alteration, repair or other improvement of a structure shall be established by a detailed written contractor’s estimate. The estimate shall include, but not be limited to: the cost of materials (interior finishing elements, structural elements, utility and service equipment), sales tax on materials, building equipment and fixtures, including heating and air conditioning and utility meters, labor, built-in appliances, demolition and site preparation, repairs made to damaged parts of the building worked on at the same time, contractor’s overhead, contractor’s profit, and grand total. Items to be excluded include: cost of plans and specifications, survey costs, permit fees, outside improvements such as septic systems, water supply wells, landscaping, sidewalks, fences, yard lights, irrigation systems, and detached structures such as garages, sheds, and gazebos.
dd. Finished living space, means, as related to fully enclosed areas below the base flood elevation (BFE), a space that is, but is not limited to, heated and/or cooled, contains finished floors (tile, linoleum, hardwood, etc.), has sheetrock walls that may or may not be painted or wallpapered, and other amenities such as furniture, appliances, bathrooms, fireplaces and other items that are easily damaged by floodwaters and expensive to clean, repair or replace.
ee. Market value means, as related to substantial improvement and substantial damage, the value of the structure as determined by the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring.
16.16 Alcoholic Beverages. Alcoholic beverages of all types may be sold in packaged form at licensed package liquor stores which are permitted only by special exception pursuant to Section
86
18.7 in certain commercial districts provided they have the appropriate liquor license. Beer may be sold in grocery/convenience stores provided they have the appropriate liquor license. Alcoholic beverages of all types may be sold in restaurants for consumption on the premises, provided they are dispensed only from a service bar and have the appropriate liquor license.
16.17 Wireless Telecommunication Facilities.
16.17.1 A. Purpose. To provide for the location of wireless communication towers, antennas and facilities while protecting neighborhoods and minimizing the adverse visual and operational effects through careful design, siting and screening. This section of the Zoning Regulations is consistent with the Telecommunications Act of 1996 in that it does not discriminate among providers of functionally equivalent services, prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of personal wireless services, or regulate the placement, construction, and modification of personal wireless service facilities on the basis of environmental effects of radio frequency emissions to the extent that such facilities comply with FCC regulations concerning such emissions. Specifically, in addition:
a. To encourage use of nonresidential buildings and structures, such as water storage tanks.
b. To encourage joint use of new or existing towers and facilities.
c. To avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failure through engineering and careful siting of towers.
d. To accommodate the need for wireless communication towers and antennas while regulating their location and number.
e. To protect historic and residential areas from potential adverse impacts of wireless communication facilities.
f. To encourage suitable design measures to minimize adverse visual effects of wireless communication facilities.
g. To reduce the number of towers and/or antennas needed in the future.
16.17.2 Connecticut Siting Council: It is recognized that certain wireless communication facilities, as defined herein, may fall under the jurisdiction of the Connecticut Siting Council for permitting purposes. In such cases, when an applicant for a permit with the Connecticut Siting Council seeks to consult with the Town pursuant to CGS Section 16-50I (e) for its recommendations to the Siting Council, the Commission shall review the materials submitted by the applicant and hold such hearings as it deems necessary to provide the Connecticut Siting Council with its recommendations. Any recommendations made to the Connecticut Siting Council will be based upon a review of the application utilizing the criteria set forth in the Preston Zoning Regulations. Any such recommendation to the Connecticut Siting Council will be made in writing and set forth the reasons for the recommendations with specific reference to the applicable portions of the Preston Zoning Regulations. Such recommendations shall be issued to the applicant and to the Connecticut Siting Council within sixty (60) days of the applicant’s initial consultation with the Town.
16.17.3 Definitions:
87
Antenna – A device used to receive or transmit electromagnetic waves. Examples include, but are not limited to whip, panel and dish antennas.
Co-location – Locating wireless communication facilities of more than one (1) provider on a single site.
Tower – A structure intended to support equipment used to receive or transmit electromagnetic waves. Examples of towers include self-supporting lattice, guyed, and monopole.
Wireless telecommunication facility – The equipment and structures involved in receiving or transmitting electromagnetic waves associated with wireless telecommunication services.
Wireless telecommunication services – Services associated with the transmission and/or reception of wireless telecommunications. These services may include, but are not limited to cellular, personal communication services, specialized mobilized radio, and paging.
16.17.4 Siting Preferences: The general order of preference for alternative facility locations shall range from one (1) as the most preferred, to five (5) the least preferred:
1. On existing structures such as non-residential buildings/facades, water towers/tanks, utility poles, steeples, clock or bell towers, monuments, billboards, chimneys, bridges, grain elevators and silos.
2. On existing or approved towers.
3. On new towers located on property occupied by one or more existing towers.
4. On new towers located in commercial or industrial zones.
5. On new towers located in residential zones.
16.17.5 Permitted Uses. The following tower uses shall be deemed permitted uses in Commercial, Planned Industrial, Resort Commercial and Thames River District zoning districts for alternative facility locations 1, 2, 3 & 4 below and subject to Site Plan Approval in Section 19 of these Regulations, unless under the jurisdiction of the Connecticut Siting Council and not requiring approval by the Commission. Section 16.17.7 – Requires a Special Exception in accordance with Section 18 unless under the jurisdiction of the Connecticut Siting Council.
1. Wireless telecommunication facilities where the antenna is mounted on the rooftop or façade of a nonresidential building, provided the following standards are met:
a. No change is made to the height of the building.
b. Panel antennas shall not exceed sixty inches (60”) in height by twenty-four inches (24”) in width; whip antennas shall not exceed forty-eight inches (48”) in height; and dish antennas shall not exceed thirty-six inches (36”) in diameter.
c. Equipment cabinets and sheds shall meet the requirements of these Regulations.
88
d. Facilities shall be of a material or color which matches the exterior of the building, and shall blend into the existing architecture to the extent possible.
e. Façade mounted antennas shall not protrude above the building structure and shall not project more than three feet (3’) beyond the wall or façade.
f. Roof mounted antennas shall not exceed the highest point of the rooftop by more than ten feet (10’). Roof mounted antennas shall be set back from the roof edge a minimum of ten feet (10’) or ten percent (10%) of the roof width, whichever is greater.
g. Roof mounted antennas shall not occupy more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the roof area in residential zones, and fifty percent (50%) in all other zones.
h. All attempts must be made to co-locate the antenna on existing towers, buildings or structures.
i. All attempts must be made to mitigate adverse visual impacts on adjacent residential areas within one thousand feet (1,000’) of the commercial or industrial zoned site.
2. Wireless telecommunication facilities where the antenna is mounted on existing towers, water towers/tanks, utility poles, steeples, clock or bell towers, monuments, billboards, chimneys, bridges, grain elevators, and silos, provided the following standards are met:
a. No change is made to the height of the structure.
b. Panel antennas shall not exceed sixty inches (60”) in height by twenty-four inches (24”) in width; whip antennas shall not exceed forty-eight inches (48”) in height; and dish antennas shall not exceed thirty-six inches (36”) in diameter.
c. Equipment cabinets and sheds shall meet the requirements of these Regulations.
d. Facilities shall be of a material or color which matches the exterior of the structure and shall blend into the existing architecture of the structure to the extent possible.
3. Wireless telecommunication facilities where a tower is located on property occupied by one (1) or more towers erected prior to the effective date of this Section, provided the following standards are met:
a. The height of the tower to be erected shall not exceed the height of the tallest tower on the property.
b. All attempts are made to co-locate the antenna on existing towers.
c. Equipment cabinets and sheds shall meet the requirements of these Regulations.
4. This section shall not govern any tower, or the installation of any antenna, which is less than sixty feet (60’) in height, that is a federally licensed amateur radio station operator or is used exclusively for receiving only antennas (including parabolic dishes) for the private use by residents or local businesses for radio to television reception, and 2-way mobile communications.
89
16.17.6 Site Plan Requirements: All applications to develop a wireless telecommunications facility as a permitted use or special exception shall meet the site plan requirements listed in Section 19 of these Regulations. In addition, the following information shall be submitted for each application where applicable. The Commission may require independent engineering/technical review of submitted materials at the applicant’s expense.
a. A map indicating the service area of the proposed wireless telecommunications site. The map shall indicate the extent of the provider’s existing and planned coverage within the Town of Preston and a map indicating the search radius for the proposed wireless telecommunications site, including the location of tall structures within one-quarter (¼) mile of the proposed site.
b. A report from a licensed telecommunication systems engineer indicating why the proposed site location is necessary to satisfy its function in the applicant’s proposed wireless telecommunications system.
c. Plan showing where and how the proposed antenna will be affixed to a particular building or structure.
d. Details of all proposed antenna and mounting equipment including size and color.
e. Elevations of all proposed shielding and details of material including color.
f. An elevation of all proposed equipment buildings, boxes or cabinets. Details of all proposed fencing including color.
g. Tower base elevation and height of tower.
h. A design drawing, including cross section and elevation, of all proposed towers. A description of the tower’s capacity, including the number and type of antennas it can accommodate as well as the proposed location of all mounting positions for co-located antennas and the minimum separating distances between antennas. The design shall indicate how the tower will collapse without encroaching upon any adjoining property if failure occurs.
i. A report from a licensed telecommunication systems engineer indicating that the proposed wireless telecommunication facility will comply with FCC radio frequency emission standards and that the installation will not interfere with public safety communications.
j. All proposed landscaping, if appropriate, with a list of plant materials.
k. Proposed access to the site.
l. All utilities servicing the proposed tower or antenna, and any ancillary buildings, must be located underground.
16.17.7 Special Exception: On new towers for wireless telecommunications proposed to be located in residential zones, the requirements of Section 18 of these Regulations, plus the following requirements of this Section must be submitted to the Commission:
a. All of the plans and information required for a permitted use wireless telecommunications facility site plan required in Section 18 of these Regulations.
90
b. A view shed analysis showing all areas from which the tower would be visible, and if requested by the Commission, a simulation of the proposed site in order to help the Commission determine the visual impacts associated with the proposal.
c. Documentation prepared by a licensed telecommunications systems engineer that no existing or planned tower or other structure can accommodate the applicant’s antenna. For tall structures located within one-quarter (¼) mile radius of the proposed site, documentation that the owners of these locations have been contacted and have denied permission to install the antenna on these structures for other than economic reasons.
d. Proximity of the tower to residential structures.
e. Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties within one thousand feet (1,000’).
f. Surrounding topography within one thousand feet (1,000’) at contour intervals not exceeding ten feet (10’).
g. Design of the tower with particular reference to design characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual obtrusiveness.
16. 17.8 Special Exception General Standards: The wireless telecommunications facility standards enumerated below shall be followed:
a. The tower and/or antenna shall be erected to the minimum height necessary to satisfy the technical requirements of the telecommunications facility. Documentation of the minimum height needed, prepared by a licensed telecommunication systems engineer, shall accompany an application. The Commission may require the submission of propagation modeling results to facilitate its review of tower height.
b. A tower must comply with the setback requirements of the zone in which it is located, or be setback from all property lines a distance equal to the height of the tower, whichever is greater.
c. A telecommunications facility may be considered as either a principal or accessory use. The minimum lot area for the construction of a new tower shall be that of the zone in which it is located. More than one (1) tower on a lot may be permitted if all setbacks, design, and landscape requirements are met for each tower. A telecommunications facility may be located on leased land as long as there is adequate ingress and egress to the site for service vehicles, and such access is documented in a deed easement presented to the Commission.
d. Towers not requiring FAA paintings or markings shall be painted a non-contrasting blue, gray, or other neutral color.
e. No lights or illumination shall be permitted unless required by the FAA.
91
f. No signs or advertising shall be permitted on any tower or antenna, except no trespassing, warning, and ownership signs are permitted at ground level.
g. The proposed support structure shall be required to accommodate a minimum of three (3) users unless it is determined to be technically unfeasible based on information submitted by the applicant and verified by the Commission. These users shall include other wireless communication companies, and local police, fire, and ambulance companies.
h. A proposed tower shall be designed and constructed to all applicable standards of the American National Standards Institute, as amended.
i. The Commission may require the use of Section 16-50a of the Connecticut General Statues to promote tower sharing.
16.17.9 Special Exception Review Standards: In addition to other appropriate review standards found in Section 18 of these Regulations, the Commission, in reviewing the applications for wireless telecommunication facilities, shall consider:
a. Detailed analysis of alternative sites, structures, access, and antennas as provided by the applicant. Particular attention will be placed upon the siting preferences found in Section 16.17.4 of these Regulations.
b. Detailed propagation and antenna separation analysis relative to tower height.
c. Tower sharing or co-location to facilitate the telecommunication needs of municipalities and other entities in order to reduce the need to construct additional towers. The Commission reserves the right to require the applicant to utilize the provisions of Section 16.50a of the CGS to achieve tower sharing.
d. Assessment of tower structure type.
e. Assessment of design characteristics/architectural treatments that mitigate, reduce or eliminate visual impacts on adjacent areas.
f. If located on a property listed on the National Register of Historic Places, preservation of the historic and/or architectural character of the landscape or any structure.
g. Consideration of future use or re-use of the site, with provisions for facility removal and site restoration.
16.17.8 Ancillary Buildings: All ancillary buildings associated with wireless telecommunication facilities shall comply with the following:
92
a. Each building shall not contain more than one hundred fifty (150) square feet of gross floor area or be more than eight feet (8’) in height.
b. Each building shall comply with the setback requirements for accessory buildings for the zoning district in which it is located.
c. If located on the roof of a building, it shall be designed to blend with the color and design of the building to the extent possible.
d. All ground level buildings, boxes, or cabinets shall be surrounded by a chain link or comparable fence and be landscaped as acceptable to the Commission.
16.17.9 Abandonment: A wireless telecommunication facility not in use for twelve (12) consecutive months shall be removed by the facility owner at their expense. This removal shall occur within ninety (90) days of the end of such 12-month period. The Commission may require a bond or other surety satisfactory to the Town of Preston, to guarantee removal, which shall be reviewed and renewed every two (2) years. If there are two (2) or more users of a single tower, this provision shall not become effective until all users cease utilizing the tower.
16.18 Handicap Access. Access ramps for the handicapped may be extended into any required yard setback, subject to the approval of the ZEO, upon demonstration by the applicant that there is no other reasonable alternative.
93
SECTION 17 - COASTAL AREA MANAGEMENT
17.1 Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish requirements and procedures that apply to the coastal area, as defined below, so that the impacts of proposed activities on both coastal resources and future water-dependent development activities are acceptable. The requirements of this section are authorized by Chapter 444 of the CGS.
17.2 Definition of Coastal Area. The coastal area is that area contained by the coastal boundary which shall be a continuous line delineated on the landward side by the interior contour elevation of the one hundred-year (100) frequency coastal flood zone, as defined and determined by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, or a one thousand foot (1,000’) linear setback measured from the inland boundary of tidal wetlands mapped under the provisions of Section 22a-20 of the CGS, whichever is farthest inland. The water side of the coastal area shall be the Town boundary. A map showing the Coastal Area and Coastal Resources in Preston is enclosed and is a part of these Regulations.
17.3 Coastal Site Plan. Except where exempted under the provisions of Section 17.4 of these Regulations, in addition to meeting the other requirements of these Regulations, all applicants for zoning permits, special exceptions, or variances relating to uses proposed for location fully or partially within the coastal area shall submit a coastal site plan which shall accomplish the following:
a. Show the location and spatial relationship of coastal resources on and contiguous to the site; Coastal resources shall be identified by a professional qualified to map the resource, as required by the Commission.
b. Describe the entire project with appropriate plans, indicating project location, design, timing and methods of construction.
c. An assessment of the capability of the resources to accommodate the proposed use.
d. An assessment of the suitability of the project for the proposed site.
e. An evaluation of the potential beneficial and adverse impacts of the project and a description of proposed methods to mitigate adverse effects on coastal resources.
f. Any person submitting a coastal site plan shall demonstrate that the adverse impacts of the proposed activity are acceptable and shall demonstrate that such activity is consistent with the goals and policies in Section 22a-92 of the CGS.
g. A site plan prepared to meet the special requirements of this section may also include information necessary to meet other site plan requirements of these Regulations.
17.4 Exemptions and non-exemption improvements within one hundred feet (100’ of a tidal wetland or coastal water). The following are exempt from the coastal site plan review requirements
94
as they relate to Permitted Uses, Special Exceptions and Variances unless the property is located within one hundred feet (100’) of tidal wetlands or coastal waters.
a. Minor additions to or modification of existing buildings or detached accessory buildings, such as garages and utility sheds.
b. Construction of new or modification of existing structures incidental to the enjoyment and maintenance of residential property including, but not limited to, walks, terraces, driveways, swimming pools, tennis courts, docks, and detached accessory buildings.
c. Construction of new or modification of existing on-premises structures, including fences, walls, pedestrian walks and terraces, underground utility connections, essential electric, gas, telephone, water and sewer service lines, signs and such other minor structures as will not substantially alter the natural character of coastal resources or restrict access along coastal waters.
d. Construction of an individual single-family residential structure.
e. Activities conducted for the specific purpose of preserving soil, vegetation, water, fish, shellfish, wildlife and other coastal land and water resources.
17.4.1 All zoning permit uses not exempt because improvements are within one hundred feet (100’) of tidal wetlands or coastal waters) shall be subject to coastal site plan approval by the Commission; however, if a variance is required such approval shall be obtained by the ZBA.
17.5 Other Exemptions not subject to Commission or ZBA approval whether or not the work is within one hundred feet (100’) of a tidal wetland or coastal waters.
a. Interior modifications to buildings.
b. Minor changes in use of a building, structure, or property.
c. Gardening, grazing, and the harvesting of crops.
17.6 Permitted Uses. All uses listed as being permitted By Right in a particular zoning district are permitted in the coastal area as well, provided they meet the additional requirements of this section.
17.7 Special Exceptions. All Special Exception uses listed in the particular zoning district are permitted in the coastal area of that district as well, provided they meet the additional Special Exception requirements of this section and Section 18.
17.8 Additional Coastal Area Special Exception Uses. In addition to other uses allowed by Special Exception in parts of zoning districts located within the coastal area, the following uses are permitted by Special Exception throughout the coastal area, regardless of the zoning district classification;
a. Boat liveries providing rental of small sail boats (eighteen feet (18’) or less in length), rowboats and canoes. No motor boat or motor boat rentals, sales, or services are allowed in Residential Districts.
95
b. Boat launching facilities.
c. Fishing bait and tackle shops.
d. Water-dependent uses acceptable to the Commission that do not impact the character of an adjacent residential district.
17.9 Coastal Site Plan Review. In addition to any other applicable site plan review criteria prescribed by these Regulations, a coastal site plan required under this section shall be reviewed and may be modified, conditioned or denied in accordance with the procedures and criteria listed in this section of these Regulations.
a. The Commission may, at its discretion, hold a public hearing on any coastal site plan submitted for review.
b. In determining the acceptability of potential adverse impacts of the proposed activity described in the coastal site plan on both the coastal resources and the future water-dependent opportunities, the Commission shall: (a) consider the characteristics of the site, including the location and condition of any coastal resources defined in Section 22a-93 of the CGS. (b) consider the potential effects, both beneficial and adverse, of the proposed activity on coastal resources and future water-dependent development opportunities; and (c) follow all applicable goals and policies stated in Section 22a-92 of the CGS and identify any conflicts between the proposed activity and any goal or policy.
c. When approving, modifying, conditioning or denying a coastal site plan on the basis of the criteria herein prescribed, the Commission shall state in writing the findings and reasons for its action and shall send a copy of any decision by certified mail to the person who submitted such plan within fifteen (15) days after such decision is rendered.
d. In approving any activity proposed in a coastal site plan, the Commission shall make a written finding that the proposed activity with any conditions or required modification (a) is consistent with all applicable goals and policies in Section 22a-92 of the General Statutes; and (b) incorporate as conditions or modifications all reasonable measures which would mitigate the adverse impacts of the proposed activity on both coastal resources and future water-dependent development activities.
17.10 Time Limitations. Whenever the approval of the coastal site plan is the only requirement to be met or remaining to be met under these Regulations for a proposed building use or structure, a decision on an application shall be rendered within sixty-five (65) days after receipt of such plan. The applicant may consent to one or more extensions of such period, provided the total period of any such extension or extensions shall not exceed two (2) sixty-five (65) day periods, or may withdraw such a plan. The review of any coastal site plan shall not be deemed complete and valid unless the Commission has rendered a final decision thereon. If the Commission fails to render a decision within the time period prescribed above in this paragraph, the coastal site plan shall be deemed rejected.
17.11 Bond. As a condition to a coastal site plan approval, the Commission may require a bond or other surety or financial security arrangement to secure compliance with any modifications, conditions, or other terms stated in its approval of the plan.
96
17.12 Violations. Any activity within the defined coastal area not exempt from coastal site plan review pursuant to Section 17.4 and 17.5 above, which occurs without having received a lawful approval from the Commission under all of the applicable procedures and criteria prescribed by these Regulations or which violates the terms and conditions of such approval, shall be deemed a public nuisance and appropriate legal remedies will be taken by the Commission for abatement of such nuisance.
SECTION 18 - SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS
18.1 Application Procedures. Applications for Special Exceptions may be obtained from the Planning and Zoning Office. Completed applications, together with a site plan prepared in accordance with Section 19 of these Regulations, and the required fee, shall be submitted to the Planning and Zoning Office at least fifteen (15) business days prior to a regularly scheduled meeting of the Commission.
18.2 Hearing and Decision. The Commission shall hold a hearing on the application within sixty-five (65) days after receipt of the application and such hearing shall be completed within thirty-five (35) days. The Commission shall take action on the application within sixty-five (65) days after the close of the hearing, except that extensions of time may be granted by the applicant consistent with the provisions of Section 8-7d of the CGS.
a. Not less than ten (10) calendar days prior to the hearing, copies of the published legal notice of the hearing shall be mailed by the applicant to the owners of record at the last addresses known to the tax collector of properties abutting and directly across the street from the subject property. The applicant shall provide the Commission with evidence of mailing of such notices at the public hearing. Note – the ten (10) days does not include the day of the mailing or the day of the meeting.
b. A Special Exception shall not be effective until a notice, signed by the Chairman, Vice Chairman or Secretary, is recorded on the Land Records. Such notice shall: state the name of the applicant and owner of the property, provide an address and description of the premises to which it relates, and specify the nature of the Special Exception and the section of these Regulations under which it is authorized. The Town Clerk shall index the same in the grantor’s index under the name of the then record owner. The record owner shall pay for such recording.
18.3 Authorization of and Evaluation Procedure for Special Exceptions. In evaluating any application for a Special Exception, the Commission shall consider the General Evaluation Criteria in Section 18.4 of these Regulations, and other applicable criteria noted herein.
18.4 Criteria for Evaluating a Special Exception:
The Commission, in approving a special exception after applying these Regulations in harmony with their general intent, may stipulate such restrictions or conditions to protect or promote the rights of individuals, property values and the environment in the area as a whole, the public health, safety or
97
welfare, sound planning and zoning principles, improved land use, site planning and land development or better overall neighborhood compatibility. Such restrictions may include, without limitation, the components of the site plan and layout, distribution of and relationship between uses and structures, vehicular and pedestrian circulation, parking, open space, landscaping, screening, signs, lighting, building design, architectural treatment and massing, and the proper relationship between the taxable values of real property in the area.
The Commission shall consider and evaluate each application for a special exception using, at a minimum, the following criteria:
a) Site Design
i. Overall design, architectural treatment and aesthetic character shall be in harmony with the surrounding area. Consideration shall be given to the following: the design of the proposed use(s), building(s) or development, the relationship between the buildings and the land, the relationships between buildings or structures, the overall physical appearance of the property, building or development and its subsequent compatibility with surrounding development and the neighborhood.
b) Appropriateness of Location or Use:
i. The use shall preserve the integrity and character of the neighborhood, adjacent uses and current zoning district. Consideration shall be given to the size, location, use and height of buildings, nature and extent of landscaping, location of driveways, parking and loading areas. The intensity of the proposed use and project development shall be compatible with the adopted POCD. The use and project shall be compatible with adjacent established uses and the neighborhood. The project and its use(s) shall not degrade or decrease the value of the surrounding properties. Surrounding properties shall continue to have an ability to consistently develop with the prevailing zoning district and applicable regulations.
ii. Adjacent and feeder street(s) shall have the ability to handle peak traffic loads and shall not cause traffic hazards. The use and the extent, nature and arrangement of parking facilities, entrances and exits shall not create or further aggravate vehicular and pedestrian traffic safety problems.
iii. The obstruction of light or air shall be reviewed as relates to impact on scenic views and solar access. The use(s) shall not create excessive and unreasonable noise that is different from what currently exists within the neighborhood. Consideration shall be given to light levels, smoke, odor, gas, dust or vibration in noxious or offensive quantities, and the distance between offensive processes and adjacent properties. The proposed use will not adversely affect environmental quality.
iv. Consideration shall be given to protecting unusual topography, walls, habitat areas, and trees, or other unique vegetation on the site. A landscaping plan shall be provided showing mature trees, shrubs, and noninvasive species.
18.5 Convalescent Home, Assisted Living Community.
98
a) The main access to the facility shall be from a numbered state highway.
b) A minimum of five (5) acres shall be provided.
c) Parking provided shall be one (1) space for each unit and one (1) space for each employee at the largest shift.
d) The parcel shall be served with public water and public sewer or an acceptable system approved by the State of Connecticut Health Department or the DEEP.
18.6 Gasoline/Fuel, Service, Repair and Stations, Automobile Sales.
a. No lot or building used for any of these purposes in a PI, C-1 or RC District shall be approved for such use if it is within one thousand feet (1,000’), as measured along the street from the lot corner to lot corner, of another lot used for such purposes.
b. No part of a lot used for any of these purposes shall be located within one thousand feet (1,000’), as measured along the street from lot corner to lot corner of a lot used for a church, playground or public park.
c. All service and repair activities shall be conducted within buildings and no abandoned, junked or wrecked vehicles shall be parked or stored outside of a building unless within a storage area approved by the Commission and in a neat and orderly pattern and behind the front building setback line.
d. No parking or outside display of merchandise shall exceed the combined equivalent of one (1) parking space for each one hundred (100) square feet of building area and the display area shall be entirely behind the front buildings setback line. All such parking or outside display shall be approved by the Commission.
e. Any property containing a newly constructed filling station and tanks serving the filling station shall have its aboveground or underground tanks located a minimum of three hundred feet (300’) from the property line of an existing property used for residential use, church, or school.
18.7 Package Liquor Stores. The following provisions apply to establishments selling or dispensing alcoholic beverages, except the sale of beer in grocery stores, which is permitted.
a. No property containing a building used for a package liquor store shall be located closer than one thousand feet (1,000’) to any property used for a church, school, or library.
b. No package/liquor store shall be located closer than one thousand feet (1,000’) to another property housing a package/liquor store.
18.8 Antique Shops. No outside storage is permitted.
99
a. Sufficient off-street parking area shall be provided to ensure that no vehicle is parked within ten feet (10’) of the travel way of a street or highway.
b. One (1) sign, not exceeding eight (8) square feet in area, is permitted, provided it is no closer than twenty feet (20’) to the travel way of a street or highway and meets the other requirements for signs in Residential Districts in Section 20 of these Regulations.
c. The Antique Shop shall not exceed a maximum of five thousand (5,000) square feet in area including storage space.
18.9 Excavations and Deposits of Fill. Such use will be permitted only after a determination that the detrimental effects of the activity are minimized and provided the future usefulness of the premises is assured when the activities are completed. Permits for excavation and/or fill shall be issued for a period not to exceed two (2) years. However, approval of such permits may be extended for such additional periods of time as the Commission deems appropriate in order to complete the operation described in the original permit provided: the existing operation is being conducted in compliance with all the terms and conditions of the original permit and all applicable provisions of these Regulations; and further provided that no such extension so granted shall be for a period of more than two (2) years with all terms and conditions of the original permit remaining in full force and effect.
a. Such operations may only be conducted Monday through Saturday between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. No operations shall be conducted on Sundays.
b. During excavation or filling no temporary slope shall exceed of one foot (1’) vertical rise in one and one half feet (1½’) of horizontal distance unless in ledge. Finished slope shall not exceed one foot (1’) vertical rise in two feet (2’) horizontal distance, unless in ledge.
c. No removal shall take place and no fill material may be placed within twenty feet (20’) of a property line unless the finish grade will be the same as the grade of the adjoining property along the property line.
d. At the conclusion of the operation or of any substantial portion thereof, the whole area, where excavation has taken place, or where fill has been placed, shall be covered with not less than four inches (4”) of topsoil and seeded with a suitable cover-crop.
e. Before a permit for an excavation and/or fill is issued or re-issued, the applicant shall post an acceptable bond in a format approved by the Commission sufficient to guarantee conformity with the provisions of the permit issued hereunder.
f. Where any excavation shall have a depth of ten feet (10’) or more and creates a slope of more than one foot (1’) vertical rise in two feet (2’) horizontal distance, unless in ledge, there shall be a substantial fence at least six feet (6’) in height with suitable gates and such fence shall be located fifteen feet (15’) or more from the edge of the excavation.
g. Provisions shall be made to prevent dust from blowing onto neighboring properties.
100
h. Locations for access roads, stock piling and equipment storage shall be selected so as to minimize adverse effects on surrounding properties.
i. No equipment used for the processing of excavated material, such as a crusher or screening and grading plant, shall be located closer than one thousand feet (1,000’) to any property line.
18.10 Permanent or temporary Commercial Saw Mill or Wood Processing Operations. Such uses may be permitted with the following conditions:
a. Such operations may be conducted only Monday through Saturday between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. No operations shall be conducted on Sundays.
b. No operation shall occur within three hundred feet (300’) of any adjacent property.
c. A Renewal Permit shall be submitted to the ZEO annually on or before March 1 for such operation at which time an inspection of the property will be conducted for a determination that the permit complies with the conditions of the special exception and these regulations.
18.11 Recreation Campgrounds as defined in Section 2 of these Regulations are intended to be occupied by recreational vehicles or tents for seasonal lodging. Campgrounds shall conform to the applicable requirements of the Connecticut Public Health Code, Section 19a-2a-29, the Connecticut Fire Safety Code, and the Building Code; however, it is not the intent of these Regulations to duplicate (or enforce) the above noted codes, but to supplement them. All definitions noted herein take precedent over the noted codes. If there is an inconsistency between any of the codes and the Zoning Regulations, the more restrictive code or regulation shall apply. All campgrounds shall conform to the following requirements:
18.11.1 Minimum Campground Size. The campground shall contain at least ten (10) acres.
18.11.2 Campground Design. Each individual campsite shall be served by an interior vehicular road system. A one hundred foot (100’) long, twenty-four foot (24’) wide primary access road shall serve each newly established campground and shall connect directly to a numbered state highway or an approved town road. There shall be no on-street parking on any street entering the site or serving the campsites. A staging area(s) shall be provided that will accommodate a minimum of ten (10) campers at the entrance of the campground.
a. An internal vehicular road system is required to serve the needs of the campground including individual campsites and other ancillary campground uses. The internal vehicular roads shall meet the design standards as noted below:
Road width
20’
Two way
Road width
12’
One way
Compacted Gravel
6”
12” over ledge
101
Subbase
Compacted Gravel Base
4”
Surface
Non-erosive such as millings, bituminous, dust free stone
b. A plan prepared by a Connecticut licensed Professional Engineer, and as applicable, Licensed Land Surveyor, shall be provided for the design of the road that shows the details for the road construction, utilities, and all necessary drainage. All dead-end roads shall have a cul-de-sac adequate to allow for turn-around of camper trailers.
c. Where there are over one hundred fifty (150) individually numbered designated campsites, there shall, in addition to the main entrance, be an emergency road not less than twenty feet (20’) wide to a paved town or state street. No campsites shall be closer than one hundred feet (100’) to any public town or state street or highway.
d. There shall be safe pedestrian access connecting campground activity areas, such as, restrooms, swimming areas, picnic areas, and recreation areas to areas containing the campsites.
18.11.3 Buffers. Where a campground abuts any property under a separate ownership other than the campground, an area used as a state forest or a lake, or other forested land of the campground owner, a treed buffer strip shall be provided at least fifty feet (50’) wide. Where a landscaped buffer strip is required, such a strip shall consist of an inter-planting of evergreen and deciduous trees and shrubs a minimum of six feet (6’) in height and shrubs suitable, in the judgment of the Commission, to provide in a reasonable time a visual barrier to the adjacent property.
Notwithstanding the above, no campsite shall be situated closer than seventy-five feet (75’) to a property line of a parcel under separate ownership.
18.11.4 Density. No more than five (5) campsites/units shall be provided for each gross acre of overall campground. The gross acreage shall include buffer areas, recreational facilities, campsites, community areas and emergency overflow areas supporting facilities and land that is readily accessible and considered an integral part of the complex (campground).
18.11.5 Individual Site Dimensions and Requirements for Campsites. Except for group camping areas, individual campsites for camper units shall be a minimum of twenty-five feet (25’) by sixty feet (60’) and one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet. Each campsite shall contain only one camper unit and shall have a clearly marked number designation on its site for safety and reference purposes. In addition, a minimum distance of three feet (3’) shall be provided from the camper unit and/or any deck or addition to the side, front and rear line of the individually numbered campsite line. This requirement will be for those campsites that are created after May 1, 2016, the adoption date of the amendment to the Regulations.
102
18.11.6 Group Camping. In addition to the individual number designated campsites, there may be specific designated areas for group camping. These are areas that allow camping in a general area (location) and not on individual numbered campsites, but there shall be no greater density for total of camper sites/units than permitted under Section 18.11.4. For example, if the campground contains thirty (30) acres and is permitted to have one hundred fifty (150) campsites/units; there may be one hundred (100) individual numbered designated campsites and fifty (50) camper units for group camping or one hundred twenty (120) campsites and thirty (30) camper units for group camping.
18.11.7 Other Provisions of these Regulations.
a. A campsite that is not served by a community sewer and water system approved by the health department must be located within three hundred feet (300’) of a public restroom served by a health department approved sanitary sewage disposal system and no campsite shall be permitted within fifty feet (50’) of any septic system.
b. A trapped dumping station shall be provided for the use of independent-type camper units.
c. Outdoor electrical outlets shall be weatherproof.
d. No permanent power line shall be permitted to lie on the ground or be suspended less than fifteen feet (15’) above the ground. No power line shall be laid on a road surface and no unit shall be required to extend service lines more than thirty-five feet (35’) to a power line.
e. Liquefied petroleum gas for cooking or heating purposes shall not be used at individual trailer spaces unless the containers are properly installed in accordance with the Connecticut Building Code and/or Connecticut Fire Safety Code and any other required permit. Portable liquefied petroleum gas cylinders shall be securely locked in place, adequately protected from the weather and installed in accordance with the Connecticut Building Code and Fire Safety Code.
f. Portable fire extinguishers shall be required for each Recreational Vehicle camper unit.
g. Campsites shall be occupied by one camper unit unless located in a group camping area. Such campsites may also contain additions and decks to camper units that have no below ground foundation, involve no grading (except minor grading for camper stabilization) or site improvements, and when removed, results in no physical alteration of the site.
18.11.8 Off Season Use. No campsite shall be occupied between November first and the next following March 31 for more than thirty (30) days (overnight stays) with the provision that the owner or operator of the campground retains a log of campers that have stayed on-site throughout this five-month period. The owner of the campground shall provide a letter certifying to the Zoning Enforcement Officer that no person had stayed at the campground over thirty (30) days during the winter period. Such letter must be submitted with the annual
103
renewal permit. The log must be available to the Zoning Enforcement Officer for review at any time. Campers must at all times retain a permanent residence outside of the campground.
18.11.9 Storage. Unoccupied camper units and boats may be stored in recreation campgrounds. By September 10th of each year, the campground owner shall provide the Assessor of the Town of Preston a list containing identification information for all long-term camper units (long-term is a period of three (3) months or more) or other personal property that is present on the property.
18.11.10 Campground Register. The owner/operator of any campground shall be responsible for the maintenance of an accurate register at such campground. Such register shall include the name of the family head or the responsible group member, his or her permanent address, date of arrival and departure, and motor vehicle license plate, if applicable. The registration shall indicate the site or unit assigned and the classification of the vehicle.
Such register shall be available at the campground for access to the Zoning Enforcement Officer and other town officials to assist in the enforcement of these Regulations.
18.11.11 Caretakers. In any campground having at least ten (10) individual and approved campsites, there may be located on the same premises one (1) permanent single-family dwelling or one (1) mobile home not less than twelve feet (12’) wide with axle removed and securely anchored against wind movement satisfactory to the Building Official or one RV, provided such dwelling or mobile home RV is occupied by the campground owner, operator, guard or caretaker of the campground and is not rented. Such dwellings may be provided at increments of one hundred fifty (150) approved campsites. Location of such dwelling shall be noted in the annual renewal permit. The location of all permanent dwellings and mobile homes shall be as permitted by the special exception approved by the Commission.
18.11.12 Accessory Uses. Permitted as an accessory use to a recreational campground and for camper use only, but not permitted as a principle use, there may be: a grocery store with grocery and camper provisions and gifts, snack bar, swimming pool, golf course of any kind, tennis courts, recreation pavilion, horseback riding, and any other appropriate activities, even though some of the activities by their nature are performed off premises, but all activities must originate on premises.
18.11.13 Music Festivals. Also permitted as an accessory use to a recreational campground are music festivals, not to exceed six (6) per year, defined as a series of musical concerts featuring a musical theme with multiple performers of at least two (2) consecutive days but not to exceed six (6) consecutive days, provided however, that said musical performances shall not be on any contiguous land but only on the land for which the special exception has been issued and provided further that all outdoor amplified musical festival performances stop at the following times:
Friday and Saturday night …………………….. 11:15 p.m.
Sunday, if Monday is a holiday………………. 11:15 p.m.
Sunday………………………………………….. 9:00 p.m.
104
Monday – Thursday……………………………. 10:15 p.m.
a. All music festivals shall comply with the State of Connecticut DEEP noise standards.
The operator of the campground shall retain, through the Town of Preston, the Resident State Trooper for the evening sessions of the festivals on Friday and Saturday nights; starting at 6:00 p.m. The trooper(s) will be trained as a sound expert qualified to apply the DEEP standards. The campground operator shall pay the cost of having the Resident State Trooper at the festival for the above-specified sessions. During the music festival performance times when the Town of Preston Resident State Trooper is not retained, campground operator must retain the services of the Connecticut State Police or other acceptable professionals (approved by the first selectman) trained to use sound equipment.
The operator of the campground shall allow any DEEP compliance sound testing to be conducted at the property lines.
If it is demonstrated through proper testing (appropriate equipment and use thereof) that noise levels violate DEEP standards, sound levels shall be reduced to meet compliance and the owner shall pay for a DEEP approved sound tester to be on the premises for the next scheduled music festival. For the purposes of this regulation, it is considered a violation if the State Trooper DEEP approved sound engineer conducting the sound testing requests a reduction in the noise level and the campground does not comply. If the State Trooper requests that the noise level be lowered and the owner complies, it shall not be considered a violation of these Regulations. All requests for reducing noise levels shall be based on DEEP noise standards. The Town of Preston and the property owner must agree upon a list of three (3) DEEP approved testing services; the Town of Preston shall select one (1) of the three (3) to perform said sound testing; the owner shall pay the entire bill for said services; the times of testing shall be determined by the Town and may occur at any time during the festival and particular testing times need not be disclosed to the owner; the total number of hours contracted for shall not exceed six (6) per evening event. These contracted services are in addition to the required State Trooper. If at the next scheduled music festival the contracted sound testing agency determines that a violation has occurred pursuant to the DEEP noise standards, the Commission / ZEO may impose a fine in accordance with “An Ordinance Establishing Citation Procedures And Fines for Zoning Violations”.
b. The volume of sound from music and public address system shall be so controlled as to prevent objectionable noise off the premises as defined by the CGS.
c. The storage, collection and disposal of refuse shall be so managed as to avoid a health hazard or an odor nuisance. Garbage shall be collected daily from all areas of the campground.
d. Insect and rodent control measures to safeguard public health as recommended by the health officer shall be applied in the campground.
18.11.14 Renewal Permit.
Every campground owner shall have an “operator” authorized by the owner of the campground to act on the owner’s behalf. The operator shall be the contact person for the Zoning
105
Enforcement Officer and other town officials. The operator/owner shall submit a renewal permit to the ZEO annually on March 1. The renewal permit application shall include:
a. Contact information of the operator:
i. Operator’s name
ii. Operator’s address
iii. Operator’s phone number
iv. Emergency contact in the event the operator is not available
b. Two (2) copies of a base map at a scale of 1”=100’ to the Zoning Enforcement Officer. A base map shall show the location and dimension of each campsite and their designated campsite number, long term camper units on camp sites – a long term camper unit is a camper that remains at a campsite for three months or more, group camping areas, staging areas, recreation areas, buildings, including decks, awnings and sheds, parking areas, park/open space areas, refuse areas, restrooms, picnic areas, snack bar areas, winter storage areas, septic areas, wells, and all other uses.
c. A letter listing any and all changes to the campground from the previous year renewal permit (including campsite configuration for individual campsites and any physical improvements, such as, new campers, decks or additions). The ZEO may require the submission of an updated revised map showing said changes.
d. A letter prepared by the campground operator certifying that no one stayed (overnight stay) at the campground for more than thirty (30) days between November 1 and March 31 as noted in Section 18.11.8. The log shall be available upon request by the Zoning Enforcement Officer of the usage of the campground during that time period.
e. Copy of the annual registration with the Health Director pursuant to Section 19a-2a-29 of the Public Health Code.
f. List of year round resident caretakers, guards, campground owners or operators that live on site and location of the on-site residence pursuant to Section 18.11.11.
g. Any change of use not noted in the special exception shall require approval by the Commission, unless exempt pursuant to Section 19.10 of these Regulations. The Zoning Enforcement Officer may order any activity discontinued providing it is believed that such activity is not permitted within the intent of the approved special exception or these Regulations. Such activity shall be discontinued on the day specified by the Zoning Enforcement Officer in writing to the operator of the campground. A copy of said order shall be forwarded to the Commission.
18.11.14.1 Renewal Permit Process. The ZEO shall forward a copy of the renewal permit application and map to the Fire Marshal, Building Inspector, Sanitarian, Director of Health and Town Planner for review and comments prior to the issuance of the renewal permit. If there are any mandated changes by the health, building code, or fire safety code, such changes shall be made to the campground as directed by the Director of Health, Building Inspector, or Fire Marshal.
Such permit shall be issued after a visual inspection of the premises by the ZEO and a determination that the renewal permit is in compliance with the approved special exception, zoning regulations and provided the following:
106
a. Campsites are visibly numbered with weatherproof reflective numbers that are a minimum of three inches (3”) in height and two inches (2”) wide per number. Such number shall be located in the front of the campsite with a location deemed acceptable to the Zoning Enforcement Officer and the Fire Marshal.
b. All permit requirements have been met and the Campground continues to be in compliance with the approved Special Exception and the operation is conducted in accordance with the provisions of these Regulations.
c. There are no outstanding issues as noted by the Building Inspector, Fire Marshal, Town Sanitarian, Director of Health, and Town Planner.
The renewal fee for the permit shall be a minimum of one hundred dollars ($100.00), plus one (1) dollar for each additional campsite over one hundred (100) units, including group campsites.
If the Zoning Enforcement Officer finds that the Campground Owner is not in compliance with their permit or any of these regulations, the Zoning Enforcement Officer may withhold issuance of the renewal permit until such time the Campground complies with said permit and/or regulations.
18.11.15 Camper Unit. A Camper Unit is a tent or a Recreational Vehicle (RV) that does not exceed four hundred (400) square feet and shall be designed, used or intended for use temporarily for camping, recreation, travel and vacationing, and is or can be mounted on wheels and may be self-propelled, and designed as an RV in the NFPA 1192 (current edition) and manufactured in accordance with ANSI 119.5, but shall not include a mobile or manufactured home. Such camper unit may include additions, such as decks or sunrooms that are specifically designed and manufactured for use with recreational vehicles and camper trailers and engineered to withstand hurricane force winds in accordance with the building code requirements. Such additions, other than decks, shall be constructed with collapsible sidewalls and shall not have an in-ground foundation or involve grading or site improvements, except as noted in Section 18.11.7g, and when removed shall not result in physical alteration of the site. Set up provisions shall be provided for RV and shall include typical quick disconnect fittings for utilities (water-hose connection, sewer-RV type sewer hose connection, electrical – cord and plug), and anchors standards per American National Standards Institute (ANSI). The unit and additions/decks/sunrooms must be set up on site such that the unit can be readily removed.
18.11.16 Campsite. A campsite is an area of a campground that is designated by the operator as capable of accommodating one independent or dependent camping unit and meets the requirements, including campsite (lot) delineation of Section 18.11.5 of these Regulations. In the event the campsites are owned and are part of a co-op as defined by Section 47-202(12) of the CGS, each campsite shall be divided using A-2 survey standards by a surveyor licensed in the State of Connecticut. In addition, pins and/or monuments shall be provided delineating the campsites at all corners.
18.11.17 Group Camping. Group camping are areas used by more than one camper unit.
107
18.11.18 Permit for RV Additions. All additions (decks/sunrooms/awnings as previously defined and limited) to Recreational Vehicles camper units shall obtain a zoning permit for installation from the Zoning Enforcement Officer; in addition, a building permit, from the Town of Preston Building Inspector, shall be required in accordance with the Building Code. Permits for any addition shall require approval from the Campground Owner or Operator prior to the issuance of a permit for an addition (as evidence by signing the application or providing written letter of approval). The Campground Owner, in addition to the applicant, will be responsible for any non-compliance with these Regulations regarding the installation of the camper units and additions.
18.12 Elderly Housing. All such housing shall meet the following requirements:
a. The property shall include at least five (5) acres.
b. The maximum number of units shall be determined by the Town Sanitarian or State Department of Health and the Town Engineer after examination of conditions for sewage disposal.
18.13 Commercial Recreation Facilities. Commercial recreation facilities are permitted under the following conditions:
18.13.1 The lot shall contain not less than ten (10 acres).
18.13.2 No structure except a single dwelling and no recreational activity except a golf course, shall be less than one hundred feet (100’) from the nearest public highway nor less than two hundred feet (20’) from the nearest property under separate ownership.
18.13.3 Off-street parking shall be provided for the cars of all patrons, employees, and persons using the facilities, together with the necessary access driveways to public roads. Surfacing shall be of a type appropriate for the proposed land uses, and shall be treated to inhibit dust. No parking area shall be located less than fifty feet (50’) from a public highway, or from any other property under separate ownership.
18.13.4 Temporary or permanent sanitary facilities shall be provided in adequate numbers to serve the maximum number of expected patrons.
18.13.5 The volume of sound from music and public address system shall be so controlled as to prevent objectionable noise off the premises as defined by the CGS.
18.13.6 Outdoor activities shall terminate at 10:00 p.m. and all other activities shall terminate at 11:15 p.m.
18.13.7 Banquets, meetings, stage presentations and dancing shall be held inside a structure, but this shall not prevent presentation outside a structure of athletic exhibitions or contests requiring outdoor facilities.
108
18.13.8 Commercial recreation areas shall include the following uses and any approved combination thereof:
a. Outdoor or indoor athletic activities, such as facilities for group skating, skiing, sledding, swimming, squash and tennis.
b. A golf course of not less than nine (9) holes as a principal recreational use, and a par three (3) golf course or putting greens and driving range as an accessory to a major recreational facility, but expressly prohibiting miniature golf putting greens and driving ranges as a principal use.
c. Riding academy as a principal use, and the keeping and boarding of horses for riding, instruction and exhibition as accessory to a major recreational facility.
d. Outdoor picnic facilities for groups, including barbecue pits and outdoor fireplaces as an accessory use to a major recreation facility.
e. Social and recreational facilities for group dining and dancing, including banquets, meetings, receptions, assemblies and entertainment, provided such activities are accessory to and a part of an indoor-outdoor recreational enterprise and are carried on inside a structure.
f. Activities similar to those listed above, that are commonly provided by such organizations as day camps, swimming and tennis clubs and other similar recreational enterprises.
g. The project shall meet the CT DEEP noise standards. The Commission or the ZEO may require all public address systems or amplification system to comply with Section 18.11.13.
109
18.14 Multi-Family Dwellings (New Construction) Excepting Land Zoned in the Thames River District. Such uses shall meet the following conditions:
18.14.1 The number of units shall not exceed two (2) units per acre without public sewer or water. The Commission may allow up to eight (8) units per acre if the project is served by both public sewer and water or systems approved by the Connecticut State Health Department.
18.14.2 No building shall contain more than eight (8) dwelling units, which may be constructed as townhouses or garden apartments.
18.14.3 No building used for such purposes shall be located closer than fifty feet (50’) from any other residential structure.
18.14.4 No outside storage area will be provided unless it is completely screened from view from any adjoining property or road. Refuse and recycling containers shall be screened from view and provided in sufficient numbers to accommodate refuse and recycling from all residents in a sanitary and ordorless manner. All accumulated refuse shall be removed from the premises at least once each week.
18.14.5 All driveways and parking areas shall be paved with appropriate drainage designed in accordance with the Connecticut Stormwater Quality Manual by a professional engineer licensed in the State of Connecticut. Alternate surfaces may be approved provided they are not a maintenance concern as determined by the Commission. Adequate sight distance shall be provided.
18.14.6 The Commission may deny an application for multi-family dwelling if the proposed location is an area substantially developed by single-family detached dwellings.
18.14.7 The locations, landscaping and design of buildings, parking areas, driveways, lighting and other features shall be such that possible adverse impact on nearby properties is minimized.
18.14.8 Each apartment shall contain the following living floor area:
Efficiency Apartment (no separate bedroom) 600 sq. ft.
One Bedroom Apartment 750 sq. ft.
Two Bedroom Apartment 900 sq. ft.
18.14.9 In computing the required minimum floor area, only that area inside the perimeter walls of the dwelling unit devoted to the exclusive use of the apartment tenant for living purposes shall be considered.
18.15 Specialized Agricultural Buildings. The Commission shall determine the following:
a. The building will be designed or adequately screened to present an appearance that is consistent with the area.
110
b. Roads and intersections providing access to the building will be adequate to provide safe and uncongested movement of traffic.
c. All plans for the storage and disposal of wastes shall be consistent with regulations of the Connecticut Department of Public Health and Department of Energy and Environmental Protection.
d. No such specialized agricultural building or waste storage or treatment area shall be located closer than five hundred feet (500’) from property used for residential purposes, public building, place of worship, place of regular or periodic public assembly, or commercial eating and drinking establishment, and is set back a minimum of 200 feet (200’) from any property line. A reduction in the setback to not less than 100 feet (100’) may be permitted where the Board finds that the adjoining property is a State open space or land physically unsuitable for building purposes.
18.16 Video Game Arcades. Video game arcades shall be permitted only if they meet the following conditions:
a. Adequate space shall be provided for each machine so as to allow its use without overcrowding. A minimum width of two feet (2’) shall be provided per machine where the machine is designed for use by one (1) player, and three and one-half feet (3-1/2’) where the machine is designed for use by two (2) players. The depth of the space in front of the machine shall be at least five feet (5’), and there shall be a minimum aisle width beyond this five feet (5’) of an additional three feet (3’).
b. An arcade shall not be located closer than five hundred feet (500’) from the property of a church, school, or public building.
c. The Commission may require a planted buffer strip where it finds that the arcade may have a detrimental impact on adjacent property used for residential purposes.
d. The Commission may permit an arcade as an accessory use to an existing use, such as a bar, campground, or other commercial or private recreation development, provided that safeguards are taken to assure the use will be compatible with the neighborhood.
e. Off-street parking shall be adequate to assure that no patron or employee vehicles park on the street.
f. No drinking of alcoholic beverages shall be permitted on the premises.
g. The arcade shall be located in a separate room, separated from other uses on the premises and from pedestrian circulation to and from such other uses. The room shall be arranged so that there is an employee or video surveillance within the room, or such that management attendants outside the room can easily see and supervise the interior of the room.
111
18.17 Bed And Breakfast Inn. The Commission may permit a Bed and Breakfast Inn in any owner-occupied residence located provided the following conditions are met:
a. Lot size; The applicant for a Bed and Breakfast Inn shall demonstrate that the property proposed for the Bed and Breakfast is of adequate size to accommodate the building, parking, landscaping, well, and septic system to the satisfaction of the Commission and Town Sanitarian.
b. The minimum finished floor area of the building shall be at least fifteen hundred (1500) square feet.
c. The building must be of adequate size to accommodate all proposed guest bedroom, guest-dining area and guest bathrooms, without reducing the required minimum livable floor area for the principal residential use, as specified in Section 15 U of these regulations.
d. No more than eight (8) guest rooms are provided.
e. All guest accommodations shall be within the principal building.
f. Off-street parking spaces shall include at least two (2) spaces for the residents of the property and one (1) space for each guest room. Parking shall be located inside the required building setback lines.
g. Written certification shall be obtained from the Town Sanitarian so that plans for the water supply and sewage disposal systems are adequate to support the intended use. All building plans for a proposed Bed and Breakfast Inn must comply with current ADA requirements for parking, accessibility, interior room design for all bedrooms, bathrooms, doorways and hallways, and must be approved by the Preston Fire Marshall and Preston Building Inspector, prior to the issuance of a Building Permit, Zoning Permit, or both.
h. The Commission may require fencing, earth berms, evergreen vegetation, or other buffers to reduce visual conflicts with neighboring uses. No outside storage of any maintenance equipment or supplies shall be permitted.
i. Registered guests may stay no longer than three (3) weeks in a three-month period.
j. Alterations to existing buildings: exterior alterations may be made to existing buildings in order to preserve a valuable historic property, promote adaptive reuse of buildings, or comply with local or state health and safety code requirements. However, in all cases, such alterations must be compatible with the residential character of the area.
k. Special Functions or Events: Special functions may be held at a Bed and Breakfast Inn subject to conditions of the permit and provided that on-site parking is adequate to address the needs of the event. A zoning permit from the Zoning Enforcement Officer shall be obtained to ensure compliance with the terms of the Special Exception approved by the Commission for any event for which more than twenty five (25) guests are present at the event.
l. The operation of a Bed and Breakfast Inn shall require an annual renewal permit issued by the Zoning Enforcement Officer to ensure compliance with the special exception and these Regulations. The renewal permit shall be submitted by August 1.
18.18 Farm Winery and Cidermill and other Farm Fruit Facilities. Farm Wineries and Cidermills, etc., as defined in Section 2 of these Regulations are permitted provided the following conditions can be met:
112
a. Such wineries shall have a minimum of five (5) acres of which a minimum of two (2) acres shall be for the growing of grapes or other fruit produce.
b. Such wineries and cidermill and other farm fruit facilities shall be permitted to hold a maximum of six (6) public winemaking promotions each calendar year that complements the harvesting and making of the wine.
c. In addition, an additional six (6) private or closed events, such as weddings or showers may be held within a year.
d. Each event shall have no more than seventy-five (75) guests in attendance; however, the Commission may permit more than seventy-five (75) guests at their discretion based on property size, impact on the neighborhood, effective buffering, condition of road accessing the site, topography, and natural resources, and provided any building used for such events is approved by the Building Inspector and the Fire Marshal prior to the use of the building for events.
e. Fourteen (14) days prior to conducting an event, a zoning permit shall be submitted to the Zoning Enforcement Office with a copy to the First Selectman. The applicant shall be responsible to contact the Town Sanitarian, Health Inspector and Fire Marshal prior to the event for all applicable permits. The applicant shall provide the date of the event(s) and number of estimated guests.
f. A winery and cidermill and other farm fruit facilities building for the sale of wine or cider products (and other accessory wine products) and for winemaking instruction is permitted. Said structure shall not exceed two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet and provided its architecture shall be acceptable to the Commission and in harmony with the surrounding neighborhood. Restaurants are not permitted as part of the winery, but the hors d’oeuvres and pastries may be sold as an accessory wine product. Full service menus may be available for private or closed events.
g. Such winery or and cidermill and other farm fruit facilities buildings shall not be open to the public later than 8:00 p.m. on weekdays and Sundays and 10:00 p.m. Friday and Saturday, and will not open earlier than 10:00 a.m.
h. Adequate parking must be installed surfaced with dust free stone or other adequate surfaces. An adequate screened buffer with a solid screen of evergreen being a minimum of six feet (6’) in height and fifty feet (50’) from property line. This provision can be waived by the Commission by a three-quarter vote of the regular members.
i. An acceptable waste management plan must be submitted as part of each winery cider mill application.
j. Traffic shall not impact residential character and no parking shall be permitted on street or State Highways.
k. All events shall comply with the State of Connecticut DEEP noise standards.
l. If the violation is not immediately resolved, the Zoning Enforcement Officer may withhold the permit for any subsequent events until such matter is resolved.
m. Renewal Permit. A renewal permit shall be submitted to the Zoning Enforcement Officer annually by March 1 to insure compliance with the conditions of the original special exception and these Zoning Regulations.
18.19 Farm Vineyard, Winery, Cider Mill and other similar farm fruit facility - Large Acreage.
113
18.19.1 Conditions. Farm Vineyard, Winery, Cider Mill and other similar farm fruit facility - Large Acreage as defined in Section 2 of these regulations are permitted provided the following conditions can be met:
a. Such wineries and cidermill and other farm fruit facilities shall have a minimum of twenty-five (25) acres of which a minimum of five (5) acres shall be for the growing of grapes or other fruit produce.
b. Such wineries and cidermill and other farm fruit facilities may offer tasting of samples of such wine or cider (or other similar fruit beverages, to visitors and prospective retail customers for consumption on the premises of the winery/vineyard or cider mill/orchard permittee.
c. Special Public Promotions may be conducted and opened to the general public that celebrate the harvesting and making of wine, cider or other fruit beverages, as follows:
1. Six (6) such events are permitted throughout a calendar year.
2. The serving of hors d’oevres and/or pastries are permitted as an accessory wine product. Full meals may be served.
3. At least fourteen (14) days prior to an event, a zoning permit application shall be submitted to the Zoning Enforcement Officer, a copy of which shall be submitted to the First Selectman. The applicant shall provide the date of the event(s) and number of estimated guests. The applicant shall be responsible to contact the Town Sanitarian, Health Inspector and Fire Marshal prior to the event for all applicable permits.
d. Closed Events may be planned that are not open to the general public. They are weddings, private parties, and similar.
i. Full meals and/or serving of hors d’oevres and/or pastries are permitted for these events; however, only those alcoholic beverages produced on premises shall be served, unless during a catered event for which the caterer has a valid liquor license in accordance with the CGS.
ii. There shall be no more than three (3) such events per week. The Commission may desire to reduce the number of events in order to eliminate impacts on the neighborhood.
iii. Closed Events and Special Public promotions shall not occur on the same day.
iv. At least fourteen (14) days prior to an event, a zoning permit application shall be submitted to the Zoning Enforcement Officer, a copy of which shall be submitted to the First Selectman. The applicant shall provide the date of the event(s) and number of estimated guests. The applicant shall be responsible to contact the Town Sanitarian, Health Inspector and Fire Marshal prior to the event for all applicable permits.
e. Retail Winery or and cidermill and other farm fruit facilities buildings that may include:
i. Sale of wine products and other accessory wine, cider or fruit products provided that seventy five percent (75%) of the products are produced on the premises.
ii. Wine, Cider or other fruit beverage tasting room or area.
iii. Public Restaurants may be permitted by the Commission provided:
a) They are located on a state highway and have vehicular access from the state highway.
b) Commission determines that there will be no adverse impacts on the adjacent neighborhood as a result of the restaurant.
c) Only alcoholic beverages produced on the premises shall be served.
114
18.19.2 Additional Criteria. The Commission shall consider the following for all uses and events:
a. Traffic: Traffic resulting from such facility shall have a negligible impact on town roads. The Commission may require a traffic study prepared by a traffic engineer to help determine impact on the town roads. The Commission shall consider the current traffic volumes, the percentage increase that will result from the project, and the quality of the roads that will serve the facility. The Commission may hire an independent traffic engineer to review any traffic study provided by the applicant.
b. Noise: All events shall comply with the State of Connecticut DEEP noise standards. The Commission, as part of the application, or the Zoning Enforcement Officer, at any time, may require the installation of a noise monitoring system that shuts down or attenuates the amplified sound when decibel levels exceed State standards. The Commission may require monitoring of any event in accordance with the provisions outlines in Section 18.11.13 for campground music festivals.
c. Outdoor Events: Outdoor events and activities shall be a minimum of two hundred feet (200’) from any property line or such other distance as deemed necessary by the Commission as circumstances require. There shall be an appropriate buffer strip that screens any such activity from the adjacent property(s).
d. Attendees: The Commission may specify a maximum number of attendees permitted for any use noted above, depending upon site conditions and impacts on town infrastructure and impacts on neighboring properties.
e. Parking: All parking lots shall be surfaced using a method approved by the Commission.
f. Architectural Considerations: All building design shall be complementary to the rural and agricultural character of Preston as determined and approved by the Commission.
18.19.3 Consultants. To ensure that the facility is harmonious with the neighborhood and in order to assist the Commission in determining impacts, the Commission may engage the services of an independent professional consultant with expertise in the discipline in question, including, but not limited to traffic, architectural design, and landscape design, sound. The applicant shall pay for the fee for such services.
18.19.4 Uses and Events. The following conditions must be met for all uses and events:
a. One single family residential structure may be permitted on site.
b. Only alcoholic beverages produced on the premises are permitted to be served, unless at a catered event for which the caterer has a valid liquor license in accordance with the CGS.
c. The hours for operation for all uses and/or events shall be as follows:
Friday and Saturday night …………………………. 11:15 p.m.
Sunday, if Monday is a holiday…………………….. 11:15 p.m.
Sunday……………………………………………….9:00 p.m.
Monday – Thursday………………………………....10:15 p.m.
18.19.5 Traffic or Noise Control. The Zoning Enforcement Officer or the First Selectman may, after the issuance of a zoning permit by the Zoning Enforcement Office in accordance with Section 18.19 above, at any time require the owner and/or operator to hire a traffic control person to control traffic or
115
a sound expert to monitor the noise levels in accordance with the same provisions of the campground music festivals outlined in Section 18.11.13 of these Regulations at the expense of the owner of the winery/cider mill.
18.19.6 Renewal Permit. A renewal permit shall be submitted to the Zoning Enforcement Officer annually by March 1 to insure compliance with the conditions of the original special exception and these Zoning Regulations.
18.20 Veterinarian hospitals (in residential districts) including accessory uses of, laboratories, offices, retail sales may be only fifteen percent (15%) of the hospital floor area, parking and loading areas as per Section 20 of these Regulations, and other accessory, to the principal use, buildings and uses.
In order to assure the facility will be functional and be an aesthetic asset to the community, the Commission shall consider the following:
a. Natural buffers between incompatible nearby land uses.
b. Traffic and pedestrian safety, both on and adjacent to the site.
c. Alignment with existing and proposed streets in the vicinity.
d. Landscaping of building areas, parking lots and open spaces.
e. Design and location of buildings and signs compatible with the character of the surrounding area.
18.21 Commercial Poultry Farm (CPF).
a. CPFs that houses over two hundred fifty (250) birds shall have a minimum of five (5) acres.
b. CPFs containing over ten thousand (10,000) birds shall have a minimum of ten (10) acres and for each additional one thousand (1,000) birds an additional acre of land shall be provided.
c. There shall be a minimum of (two) 2 square feet of building area per bird.
d. The Commission may require landscaped buffer strips to screen the use from adjacent residential uses and the street right-of-way.
e. Odor shall not (consistently) extend beyond the property line. Details outlining odor control shall be provided.
f. Buildings over forty thousand (40,000) square feet shall be a minimum of two hundred feet (200’) from a property line.
g. Provide waste management plan prepared by a registered professional engineer and/or other recognized professional acceptable to the Commission in the fields of poultry and waste management. Identify any processing of poultry products to be undertaken, waste management systems employed including any off-site operations, and anticipated schedules of disposal.
h. The facility will not cause pollution of air or water or generate other environmental or health hazards prohibited under federal, state or local laws; and that all pertinent federal, state and local regulations have been met.
116
i. Location of waste material storage and disposal facilities shall be a minimum of five hundred feet (500’) from property under separate ownership, and two hundred feet (200’) from a designated wetland/watercourse area.
18.22 Historic Country Inn: The conversion of a historic home listed on the Preston Historic Building listed in the Preston Historic Resource Inventory located within the Village Districts and as an Accessory Farm Business pursuant to Section 5.2.14 of these Regulations and provided:
a. No more than ten (10) guestrooms shall be provided.
b. One (1) parking space per room plus one (1) space per employee at the largest shift. Parking lots should be designed with landscaping, screened and located to the side or rear of the structure. In order to retain the historic character of the area, the Commission encourages alternatives to paving with bituminous concrete.
c. Parking lots shall be located so that they are no closer to the road than the front of the structure. In all situations, the parking lot shall be screened from the road using a variety of low growing shrubs as well as street trees. The plantings shall not interfere with sight line for the driveways. In areas where a parking lot abuts a property used for residential purposes or is zoned residentially, there shall be a landscape buffer strip with staggered evergreen trees and shrubs adequate to create a solid screen preventing view of such parking lot from the residential property.
d. Such Inns may serve breakfast, lunch and dinner and provide spa services to registered guests only.
e. Registered guests may stay no longer than three (3) weeks in a three-month period.
f. All exterior building renovations and site work should be consistent with the Secretary of Interior Standards for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings, as amended. At times there is a need to balance the financial expense of improvements with the reasonableness of historic rehabilitation. The Commission may allow for flexibility in design renovations to meet the spirit of the Secretary of Interiors Standards for Historic Rehabilitation as determined by the Commission.
g. Signage design shall be designed to complement the historic nature of the project.
18.23 Construction Company Storage Yard.
a. All such storage yards shall have adequate screening from public view and/or neighboring properties.
b. Only clean fill or materials are permitted.
c. Tanks or other construction debris shall be be cleaned of all hazardous materials prior to being stored on the site.
d. Location of all storage areas shall be identified on the site plan.
e. Adequate vehicular access shall be provided to the site and if the site is located on a town road, annual inspection of the road condition shall be conducted to ensure that heavy vehicles and or equipment do not deteriorate the condition of the road. A bond in the amount of ten thousand dollars ($10,000) shall be posted to address any road deterioration created by the use.
f. A renewal permit is required to the ZEO annually on May 1st to ensure compliance with the terms of the special exception and these Regulations.
117
18.24 Solar Farm.
A site plan is required in accordance with Section 19, and the provisions of Section 18.23 a-h of these Regulations shall be addressed, unless otherwise exempt from these Regulations based on the CGS with oversight by the Connecticut Siting Council. a. If the applicant is not the owner of the land, an executed copy of property lease between the owner of the land and the solar farm owner/applicant shall be provided to the Commission and shall be filed in the Preston land records.
b. The parcel shall be a minimum of five (5) acres.
c. All panels shall be a minimum distance to the property line equal to the building setback line.
d. There shall be adequate buffer and screening to adjacent properties. The Commission may require additional distance of the panels to the property line, and may require fencing, evergreens, and other techniques to ensure adequate screening of the project to the adjacent residentially used and or zoned properties.
e. The permit is transferable only after approved by the Commission and based on meeting the following: a copy of the new lease is provided to the Commission signed by the new solar farm owner, all bonding requirements are in place on behalf of the new solar farm owner, including the decommissioning bond and performance bond, as applicable.
f. The lot coverage including the panels and any buildings shall not exceed eighty (80) percent of the property.
g. A maintenance plan shall be provided outlining how the the project area will be maintained throughout the life of the project.
h. A decommissioning plan shall include:
1. Remove all equipment, conduits, structures, fencing, and foundations.
2. Remove all graveled areas and access roads and restore the land to a condition reasonably similar to its condition before solar farm development.
4. Loam or replacement of any topsoil and seed all cleared areas.
5. Phasing plan for decommissioning the solar farm.
6. A separate bond shall be provided that will cover the cost of the decommission plan. Such bond shall be updated annually using an inflation rate of two and one half percent (2.5%).
7. A notarized agreement from the owner of the land accepting responsibility and obligation to perform the decommissioning in the event of failure or default by the applicant and/or leasee. This notarized agreement shall be placed on the land records.
At the time of decommissioning, the applicant/leasee may amend the decommissioning plan with the approval of the Planning and Zoning Commission and the landowner.
h. A decommission plan shall be implemented as a result of the following:
1. The system does not produce power.
2. The system is damaged and will not be repaired or replaced.
3. A land lease ends.
SECTION 19 - SITE PLAN REQUIREMENTS
118
19.1 Contents. Eight (8) copies of a site plan shall be provided, prepared by the Land Surveyor and Professional Engineer, as applicable, licensed in the State of Connecticut at a scale of 1” = 40’ or at a scale acceptable to the Commission. The plans shall show adequate detail for all work being completed, and shall be on 36” x 24” sheets for distribution to the town staff. Said plans shall be required for all buildings and uses other than single-family detached dwellings, agricultural buildings (except for Specialized Agricultural Buildings as defined in Section 2 of these Regulations), additions, or minor accessory buildings on residential lots.
19.1.1 Drainage.
Where drainage features, regrading, or other major site improvements are proposed, the site plan shall be prepared and sealed by a professional engineer licensed in the State of Connecticut. Drainage plans depicting both existing and proposed conditions shall be provided at a scale of 1” = 40’ with at least 2-foot contours and spot elevations, as necessary. The plan shall provide features necessary to evaluate hydraulic runoff conditions including, but not limited to, roadways, buildings, driveways, property lines, vegetated areas, limits of trees, water bodies, watercourses, detention and retention basins, and drainage structures, roof drains. Comprehensive Stormwater Management Strategy for the site shall be prepared in accordance with the Connecticut Stormwater Quality Manual, as amended. Additional information may be required as directed by the town engineer.
The Commission shall encourage Low-Impact Development Techniques including the following:
a) Use of pervious surfaces in areas that are appropriate.
b) Direct roof drains away from impervious surfaces
c) Use rain gardens
d) Parking lots with depressed landscaped islands to accept stormwater
e) Allow runoff from parking areas to infiltrate through curb cut areas
19.1.2 Wetlands/Watercourses.
All plans shall have a certification from a soil scientist noted on the plan that states the following: “The site has been reviewed to determine whether or not wetlands or watercourses are located within the property boundaries and/or within one hundred feet of the development. I (soil scientist name) verify/certify, to the best of my abilities, that there are or are not wetlands or watercourses within the site. In addition, I have reviewed all available information including the most recent town GIS air photos and other available data and am of the opinion that there are or are not wetlands or watercourses on any adjacent site within one hundred feet of the site” Signature of the soil scientist.
If the site contains wetlands or watercourses, the plan shall show all flag locations outlining the wetlands/watercourses. Work/improvements within wetlands or watercourses or within one hundred feet (100’) of wetland or watercourse will require submission of an application to the Inland Wetlands Watercourses Commission prior to or on the same day of submission to the Planning and Zoning Commission in accordance with Section 8-3 (g) (1) of the CGS.
19.1.3 Plan Content and Ingredients. Such plans shall show the following:
119
a. Scale, north arrow, date of drawing or its revision, and name of person preparing the site plan.
b. Address of property and name of owner of record.
c. Property boundaries, dimensions and area, location of natural resources, large trees, stonewalls, ledge outcroppings, etc. Survey information including distances, angles and bearings. The survey shall conform with A-2 Requirements of the “Standards for Surveys and Maps on the State of Connecticut” unless otherwise acceptable to the Commission.
d. Locations and dimensions of any right-of-way, and purpose of said right-of-way.
e. Locations of any wetlands and watercourses boundaries and the name of the soil scientist mapping the wetlands and/or watercourses.
f. Location and dimensions, as applicable, of all existing and proposed buildings and uses, including, but not limited to, sidewalks, curbing, driveways, parking and loading areas, and abutting streets; poles, hydrants and other utility appurtenances; areas to be used for exterior storage and the type of screening to be provided.
g. Location and details for fire lanes and access around buildings for fire access, as necessary.
h. Dimensions of all yards, as required by these Regulations. Chart indicating “required” and “provided” information.
i. Traffic control, including signs, directional arrows.
j. All proposed driveways and driveways within one hundred feet (100’). Adequate sight distance for any driveway wall be provided and noted on the plan.
k. Lighting plan illustrating that lighting is adequate to address the needs of the patrons and employees. If the site is located adjacent to a residentially used property, lighting shall be shielded from said residential property.
l. Proposed phasing for the project.
m. Walkways serving pedestrians, including widths of walkways and materials to be used.
n. Key map showing streets and zoning districts within one thousand (1,000) feet.
o. Outside refuse and recycling collection and appropriate fencing and screening.
p. Parking locations including stall sizes and backup space. Such parking space shall be one hundred eighty (180) square feet – either 10’x18’ or 9’x20’. Back up space shall be a minimum of twenty-four feet (24’) or as deemed appropriate by the PZC.
120
q. Loading area(s).
r. Curb cuts with radii.
s. Buffer strips and areas specifying landscaping sizes.
t. Locations and descriptions of water supply and sewage disposal facilities.
u. Contour lines at intervals sufficiently clear to show natural drainage. If grading is proposed, the existing and proposed contours will be shown. Datum shall be noted.
v. Existing and proposed drainage structures or systems on the property and those off the property that may be affected by the proposed building or use. Draining shall be developed in accordance with the “The Connecticut Stormwater Manual, as amended and low impact development techniques.
w. Proposed landscaping, including the type, size and location of proposed plantings.
x. Location, type and size of any proposed signs installed in compliance with Section 21 “Signs”.
y. Front, side and rear elevations of all proposed buildings.
z. Architectural renderings or other information sufficiently detailed so the Commission may determine the exterior appearance of the proposed buildings. All such buildings shall be of a quality that meets the aesthetic character of the town.
aa. When the building, structure or use is located in the Coastal Area, the additional information prescribed in Section 17.3 of these Regulations shall also be required.
bb. Revision table indicating revision dates.
cc. Existing landmarks such as, rock outcrops, stonewalls and any dominant vegetation. Check CT DEEP Natural Diversity Data Base and if there is an area of concern, contact the CT DEEP. Provide a copy of the response letter.
dd. Materials and size of retaining walls and show all fencing being used for safety purposes as part of the retaining walls.
ee. Additional information that is deemed necessary by the Commission.
19.1.4 Erosion and Sediment (E&S Control Plan. Whenever plans for the proposed development show that it will result in the disturbance of more than one-half acre of land, the applicant will submit with the site plan an erosion and sediment control plan that presents, in a mapped and narrative form, the measure to be taken to control erosion and sedimentation during and after construction. The E&S
121
plan shall be based on “Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control”. Single-family residences that are not part of a subdivision are exempt from the E&S plan requirements.
19.1.4.1 The E&S Control Plan shall include the following:
a. A description of the project and a schedule of the major activities to be constructed on the land.
b. Locations of areas to be stripped of vegetation, and locations of all wetlands and watercourses.
c. Location of areas to be regraded and contour data indicating existing and proposed grades.
d. A schedule of operations, including the sequence of major improvement phases such as clearing, grading, paving installation of drainage features and the like.
e. Seeding, sodding, or revegetation plans and specifications for all unprotected or unvegetated areas.
f. Location, design and timing of structure control measures, such as diversions, waterways, grade stabilization structures, debris basins, and the like. The narrative shall indicate design criteria used in the design of control measures.
g. A description of procedures to be followed to maintain sediment control measures.
h. The plan map shall show the words: “Erosion and Sediment Control Plan Certified by vote of the Preston Planning and Zoning Commission on (date),” and a space for the signature of the Chairman or Secretary of the Commission.
19.1.4.2 After review of the E&S Control Plan by the Commission or its designee, the Commission shall vote to certify that the plan is in compliance with these Regulations. (A vote of the Commission to approve a site plan shall imply certification of the E&S plan as well.)
19.1.4.3 The Commission, through its members, agents, and consultants, shall periodically inspect construction projects for which site plans have been approved to verify that E&S controls are consistent with the certified plan.
19.2 Site Plan Changes. Modifications to an approved site plan shall be reviewed by the Town Planner and may require approval by the Commission. All modifications shall be submitted as part of the as-built plan at the completion of the project. Any modifications made without the Commission approval are made at the developer’s risk.
19.3 Waiver of Requirements. The Commission may waive one or more of the site plan ingredient requirements if the applicant can show, to the satisfaction of the Commission, that the information is not needed to reach a decision on the application. Such waiver shall require an affirmative vote of the Commission. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to buildings, structures, or uses located in the coastal area.
19.4 Preliminary Plan. A preliminary plan is not required but may be submitted at the applicant’s discretion for the purposes of informal discussion and clarification of the details of the site plan. A preliminary plan should contain all data required for a site plan, expressed in general terms, and clearly indicating the scope of the proposals. A preliminary plan has no official status and will receive neither approval nor disapproval by the Commission.
122
19.5 Design Standards. In an endeavor to ensure that structures and the uses of land are arranged in a manner that enhances the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the Town of Preston, the Commission, as appropriate, shall inspect and approve all site plans, special issue zoning permits or special exceptions. The Commission shall seek to determine that the proposed buildings or uses shall be of such character as to harmonize with the neighborhood, to accomplish a transition in character between areas of unlike character, to protect property values in the neighborhood, to preserve and protect natural resources and the appearance and beauty of the community and to avoid causing or further aggravating traffic hazards or congestion.
a. Parking areas shall have a permanent all-weather surface, properly curbed, and shall have an acceptable subsurface drainage system.
b. Entrance and exit driveways shall be paved and curbed to control runoff, and no such driveway shall be closer than forty feet (40’) to another driveway or to a distance determined by the Commission to be acceptable. All driveway widths shall be appropriate for the use as determined by the Commission. Driveways shall be no closer than fifty feet (50’) from an intersection.
c. Parking areas shall be separated from adjacent streets by a landscaped divider strip at least ten feet (10’) in width.
d. Applicants are encouraged to integrate parking and driveway facilities with such facilities on adjoining properties wherever possible.
e. Where a landscaped buffer strip is required, such strip shall consist of an interplanting of evergreen and deciduous trees and shrubs suitable, in the judgment of the Commission, to provide in a reasonable time a visual barrier between different land uses. Such buffer may be located on property under other ownership, provided such land is dedicated to use as a landscaped buffer, and so recorded in the Town Clerk’s office, provided further than maintenance of such buffer shall be the sole responsibility of the owner required to provide such a buffer. Where appropriate, in the judgment of the Commission, suitable walls, fencing, or other buffer may be used as part of the landscaped buffer requirements.
f. A planting plan, with plant list and sizes, shall be a part of the site plan. Proper maintenance of a landscaped buffer shall be a condition of compliance to these Regulations.
g. Existing topography shall be disturbed to a minimum. Trees, wherever possible, shall be preserved.
h. Storm and roof drainage shall be properly addressed so not to create on or off-site drainage concerns as determined by the town engineer.
i. Public improvements shall conform to the applicable section of the Subdivision Regulations of the Town of Preston.
123
j. Applicants should consider solar access in the layout of features on the site plan. Building locations and positioning should be such that buildings, topographic features, or trees on the same or adjoining lots do not shade south-facing walls. Buildings should not be located where they will deny solar access to the buildable area of any adjoining lot.
19.6 Bond. As a condition of site plan approval, a bond to cover the costs of site improvements, including driveways, parking areas, curbs, drainage features, erosion control measures, sidewalks, buffers, fencing, recreation facilities and any other site improvements other than buildings, as may be prescribed by the Commission, shall be required. The bond shall be posted in the amount approved by the town engineer of fifty percent (50%) of the total cost of the site work. The commission shall have the right to call the bond for erosion and sediment control or public safety hazards such as the installation of safety fencing. The bond shall be posted in a format acceptable to the Commission.
19.7 Time Limit for Action. The Commission shall take action on a site plan within sixty-five (65) days after receipt of such plan, except that the applicant may consent to one (1) or more extensions of such period, provided the total period of any such extension or extensions shall not exceed two (2) sixty-five (65) day periods, or may withdraw such plan.
19.8 Endorsement of Approval and Completion of Work. Approval of a site plan shall be endorsed by the Chairman, Vice Chairman, or Secretary of the Commission on a Mylar copy of the plan. Each plan shall contain the words “Approved by the Preston Planning and Zoning Commission” as appropriate. Each plan shall also include the words “Date of Completion of Work,” and a space for such date. All work in connection with a site plan shall be completed in accordance with Section 8-3(m) of the CGS or the approval, or the approval shall automatically expire. The Commission will have the right to use any posted bond to complete the required work. Work, for the purpose of this subsection, means all physical improvements required by the approved plan.
In the case of any site plan for a project consisting of four hundred (400) or more dwelling units, all work in connection with such site plan shall be completed within ten (10) years after the approval of the plan. In cases of any commercial, industrial or retail project that have an area equal to or greater than four hundred thousand (400,000) square feet, the Commission shall set the date for completion, but shall not be less than five (5) years and more than ten (10) years from the date of approval.
APPROVED BY THE PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
Site Plan #__________________________________
Description___________________________________________________________________________
Project Location _____________________________
__________________________________________
Owner ____________________________________
Applicant__________________________________
Approved by the Commission on this date
__________________________________________
__________________________________________ Signed Chairman/Secretarty
Expiration Date______________________________
The above noted approval box shall appear on each page of the site plan.
124
The commission may grant one (1) or more time extensions of time periods to complete the work, provided that such extensions do not cumulatively exceed ten (10) years.
“Work” for purposes of this section means all physical improvements required by the approved plan.
19.9 Filing the Site Plan. The Mylar plans shall be filed in the Planning and Zoning Office within ninety (90) days. The Commission may grant extensions to this period, but not to exceed ninety (90) days per extension request. After such time the plans are endorsed the Mylar copy of the site plan shall be filed by the applicant with the Town Clerk and a print shall be provided to the Commission for its files.
19.10 Exceptions from site plan application review: The above noted requirements for approval of a site plan by the Commission shall not apply to the following:
a. Minor enlargement of an existing structure or the construction of any accessory building that is subordinate and customarily incidental to a principal building use, provided:
i. No site work is completed or required except for incidental grading around the enlargement or accessory structure.
ii. Any enlargement or construction of any accessory building shall conform to all of the requirements of the zoning district in which the property is located.
iii. Such enlargement or construction of any accessory building shall not cumulatively exceed fifteen percent (15%) of the square footage of the building(s) or fifteen hundred (1500) square feet, whichever is less. The cumulative square footage shall be calculated from the time of the adoption of this amendment to the regulations (SEPTEMBER 20, 2000) or from the date of a site plan approved by the Commission after September 20, 2000.
b. Site work involving the creation of five (5) parking spaces or less and/or the installation of landscaping that involves less than one-half acre of land, provided no additional drainage is required or necessary, and that the installation of buffer strips are (is) not required.
c. Conversion of a use that does not require any site improvements except as noted in section b) above.
d. Public utility electrical boxes, telephone boxes, or traffic control boxes.
The Town Planner shall approve the exception from the site plan requirement. All approved exceptions shall be reported to the Commission on a monthly basis at its Regular Commission meeting. In the event there is any question or concern by the Town Planner regarding the exception, the matter shall be referred to the Commission for a determination.
SECTION 20 - PARKING REQUIREMENTS
125
20.1 General Requirements. Parking facilities shall be provided, off street or highway right-of-way, on all premises, sufficient to accommodate the motor vehicles of all occupants, employees, customers, and other persons normally visiting the premises at any one time, but in no case shall be less than the requirements of Section 20.2 below unless otherwise noted in Section 20.2.l of these Regulations.
The purpose of this Section is to lessen congestion in the streets and to assure that off-street parking and loading spaces are properly designed and located to accommodate the safe flow of traffic on public and private property.
a. Required parking lots and driveways shall have an adequate all-weather surface, capable of
allowing free and safe movement of all vehicles customarily using the facility.
b. Each parking space shall have one hundred eighty (180) square feet. Spaces may be either 10’ x 18’ or 9’x 18’; ten percent (10%) of the number of required parking spaces may be for compact cars and may be 9’ x 18’. Handicap spaces shall be provided in accordance with the Building Code.
c. Each maneuvering lane shall provide adequate ingress and egress by means of access lane or lanes, each access lane shall have a width of
twenty-four (24) feet for two-way traffic movement and twelve (12) feet for one way traffic movement. Other widths may be acceptable depending upon the angle of the parking space and in accordance with acceptable professional parking design standards.
d. Landscaping within a parking lot may be required by the Commission.
20.2 Spaces Required. Parking spaces shall be provided as follows:
a. For residential use, two (2) spaces per dwelling unit, except that the requirements shall be one (1) space per elderly housing unit. In the event a multi-family residential use is proposed, the Commission may require additional parking to accommodate visitor parking at a ratio the Commission deems necessary.
b. For roadside produce stands, three (3) spaces in addition to those required for any other use of the property.
c. For a theater, assembly hall, church, or auditorium having fixed seats, one (1) space for each three (3) seats.
d. For other places of public assembly and public recreation, one (1) space for each three (3) legal occupants.
e. For a hotel, or boarding, rooming or tourist house, one (1) parking space for every guest room, plus one (1) space for each employee on the largest shift.
10’
18’
24’
126
f. For a hospital or convalescent home, one (1) parking space for each two (2) beds, plus one (1) parking space for each employee on the largest shift
g. For business offices and financial institutions, one (1) space for each one hundred (100) square feet of building floor area, above the basement, excluding storage areas and stairs.
h. For a club, dance hall, one (1) space for every employee and one (1) additional space for every two (2) patron accommodations.
i. For any other business, one (1) space for each two hundred (200) square feet of floor area, and one (1) space for every four hundred (400) square feet of floor area or fraction thereof above the first floor, or as deemed acceptable to the Commission to ensure all parking is provided on-site.
j. For industries, warehouses, research laboratories and the like, one (1) space for every two (2) employees on the largest shift.
k. For Restaurant or Café, one (1) parking space for every three (3) seats plus one (1) space for each employee on the largest shift.
l. An applicant may provide the Commission with a parking study prepared by a professional traffic planner or engineer that certifies the parking required for any use proposed. The Commission may accept the recommendations of the parking report for the required number of parking spaces.
20. 3 Loading. Provision shall be made for the loading and unloading of all trucks off the street or highway and without encroachment on required parking areas. The adequacy of space and suitability of location shall be determined among other things by expected volume, building use, and relation to streets and across driveways.
a. At least one (1) loading space ten feet (10’) wide by fifty feet (50’) long with fourteen feet (14’) height of clearance shall be required for a non-residential building with a gross floor area of ten thousand (10,000) square feet or more.
b. Loading area shall be to the rear of the building line.
SECTION 21 – SIGNS
21.1 Permits and Tenure. All signs larger than thirty-two (32) square feet, except those shown on a site plan of a use approved by the Commission, shall require approval by the Zoning Enforcement Officer and shall meet all requirements of the Building Code and these Regulations. Applications for permits shall be made on forms supplied by the Zoning Enforcement Officer. Failure to maintain signs shall be considered a violation of these Regulations. Upon discontinuance of a use, it shall be the responsibility of the property owner to eliminate signs pertaining to the use within thirty (30) days after such discontinuance.
127
21.2 Measurement of Sign Area. The area of a sign shall be considered that of the smallest trapezium or triangle which encompasses all framing, lettering, design, or symbols together with any background different from the balance of the wall on which it may be located, if such background is designed as an integral part of and obviously related to the sign. The minimum support needed to affix a sign to the ground or to a building shall not be considered part of a sign as defined in these Regulations.
21.3 General Requirements. The following regulations apply to signs in all districts:
a. No sign or its illuminator shall, because of its size, shape or method of illumination, be permitted to confuse or obstruct the view or effectiveness of any traffic sign or signal or in any way result in a hazard to the safe and efficient flow of vehicular traffic.
b. No sign shall advertise a product, service or activity other than that which is produced, provided or conducted on the premises. Only one temporary advertising sign shall be permitted that does not exceed six (6) square feet and shall not remain on the premised for more than ten (10) days.
c. No sign shall be equipped with flashing lights or movable parts, except that time-temperature signs are permitted provided they meet the other requirements of these Regulations.
d. The light source of an illuminated sign shall be shaded so as not to be viewed from off the premises on residentially zoned or used properties.
e. No part of any sign shall project more than twenty-five feet (25’) above the ground surface.
f. Directory signs for civic, fraternal, religious, service or similar groups are permitted not exceeding two (2) square feet in area, providing no more than two (2) such signs are erected in the Town and a permit is obtained from the Zoning Enforcement Officer.
g. Temporary signs larger than or in addition to those permitted by these Regulations may be permitted for one (1) month, provided they meet the other requirements of these Regulations and a permit is obtained from the Zoning Enforcement Officer. An extension of time may be permitted on request for one additional month.
h. Off-site temporary advertising signs, including directional advertising signs are permitted provided they do not exceed six (6) square feet or are not displayed in one location within the town. However, there may be two (2) directional advertising signs. Such signs shall not remain in its location for more than thirty (30) days.
i. Nothing in these Regulations shall prohibit the State of Connecticut or the Town of Preston from erecting signs intended for the health, safety and welfare of the public.
128
j. Temporary political signs may be erected within thirty (30) days of an election provided a zoning permit is obtained from the ZEO. A list of sign locations shall be filed with zoning permit. All signs shall be removed within ten (10) days after such election.
21.4 Residential District Signs. The following signs are permitted in residential districts:
a. One (1) sign is permitted on each residential lot, not over two (2) square feet in area, showing the house number and name of the occupant. If a home occupation is conducted on the premises, the same sign may show the occupation of the resident or the service provided, provided the sign is not enlarged to more than four (4) square feet.
b. No more than two (2) temporary signs of a contractor, builder, painter, or other artisan or signs offering the premises for sale or lease, provided they shall not exceed four (4) square feet in size and be set back at least ten feet (10’) from any property line.
21.5 Non-Residential District Signs. Signs permitted in non-residential districts:
a. No sign shall be closer than ten feet (10’) from any road right-of way or property line.
b. No sign located within fifty feet (50’) of a road right-of-way shall be larger than thirty-two (32) square feet, although it may be double-faced.
c. No freestanding sign shall exceed one hundred (100) square feet in size.
d. A sign on a wall or canopy or attached to a building may exceed one hundred (100) square feet, provided the building is at least fifty feet (50’) from any road right-of-way, but in no case shall any sign exceed two hundred (200) square feet.
e. Each non-residential use or activity shall have no more than one (1) permanent sign, except that two (2) signs are permitted where the total combined area of the signs does not exceed the limits described in Sections 21.5.b, 21.5.c and 21.5.d above.
f. In any commercial or business complex or building containing two (2) or more activities, each individual use may have a sign, not exceeding twelve (12) square feet each, attached to or projecting from the building, provided that such signs do not project more than ten feet (10’) from the building and shall be at least eight feet (8’) above ground level. In addition, a commercial or business complex may have a directory sign no more than eight feet (8’) wide, consisting of one (1) sign of no more than two feet (2’) high identifying the complex and individual signs no more than one foot (1’) high identifying the individual activities.
129
SECTION 22 – NON-CONFORMING LOTS, BUILDINGS AND USES
22.1 Purpose. Within the districts established by these Regulations, there are lots, buildings and uses that do not conform to the building/structure, use and dimensional requirements of these Regulations and which are declared incompatible with the permitted uses in said districts. While such non-conformities are permitted to continue, it is the purpose of this section that such buildings and uses shall eventually be discontinued.
22.1.1 Definitions:
a. Non-conforming Building or Structure. A non-conforming building or structure is a building that does not comply with design criteria that may be noted in specific district regulations and/or does not comply with the dimensional requirements of Section 15 for one (1) or more of the following reasons: it does not meet the minimum floor area, it exceeds the building height, it exceeds the allowable square footage as permitted under lot coverage, or it extends over the building setback lines.
b. Non-conforming lot. A non-conforming lot is a lot that does not meet the dimensional requirements for lot area and frontage.
c. Non-conforming use. A non-conforming use is a use of land or structure that is incompatible with the permitted uses or special permitted uses noted for the specific zone in which the land or building is located.
22.2 Non-Conforming Uses of Buildings and Land. Any non-conforming uses, non-conforming lots, or non-conforming buildings lawfully existing at the time of the adoption of these Regulations or any amendments thereto, may be continued, subject to the provisions provided herein.
a. No such non-conforming use, lot, or building shall be lost solely as a result of non-use for any period of time without the intent of the property owner to abandon such non-conformity.
b. Any building containing a non-conforming use, any non-conforming building, or any building located on a non-conforming lot, where more than fifty percent (50%) of the square footage of the building space is destroyed by fire or natural disaster may be rebuilt or repaired after receiving approval of a zoning permit by the Zoning Enforcement Officer. The building must be rebuilt using exact dimensions, including cubical content, and in the exact location of the destroyed building. Such reconstruction shall begin within two (2) years of the date the building was destroyed, unless, due to unforeseen circumstances, an extension of this time period is granted by the Commission.
c. Nothing in these Regulations shall prevent required strengthening of the integrity of such structures, such as replacing roofs, windows, deteriorated beams and columns, siding or similar. Any such non-conformity that is intentionally destroyed by the owner or someone acting on his/her behalf shall not be permitted to rebuild or reuse.
d. The Zoning Enforcement Officer may allow the expansion of a non-conforming building as a conforming use if said building expansion meets the building setback dimensional requirements listed in Section 15 of these Regulations and provided the Public Health Code and Building Code are met for the redevelopment of the lot.
22.2.1 Non-conforming Uses.
130
a. No non-conforming use may be changed except to a conforming use, or with the approval of the Zoning Board of Appeals, to another non-conforming use of a less objectionable character.
b. No non-conforming use shall, if once changed into a conforming use, be changed back to a non-conforming use.
c. No non-conforming use, and no building containing a non-conforming use, shall be extended or expanded.
d. Structural alterations, such as remodeling, (excluding the provisions as noted above regarding building strengthening), which do not materially alter the characteristics or exterior appearance of a building containing a non-conforming use, may be made providing the total costs of such alterations do not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the assessed valuation of such, unless the use thereof be changed to a conforming use or location, or otherwise noted in Sections 9.1.19, 10.3.7, and 11.3.8 of these Regulations.
e. Any non-conforming use that has been abandoned for one (1) year or more, shall not be resumed.
22.2.2 Non-conforming Lots.
a. Non-conforming contiguous lots shall be deemed to have merged if:
i. They are owned by the same person at the time of adoption of these Regulations or at the time the regulations were changed to make them non-conforming;
ii. And, one or more lots are undeveloped;
iii. And, one or more lots do not conform to the dimensional requirements of these Regulations;
iv. And, if taken together, the combined lot would meet or more nearly meet the requirements of the Zoning Regulations.
b. Nothing in these Regulations shall prevent the construction of a permitted building or the establishment of a permitted use on a lot which at the time of the adoption of these Regulations was owned separately from an adjoining lot as evidenced by a deed recorded in the land records of the Town of Preston; however, such building or use shall comply with all applicable building setback lines noted in Section 15 of these Regulations and health code, and sanitation requirements.
c. In the event a building is removed, it may be replaced provided the building meets the building set back lines noted in Section 15 of these Regulations and health code, and sanitation requirements.
22.2.3 Non-conforming Buildings. The following provisions apply to non-conforming buildings:
a) Where a part of a non-conforming building extends into a required yard, any addition shall meet the required setback lines or be at the same non-conforming distance in the same yard as the non-conformity.
Nothing in this section requires any changes in the plans, construction, or designated use of a building for which a building permit in accordance with existing regulations has been issued prior to the adoption of these Regulations.
SECTION 23 - ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
131
23.1 Power and Duties. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the powers and duties prescribed in Section 8-6 of the CGS.
a. Any person may apply to the Zoning Board of Appeals for a variance of these Regulations with respect to a parcel of land where, owing to conditions especially affecting such parcel but not affecting generally the district in which it is situated, a literal enforcement of these Regulations would result in exceptional difficulty or unusual hardship.
b. No variance shall be granted that would result in the establishment of a commercial or industrial use in a residential district, except as may be permitted by these Regulations.
c. No variance shall be effective until it is filed by the applicant with the Town Clerk in the land records, as prescribed in Section 8-3d of the General Statutes.
d. Any person claiming to be aggrieved by any order, requirement or decision made by the Zoning Enforcement Officer may appeal to the Zoning Board of Appeals.
23.2 Procedures. All appeals and applications for variances made to the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be in writing on forms obtainable from the Zoning Enforcement Officer.
a. The Board shall hold a public hearing on all applications and appeals as prescribed by the General Statutes.
b. All applications and appeals shall be accompanied by a fee as noted in Section 3.17 of these Regulations
c. An appeal must be filed with the Board within thirty (30) days after the date of the action being appealed.
132
SECTION 24 - PENALTIES
24.1 Procedure when regulations are violated. If any building or structure has been erected, constructed, altered, converted or maintained, or any building, structure or land has been used, in violation of any provision of these regulations made under authority conferred hereby, any official having jurisdiction, in addition to other remedies, may institute an action or proceeding to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, alteration, conversion, maintenance or use or to restrain, correct or abate such violation or to prevent the occupancy of such building, structure or land or to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about such premises. Such regulations shall be enforced by the Zoning Enforcement Officer, Commission or Zoning Board of Appeals, who shall be authorized to cause any building, structure, place or premises to be inspected and examined and to order in writing the remedying of any condition found to exist therein or thereon in violation of any provision of the regulations made under authority of the provisions of this chapter or, when the violation involves grading of land, the removal of earth or soil erosion and sediment control, to issue, in writing, a cease and desist order to be effective immediately. The owner or agent of any building or premises where a violation of any provision of such regulations has been committed or exists, or the lessee or tenant of an entire building or entire premises where such violation has been committed or exists, or the owner, agent, lessee or tenant of any part of the building or premises in which such violation has been committed or exists, or the agent, architect, builder, contractor or any other person who commits, takes part or assists in any such violation or who maintains any building or premises in which any such violation exists, shall be fined not less than ten (10) dollars or more than one hundred dollars (100) for each day that such violation continues; but, if the offense is willful, the person convicted thereof shall be fined/convicted in accordance with Section 8-12 of the CGS. Any person who, having been served with an order to discontinue any such violation, fails to comply with such order within ten (10) days after such service, or having been served with a cease and desist order with respect to a violation involving grading of land, removal of earth or soil erosion and sediment control, fails to comply with such order immediately, or continues to violate any provision of the regulations made under authority of these regulations specified in such order shall be subject to a civil penalty in accordance with Section 8-12 of the CGS
SECTION 25 - VALIDITY AND EFFECTIVE DATE
25.1 Validity. If any section or provision of these Regulations shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, the same shall not invalidate these Regulations as a whole or any part thereof other than the section so adjudged.
25.2 Effective Date. These Regulations were first adopted on April 9, 1964, and became effective on April 13, 1964, and were subsequently revised and amended. These amended Regulations shall take effect on March 18, 2018.

Town of Preston, Connecticut
Subdivision Regulations
Revised to August 28, 2012; Effective September 22, 2012
Town of Preston, Connecticut
Subdivision Regulations
Revised to August 28, 2012; Effective September 22, 2012
This page left blank intentionally
Town of Preston, Connecticut
Subdivision Regulations
Revised to August 28, 2012; Effective September 22, 2012
Table of Contents
SECTION 1: TITLE, PURPOSE, AND AUTHORITY ............................................................................................. 1
1.1. Title. .............................................................................................................................................. 1
1.2 Purpose. ........................................................................................................................................ 1
1.3 Application of Regulations and Authority ..................................................................................... 1
SECTION 2: DEFINATIONS ............................................................................................................................. 1
2.1 Subdivision .................................................................................................................................... 1
2.2 Resubdivision ................................................................................................................................ 1
2.3 Commission ................................................................................................................................... 2
2.4 Applicant ....................................................................................................................................... 2
2.5 Street ............................................................................................................................................. 2
2.6 Cul-de-sac ...................................................................................................................................... 2
2.7 Easement ...................................................................................................................................... 3
2.8 Lot. ................................................................................................................................................ 3
2.9 Property Line Adjustment. ............................................................................................................ 3
2.10 Boundary survey. .......................................................................................................................... 3
2.11 Disturbed area. ............................................................................................................................. 3
2.12 Enforcement Officer...................................................................................................................... 3
2.13 Erosion. ......................................................................................................................................... 3
2.14 Flood Hazard Areas. ...................................................................................................................... 3
2.15 Grading. ......................................................................................................................................... 3
2.16 Improvements. .............................................................................................................................. 4
2.17 Intermittent Watercourse. ............................................................................................................ 4
2.18 Map, location. ............................................................................................................................... 4
2.19 Plan, topographic and development. ............................................................................................ 4
2.20 Owner............................................................................................................................................ 4
2.21 Plan of Conservation and Development. ...................................................................................... 4
2.22 Plan, final. ...................................................................................................................................... 4
2.23 Plan, plot. ...................................................................................................................................... 4
2.24 Plan, grading. ................................................................................................................................ 4
2.25 Revision of subdivision. ................................................................................................................. 4
Town of Preston, Connecticut
Subdivision Regulations
Revised to August 28, 2012; Effective September 22, 2012
2.26 Right-of-way. ................................................................................................................................. 4
2.27 Roadway. ....................................................................................................................................... 4
2.28 Sediment. ...................................................................................................................................... 4
2.29 Soil. ................................................................................................................................................ 4
2.30 Soil erosion and sediment control plan. ....................................................................................... 5
2.31 Steep sloping topography ............................................................................................................. 5
2.32 Subdivider. .................................................................................................................................... 5
2.33 Travel path. ................................................................................................................................... 5
2.34 Watercourses. ............................................................................................................................... 5
2.35 Wetlands. ...................................................................................................................................... 5
2.36 Zoning Regulations. ....................................................................................................................... 5
SECTION 3: PROCEDURES .............................................................................................................................. 5
3.1 Application Submission. ................................................................................................................ 5
3.2 Fee. ................................................................................................................................................ 6
3.3 Hearing. ......................................................................................................................................... 7
3.4 Regional Planning Agency Referral. .............................................................................................. 7
3.5 Wetlands Referral. ........................................................................................................................ 7
3.6 Adjoining Municipality Referral. ................................................................................................... 8
3.7 Action by the Commission. ........................................................................................................... 8
3.10 Filing the Plan. ............................................................................................................................... 9
3.11 Time Limit on Completion. .......................................................................................................... 10
3.12 Conditional Approval. ................................................................................................................. 10
SECTION 4: OPTIONAL PRE-APPLICATION SKETCH PLAN ............................................................................ 11
4.1 Purpose. .................................................................................................................................. 11
SECTION 5: REQUIRED SUBDIVISION PLAN CONTENTS .............................................................................. 12
5.1 General Requirements ............................................................................................................ 12
5.2 Key Map .................................................................................................................................. 12
5.2A Summary Map ......................................................................................................................... 13
5.3 Boundary Survey Map ............................................................................................................. 13
5.4 Construction Plan .................................................................................................................... 14
5.5 Erosion and Sediment (E&S) Control Plan .............................................................................. 15
5.6 Utilities Report ........................................................................................................................ 16
5.7 Other Supporting Documents ................................................................................................. 16
5.8 Coastal Area ............................................................................................................................ 17
5.9 Coastal Site Plan ...................................................................................................................... 17
Town of Preston, Connecticut
Subdivision Regulations
Revised to August 28, 2012; Effective September 22, 2012
SECTION 6: SUBDIVISION DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS ................................................................................. 18
6.1 Lots. ......................................................................................................................................... 18
6.2 Rear Lots.................................................................................................................................. 18
6.3 Streets. .................................................................................................................................... 19
6.4 Trees ........................................................................................................................................ 22
6.5 Drainage .................................................................................................................................. 23
6.6 Sidewalks ................................................................................................................................. 24
6.7 Street Signs ............................................................................................................................. 25
6.8 Open Space, Parks, and Playgrounds ...................................................................................... 25
6.9 Fee in Lieu of Land for Open Spaces, Parks and Playgrounds ................................................. 26
6.10 Exemptions from Open Spaces and Recreation Land Requirements ..................................... 26
6.11 Flooding Considerations.......................................................................................................... 26
6.12 Coastal Area Considerations ................................................................................................... 27
6.13 Flood Elevations ...................................................................................................................... 27
6.14 Floodway Encroachment......................................................................................................... 27
6.15 Utility Lines .............................................................................................................................. 28
6.16 Driveways. ............................................................................................................................... 28
6.17 Special Structures .................................................................................................................... 28
SECTION 7: IMPROVEMENT SPECIFICATIONS ............................................................................................. 28
7.1 Monuments ............................................................................................................................. 28
7.2 Streets ..................................................................................................................................... 29
7.3 Street Trees ............................................................................................................................. 29
7.4 Drainage .................................................................................................................................. 29
7.5 Sidewalks ................................................................................................................................. 29
7.6 Street Signs ............................................................................................................................. 29
7.7 Public Water Supplies ............................................................................................................. 29
7.8 Clean-up .................................................................................................................................. 30
7.9 General Construction Procedures ........................................................................................... 30
SECTION 8: WAIVERS .................................................................................................................................. 31
8.1 Waivers ................................................................................................................................... 31
8.2 Reasons for Actions on Waivers.............................................................................................. 32
SECTION 9: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES ................................................................................................... 32
SECTION 10: SEPARABILITY ......................................................................................................................... 32
SECTION 11: AMENDMENTS ....................................................................................................................... 33
SECTION 12: EFFECTIVE DATE ..................................................................................................................... 33
Town of Preston, Connecticut
Subdivision Regulations
Revised to August 28, 2012; Effective September 22, 2012
SUBDIVISION / RESUBDIVISION PROCEDURE ................................................................................................ i
SUBDIVISION/RESUBDIVISION APPLICATION............................................................................................... iv
OPEN SPACE POLICY ................................................................................................................................... viii
SUBDIVISION/RESUBDIVISION CHECKLIST ................................................................................................... ix
SAMPLE NOTICE OF INTENT TO SUBDIVIDE ................................................................................................ xv
COASTAL RESOURCES................................................................................................................................. xvii
SAMPLE SIGNATURE BLOCK ........................................................................................................................ xix
STREET TREES, CONCRETE STREET NAME POST ......................................................................................... xxi
SAMPLE BOND FORMS ............................................................................................................................... xxv
Town of Preston, Connecticut
Subdivision Regulations
Revised to August 28, 2012; Effective September 22, 2012
ZTA #1-12 – Grammatical Amendments (App. 08/24/12; Eff. 09/22/12)
Town of Preston, Connecticut
Subdivision Regulations
Revised to August 28, 2012; Effective September 22, 2012
This page left blank intentionally
Town of Preston, Connecticut
Subdivision Regulations
Revised to August 28, 2012; Effective September 22, 2012
1
SECTION 1: TITLE, PURPOSE, AND AUTHORITY
1.1. Title. This document contains regulations covering the subdivision of land in the Town of Preston, Connecticut, which shall be known as the “Subdivision Regulations, Town of Preston, Connecticut,” and which are referred to herein as “these Regulations.”
1.2 Purpose. The purpose of these Regulations is to promote and to ensure the orderly development of land within the Town so that the land to be subdivided shall be of such character that it can be used for building purposes without danger to health and safety; so that proper provisions shall be made for water supply, surface drainage, and sewage disposal; so that proposed streets shall be in harmony with existing or officially proposed major Town roads and so arranged and constructed so as to provide an adequate and convenient system for the present and prospective traffic needs; so that open spaces for parks and playgrounds shall be provided in locations deemed proper by the Commission; and, in general, to protect the health, safety, convenience and welfare of the inhabitants of the Town of Preston.
1.3 Application of Regulations and Authority. These Regulations shall apply to any owner or agent of the owner of any land within the Town of Preston who subsequent to the effective date of these Regulations proposes to effect a subdivision or resubdivision of land, as herein defined. These Regulations are adopted by the Planning and Zoning Commission of the Town of Preston pursuant to the authority conferred by Chapter 126, Connecticut General Statutes.
SECTION 2: DEFINATIONS
This section defines a number of important words and terms used in these Regulations. Any term defined in the Preston Zoning Regulations and used in these Regulations shall have the same definition. The singular number shall include the plural and the plural the singular. Undefined words shall have commonly accepted meanings.
2.1 Subdivision. The division of a tract or parcel of land into three (3) or more parts or lots made subsequent to the adoption of subdivision regulations by the Commission, for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or building development, expressly excluding development for municipal, conservation or agricultural purposes, and includes resubdivision.
2.2 Resubdivision. A change in a map of an approved or recorded subdivision, or resubdivision, if such change (a) affects any street layout shown on such map, or (b)
Town of Preston, Connecticut
Subdivision Regulations
Revised to August 28, 2012; Effective September 22, 2012
2
affects any area reserved thereon for public use, or (c) diminishes the size of any lot shown thereon and creates an additional building lot, if any of the lots shown thereon have been conveyed after the approval or recording of such map.
2.3 Commission. The Planning and Zoning Commission of the Town of Preston, Connecticut.
2.4 Applicant. The owner(s) of the land to be subdivided or an agent, who acts for the owner, provided written evidence of such fact is submitted to the Commission.
2.5 Street. (Rev. 11/14/00; Eff. 12/07/00) (Rev. 05/06/03; Eff. 05/23/03)
i. Any improved right-of-way dedicated for public use, accepted for public use by Town Meeting, and maintained by the Town of Preston for automobile travel; or,
ii. Any proposed street shown on the subdivision plan under consideration; or on one previously approved by the Commission; or,
iii. State of Connecticut Routes 2, 2A, 12, 117, 164, 165 and 605 (Old Shetucket Turnpike).
Streets are further classified when proposed in part of a subdivision as one of the five categories – “Light residential, Residential, Collector, Commercial/Industrial, and Expandable”, and have the following functions:
a. Light residential streets. These streets are relatively short, service less than thirty (30) home sites, and are dead end cul-de-sacs.
b. Residential streets. These streets generally have more activity than light residential streets, and have between thirty (30) homes and one hundred fifty (150) home sites.
c. Collector streets. These streets receive all of the traffic from the residential neighborhoods and convey it to the major street system (State of Connecticut highway system).
d. Commercial/Industrial (or arterial) streets. These streets have or can accommodate heavy commercial and industrial traffic and are designed to handle the weight and size of commercial or industrial vehicles.
e. Expandable subdivision streets. The expandable street is not an actual classification of street but a situation, which arises often as subdivisions are developed throughout the State. If the probability exists that a dead end street will be opened to future development, then it should be designed to accommodate the future traffic. For example, if a light residential street has twenty (20) homes but another one hundred (100) units are planned in future phases or the potential exists for future development; then the street falls under the residential street classification.
2.6 Cul-de-sac. A residential street that terminates in a circular turn-around.
Town of Preston, Connecticut
Subdivision Regulations
Revised to August 28, 2012; Effective September 22, 2012
3
2.7 Easement. (Rev. 11/14/00; Eff. 12/07/00) The authorization by a property owner or his authorized agent (grantor) granting the use of a strip of land to a grantee for limited and specific purposes.
2.8 Lot. A plot or parcel of land occupied or capable of being occupied by one principal building and the accessory buildings customarily incidental to it.
2.9 Property Line Adjustment. (Rev. 11/14/00; Eff. 12/07/00) A change in the location of an existing property line in a manner that does not create any of the following: (a) an additional building lot; (b) a condition that violates any of the dimensional requirements outlines in Section 12 of the Preston Zoning Regulations; (c) increase any existing nonconformities of the dimensional requirements outlined in Section 12 of the Preston Zoning Regulations; (d) change or reduce land dedicated as approved open space pursuant to Section 6.8 of these Regulations. Such property line adjustment is not considered a subdivision or resubdivision, and, therefore does not require approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission, but does require approval by the Zoning Enforcement Officer to determine compliance with the Zoning Regulations. The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall require review by the Town Sanitarian, and if the adjustment changes a parcel to be unbuildable based on the State of Connecticut Public Health Code, the Zoning Enforcement Officer shall deny the proposed adjustment.
2.10 Boundary survey. A map showing the legal property lines of a lot, parcel or tract based on the State Plane Coordinate System, where available, and prepared to A-2 and/or Class D standards and certified by a land surveyor registered in the State of Connecticut.
2.11 Disturbed area. An area where the ground cover is destroyed or removed leaving the land subject to accelerated erosion.
2.12 Enforcement Officer. For the purposes of these Regulations shall be the Zoning Enforcement Officer.
2.13 Erosion. The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by water, wind, ice or gravity.
2.14 Flood Hazard Areas. Any area of special flood hazard within the Town of Preston designated as Zone A or Zones A1-30 on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), as amended, which map is part of the Zoning Regulations.
2.15 Grading. The excavating, grubbing, filling (including hydraulic filling) or stockpiling of earth materials or any combination thereof, including the land in its excavated or filled condition.
Town of Preston, Connecticut
Subdivision Regulations
Revised to August 28, 2012; Effective September 22, 2012
4
2.16 Improvements. Grading, roads, bridges, curbs, gutters, sewers, culverts, manholes, appurtenances, monuments, and other similar buildings or structures as required by these Regulations.
2.17 Intermittent Watercourse. A watercourse as defined in Section 22a-38 (16) of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
2.18 Map, location. A map showing the existing and proposed zoning districts and streets within a one-half (½) mile of the proposed subdivision.
2.19 Plan, topographic and development. A map showing existing man-made and natural features and contours of a lot, tract or parcel.
2.20 Owner. The owner of record of a parcel of land as filed in the office of the Town Clerk.
2.21 Plan of Conservation and Development. The adopted plan of conservation and development and all accompanying charts and descriptive matter.
2.22 Plan, final. A complete and exact subdivision plan including all the required documents prepared for approval and endorsement by the Commission and for official recording with the Town Clerk.
2.23 Plan, plot. A map showing the overall street and lot layout of a subdivision.
2.24 Plan, grading. A map showing the existing and proposed elevations and contours of the land and specified improvements.
2.25 Revision of subdivision. A minor change in size of lot or property lines inside a subdivision provided no street or area reserved for public use is affected and Section 2.9 are met. The Commission shall be notified by the Zoning Enforcement Officer of all such changes for purposes of maintaining its records.
2.26 Right-of-way. The lines defining the limits of land dedicated, secured, or reserved for public use.
2.27 Roadway. That portion of a right-of-way included within the construction limits of the improvements, including the travel path plus the shoulders, curbs and gutters.
2.28 Sediment. The solid material, either mineral or organic material, that is in suspension, is transported, or has been moved from its site or any origin.
2.29 Soil. Any unconsolidated material or organic material of any origin.
Town of Preston, Connecticut
Subdivision Regulations
Revised to August 28, 2012; Effective September 22, 2012
5
2.30 Soil erosion and sediment control plan. A scheme that minimizes soil erosion and sedimentation resulting from development and includes, but is not limited to, a map and narrative.
2.31 Steep sloping topography. A slope of fifteen percent (15%) or more in any direction on the lot.
2.32 Subdivider. Any person, firm, corporation, partnership, association, or other group, who is the owner or acting agent for the owner in securing the approved subdivision or resubdivision of land. The subdivider shall include any of the above to whom the subdivision is transferred prior to the total completion of subdivision improvements.
2.33 Travel path. That portion of the roadway especially prepared for the use of vehicular traffic, excluding paved shoulders, curbs and gutters.
2.34 Watercourses. A watercourse as defined in Section 22a-38 (16) of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
2.35 Wetlands. A wetland is defined in Section 22a-38 (16) of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
2.36 Zoning Regulations. The adopted regulations of the Town of Preston, as amended.
SECTION 3: PROCEDURES
3.1 Application Submission. Any person intending to subdivide land in the Town of Preston shall submit an application as prescribed herein to the Chairman of the Commission or the Zoning Enforcement Officer at least ten (10) days before a regularly scheduled meeting of the Commission at which the application will be considered. If this time requirement is not met, the application will be considered at the following regular meeting of the Commission. Ten (10) copies of the plan shall be submitted, along with the completed application form and the required fee. Application forms are available from the Planning and Zoning Office. (Rev. 01/04/05; Eff. 01/27/05)
3.1.1 The day of receipt of an application shall be the day of the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Commission immediately following the day of submission to the Commission or the Zoning Enforcement Officer of such application or thirty-five (35) days after such submission, whichever is sooner.
3.1.2 The applicant is responsible for submitting a copy of the subdivision plan to (a) the Town Sanitarian in accordance with the Ordinance Regulating Private Sewage Disposal Facilities; and (b) the Southeastern Connecticut Water
Town of Preston, Connecticut
Subdivision Regulations
Revised to August 28, 2012; Effective September 22, 2012
6
Authority when it is the intention of the applicant to develop a well water supply on the basis of studies which indicate a maximum requirement in excess of fifty (50) gallons per minute, or when the tract to be subdivided contains fifty (50) acres or more and is intended to contain two (2) or more dwelling units to be served by a single water supply. The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall distribute copies of the plan to the First Selectman and the Town Planner.
3.1.3 (Rev. 03/01/86) For any subdivision or resubdivision, the applicant shall, prior to or at any public hearing on an application, or, if no hearing is held, prior to the Commission’s action on an application, provide the Commission with evidence, in the form of mail receipts and a copy of notice, that owners of property abutting and directly across any road from any new building lots in the proposed subdivision or resubdivision have been notified of the applicant’s intent to subdivide, as indicated by postal receipts dated at least ten (10) days prior to the scheduled hearing or action by the Commission. (A sample form for the notice is provided in the Appendix to these Regulations.)
3.2 Fee. All applications shall be submitted with check or money order made payable to the Treasurer, Town of Preston, in accordance with the following:
3.2.1 The fee for all subdivisions shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per lot, or fifty dollars ($50.00), whichever is greater. (02/15/88) Plus one hundred dollars ($100.00) for subdivisions containing five (5) lots or more to cover the public hearing fee. (Rev. 01/04/05; Eff. 01/27/05)
3.2.2 In the case of a resubdivision, the fee shall be based on the number of new lots created and on Subsection 3.2.1, above. Plus one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the public hearing fee. (Rev. 01/04/05; Eff. 01/27/05)
3.2.3 In addition to the filing fee specified in Section 3.2.1 or 3.2.2 above, the following fees shall be paid at the time of submission of the application to cover the town’s engineering and any other professional fees:
a) An additional fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00) per lot shall be charged for any lots that do not have public improvements. This fee is to cover charges for professional services such as the town engineer. Any balance remaining of this fee will be returned to the applicant after the final approval has been granted for the subdivision.
b) An additional fee shall be paid to the town for subdivision containing public improvements, equal to three percent (3%) of
Town of Preston, Connecticut
Subdivision Regulations
Revised to August 28, 2012; Effective September 22, 2012
7
the estimated cost of public improvements based on the cost estimate prepared by the applicant’s engineer for all public improvements. Public improvements includes, but is not limited o the construction of new roads, storm drainage, water, sewer and other utility lines, planting of trees or other landscaping, the installation of retaining walls or other structures and erosion and sediment controls. Such cost estimate will be forwarded to the town engineer for review and approval. If the cost estimate is increased by the town engineer, the applicant shall pay the additional fee prior to the Commission considering the application. Any balance remaining of this fee will be returned to the applicant after completion of all required work. This fee is to cover the cost of professional services such as the town engineer for the technical review of the plans and inspection of public improvements. (Rev. 01/04/05; Eff. 01/27/05)
3.3 Hearing. The Commission may hold a public hearing regarding any subdivision proposal within sixty-five (65) days after receipt thereof, if, in its judgment, the specific circumstances require such action. The Commission shall conduct a public hearing for subdivisions containing five (5) lots or more, and for all resubdivision applications. Notice of a hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town at least twice at intervals of not less than two (2) days, the first not more than fifteen (15) days, nor less than ten (10) days, and the last not less than two (20 days prior to the date of the hearing. The hearing shall be completed within thirty-five (35) days after it commences. (Rev. 01/04/05; Eff. 01/27/05)
3.4 Regional Planning Agency Referral. Whenever a subdivision of land is planned, the area of which will abut or include land in another municipality, the Commission shall, before approving the plan, submit it to the Southeastern Connecticut Regional Planning Agency. The Regional Planning Agency shall, within thirty (30) days, report to the Commission and to the applicant its findings on the intermunicipal aspects of the proposed subdivision. If such report is not submitted within thirty (30) days after the referral from the Commission, it shall be presumed that the Agency does not disapprove of the proposed subdivision. The Regional Planning Agency’s report shall be purely advisory.
3.5 Wetlands Referral. If an application involves land regulated as an inland wetland under the provisions of Chapter 440 of the Connecticut General Statutes, the applicant shall submit an application to the Preston Inland Wetlands & Watercourses Commission (IWWC) no later than the day the application is filed for the subdivision. The Commission shall not render a
Town of Preston, Connecticut
Subdivision Regulations
Revised to August 28, 2012; Effective September 22, 2012
8
decision until the Wetlands Commission has submitted a report with its final decision to the Commission. In making its decision, the Commission shall give due consideration to the report of the IWWC. If the time for a decision after a decision by the Commission would elapse prior to the thirty-fifth (35th) day after a decision by the IWWC. The provisions of this subsection shall not be construed to apply to any extension consented to by the applicant. (08/15/88)
3.6 Adjoining Municipality Referral. The Commission shall notify the clerk of the adjoining municipality of the pendency of any subdivision application on any site when: (1) any part of the property affected by the Commission’s decision is within five hundred feet (500’) of the adjoining municipality; (2) a significant portion of the traffic to the completed project will use streets within the adjoining municipality to enter or exit the side; (3) a significant portion of the sewer or water drainage from the project on the site will flow through and significantly impact the drainage or sewer system within the adjoining municipality; or (4) water runoff from the improved site will impact streets or other municipal or private property within the adjoining municipality. Such notice shall be made by registered mail and shall be mailed within seven (7) days of the date of receipt of the application or site plan and no hearing shall be held on the application or site plan until after the adjoining municipality has received such notice. A representative from the adjoining municipality may appear and be heard at any hearing on any such application of site plan. (08/15/88)
3.7 Action by the Commission. The Commission shall vote to approve, modify and approve, or disapprove any subdivision application or maps and plans submitted therewith within sixty-five (65) days after the public hearing thereon, if no public hearing is held, with sixty-five (65) days after the receipt thereof. Notice of the decision of the Commission shall be published in a newspaper having a substantial circulation in the town and addressed by certified mail to the applicant by its secretary or clerk, under his signature within fifteen (15) days after such decision has been rendered. The failure of the Commission to act thereon shall be considered as an approval, and a certificate to that effect shall be issued by the Commission on demand. The applicant may consent to one or more extensions of any period specified in the subsection, provided the total extension of any such period shall not be longer than the original period as specified in this subsection. The grounds for the action of the Commission shall be stated in the records of the Commission.
3.8 Posting of Bonds. Prior to endorsement of the plan, the Commission shall accept from the applicant a performance bond from a bonding company licensed to conduct business in Connecticut, or other surety with conditions satisfactory to the Commission securing to the Town of Preston the actual construction and
Town of Preston, Connecticut
Subdivision Regulations
Revised to August 28, 2012; Effective September 22, 2012
9
installation of all improvements as required by these Regulations, including the construction of streets, drainage features, street signs, the installation of monuments and markers, the grading and improvement of recreation facilities, clean up of the premises and measures to be taken to control soil erosion and sedimentation likely to occur from the proposed subdivision. The amount of the bond shall be estimated by the applicant who shall provide the Commission with the basis for the estimate. The Commission shall review the estimate with the First Selectman prior to approving the amount of the bond.
3.8.1 The bond shall be accepted by the Commission and deposited with the Town Treasurer until its release is voted by the Commission. The bond shall not be released until improvements have been completed, until as-built plans are submitted to the Commission, and, where new streets are involved, until such streets are certified completed by the First Selectman. Before release of the performance bond, a maintenance bond shall be submitted which shall be in an amount equal to ten percent (10%) of the performance bond of twenty-five thousand ($2,500), whichever amount is greater, and which shall be retained by the Town for one year. The purpose of the maintenance bond is to guarantee correction of any construction failures related to the subdivision.
3.9 Endorsement of the Plan. (11/13/85) If the Commission votes to approve a plan or modify and approve the plan, its approval with the date thereof, shall be endorsed and signed by the Chairman or Secretary of the Commission in the space provided for such purpose on each sheet of a Mylar copy of the plan provided by the applicant within thirty-five (35) days after the approval date, except that an extension of such time may be approved by vote of the Commission. In addition to the above, the applicant shall provide five (5) paper copies of the endorsed plan.
3.9.1 The Commission or Secretary of the Commission shall, when endorsing the plan, indicate on the plan the date of endorsement and the date by which all improvements shown on the plan shall be completed, as required in Section 3.11, below. The plan shall be delivered to the applicant for filing promptly after the fifteen (15) day appeal period, which period commences on the date of publication of the Commission’s action to approve the plan.
3.10 Filing the Plan. The endorsed Mylar copy of the plan shall be filed by the applicant in the office of the Preston Town Clerk and any plan not so filed within ninety (90) days of the date such plan is delivered to the applicant or within ninety (90) days of the date upon which the plan is taken as approved by reason of the failure of the Commission to act, shall become null and void, except that upon request by the applicant, the Commission may extend the time for such
Town of Preston, Connecticut
Subdivision Regulations
Revised to August 28, 2012; Effective September 22, 2012
10
filing for as long as two additional periods of ninety (90) days, and the plan shall remain valid until the expiration of such extended time. No such plan shall be filed or recorded by the Town Clerk until its approval has been endorsed in writing on such plan by the Chairman or Secretary of the Commission.
3.11 Time Limit on Completion. Any person, firm or corporation making any subdivision of land shall complete all work in connection with such subdivision within five (5) years after the Commission’s vote to approve the plan for such subdivision, which completion date shall be noted on the plan by the Chairman or Secretary of the Commission at the time of endorsement of the approved plan.
3.11.1 Failure to complete all work within such five (5) year period shall result in automatic expiration of the approval of such plan, provided the Commission shall file on the land records of the Town of Preston notice of such expiration and shall slate such expiration on the subdivision plan on file in the office of the Town Clerk, and no additional lots shall be conveyed in the subdivision by the subdivider except with approval by the Commission of a new application for subdivision of the subject land. If lots have been conveyed during such five (5) year period, the Commission shall call the bond or other surety on said subdivision to the extent necessary to complete the required to serve those lots. “Work” for purposes of this section means all physical improvements required by the approval of the plan, other than the staking out of lots, and includes but is not limited to the construction of roads, storm drainage facilities and water and sewer lines, the setting aside of open space and recreation areas, installation of telephone and electrical services, planting of trees or other landscaping, and installation of retaining walls or other structures.
3.12 Conditional Approval. (05/16/89) In lieu of either the completion of the work or the furnishing of a bond as provided in these Regulations, the Commission may authorize the filing of a plan with a conditional approval endorsed thereon. Such approval shall be conditioned on (1) the actual construction, maintenance and installation of any improvements or utilities prescribed by the Commission, or (2) the provision of a bond as provided by these Regulations. Upon the occurrence of either of such events, the Commission shall cause a final approval to be endorsed on the subdivision plan in the manner provided by these Regulations. Any conditional approval shall lapse five (5) years from the date it is granted. Any person, firm or corporation who, prior to such final approval, sells or offers for sale any lot subdivided pursuant to a conditional approval shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500) for each lot sold or offered for sale.
Town of Preston, Connecticut
Subdivision Regulations
Revised to August 28, 2012; Effective September 22, 2012
11
3.12.1 If conditional approval is granted, the following signature block shall appear on each sheet of the subdivision plan: the words, “Conditional Approval by the Preston Planning and Zoning Commission” and a space for the date of such conditional approval vote; designated spaces for the signature of the Commission Chairman or Secretary and the date of such signature; the words, “Conditional Approval expires on” and space for the date of such expiration; the words, “Final Approval voted by the Preston Planning and Zoning Commission” and space for the date of such final approval voted, spaces for the signature of the Commission’s Chairman or Secretary endorsing such final approval and the date of such signature.
SECTION 4: OPTIONAL PRE-APPLICATION SKETCH PLAN
4.1 Purpose. The pre-application sketch plan is a general layout of a proposed subdivision submitted by the subdivided for informal consideration by the Commission prior to a formal submission of an application for approval. A pre-application sketch plan shall not be required prior to submission of an application, but applicants are encouraged to use it as a means of ensuring that basic requirements can be met prior to incurring engineering, application, and legal fees involved with submission of the required application and plan. It should be clearly understood that pre-application sketch plan enjoys no official legal status and that consent with regard to feasibility of the pre-application sketch plan on the part of the Commission in no way predicates approval of the required plan. A pre-application sketch plan is encouraged in the interest of improved communication between the applicant and the Commission with regard to intent and general design, but it is at the sole discretion of the applicant.
4.2 Contents. The pre-application sketch plan may be drawn on tracing paper with pencil at a suitable scale, which will show sufficient information about the subdivision to present a clear picture of its scope and impact. The pre-application sketch plan should show:
4.2.1 The subdivision name, boundaries, true north point, date, scale.
4.2.2 The names and addresses of the record of owner and the applicant.
4.2.3 Approximate locations of all major site features such as existing streams, waterbodies, stonewalls, large trees, rock ridges, outcroppings.
4.2.4 The name and approximate location of existing adjacent streets and proposed streets.
4.2.5 The total site area, the total number of proposed lots, and general configuration of the proposed lot boundary lines and approximate area of each proposed lot.
Town of Preston, Connecticut
Subdivision Regulations
Revised to August 28, 2012; Effective September 22, 2012
12
4.2.6 Areas dedicated or reserved for purposes other than residential use.
4.2.7 Subsurface soil conditions based on results of random soil pit tests distributed evenly over the proposed subdivision tract.
SECTION 5: REQUIRED SUBDIVISION PLAN CONTENTS
5.1 General Requirements. (Rev. 11/14/00; Eff. 12/07/00; Rev. 01/04/05; Eff. 01/27/05) Ten (10) copies of all maps, plans and profiles shall be submitted with the application and fee. The Plan shall conform with Class A-2 standards of the Code of Recommended Practice for standards of accuracy of maps prepared by the Connecticut Technical Council, Incorporated, except that boundaries of parcels containing more than ten (10) acres within the subdivision and which are not intended to be used as building lots may be drawn using the Preston Assessor’s maps as a source. Plans shall be prepared and sealed by a registered land surveyor and shall be presented on good-quality white paper prints and shall be thirty-six inches (36”) by twenty-four inches (24”), twenty-four inches (24”0 by eighteen inches (18”) by twelve inches (12”) in size. All such prints shall have a one-half inch (½”) border on three (3) sides and a two-inch (2”) border on the left side. If more than one (1) sheet is submitted, they shall be bound. All such prints shall bear the following information:
5.1.1 The name or title of the subdivision and the words, “Preston, Connecticut.”
5.1.2 The name of the subdivider and owner of the property.
5.1.3 North Point, scale, date of survey, and date of original drawing and revisions.
5.1.4 Where only a part of the subdivision is shown on the sheet, a key map shall show its location in relation to the whole subdivision.
5.1.5 Name, registration number and seal of the land surveyor or engineer that prepared the drawing.
5.2 Key Map. The key map shall be at a scale not smaller than one inch (1”) equals two thousand feet (2,000’) and shall show the location of the proposed subdivision and all existing roads and watercourses within two thousand feet (2,000’) of it. If space permits, the key map may be included as an insert map on the boundary survey map. The key may be a simple tracing of a U.S. Geological Survey topographic map. In the case of a resubdivision, the key map shall show the boundaries of the original subdivision within which the resubdivision is located.
Town of Preston, Connecticut
Subdivision Regulations
Revised to August 28, 2012; Effective September 22, 2012
13
5.2A Summary Map. (08/16/89) The applicant shall provide a map of the property at a scale of one inch (1”) equals two hundred feet (200’) showing existing and proposed streets on and abutting the property and all existing and proposed streets on and abutting the property and all existing and proposed property liens and their lineal dimensions. The purpose of the map is to facilitate the transfer of information from the plan to the Town’s Assessor Maps. This map may be in the form of an insert map or may be presented on a separate sheet.
5.3 Boundary Survey Map. This map shall show the property to be divided into building lots at a scale of at least one inch (1”) equals one hundred feet (100’), although a scale of one inch (1”) equals fifty feet (50’) or one inch (1”) equals forty feet (40’) will also be acceptable. The scale of the map shall be adequate to clearly show all of the information required by these Regulations. The boundary survey map shall show the following:
5.3.1 Boundaries, dimensions and acreage of the property to be subdivided.
5.3.2 Boundaries of properties and names of current property owners within one hundred feet (100’) of the proposed new building lots.
5.3.3 Locations and designations of all wetlands, watercourses, and rock outcroppings on the property being subdivided and visible wetlands and watercourses within one hundred feet (100’) of the property being subdivided. (05/16/89)
5.3.4 Boundaries, dimensions, angles, bearings, area in square feet and lot number of all proposed lots. (Lot areas may be shown in tabular form on the same sheet.)
5.3.5 All existing buildings, stone walls, trees in excess of two feet (2’) in diameter, and locations of existing utility poles on the property and on both sides of any abutting street or highway.
5.3.6 All existing and proposed monuments, pipe markers and any other physical evidence concerning property boundaries.
5.3.7 Locations of all existing and proposed easements, right-of-ways, drainage rights and open spaces.
5.3.8 Contours of the land to be subdivided in sufficient detail to show general topography, watercourses and the direction of surface water flow. Contours shall be shown at not more than five-foot (5’) intervals. Elevations shall be referenced to U.S. Geological Survey datum.
Town of Preston, Connecticut
Subdivision Regulations
Revised to August 28, 2012; Effective September 22, 2012
14
5.3.9 All subdivisions shall include base flood (100-year storm) elevation data for that portion of the subdivision containing building lots located with A Zones on the Flood Hazard Boundary Map or Flood Insurance Rate map for Preston.
5.3.10 Signature block showing approval by the Commission, with designated spaces provided for the date and signature of the Chairman or Secretary of the Commission, as prescribed by the Sample Signature Block in the Appendix of these Regulations.
5.4 Construction Plan. (Rev. 11/14/00; Eff. 12/07/00) A construction plan, drawn at a scale of one inch (1”) equals forty feet (40’), shall be submitted when any type of construction, such as roads, drainage, water supply or sewer systems, retaining walls, etc., is to be carried out in connection with the subdivision. Profiles shall also be submitted for all new road construction and shall be at a scale of 1” – 40’ (horizontal) and 1” – 4’ (vertical). The construction plan shall be prepared and sealed by a Connecticut registered professional civil engineer. The construction of all streets shall be in conformance with these Regulations and any additional requirements of the Town road ordinance, titled, “An Ordinance Regulating the Addition of Any New Street or Highway to the Highway System of the Town of Preston, July 1, 1965,” as amended. All other construction shall be in accordance with the current issue of the Connecticut Department of Transportation Bureau of Highways “Standard Specifications for Roads, Bridges and Incidental Construction,” and any supplements and amendments thereof, unless otherwise specifically provided by these Regulations. All plans shall be submitted using non-metric English measurement. The construction plan shall include the following, where applicable:
5.4.1 Plan and profile for all proposed streets, showing:
a) Existing surface elevation along the centerline.
b) Locations, bearings curve data, include arc length , radii and center angles, proposed grades, vertical curves with centerline elevations every fifty feet (50’), except that such information shall be provided at ten foot (10’) intervals within eighty feet (80’) of the centerline cross point of an intersection.
c) Locations, size and invert elevations of existing and proposed storm drains, catch basins, manholes, bridges, culverts, outfalls and other drainage features.
d) Location, size, and invert elevations of proposed sewers, if any.
e) Location and size of all water supply and distribution facilities and hydrants.
f) Cross section at twenty-five foot (25’) intervals where existing terrain slopes more than ten percent (10%).
g) Sidewalk location, if any and location of street paving and curbs within the right-of-way.
h) Locations of street signs, trees, and other special landscape features to be installed by the applicant.
i) Street names.
Town of Preston, Connecticut
Subdivision Regulations
Revised to August 28, 2012; Effective September 22, 2012
15
5.4.2 Where drainage systems are to be constructed, one (1) copy of the construction plan shall be suitably marked to show watershed data used in the design of such systems and shall be accompanied by all calculations used in the drainage design.
5.4.3 In the case of retaining walls or other special features, drawing to a scale of one-half inch (½”) equals one foot (1’) of all such details shall be furnished.
5.4.4 Wording to indicate the date by which all work will be completed, as prescribed by the Sample Signature Block in the Appendix of these Regulations.
5.5 Erosion and Sediment (E&S) Control Plan. (06/18/85) Whenever plans for a subdivision show construction of improvements or buildings related to the subdivision that will result in the disturbance of more than one-half (½) acre of land, the applicant will submit, as part of the subdivision plan, E&S control plan that presents, in mapped and narrative form, the measures to be taken to control erosion and sedimentation both during and after construction. The E&S plan shall be based on “Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control” available from the Natural Resources Center of the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection.
5.5.1 The E&S Control Plan shall include the following:
a) A description of the project and a schedule of the major activities to be constructed on the land.
b) Locations of areas to be stripped of vegetation.
c) Locations of areas to be upgraded and contour data indicating existing and proposed grades.
d) A schedule of operations, including the sequence of major improvement phase such as clearing, grading, paving, installation of drainage features and the like.
e) Seeding, sodding, or revegetation plans and specifications for all unprotected or unvegetated areas.
f) Location, design and timing of structural control measures, such as diversions, waterways, grade stabilization structures, debris basins, and the like. The narrative shall indicate design criteria used in the design of control measures.
g) A description of procedures to be followed to maintain sediment control measures.
h) The plan map shall show the words: “Erosion and Sediment Control certified by vote of the Preston Planning & Zoning Commission on (date),” and a space for the signature of the Chairman or Secretary of the Commission.
5.5.2 After review of the E&S Control Plan by the Commission or its designee, the Commission shall vote to certify that the plan is in compliance with these Regulations.
Town of Preston, Connecticut
Subdivision Regulations
Revised to August 28, 2012; Effective September 22, 2012
16
(A vote of the Commission to approve a subdivision shall imply approval of the E&S plan as well.)
5.5.3 The Commission through its members, agents, and consultants, shall periodically inspect construction projects for which E&S plans have been certified to verify that erosion and sediment controls are consistent with the certified plan.
5.5.4 The performance bond required for improvements in connection with the proposed subdivision shall be required to be sufficient to cover the costs of accomplishing the E&S control measures.
5.6 Utilities Report. As part of the subdivision plan, a written report endorsed by the Town Sanitarian, shall be submitted to the Commission concerning the adequacy of plans for proposed private sewage disposal facilities and water supply. Adequacy of plans for subsurface sewage disposal shall be based on percolation tests and observation pits on each lot in the proposed subdivision in the probable location of the private sewage disposal facility and carried out in conformity with the standards and requirements of the Preston Public Health Code. Percolation rates and water table levels shall be shown on the subdivision plan or submitted therewith. The plan also shall indicate the manner in which water is expected to be supplied to the lots when they are developed.
5.6.1 Where results of such tests indicate a need for a lot size that is greater than required in the zoning regulations because of sewage disposal requirements, final approval will not be granted until such larger lots as required are shown on the map. Lots that fail to obtain approval of the Sanitarian shall not be approved by the Commission as building lots and shall be so marked on the subdivision plan.
5.6.2 As part of the Subdivision Plan, the subdivider shall also submit to the Commission, the report of a registered professional engineer, registered land surveyor, or a qualified individual approved by the Commission as to soil conditions for storm and surface drainage, which report shall state in detail the tests made and their locations, together with the engineer’s, surveyor’s or qualified individual’s evaluation of the results of such tests.
5.7 Other Supporting Documents. Before approval of any subdivision, the Commission shall require the following:
5.7.1 Evidence of permits for activities that might be controlled or subject to approval by other local or state agencies.
5.7.2 The subdivider shall submit to the Commission written copies of all agreements, restrictive covenants, or other documents governing the use, reservation, or
Town of Preston, Connecticut
Subdivision Regulations
Revised to August 28, 2012; Effective September 22, 2012
17
maintenance of land. By showing the locations of the new streets, open spaces, recreation areas, and easements on the subdivision plan, the applicant makes an irrevocable commitment to deed such lands to the Town of Preston.
5.7.3 When the subdivision includes any portion of a watercourse that is located within an A Zone on the Flood Hazard Boundary Map or the Flood Insurance Rate Map for Preston, and the subdivision would result in the alteration or relocation of that watercourse, the applicant shall submit a hydrological design by a registered professional engineer that indicates that the flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse will not be impaired by any construction or additional runoff resulting from the subdivision.
5.7.4 No subdivision shall be laid out in a manner which will obstruct or prevent the efficient drainage of the land or surrounding lands or cause flooding in downstream areas. The Commission may require plans showing measures to be taken to avoid excessive storm water runoff from new subdivisions.
5.8 Coastal Area. (11/09/82) Whenever a parcel of land is proposed for subdivision which lies wholly or partially in the Coastal Area of the Town of Preston, the applicant shall present a coastal site plan, as prescribed in Section 5.9, below. A map showing the Coastal Area and the Coastal Resources in Preston is enclosed with, and is part of, these Regulations.
5.9 Coastal Site Plan. (11/09/82) A coastal site plan shall consist of all information prescribed in Sections 5.1 through 5.7 of these Regulations, plus any other information needed to accomplish the following:
5.9.1 Show the location and spatial relationship of coastal resources on and contiguous to the proposed subdivision.
5.9.2 Describe the entire project with appropriate plans, indicating project location, design, timing and methods of construction for all improvements.
5.9.3 An assessment of the capability of the resources to accommodate the proposed use.
5.9.4 An assessment of the suitability of the project for the proposed site; and,
5.9.5 An evaluation of the potential beneficial and adverse impacts of the project and description of proposed methods to mitigate adverse effects on coastal resources.
Town of Preston, Connecticut
Subdivision Regulations
Revised to August 28, 2012; Effective September 22, 2012
18
SECTION 6: SUBDIVISION DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS
6.1 Lots. Proposed lots shall be arranged to make the best use of the natural terrain, to preserve important natural features, and to afford maximum opportunity for the use of solar energy.
6.1.1 Lot sizes shall conform to the requirements of the Preston Zoning Regulations. Except for special-purpose parcels, such as open space, no parcel shall be approved unless it meets the requirements of the Zoning Regulations.
6.1.2 All lots shall front on a street and have the street frontage prescribed by the Preston Zoning Regulations.
6.1.3 Where practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles to the street on which the lot fronts, or radial to curved street lines.
6.1.4 To the maximum extent possible, lots shall be generally rectangular in shape and excessively deep lots shall be avoided.
6.1.5 To the maximum extent possible, lots should be arranged in a manner that provides the best opportunity for the use of solar energy in buildings subsequently built on them. As a general rule, lot arrangements should enable principal buildings to be situated so that their longest axis lies in an east/west direction, so as to expose the front or rear of the building to the south. Attention should be given to ensuring that expected building locations are not shaded by buildings on adjoining properties, particularly on north-facing slopes during the heating season when the sun is low in the southern sky.
6.2 Rear Lots. The Commission may permit the subdivision of land that would result in a building lot or lots being established that are remote from established streets or streets proposed by the subdivision plan, provided that the Commission determines that the establishment of such rear lot or lots and related driveways will not prevent the orderly development of land located between the rear lot and the street, and provided that the following other conditions are met.
6.2.1 It is the intent of this subsection to permit limited use of backland which would otherwise become unusable as land along the street frontage is subdivided. (01/16/87)
6.2.2 Rear lots are permitted only to the rear of lots fronting on streets and not behind other rear lots which front on the same street. (04/18/95)
6.2.3 Any such lot shall contain at least three (3) acres and shall be of such shape that it can contain a rectangle with minimum dimensions of three hundred feet (300’) by four hundred feet (400’).
Town of Preston, Connecticut
Subdivision Regulations
Revised to August 28, 2012; Effective September 22, 2012
19
6.2.4 Such a lot shall be accessible to a street by way of a driveway owned as part of the lot and consisting of a strip of land not less than twenty-five feet (25’) in width throughout. The area of the driveway shall not be included in the three-acre lot size requirement.
6.2.5 The Commission shall determine that the location of the driveway will not impede future development or use of the land through which it passes and will have the least possible harmful impact on the natural features.
6.2.6 The deed for any such lot shall contain the provision that the access driveway cannot be used for access to any other property except for agricultural purposes and that the Town of Preston shall not ever be required to plow, maintain, assume ownership of, or provide school bus service or garbage collection service along the driveway access to such lot.
6.2.7 Where the driveway for any rear lots meets the street, it shall not be closer than one hundred feet (100’) from more than one (1) other existing or approved driveway on the same side of the street. The plan for any subdivision having one (1) or more real lots shall show the locations of any existing or approved driveways within one hundred feet (100’) in all directions of the proposed driveway or driveways. Connection of any such driveway to a town road shall be approved by the First Selectman. Connection to a state highway shall be approved by the Connecticut Department of Transportation.
6.3 Streets. (Rev. 11/14/00; Eff. 12/07/00) streets shall be laid out so as to provide the connections with existing streets on adjoining properties and also with proposed streets that may be provided for in the Preston Plan of Conservation and Development. When a subdivision adjoins undeveloped land, its streets shall be laid out so as to provide suitable future street connections with the adjoining land where it appears probable that the latter could be subdivided. Streets intended for future extension to adjoining property shall extend to the property line.
6.3.1 Street Design. (Rev. 11/14/00; Eff. 12/07/00)
a) Roadway design criteria. The roadway design shall depend upon its classification. Roadway classifications are as follows: Light residential streets, Residential streets, Collector streets, Commercial and Industrial streets.
Town of Preston, Connecticut
Subdivision Regulations
Revised to August 28, 2012; Effective September 22, 2012
20
Lt. Residential
Residential
Collector
Commercial - Industrial
R.O.W. width
50’
50’
60’
60’
Road pavement width
24’
28’
30’
36’
Minimum grade
1%
1%
1%
1%
Maximum grade
12%
10%
10%
10%
See Section 2.5 - definitions
*The above noted chart outlines design criteria unless otherwise noted in the Subdivision Regulations.
b) Minimum right-of-way on existing streets. Where a abuts on an existing street which as less than the minimum right-of-way established above, the subdivider shall be required to dedicate to the town for street purposes, a strip of land abutting the existing street of a width equal to one-half (½) of the width required to widen the street to the required minimum right-of-way established above.
c) Slope rights. The Commission may require slope rights and/or rights to occupy property to construct and/or maintain retaining walls or other similar structures.
d) Unimproved town roadway. The Commission may require the applicant to improve to subdivision standards on any unimproved town owned or private roadway if any proposed lot is located on said unimproved roadway.
e) Dead-end streets. Dead-end streets, designed to be so permanently, shall not, exceed one thousand two hundred feet (1,200’) in length from its intersection with the nearest through street t the end of cul-de-sac and shall be designed in accordance with the “recommended cul-de-sac layout” contained herein. Such streets shall be provided as the closed end with a turn-around having a paved travel path of a radius of not less than fifty feet (50’) and a street right-of-way of a radius of not less than sixty feet (60’).
f) Temporary dead-end. Any temporary dead-end street will be accepted only when a right-of-way is provided to continue the street beyond the turn-around. On a temporary turn-around, it shall be loamed and seeded as shown on the “recommended cul-de-sac layout” contained herein. Any temporary cul-de-sac shall be constructed in the same manner as a permanent cul-de-sac. If a subdivision is to contain a temporary dead-end street, the subdivider shall post a cash or surety bond for each such street sufficient to cover the cost of removing all pavement no longer essential and extending curbing and gutters from their
Town of Preston, Connecticut
Subdivision Regulations
Revised to August 28, 2012; Effective September 22, 2012
21
point of termination at the beginning of the turn-around at a future date. The disturbed area shall be loamed and seeded and driveways shall be extended and paved as necessary. The Commission may waive the maximum length of dead-end street to exceed one thousand two hundred feet (1,200’) in cases where another dead-end or cul-de-sac street could logically connect to provide a future through street. The Commission may request a report from the Director of Public Works and the Fire Chief regarding the request for the increase in the dead-end street length.
g) Street grades. The streets shall be designed so as to have a reasonable relationship to the existing topography. Excessive cuts and fills shall be avoided by good design. Grades of all streets shall not be less than one percent (1%) nor greater than ten percent (10%) except that a maximum grade of twelve percent (12%) may be permitted on light residential streets for distances of not more than two hundred fifty feet (250’). Due allowance will not be made for reasonable vertical curves as provided in Section 6.3.1 j) below. The maximum slope for a cul-de-sac shall be five percent (5%).
h) Street and lot layout. Streets shall be so laid as to obtain as many of the building sites as possible at or above grade of the street. In residential areas, curvilinear street arrangements following natural contours where practicable shall be generally used in preference to gridiron systems. To the maximum extent possible, streets shall be laid out in a generally east/west direction to facilitate solar orientation of building on abutting lots.
i) Street access. All streets in any subdivision shall have free access to one (1) or more accepted town streets, or state highways.
j) Vertical curves. Appropriate vertical curves for transition shall be established on all streets and at street intersections to insure adequate sight distances. Vertical curves should be based on a design speed of thirty (30) miles per hour. Where any street approaches an intersection at a grade of five percent (5%) or more, a transition area, having a maximum grade of two percent (2%), shall be constructed for a minimum of fifty feet (50’) measured from the right-of-way line of the street so intersected. The Commission may waive this requirement for streets with excessive ledge conditions and after consideration of a recommendation by the Town Engineer.
k) Horizontal curves. The minimum radius of curvature at the centerline of curved streets shall be established on the basis of the applicable design or posted speed, provided that no radius shall be less than one hundred fifty feet (150’) for light residential or residential streets and three hundred feet (300’) for collector and commercial/industrial/arterial streets. Suitable tangents shall be provided. This shall apply unless a minimum design speed of thirty (30) miles per hour does not provide suitable stopping sight distance.
l) Intersections. No more than two (2) streets shall intersect at one (1) point. Intersections shall be spaced not less than one hundred fifty feet (150’) apart,
Town of Preston, Connecticut
Subdivision Regulations
Revised to August 28, 2012; Effective September 22, 2012
22
measured between centerlines. Streets shall intersect one another at as near to a right angle as is practical; no intersection shall be at an angle differing more than ten (10) degrees from the right-angle intersection. Intersections of collector or commercial/industrial/arterial streets with other such streets shall not be permitted closer than eight hundred feet (800’). Intersecting street lines all have a minimum of twenty-five foot (25’) radius. When two (2) streets are located across from each other, they shall be directly opposite each other in a four-way intersection.
m) Crown or cross-pitch. Streets shall be designed to incorporate a minimum cross-pitch of one-quarter inch (¼”) per foot from the edge of pavement to the centerline of the street. A typical cut and fill cross-section drawing shall accompany the subdivision plans.
n) Curbs. Curbs shall be provided along both edges of all street travel paths for their entire length.
6.3.2 Street construction. All clearing, grubbing, excavation, sub-base, binder and surface course requirements shall comply with the town public works department requirements and these Regulations.
a) Grading. All streets shall be graded to the full width of the roadway including areas for the travel path, curbs, gutters, shoulders, and where applicable, sidewalks.
b) Slopes. Cut and fill sections beyond the roadway shall not exceed a slope of two (2) to one (1) except in rock. All earth surfaces of slopes, and areas that have been disturbed in any way due to grading and construction of the streets shall be covered with a minimum of four inches (4”) of top soil and suitably seeded or planted to prevent soil erosion. The Commission may require the removal or lowering of embankments adjacent to street and/or driveway intersections in order to assure adequate sight distance at the intersection. No cut or fill sections beyond the street right-of-way shall extend into property outside the subdivision of property not owned by the applicant unless appropriate slope rights are obtained by the subdivider for the town so that the town may maintain them upon acceptance of the street; in the absence of such slope rights, the subdivider shall construct such appropriate protective facilities as the Commission shall requir4e within the subdivision to prevent encroachment upon adjoining property.
6.4 Trees. (Rev 11/14/00; Eff. 12/07/00) Street trees shall be planted on both sides of every new street unless specifically waived by the Commission. Trees shall be spaced approximately fifty feet (50’) apart, subject to variations made necessary by driveways, street corners, and walks and shall be located in the areas and/or alternate areas as designated on the subdivision plan. The type of trees planted shall be based on site
Town of Preston, Connecticut
Subdivision Regulations
Revised to August 28, 2012; Effective September 22, 2012
23
conditions and any other issues such as location of utility lines and shall be subject to approval by the Commission.
6.5 Drainage. An adequate system of storm water drainage shall be provided and installed by the subdivider and no natural watercourse shall be altered or obstructed in such a way as to reduce the natural runoff capacity unless substitute means of runoff are provided. The developer shall provide additional capacity in adjacent culverts and other drainage features for accommodating increased runoff from the proposed development should it be deemed necessary by the Commission. All existing and proposed drainage systems shall be indicated as to size and location on plans and profile sheets. Drainage rights-of-way through lots shall be a least twenty feet (20’) wide, and follow property lines wherever possible. The Commission may require culverts and other storm water drainage installations where it deems necessary, to connect with one (1) or more natural watercourse(s). All necessary easements for drainage shall be provided to endorsement of the approved plan by the Commission Chairman.
a) Design. All storm drainage facilities shall be designed and constructed in accordance with pertinent specifications of the Department of Public Works, the Connecticut Highway Department and these Regulations. Drainage shall be designed for a minimum of a twenty-five (25) year storm; however, the Commission may require that drainage be designed for greater storm frequency if there are conditions that could create life-threatening situations.
b) Pipe size. All storm sewer pipe sizes are to be determined by actual design with due consideration to the avoidance of problems which may arise from the concentration of storm water runoff or onto adjacent development or underdeveloped properties in the drainage area whether on-site or off-site. The minimum size of storm drains shall be twelve inches (12”) and shall have a minimum cover of two feet (2’).
c) Slope. The minimum slope for storm sewers shall be sufficient to give a mean velocity of three feet (3’) per second when pipe is flowing half full. The maximum slope for storm sewers shall be designed to give a mean velocity of not exceeding fifteen feet (15’) per second when pipe is flowing half full.
d) Catch basins. Catch basins shall be constructed at all changes of pipe sizes. Unless otherwise authorized by the town engineer, no gutter shall run for more than three hundred and fifty feet (350’) without provision from removal of water by a curb-inlet catch basin, lead-off or other approved method. On slopes of less than five percent (5%), closer spacing of catch basins may be required. At low points, double grate catch basins will be required with four-foot (4’) sumps. A gutter flow analysis shall be prepared based on the DOT guidelines.
e) Underdrains. Where excessive ground water or watercourses or wetlands are encountered in the roadway, the Commission may require that suitable underdrains be installed and connected to the nearest drainage facility for that portion of land involved in the subdivision.
Town of Preston, Connecticut
Subdivision Regulations
Revised to August 28, 2012; Effective September 22, 2012
24
f) Foundation drains. Foundation drains shall tie into the road drainage system wherever feasible by gravity. The Commission may require that roof and foundation drains outlet into an approved easement.
g) Cover. No drainage shall be constructed with less than two feet (2’) cover, except that where it is impossible to obtain the required depth, the Commission shall approve the method of construction.
h) Existing streets. Where a subdivision abuts on existing town street, or where the tract of land to be subdivided presently receives storm water drainage from an existing town street or from a watercourse, it shall be the responsibility of the subdivider to provide an adequate storm water drainage system suitable to give the existing town street and the proposed subdivision proper drainage.
i) Future development. If the town anticipates future development that will increase the drainage flow on the town street, the town may exercise the right to require additional drainage capacity in the subdivision exceeding requirements present at the time of approval of the subdivision plan. The town will participate in cost sharing for that portion of the required drainage improvements for the additional capacity.
j) Discharge. The discharge of all storm water from the subdivision shall be into suitable streams or rivers or into storm sewers, ditches, or other town drainage facilities with adequate capacity to carry the additional water. Where the discharge shall be onto private property adjoining the proposed subdivision, proper easements and discharge rights shall be secured by the subdivider for the town, and any pipe so installed shall extend a minimum distance as required by the Commission after all conditions have been considered.
k) Sections (or phases). When a subdivision is constructed in sections, the developer may be required to install drainage in future sections to provide outlets for drainage, ground water, roof drains and other problems created in the first section to be developed. Temporary rights may be required until future sections are developed.
l) Easements. Easements, at least twenty feet (20’) in width, shall be provided by the subdivider for all drainage structures, swales, water lines, sewer lines or similar improvements that are not to be installed in a street. easements shall also be provided for the full width of the channel of any stream or drainage ditch in the subdivision which will carry drainage runoff from any proposed street, existing street or streets which may be constructed in the future on the undeveloped land within the watershed. Easements hall also be provided for storm water pipes that may need to be installed in the future to serve undeveloped land within the watershed that normally drains across the area of the proposed subdivision.
6.6 Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be required on one (1) side of the street in all subdivision under either one (1) of the following conditions:
6.6.1 DELETED (05/16/89)
Town of Preston, Connecticut
Subdivision Regulations
Revised to August 28, 2012; Effective September 22, 2012
25
6.6.2 On a street within six thousand feet (6,000’) of the property line of a public school, or site designated for a public school.
6.6.3 DELETED (05/16/89)
6.7 Street Signs. Street name signs shall be placed at all intersections on at least two (2) diagonally opposite corners. In the case of a T-Junction, only one (1) sign shall be required.
6.7.1 Streets which join or are in alignment with streets of an adjoining or neighboring property shall bear the same name.
6.7.2 No duplication of streets names shall be permitted except as indicated in 6.7.1, above, and all street names shall be subject to approval of the Commission.
6.8 Open Space, Parks, and Playgrounds. The Commission may require open spaces, parks, playgrounds in a proposed subdivision up to a maximum of ten percent (10%) of the gross site area. In determining the need for open spaces and recreation areas, the Commission shall take into account the density of the populations and existing public open spaces in the vicinity of the subdivision. The Commission should also make reference to the recommendations of the Plan of Development regarding recreation and open space and, if advisable, consult with the Conservation Commission and the Parks and Recreation Commission.
6.8.1 Open Spaces, parks, and playgrounds shall be provided in places deemed proper by the Commission may require the applicant to pay a fee to the Town of Preston or pay a fee and transfer land to the Town of Preston in lieu of providing open spaces, parks and playgrounds.
6.8.2 Open Space for parks and playgrounds may be covered by any of the following means as to be determined by the Commission:
a) Deeded to the Town of Preston after all improvements have been completed.
b) Deeded to a homeowner’s association within the subdivision upon such terms and conditions, as approved by the Commission, which will protect the public welfare and assure the continued use of the open space for the purpose intended. A copy of the homeowner’s deed and the by-laws of the homeowner’s association shall be submitted with the application.
c) Open space may be reserved for common use by all property owners in the subdivision covenant in the deed. A copy of the covenant shall be submitted with the application.
Town of Preston, Connecticut
Subdivision Regulations
Revised to August 28, 2012; Effective September 22, 2012
26
d) Deeded to a land trust under terms acceptable to the Commission.
e) Development rights for the property may be deeded to the Town while ownership is retained by the homeowners.
6.9 Fee in Lieu of Land for Open Spaces, Parks and Playgrounds. (04/17/91) The Commission may require the applicant to pay a fee to the Town of Preston or pay a fee and transfer land to the Town of Preston in lieu of providing open spaces, parks and playgrounds.
6.9.1 Such payment or combination of payment and the fair market value of land transferred shall be equal to ten percent (10%) of the fair market value as undeveloped land of the land to be subdivided prior to the approval of the subdivision.
6.9.2 The fair market value shall be determined jointly by the applicant and the Commission. The applicant shall submit the names of three (3) appraisers doing business in New London County. The Commission shall select one (1) of the three (3) to conduct the appraisal of the land to be subdivided. The costs of the appraisal shall be borne by the applicant.
6.9.3 A fraction of such payment, the numerator of which is one (1) and the denominator of which is the number of approved parcels in the subdivision, shall be made at the time of the sale of each approved parcel of land in the subdivision.
6.9.4 Said payment shall be deposited with the Treasurer of the Town of Preston in a fund which shall be used by the Town of Preston for the purpose of preserving open space or acquiring additional land for open space or for recreational or agricultural purposes.
6.10 Exemptions from Open Spaces and Recreation Land Requirements. (04/17/91) The open space and recreation land requirements of this section shall not apply if the transfer of all land in a subdivision of less than five (5) parcels is to a parent, child, brother, sister, grandparent, grandchild, aunt, uncle or first cousin for no consideration, or if the subdivision is to contain affordable housing, as defined in Section 8-39a of the Connecticut General Statues, equal to twenty percent (20%) or more of the total housing to be constructed in such subdivision.
6.11 Flooding Considerations. (04/20/85) (App. 04/26/11; Eff. 05/19/11) The Commission shall determine that proposed subdivisions (including manufactured home subdivisions) are reasonably safe from flooding. When a subdivision is proposed in an A or AE Zone on the Town’s Flood Insurance Rate Map, dated July 18, 2011, or any subsequent revisions thereof, it shall be reviewed to assure the following:
Town of Preston, Connecticut
Subdivision Regulations
Revised to August 28, 2012; Effective September 22, 2012
27
6.11.1 That all proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage within the flood-prone areas.
6.11.2 That all public utilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
6.11.3 That adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
6.11.4 That new and replacement water supply systems are designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters in to the systems.
6.11.5 That new and replacement sanitary sewer systems are designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into systems or discharges from the systems into floodwaters.
6.11.6 That on-site sewage disposal systems are located to avoid impairment of them or contamination from them during flooding.
6.11.7 That the flood-carrying capacity is maintained within any altered or relocated portion of any watercourse.
6.12 Coastal Area Considerations. (11/09/82) Any person submitting a coastal site plan, as required in Section 5 of these Regulations shall demonstrate that such activity is consistent with the goals and policies in Section 22a-92 of the Connecticut General Statutes.
6.13 Flood Elevations. (04/20/12) (App. 04/26/12; Eff. 05/19/11) All applications for subdivisions (including manufactured home subdivisions) greater than five (5) acres or fifty (50) lots (whichever is less) shall include with such applications base flood (100-year flood) elevation data for that portion of the subdivision which permits the construction of buildings and which is located with A and AE Zones on the Town’s Flood Insurance Rate Map, dated July 18, 2011, or any subsequent revision thereof. In addition, the Commission shall obtain, review, and reasonable utilize any base flood evaluation and floodway data available from a Federal, State, or other source as criteria for requiring that new construction, substantial improvements, or other development in A and AE Zones, meet the standards of these Regulations.
6.14 Floodway Encroachment. (04/20/85) Within the floodway designated on the Flood Insurance Rate Map for New London County, dated July 18, 2011, or any subsequent revision thereof a copy of which is on file with the Commission, all encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements to existing structures, and
Town of Preston, Connecticut
Subdivision Regulations
Revised to August 28, 2012; Effective September 22, 2012
28
other development, are prohibited unless certification, with supporting technical data by a Connecticut registered professional engineer is provided by the applicant demonstrating, through hydrologic and hydrodynamic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice, that such encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the base flood (a flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year).
6.15 Utility Lines. Except where deemed impracticable by the Commission because of topography or other conditions, electric power, telephone and cable television lines shall be installed underground when serving lots on new streets. (08/15/88)
6.16 Driveways. (Rev. 11/14/00; Eff. 12/07/00) Adequate sight distance shall be provided for all driveway intersection with the street. The sight distance shall be based on the posted speed and ASHTO standards. A minimum vertical curve of five percent (5%) shall be provided at the intersection of the driveway and the road for a distance of thirty feet (30’). No driveway shall outlet drainage directly onto the road. Any driveway in excess of eight percent (8%) grade shall be paved.
6.17 Special Structures. Bridges, box culverts, headwalls, deep manholes and other special structures shall be designed in accordance with the Town of Preston, the Connecticut Department of Transportation standards, these Regulations and good engineering practice acceptable to the Commission and shall be designed for one hundred (100) year storm event.
a) Size. Bridges, culverts, headwalls, or other structures designed to carry streets over existing watercourses shall be designed to handle maximum anticipated flow for a one hundred (100) year storm, unless otherwise required by the Commission.
b) Capacity. All structures should be designed to accept a live load of HS20-44.
c) Width. No bridge or culvert shall be constructed to less than the full width of the minimum required roadway, plus a sidewalk if required by the Commission.
d) Endwalls and flared end units. These shall be constructed in accordance with Town of Preston standards and the Connecticut Department of Transportation standards.
SECTION 7: IMPROVEMENT SPECIFICATIONS
7.1 Monuments. Monuments shall be set at the extreme front corners of each lot and at all corners of each lot and at all corners and angles of all streets and at all points of curvature and points of tangency on curved streets. Monuments shall be set plumb, in line with street lines one inch (1”) above finish grade. They shall be of granite or reinforced concrete, not less than four inches (4”) square and thirty inches (30”) long, with a brass or copper plug or drill hole marking the center of the four-inch (4”) square.
Town of Preston, Connecticut
Subdivision Regulations
Revised to August 28, 2012; Effective September 22, 2012
29
No permanent monuments shall be installed until all construction which could destroy or disturb the monuments is completed.
7.1.1 Lot markers indicating lot boundaries other than the extreme front corners may be solid iron pipe one inch (1”) inside diameter three feet (3’) long, all set flush with proposed grades.
7.2 Streets. (Rev. 11/14/00; Eff. 12/07/00) The construction specifications for streets shall be specified in the Town Road Ordinance entitled, “An Ordinance Regulating the Addition of Any New Street or Highway System of the Town of Preston, July 1, 1966,” as amended and with the provision of Section 6 of these Regulations.
7.3 Street Trees. (Rev. 11/14/00; Eff. 12/07/00) Trees shall be nursery grown, of specimen quality, balled and burlapped, and shall be straight stemmed, free from disease, and prior bark injuries shall be fully callused over. Trees shall be at least one-half (½) to two inches (2”) in caliber as measured six inches (6”) above the soil line. (See Appendix)
7.4 Drainage. The construction specifications for storm drainage improvements shall be as specified in the Town Road Ordinance entitled, “An Ordinance Regulating the Addition of Any New Street or Highway System of the Town of Preston, July 1, 1966,” as amended and with the provision of Section 6 of these Regulations.
7.4.1 No runoff from a road shall be permitted to flow on the surface across a proposed lot. Such runoff shall be piped to the rear of the abutting lot and rights-to-drain beyond the lot shall be provided.
7.5 Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be a minimum of four feet (4’) in width and shall be located within the street lines with one (1) edge one foot (1’) from the property line. The sidewalk shall consist of a dense bituminous concrete surface, two inches (2”) thick after compaction, constructed on a six-inch (6”) processed gravel base, thoroughly compacted with a roller weighing not less than five hundred (500) pounds. The sides of the walk shall be backfilled with suitable material thoroughly compacted and finishing flush with the top of the walk. All surplus shall be removed from the site which shall be left in a neat and presentable condition. In sections inaccessible to the roller, the base course, surface course and backfill shall be hand tamped with tampers weighing not less than twelve (12) pounds, the face of which shall not exceed fifty (50) square inches in area.
7.6 Street Signs. Street signs shall be concrete post installed according to the construction details in the Appendix of these Regulations.
7.7 Public Water Supplies. Water supply and distribution systems, where required, shall be installed in accordance with the specifications of the Southeastern Connecticut Water
Town of Preston, Connecticut
Subdivision Regulations
Revised to August 28, 2012; Effective September 22, 2012
30
Authority (SCWA) or the Connecticut Department of Health, whichever, has jurisdiction. In accordance with Section 13 of Special Act 67-381, as amended, of the Connecticut General Assembly, SCWA may exercise jurisdiction when it is the intention of the applicant to develop a well water supply on the basis of studies which indicate a maximum requirement in excess of fifty (50) gallons per minute, or when the tract to e subdivided contains fifty (50) acres or more and is intended to contain two (2) or more dwelling units to be served by a single water supply.
7.8 Clean-up. Upon suspension or completion of the work or any portion thereof, the developer or contractor shall remove from all public or private property all temporary structures, tools and equipment, rubbish or waste materials resulting from his operations. Tree stumps and boulders shall be buried along property lines with a minimum two-foot (2’) cover. Cut-down trees and brush shall be removed from the property. All ditches shall be filled; all sewers, drains, catch basins and manholes cleaned and flushed; streets, walks, curbs and other structures cleaned and repaired and the whole work left in a neat condition. All unpaved areas within the street lines and excavated or filled areas on private property shall be graded, covered with suitable topsoil or loam, rolled, fertilized and seeded.
7.9 General Construction Procedures. The following procedures shall be followed by the builder/subdivider and by contractors under the direction of the builder/subdivider in the construction of any subdivision or related improvement:
7.9.1 Pre-Construction meeting. A pre-construction meeting shall be held with the Director of Public Works and/or agent, and the builder/subdivider (or his duly authorized representative) and the on-site project manager at least seven (7) days prior to the start of any subdivision improvements.
7.9.2 Notification. No step in the construction of required improvements shall commence until the Director of Public Works has been notified at least twenty-four (24) hours in advance of the phases of construction listed in 7.9.3, below.
7.9.3 Inspection of Improvement. Inspection by the Director of Public Works and/or agent and approval by the Director of Public Works shall be required for the following phases or steps of subdivision improvements:
a) During and following installation of all underground drainage structures, systems and utilities prior to backfilling;
b) During and following the preparations of the road sub-grade and shoulders;
c) During and following the spreading and compaction of the sub-base course;
Town of Preston, Connecticut
Subdivision Regulations
Revised to August 28, 2012; Effective September 22, 2012
31
d) During and following the spreading and compaction of the base course prior to the application of the asphalt binder course;
e) Immediately prior to and during the application and compaction of the asphalt surface course on the roadway and, if required, sidewalks; and,
f) Following completion of all improvements and installation of bounds;
g) At periodic intervals as required to ensure compliance with the approved Erosion and Sediment Control Plan.
The Director of Public Works may require inspection at such other intervals as he may deem necessary to assure proper construction of improvements.
7.9.4 Request for Inspection. Whenever an inspection is required, the builder/developer shall request the Director of Public Works and/or agent to make such inspection. The Director of Public Works and/or agent shall within forty-eight (48) hours, exclusive of Saturday, Sunday and Holidays, make such inspection and give to the builder/developer written approval or disapproval of the improvements inspected. No subsequent phase or step shall commence until an inspection has been made and approval granted.
7.9.5 As-Built Drawings. Upon completion of construction of all required improvements, and before the performance bond is released and the maintenance bond is accepted, the developer shall furnish two (2) sets of transparent Mylar.
7.9.6 Inspection Fees. Inspection fees shall be paid in the amount established in Section 3.2.3, and shall be paid in accordance with Section 3.2.3. (12/01/97)
SECTION 8: WAIVERS
8.1 Waivers. (Rev. 11/14/00; Eff. 12/07/00) The Commission may waive a requirement of these Regulations, in whole or in part, by a three-quarters (¾) vote of all the regular members of the Commission in cases where conditions exist which effect the subject land and which are not generally applicable to other land in the area, except that no waiver shall be granted that would have a significant adverse effect on adjacent property or on public health and safety, and no waiver shall be granted unless one of the following conditions exist:
8.1.1 The proposed subdivision includes land in more than one (1) municipality, and lots located wholly or partially in Preston are at least as large in total as the minimum lot size required for that area by the Preston Zoning Regulations; and the street frontage
Town of Preston, Connecticut
Subdivision Regulations
Revised to August 28, 2012; Effective September 22, 2012
32
requirement is satisfied for each lot, regardless of the municipality in which the street is located.
8.1.2 Strict adherence to the requirements of these Regulations would result in the alteration or destruction of a significant or unique natural feature, such as a large tree, a watercourse, a wetland or a rock formation.
8.1.3 Strict adherence to the requirements of these Regulations would result in significant alteration of the natural land contour in a manner that would aggravate natural drainage or cause erosion and sedimentation problems that would be difficult to control or correct.
8.1.4 A subdivision design standard would impair maximum access to the sun for solar energy on one (1) or more lots in the subdivision.
8.1.5 A required subdivision plan ingredient may be waived if the Commission finds it will not contribute to an understanding of the subdivision.
8.1.6 (Rev. 11/14/00; Eff. 12/07/00) Waiver for road or other required improvements. All subdivision roads whether public or private shall comply with subdivision design requirements. However, the Commission may, based on a report from the Director of Public Works, waive certain design standards for any proposed road improvements depending upon site conditions. Such waivers may be granted only in cases where conditions exist that prohibit the road to be constructed to standards or where improvements are required for an unimproved town road.
8.2 Reasons for Actions on Waivers. The Commission shall state upon its records the reasons for which a waiver is granted in each case.
SECTION 9: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
9.1 Any person, firm or corporation making any subdivision of land without the approval of the Planning and Zoning Commission of the Town of Preston shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500) for each lot sold or offered for sale or so subdivided. Said penalty is pursuant to Section 8-25 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
SECTION 10: SEPARABILITY
10.1 If any section, subsection, sentence, or portion of these Regulations is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion
Town of Preston, Connecticut
Subdivision Regulations
Revised to August 28, 2012; Effective September 22, 2012
33
shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and independent provision, and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of these Regulations.
SECTION 11: AMENDMENTS
11.1 These Regulations may be amended from time to time in accordance with the procedures specified in Section 8-25, Chapter 126 of the General Statutes 1958 Revision, as amended.
SECTION 12: EFFECTIVE DATE
12.1 These Regulations amend and replace subdivision regulations adopted by the Commission and made effective in May of 1962 and subsequently amended.
This page left blank intentionally
i
APPENDIX 1
SUBDIVISION / RESUBDIVISION PROCEDURE
ii
TOWN OF PRESTON
SUBDIVISION / RESUBDIVISION PROCEDURE
The following information is intended to help you understand the subdivision application process. Please consult the Regulations for the technical and design requirements for the creation of the subdivision.
1. The applicant must be filed in the Planning and Zoning Office twelve (12) working days prior to the Commission meeting. The Commission meets the fourth Tuesday of every month. Staff is available by appointment to answer any questions. In the event more than eight (8) lots are created or the application involves the construction of a road; it is recommended that a staff meeting be scheduled to provide you with an overview of the process.
2. Please be sure that all necessary permits from other agencies have been obtained or are pending prior to submission. This includes all local, state and federal permits.
3. After submission of the application, the plans will be forwarded to the various town staff members for review. The Town Planner’s review and other staff comments will be forwarded to you prior to the Commission meeting. Your Land Surveyor and Engineer must revise the plan and a staff meeting will subsequently be scheduled to review the revised plan. This meeting will be scheduled prior to the Planning and Zoning Commission meeting.
4. If your application is a resubdivision, the Commission will schedule a public hearing on the application. In addition, the Commission may schedule a public hearing on any other application.
5. All applicants, whether or not a hearing is scheduled on an application, are required to notify the abutting property owners (including across the street). Such notice is to be sent ten (10) days prior to the Commission meeting (this does not include the date of the meeting or the date the notices were mailed, so it is twelve (12) days before the meeting). The notice must state the date, place and time of the meeting, the location of the subdivision, number of lots being created and that the plans are available at the town hall for review prior to the meeting (an example letter is available). The letters must be sent certified mail – return receipt.
6. In the event a hearing is held, it must be scheduled within sixty-five (65) days of the Commissions receipt of the application. The hearing must be concluded within thirty (30) days of the hearing. The Commission has sixty-five (65) days to act on the application after the close of the hearing. The applicant must request an extension for any of the time periods equal to the specific time period. In the event a hearing is not held, the Commission must act on the application within sixty-five (65) days of its receipt.
iii
7. The Commission will approve, modify and approve or deny the application. After approval is granted, the required bond must be posted and the three percent (3%) fee must be paid to the Town (see Section 3.2.2 of the Subdivision Regulations). One (1) Mylar copy 9prepared in accordance with Section 7-31 of the Connecticut General Statues) and five (5) paper copies of the approved and/or modified plan must be submitted to the Department for endorsement by the Commission Chairman. These copies must be submitted within thirty-five (35) days of the Commission action (extensions may be granted by the Commission). The plan must be filed with the Town Clerk’s office within ninety (90) days of the return of the Mylar’s.
8. Prior to commencing any required public improvements, a permit must be obtained from the First Selectman’s Office and a pre-construction conference must be scheduled with the Town Planner. Forty-eight (48) hours notice for the pre-construction meeting must be given for the scheduling of this meeting.
9. After completion of any road construction or public improvements, a letter requesting a bond release must be submitted for the Commission’s release. If the project entails the construction of a road, a maintenance bond equaling ten percent (10%) of the project cost or a minimum of two thousand five hundred ($2,500) dollars must be submitted to the Town. The maintenance bond will be held for a period of one (1) year.
iv
APPENDIX 2
SUBDIVISION/RESUBDIVISION APPLICATION
v
vi
vii
viii
OPEN SPACE POLICY
The requirement for the dedication of open space or fee in lieu of open space to the town is noted in Section 6.8 of the Subdivision Regulations. This policy was developed by the Commission to aid the developer in addressing the open space requirements of the regulations.
Intent: It is the intent of the Commission and the regulations to provide usable open space for the enjoyment of the future residents of the subdivision or to aid in the preservation of significant natural or archaeological resources for public educational purposes.
It is the intent to create a policy that can be flexible, responsible, and serves the needs of the town. In order to ensure an understanding of the intent of the policy, it is strongly recommended that a meeting with the Town Planner be scheduled prior to designing your subdivision. If there are any questions or issues with the dedication of open space or fee in lieu of such, the Planner may refer the matter to the Commission for further review.
Criteria for the Dedication of Open Space or Payment in lieu of Fee
a) Land Dedication for all Subdivisions: The Commission desire to receive not less than eighty-thousand (80,000) square feet of land area is to be offered. The dedicated land shall contain slopes with less than a five percent (5%) grade or land that is not defined as wetland areas. Active recreational equipment may be required to serve the families within the subdivision, such as swing sets, slides or playscapes.
b) Subdivisions containing significant natural or archeological resources as identified in the Preston Plan of Conservation and Development, or by the Preston Conservation Commission, or the State of Connecticut Department of Energy and Environmental Protection (DEEP): The Commission may require the dedication of such resources for open space. In addition to said dedication, the Commission may require that an educational program be developed for the general public that may include installation of interpretive signs and walking or hiking trails.
c) Subdivisions on ridgelines or containing scenic vistas or agricultural resources: The Commission may require the dedication of open space for the protection of scenic vistas or agricultural resources.
d) All other subdivisions: A fee in lieu of open space should be paid to the town when the subdivision does not meet any of the above noted criteria.
Process of Determining Fee in Lieu of Taxes: A list of three (3) appraisers shall be submitted to the Commission with the subdivision or re-subdivision application. The Commission will select an appraiser from the list. The applicant will be responsible for obtaining the appraisal by the selected appraiser from which the fee in lieu of open space will be determined. The fee shall be provided t the town prior to endorsement of the pain.
ix
APPENDIX 3
SUBDIVISION/RESUBDIVISION CHECKLIST
x
SUBDIVISION / RESUBDIVISION CHECKLIST
__________1 Name of subdivider and landowner.
__________2 Scale, date and revision dates, north arrow, legend.
__________3 Key map showing all surrounding zoning districts, streets, town boundaries and tracts or parcels within 2,000 feet of the subdivision.
__________4 Summary map showing at a scale of 1” – 200’ showing the subdivision and the existing and proposed streets and lot lines.
__________5 Names of all property owners and location of all lot lines for properties within 100’ of the subdivision.
__________6 Proposed lot layout, lot numbers, square footage and dimensions of all lots.
__________7 Existing and proposed rights-of-ways, easements and encroachments.
__________8 Location of all watercourses and bodies, wetlands, and areas subject to 100-year flood as defined by the Flood Insurance Rate Map. A soil scientist must map all wetland areas – provide name of soil scientist with original signature.
__________9 All soil test results (and locations). Plan should indicate which lots will be required to have septic systems designed by a professional engineer. Additional soil testing may be required.
__________10 Location of existing natural and historic resources and landmarks including ledge outcroppings, stone walls, wooded areas, trees over 2’ in diameter, etc.
__________11 Proposed / feasible location of septic systems, wells, houses and driveways.
__________12 Zoning setback lines.
__________13 Open Space Area (dimensions and locations).
__________14 Topographic information, referenced to U.S. Geological Survey data.
__________15 Location and type of monuments.
xi
__________16 Approval block for P & Z Commission.
__________17 Engineer’s estimate of cost of public improvement.
__________18 Connecticut Department of Transportation approval and/or Public Works Director’s approval.
__________19 Environmental impact statement in the form of a narrative indicating what the impact on downstream properties will be as a result of the subdivision.
__________20 Submission to Regional Planning Agency (if applicable).
__________21 Existing roads, buildings, utilities and other structures.
__________22 Boundary survey to A-2 standards. Seal and signature of land surveyor registered in the State of Connecticut. Original signature of such land surveyor must be provided.
__________23 Erosion and sediment control plan.
__________24 Seal and original signature of Professional Engineer (if applicable).
__________25 Drainage calculations including design of any required storm water facilities, sealed and signed by a professional engineer.
__________26 Grading plan – existing and proposed topography (if applicable).
__________27 Street layout, width, street names, plans and profiles, sidewalks.
__________28 Public improvement plan.
__________29 Utility plan (water, sewer, storm drainage, telephone, electric, etc.). Letter from private utility company.
__________30 All construction details.
__________31 Note on plan regarding public improvements – completion in five years.
__________32 Street R.O.W. width.
xii
__________33 Foundation drain outlet. Drains must not outlet into road or onto abutting property unless approved by the Town Engineer and into a drainage system.
__________34 Driveways over 8% in grade must be paved. No drainage from driveways shall outlet into the road creating potential icing conditions.
__________35 Total acreage of parcel.
__________36 Note on plan individual E&S Control plans to be provided with the development of each lot.
__________37 Inland Wetlands Commission approval.
__________38 Other applicable Commissions and/or Department approvals.
__________39 Unexecuted copies of deeds for expansion of existing road right-of-ways, proposed new right-of-way, easements, proposed public land (open space), (if applicable).
__________40 Intentions for use of remaining land. Layout for future development of land, if proposed.
__________41 Where possible lot lines shall follow existing stone walls.
__________42 Certify whether blasting is required and note on the plan. A pre-blast survey shall be conducted prior to blasting, and should include well water quality test for homes within 1,000 feet of the blast area.
__________43 List of waivers being requested.
__________44 Adequate sight distance for driveways.
__________45 Please provide Connecticut State plane coordinates for each property corner. Provide disc compatible for Arc View.
__________46 Other comments as noted below.
In the event the application entails the construction of a new road, the additional items need to be provided:
__________47 Road construction plans at a scale of 1” – 40’.
__________48 Locations, bearings, curve data with centerline elevations.
xiii
__________49 Drainage design, including watershed information, and gutter flow analysis. Provide narrative comparing run-off before and after the development, and what impact it will have on the downstream properties.
__________50 Utility line locations.
__________51 Sidewalk locations and detail, if proposed.
__________52 Road profiles and cross-sections:
a) Profiles of existing and finished grades along the centerlines and right-of-way lines of all existing and proposed streets coordinated by station with plot plan.
b) Profiles and cross or detail drawings of any special structure or other installations shall appear as inserts.
c) A typical cross section of the proposed street for the full width of the right-of-way. Cross sections shall indicate the shoulders, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, slopes, and other information with the appropriate specifications.
d) All elevations must be referenced at least to two (2) permanent or temporary benchmarks per sheet. The minimum spacing of benchmarks per sheet shall not be less than one thousand (1,000) feet. The datum used for level benchmarks shall be the U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey Datum.
__________53 Details of all improvements such as retaining walls, sidewalks, lighting, catch basins, etc.
__________54 Description of water supply system including hydrants.
__________55 Tree and planting plan, location and detail of signs, names of proposed streets.
__________56 Street grades not over 10% or up to 12% for a distance of not more than 250 feet.
__________57 Vertical and horizontal curves.
__________58 Crown or cross pitch of road.
__________59 Curbs and gutters.
__________60 Inspection of improvements notes.
xiv
__________61 Note on plan that as-built drawings of the road construction will be required.
__________62 Cost estimate prepared by a Professional Engineer licensed in the State of Connecticut. Prior to endorsement of the approved plan, a fee in the amount of 3% of the total cost of public improvements shall be paid to the town.
__________63 Adequate sight distance at intersection of new roads.
__________64 Is the road designed to allow for the weight of the heaviest Fire Apparatus used for fire protection for the Town of Preston?
__________65 Radii for proposed intersections (25’ required)
xv
APPENDIX 4
SAMPLE NOTICE OF INTENT TO SUBDIVIDE OR RESUBDIVIDE LAND
IN THE TOWN OF PRESTON, CT
xvi
Sample Notice of Intent to Subdivide OR
Re-subdivide Land in the Town of Preston, CT
Date
Name
Address
City, State, Zip
Dear Neighbor:
In accordance with the requirements of the Preston Subdivision Regulations – Section 3.1.3, I hereby notify you, as an abutting property owner, of my intent to Subdivide or Re-subdivide my property located on ____________________________________________________________, and more specifically identified as Lot #__________ on Map #__________, of the Preston Assessor’s Aerial Maps.
Attached is a copy of the legal notice appearing in the Norwich Bulletin describing the time, place, date and nature of the request to the Preston Planning and Zoning Commission.
A complete copy of this application is on file in the Preston Town Hall – Planning and Zoning Office. You may appear at the Public Hearing and be heard, and written communications may be forwarded to the Planning and Zoning Office prior to the Public Hearing.
Sincerely,
Name
Address
City, State, Zip
xvii
APPENDIX 5
COASTAL RESOURCES
xviii
xix
APPENDIX 6
SAMPLE SIGNATURE BLOCK
xx
SAMPLE SIGNATURE BLOCK
FOR APPROVAL OF SUBDIVISION PLANS
This plan was approved by vote of the Preston Planning and Zoning Commission on _____________________________________. Endorsed this __________ day of __________, 20_______, by _______________________________________________, (Commission Chairman or Secretary).
If the plan includes improvements, the following should be added:
Any improvements on this Plan shall be completed by ___________________ (date), or the Plan approval shall expire on that date.
SAMPLE SIGNATURE BLOCK
FOR CONDITIONAL APPROVAL OF SUBDIVISION PLAN
Conditional Approval by the Preston Planning and Zoning Commission was granted on _______________________________________ (date of Conditional Approval vote).
Signature of Chairman or Secretary Date Signed
Conditional Approval expires on ___________________________ (date).
Final Approval voted by the Preston Planning and Zoning Commission on _____________________________________________________ (date of Final Approval vote).
Signature of Chairman or Secretary Date Signed
xxi
APPENDIX 7
STREET TREES, CONCRETE STREET NAME POST
TYPICAL CROSS SECTION (50’ R.O.W.)
TYPICAL CUL-DE-SAC DETAIL
xxii
xxiii
xxiv
xxv
APPENDIX 8
SAMPLE BOND FORMS
xxvi
TYPICAL (INSURANCE) FORM SUBDIVISION PLAN BOND
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS:
THAT WE, _____________________________________________ as SURETY, are held and firmly bound unto THE TOWN OF PRESTON, CONNECTICUT, in the sum of $__________________________________ DOLLARS, to be paid to the said Town of Preston, Connecticut, its successors and assigns, firmly by these presents.
WHEREAS, the Principal has submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission of the Town of Preston, Connecticut, for its approval a Subdivision Plan # _______________ entailing: _________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________, and WHEREAS, the Planning and Zoning Commission of the Town of Preston, Connecticut has approved said subdivision plan condition that the said Principal file with the Town of Preston, Connecticut, a bond in the amount of $__________________________________ DOLLARS with sureties and in form approved by the Town and with conditions satisfactory to the Planning and Zoning Commission securing to the Town of Preston, Connecticut, actual completion within five (5) years of certain work and installations required by the Planning and Zoning Commission as more fully appears on the application maps, plans and profiles filed by the Principal.
NOW, THEREFORE, if said Principal within five (5) years after the plans were approved, or any approved extension, make and complete to the satisfaction of the Town of Preston Planning and Zoning Commission, in accordance with its Subdivision Regulations and approved plan, the work and installation herein referred to, this obligation after formal action to release said bond shall be by the Planning and Zoning Commission, otherwise to remain in full force and effect; the Principal, further, hereby grants to the Town of Preston a l license to enter upon the premises covered by this bond for the purpose of completing the work guaranteed hereby.
If there are any problems during the construction of the subdivision improvements with the installation or maintenance of the erosion and sediment control or any other improvements, the Obligor authorizes the Obligee at any time to apply the collateral posted with the Obligee to use such funds provided herein to repair, maintain or install any of the erosion and sediment control measures or any of the required improvements.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, we have hereunto set our hands and seals at ________________, Connecticut, this __________ day of _____________________, 20_____.
_____________________________________________________
By __________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________ Company
_____________________________________________________
By __________________________________________________
Approved:
Town Counsel
(This is an insurance bond form)
xxvii
(This form is used for passbooks)
All bank book bonds, regardless of type, shall be accompanied by a letter addressed to PRESTON PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION and signed by an officer of the subject bank, and said letter shall state the following:
RE: (Reference subdivision plan number, location and applicant)
The ____________________________________ has placed an Assignment Hold on Account # _______________________________________, in the amount of $______________________, effective _______________________________, 20______, for Subdivision Plan # ___________, property located at _____________________________________________________________.
Said account shall not be reduced or withdrawn until such time as the bank is notified in writing by the Planning and Zoning Commission as to the amount of the reduction or withdrawal.
The Town shall have the right to withdraw from the account at any time for the purpose of completing required site work as shown on the approved subdivision plan.
Signature _____________________________________________
Type or print name of authorized bank official and title
Name _______________________________________________
Title _______________________________________________
Consented by: (Signature of account holder) _________________________________________
Type or print name of account holder_______________________________________________
THIS IS NOT A FORM. LETTER MUST BE ON BANK LETTERHEAD.
xxviii
LAND USE APPLICATION
BONDING PROCESS
After approval of the application, a bond may be required to be filed with the Planning and Zoning Commission. The bond can be one of two formats: 1) a bank bond, or, 2) an insurance bond.
ACCEPTABLE BOND FORMS
Bank Bond – This format requires the applicant to obtain a letter from the bank, rather than a passbook. The letter states that the bank is placing an assignment hold on the account that will remain in the name of the applicant. The letter also states that the account cannot be withdrawn from unless approved by the Commission. The Commission has the right to withdraw from the account to complete the work in the event the applicant fails to meet the terms of the Commission’s approval. The letter is signed by an authorized bank official and is consented to by the applicant. An example letter is attached to this memo that can be used by the bank. In addition to the letter, a contract legally outlines the terms of the bond. In the event the applicant is a corporation, the corporate seal must be placed on the bond contract form. Once the letter from the bank and the contract is submitted to the Town Planner’s office, the Town Planner will review the bond. If acceptable, it may be sent to the Town Attorney for final review and approval (generally bonds over $50,000). If there are any concerns or problems, the Town Attorney will contact the Town Planner’s office to request that the applicant modify the bond. Once the bond is filed and all modifications of the approval have been met, the applicant may file the signed Mylar(s) of the subdivision or site plan (if required) with the Town Clerk.
Insurance Bond – The second bond form is an insurance bond. In addition to the surety company bond form, a separate bond contract is also executed. The contract, which is attached to this memo, outlines the terms of the surety bond. All bonding companies must be licensed in the State of Connecticut. These bonds will be reviewed by the Town Planner prior to submission to the Town Attorney for signature as applicable. If the Town Attorney requests changes, the Town Planner will contact the applicant to discuss the proposed changes to be made to the bond. Once the Town Attorney approves the final bond and all modifications are made to the plan, the signed Mylar(s) may be filed with the Town Clerk.
BOND RELEASE OR REDUCTION:
After part or all of the work is completed, a written request for a release or reduction must be submitted to the Town Planner’s office at least two (2) weeks before the regular Planning and Zoning Commission meeting. An inspection of the work will be completed and the Planner will submit your request to the Commission along with a recommendation as to whether or not the bond shall be released or reduced. After the Commission votes to approve the reduction or release, a letter will be prepared and forwarded to the Bank/Insurance Company. The letter must be signed by both the Town Planner and the Town Treasurer in order to authorize the release. It will take about one (1) week (after the Commission action) to process the letter for release or reduction.
If there are any questions regarding the bonding format, please contact the Town Planner’s office at (860) 887-5581 x109.