CODE OF ORDINANCES TOWN OF SEYMOUR, CONNECTICUT 
____________ 
CONTAINING 
THE CHARTER AND SPECIAL ACTS 
AND 
GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE TOWN 
____________ 
Published in 1987 by Order of the Board of Selectmen 
____________ 
Reprinted 2000 
____________ 

> 
____________ 
W. Kurt Miller 
First Selectman 
____________ 
Nicole Klarides-Ditria 
Deputy 
____________ 
Annmarie A. Drugonis 
Stephan Behuniak 
Karen Stanek 
Al Bruno 
Len Greene, Jr. 
Selectmen 
____________ 
Berchem, Moses & Devlin, PC 
Town Counsel 
____________ 
Susan DeBarber 
Town Clerk 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a complete republication of the ordinances of the Town of Seymour of a general and permanent nature. The Code supersedes all such ordinances not included therein or recognized as continuing in force by reference thereto. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1961 Code, as supplemented through March 7, 1978; the 1987 Code, as supplemented through December 6, 1994; and ordinances subsequently adopted by the board of selectmen. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the Comparative Tables appearing in the back of this volume, the reader can locate any section of the 1961 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Footnotes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state laws have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this volume. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. 
CHARTER CHT:1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 
CDB:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLES SLT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
Indices 
    The indices have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of the headings being couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by municipal officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within each index which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which he is interested. 
  
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this Code to which the attention of the user is especially directed is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing for the Code. With this system, the Code will be kept up-to-date periodically. Upon the final passage of amendatory ordinances, they will be properly edited and the page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the Code, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Successfully maintaining of this Code up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the volume. As revised sheets are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publishers that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
  
Acknowledgments 
    The republication of this Code was under direct supervision of Kyle Christopher, Supplement Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publishers are most grateful to Mr. Robert J. Koskelowski, First Selectman, Mr. Richard Bruchal, Town Counsel, and Mrs. Norma Drummer, Town Clerk, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this Code. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publishers have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the town readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the town's affairs. 
MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION 
Tallahassee, Florida 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Municipal Code will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord./Res. of Include/Omit Supp. No.  8- 8-13 Include 9 10- 1-13 Include 9  3- 4-14(1) Include 10  3- 4-14(2) Include 10  6- 4-14 Include 11  7-21-15(1) Include 12  7-21-15(2) Include 12  7-21-15(3) Include 12  7-21-15(4) Include 12 11-12-09(1) Include 13  3-13-14(1) Include 13  3-13-14(2) Include 13  5-18-14(1) Include 13 12-11-14(1) Include 13 10-20-15(1) Include 13  1- 1-15(1) Include 14  4-19-16(1) Include 14  4-19-16(2) Include 14  7-19-16(1) Include 14  7-19-16(2) Include 14  7-19-16(3) Include 14  7- 1-17 Include 15  6- 6-18(1) Include 16  
PART I - CHARTER AND SPECIAL ACTS 
SUBPART A. - CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- The Town of Seymour, Connecticut, Charter, as approved at an Election of November 2, 2004, effective January 1, 2005, is now located in a separate publication. The users attention is directed to the publication "Charter and Special Acts" located in the offices of the Town. 

Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal powers generally, G.S. § 7-148; powers of municipalities, G.S. § 7-194; municipal charters and special acts, G.S. §§ 7-187-7-201; municipal ordinances and regulations generally, G.S. §§ 7-148-7-186. 

Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
    The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances, Town of Seymour, Connecticut," and may be so cited. 
(Code 1961, § 1-1) 
Sec. 1-2. - Rules of construction and definitions. 
    In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances, the following rules shall be observed, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
    Code. Reference to "this Code" or "the Code" shall mean the Code of Ordinances, Town of Seymour, Connecticut, as designated in section 1-1. 
    County. The words "the county" or "this county" shall mean the County of New Haven, in the State of Connecticut. 
    Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department or officer of the town to do some act or make certain inspections it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department or officer to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act or make the required inspection unless the terms of the provision or section designated otherwise. 
    First Selectman. Reference to the "first selectman" shall mean the first selectman of the Town of Seymour, Connecticut. 
    Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. 
    Keeper and proprietor. The words "keeper" and "proprietor" shall mean and include persons, firms, associations, corporations, clubs and copartnerships, whether acting by themselves or through a servant, agent or employee. 
    Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and thing. 
    Officers, employees. The title of any officer or employee used herein shall be construed as if the words "of the town" followed it, and shall include his duly authorized representative. 
    Owner. The word "owner" applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant, or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
    Person. The word "person" shall extend and be applied to communities, societies, associations, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals. 
    Personal property. The term "personal property" shall include every species of property except real property, as herein defined. 
    Property. The word "property" shall include real and personal property. 
    Public place. The term "public place" shall include any and all streets, highways, and boulevards, alleys or other publicly owned or controlled ways and any and all publicly owned or controlled parks, squares, spaces, grounds and buildings. 
    Real property. The term "real property" shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
    Selectmen. Reference to "the selectmen" or "the board of selectmen" shall mean the board of selectmen of the Town of Seymour, Connecticut. 
    Shall, may. "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive. 
    State. The words "the state" or "this state" shall be construed to mean the State of Connecticut. 
    State law, general law or general statutes. The terms "state law, general law or general statutes" shall refer to the General Statutes of Connecticut, Revision of 1958, as amended. 
    Street. The word "street" shall be construed to embrace all accepted streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts and all other public ways. 
    Tenant, occupant. The word "tenant" or "occupant" applied to a building or land, shall include any person holding a written or oral lease of, or who occupies, the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others. 
    Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
    Time. All times prescribed in this Code shall be Eastern Standard Time, except that when daylight saving time is being observed in the State of Connecticut, such times shall be Eastern Daylight Time. 
    Town. The words "the town" shall mean the Town of Seymour in the County of New Haven and the State of Connecticut. 
(Code 1961, § 1-2) 
State Law reference- Rules of construction for terms used in the General Statutes, G.S. § 1-1. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections. 
    The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections including the catchlines are amended or reenacted. 
(Code 1961, § 1-3) 
Sec. 1-4. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances. 
    All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code of Ordinances which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code of Ordinances, may be numbered sequentially and shall make reference to the portion of this Code intended to be affected and shall be printed for inclusion herein. In the case of repealed chapters, articles, divisions, sections and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. 
(Code 1961, § 1-6) 
Sec. 1-5. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by town personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the board of selectmen. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the board of selectmen during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into the unified Code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _______ to _______" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but, in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-6. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
    The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect, unless expressly stated. 
    The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed under the ordinance repealed. 
(Code 1961, § 1-4) 
Sec. 1-7. - Severability of parts of Code. 
    If any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional by the valid judgement or decree of any court, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining provisions of this Code. 
(Code 1961, § 1-5) 
Sec. 1-8. - Altering Code. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend, by additions or deletions, any part of this Code of Ordinances or any ordinance of the town, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever with intent that any provision of this Code or other ordinance of the town shall be misrepresented, or with intent to commit a fraud thereby. 
(Code 1961, § 1-7) 
Sec. 1-9. - General penalty. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to violate or fail to comply with any provision of this Code, and where no specific penalty is provided therein, the violation of any provision of this Code shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $100.00. Each day any such violation shall continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such. 
(Code 1961, § 1-8) 
State Law reference- Penalties limited, G.S. 7-148(c)(10)(A). 
Sec. 1-10. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)  Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the town, or any evidence of the town's indebtedness; 
(2)  Any appropriation ordinance or ordinance providing for the levy of taxes or for an annual budget; 
(3)  Any ordinance annexing territory to the town or excluding territory as a part of the town; 
(4)  Any ordinance granting any franchise, permit or other right; 
(5)  Any zoning ordinance or regulations; 
(6)  Any subdivision ordinance or regulations; 
(7)  Any ordinance creating a special services district; 
(8)  Any ordinance approving, authorizing or otherwise relating to any contract, agreement, lease, deed or other instrument; 
(9)  Any ordinance adopting a preliminary plan or development plan; 
(10)  Any temporary or special ordinance; 
(11)  The civil service ordinance adopted August 7, 1984. 
and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length herein. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 4; elections, Ch. 5; fire department, § 6-21 et seq.; administration of flood regulations, § 7-21 et seq.; licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 10; parks and recreation, Ch. 12; planning, Ch. 13; zoning, App. A; subdivisions, App. B; regulations for the protection and preservation of inland wetlands and water courses, App. C; civil service, Ch. 4.5. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Maps recorded by clerk. 
    All maps filed with the town clerk shall be made in accordance with the state statutes. 
(Code 1961, § 2-3) 
State Law reference- Filing requirements of maps, G.S. § 7-31; maps of streets and highways, G.S. § 13-25. 
Sec. 2-2. - Contracts. 
    All contracts entered into by the town or any of its agencies, boards or commissions, shall first be reviewed by the town counsel before such contracts are entered into on behalf of the town. For the purposes of this section, solely, a purchase order shall not be deemed a contract. 
(Code 1961, § 2-5) 
Cross reference- Purchasing and selling, § 2-262 et seq. 
Sec. 2-3. - Chief executive officer to control governmental functions during disaster. 
(a)  In the event of disaster, the chief executive officer of the town will assume complete command of all local government functions and facilities including public school facilities and personnel. All available local resources will be brought to bear on the existent disaster in an effort to protect and preserve human life and property of the community, to the greatest extent possible. 
(b)  The authority of the chief executive officer of the town shall be limited only by the governor of the state in state-declared emergencies or the president of the United States of America in a declared national emergency. 
(Code 1961, § 2-17) 
Cross reference- Civil preparedness agency, § 2-111 et seq. 
Sec. 2-4. - TEAM, Inc.; town members of board of directors. 
    The board of selectmen are authorized and directed to nominate for election to the board of directors of TEAM, Inc., five citizens of the town who will serve with a board of 31 members: Eight from Milford, eight from Ansonia and five each from Derby, Seymour and Shelton, in accordance with its bylaws and certificate of incorporation to determine and recommend to the municipalities involved the most efficient and equitable use of funds available upon proper application under the Economic Opportunity Act of 1964, as amended. 
(Code 1961, § 2-13) 
Sec. 2-5. - Eminent domain. 
    That the Town of Seymour shall establish the following restrictions and requirements for the town's exercise of eminent domain: 
(a)  The board of selectmen must find that the taking of a private parcel of land has a significant and logical nexus to the safety health and/or welfare of its citizens and is within the scope of the municipal powers granted as enumerated in Section 7-78, C.G.S., prior to the scheduling of a town meeting to discuss and act upon the eminent domain proceedings. 
(b)  The board of selectmen must acquire two independent appraisals of the property sought to acquire prior to its negotiations to purchase with the owner. 
(c)  The board of selectmen must demonstrate that it has engaged in good faith negotiations with the owner of the subject property prior to the scheduling of a town meeting to discuss and act upon the eminent domain proceedings. 
(d)  The mere showing that the town may enjoy a revenue tax benefit from a particular taking will not be, in and of itself, adequate justification to proceed to an eminent domain proceeding. The board of selectmen must demonstrate and enumerate all benefits to the common good of the citizens of Seymour prior to its scheduling a town meeting to discuss the eminent domain proceedings. 
(e)  The town shall not sell, lease, transfer or in any other way convey any private premises taken by it to a private individual or business entity. Any property taken by eminent domain must be used for the stated purpose unless it becomes impracticable or impossible to so use such property. In the event that the said property cannot be used for the stated purpose then said property shall be offered for sale to the original owner for an amount paid by the town under the eminent domain proceedings. If the owner is not available or declines the offer under this section the subject property shall be offered at a public auction within two months of the determination that said owner is not available or declines the offer. 
(f)  Eminent domain shall not be employed for the sole purpose of obtaining open spaces or restricting housing development. 
(Ord. of 10-4-05(1)) 
Editor's note- At the discretion of the editor, the provisions of the ordinance adopted Oct. 4, 2005, have been set out as § 2-5. Said provisions did not expressly amend the Code. 
Secs. 2-6-2-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, COMMITTEES AND AGENCIES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- Elected boards, Ch. 2; organization of boards, Ch. 4; board of library directors, Ch. 5; board of education, Ch. 6; appointed boards, Ch. 10. 
Cross reference- Building commission, § 4-51 et seq.; board of building appeals, § 4-66 et seq.; composition of board for admission of electors, § 5-4; board of library directors, § 12-31 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-21-2-30. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - COMMITTEE ON THE AGING[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference- Committee on the aging, § 10.15. 
State Law reference- Authority to establish committee on the needs of the aging, G.S. § 7-127a. 

Sec. 2-31. - Established; membership. 
    There shall be a committee to study the needs of and coordinate programs for the aging of the town, consisting of the first selectman, ex officio, and four other members to be appointed by the first selectman. 
(Code 1961, § 2-15) 
Sec. 2-32. - Duties. 
    The committee on the aging shall make a continuing study of the needs of elderly in relation to housing, welfare, health, recreation and other matters. It shall analyze the services for the aged provided by the community both by public and private agencies, in cooperation with state and other services to the extent possible. 
(Code 1961, § 2-15) 
Sec. 2-33. - Compensation of members. 
    The members of the committee on the aging, so appointed, shall serve without compensation. 
(Code 1961, § 2-15) 
Sec. 2-34. - Terms of members. 
    The members of the committee on the aging, except the first selectman who shall ex officio be a member for the term of his office, shall be appointed as follows: Of the four members initially appointed two shall be appointed for a term of one year and two for two years. Thereafter, as such terms expire, members shall be appointed for two years. All terms shall begin on April first, of the year in which such appointment shall be made. 
(Code 1961, § 2-15) 
Sec. 2-35. - Vacancies. 
    Vacancies in the membership of the committee on the aging shall be filled by the first selectman. 
(Code 1961, § 2-15) 
Charter reference- Vacancies on appointed boards, § 9.3. 
Sec. 2-36. - Organization. 
    At the first meeting in April, the committee on the aging shall elect a chairman, vice-chairman and secretary from among its members whom shall serve until 31st of the ensuing year. 
(Code 1961, § 2-15) 
Sec. 2-37. - Finances, contracts, agreements. 
    The town meeting may make appropriations to cover the expenses of the committee on the aging including reasonable clerical services. The committee on the aging shall not enter into any contract, agreement or any other financially binding obligation without the express approval of the board of selectmen and where required by the general statutes, any special act or town ordinance, the approval of the board of finance shall be obtained prior to any contract, agreement or any other financially binding obligation. 
(Code 1961, § 2-15) 
Sec. 2-38. - Annual report. 
    The chairman of the committee on the aging shall annually make a report to the board of selectmen of the recommendations and studies of said commission not later than December thirtieth of each year. 
(Code 1961, § 2-15) 
Secs. 2-39-2-45. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - BOARD OF ETHICS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Charter reference- Board of ethics, § 10.6. 
Cross reference- Board of ethics generally, § 2-241. 

Sec. 2-46. - Created. 
    There is hereby created a board of ethics in accordance with section 10.6 of the Town Charter, which board shall have all the powers outlined in section 10.6 of the Charter. 
(Code 1961, § 2-45) 
Sec. 2-47. - Composition; terms; vacancies. 
    The board of ethics shall be composed of five resident electors no more than a bare majority of whom may be members of the same political party. The first selectman shall appoint all members to the board of ethics. Of the five members initially appointed, one shall be appointed for a term of five years, one for a term of four years, one for a term of three years, one for a term of two years and one for a term of one year. Thereafter, upon the expiration of the initial term of any member of the board, the first selectman shall appoint a new member to fill the expired term. In the event a vacancy exists on the board of ethics, the first selectman shall appoint a new member to fill the vacancy for the unexpired term. All subsequent appointments to the board of ethics filling expired terms shall be for a term of two years. In no event may any member of the board of ethics serve on the board for a period of more than five years in succession. Any member having served for five years in succession shall be ineligible for reappointment to the board of ethics for a period of two years after he last served on the board of ethics. Each member shall serve until his successor has been appointed. 
(Code 1961, § 2-46) 
Charter reference- Vacancies on appointed boards, § 9.3. 
Secs. 2-48-2-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - MUNICIPAL FLOOD AND EROSION CONTROL BOARD[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Flood damage prevention, Ch. 7; regulations for the protection and preservation of inland wetlands and water courses, App. C. 

Sec. 2-61. - Purpose. 
    Whereas the threats of flood and erosion are a constant menace to the citizens of the town and whereas the sense of the board of selectmen is that the town should take adequate steps to remedy and guard against this threat. It is therefore, the purpose of this division to protect the citizens of the town by making provisions for flood and erosion control within the town. 
(Code 1961, § 2-59) 
Sec. 2-62. - Selectmen to constitute board. 
    Pursuant to authority granted within section 25-84 of the general statutes, the board of selectmen hereby declares itself to be and constitutes the flood and erosion control board of the town and hereby assumes the power to act as such flood and erosion control board with the town. 
(Code 1961, § 2-60) 
Sec. 2-63. - Powers and duties. 
    The municipal flood and erosion control board shall have authority, within the limits of appropriations from time to time made by the municipality, to plan, lay out, acquire, construct, reconstruct, repair, maintain, supervise and manage a flood or erosion control system. As used in this division, "flood or erosion control system," means any dike, berm, piping, groin, jetty, seawall, embankment, revetment, tidegate, water storage area, ditch, drain or other structure or facility useful in preventing or ameliorating damage from floods or erosion, whether caused by fresh or salt water, and shall include any easements, rights-of-way and riparian rights which may be required in furtherance of any such system. 
(Code 1961, § 2-60) 
Sec. 2-64. - Authority to purchase, condemn, etc., property. 
    The municipal flood and erosion control board is authorized to enter upon and to take and hold by purchase, condemnation or otherwise, any real property or interest therein which it determines is necessary for use in connection with the flood or erosion control system. Whenever the board is unable to agree with the owner of any such property as to the compensation to be paid for the taking thereof, the board, in the name of the municipality, may bring condemnation proceedings in accordance with the procedure provided by the general statutes for condemnation by municipalities generally. In such case, the court or judge may permit immediate possession of such property by the board in accordance with the procedure provided by such statutes. 
(Code 1961, § 2-61) 
Sec. 2-65. - Issuance of bonds; assessments of costs against property. 
    At any time after voting to acquire, construct or reconstruct any flood or erosion control system or portion thereof, the municipal flood and erosion control board in its discretion may elect to defray the cost thereof, by issuing bonds or other evidences of debt, or from general taxation, special assessment or any combination thereof. If it elects to defray any part of such cost from special assessment, it may apportion and assess such part upon the lands and buildings in the municipality which, in its judgment, are especially benefited thereby, whether they abut on such flood or erosion control system or not, and upon the owners of such lands and buildings, subject to the right of appeal as hereinafter provided. Such assessment may include a proportionate share of any expenses incidental to the completion of such flood or erosion control system, such as fees and expenses of attorneys, engineers, surveyors, superintendents or inspectors, the cost of any property purchased or required for such work, interest on securities, the cost of preparing maps, plans and specifications, and the cost of printing, publishing or serving advertisements or notices incidental thereto. The municipal flood and erosion control board may divide the total territory to be benefited by any flood or erosion control system into sections and may levy assessments against the property benefited in each section separately. In assessing benefits against the property in any section, the board may add to the cost of the part of the flood or erosion control system located in such section, a proportionate share of the cost of any part of such system, located outside the section which is useful for the operation or effectiveness of that part of such system within the section and of any of the other items of cost or expense above enumerated. 
(Code 1961, § 2-62) 
Sec. 2-66. - Determination of assessment. 
    Whenever any assessment is made as provided in this division, the amount to be raised thereby shall be apportioned among the properties benefited according to such rules as the municipal flood and erosion control board may adopt, based upon area, street frontage, assessed valuation of the land in the last-completed grand list of the municipality, the present or permitted use of any real property in the section, or any combination of these or other relevant factors. The municipal flood and erosion control board may make reasonable allowances when for any reason the particular condition or situation of any property requires such allowance. No benefits shall be assessed against any property in excess of the special benefit to accrue to such property. Assessments under this part shall be made subject to the provisions of the general statutes relating to assessments. 
(Code 1961, § 2-63) 
Sec. 2-67. - Procedure when assessment unenforceable or insufficient. 
    If any assessment is not valid or enforceable for any reason, a new assessment may be made in the manner hereinbefore provided for the determination of the original assessment. If any assessment is made which is not sufficient to cover the entire cost of the work to be paid for by such assessment, a supplementary assessment may be made by the municipal flood and erosion control board against those properties previously assessed, to the end that a sum sufficient to pay the cost of such work may be obtained, provided the total of such supplementary assessment and the original assessment shall not exceed the value of the special benefit to accrue to the property against which the benefit is assessed. 
(Code 1961, § 2-64) 
Sec. 2-68. - When assessments due; notification. 
    Assessments shall be due and payable at such time as may be fixed by the municipal flood and erosion control board, provided no assessment shall become due until the work, or particular portion thereof for which such assessment was levied, has been completed. The municipal flood and erosion control board shall give notice of the date when such assessments are due and payable by publication at least twice within a period of 15 days in a newspaper having a circulation in the municipality, listing the streets and describing the area within which are located the properties against which assessments are due. Such notice shall state the date when such assessments are due and payable, which date shall be more than 30 and less than 60 days after the date of the first such publication. 
(Code 1961, § 2-65) 
Sec. 2-69. - Installment payment of assessment. 
    The municipal flood and erosion control board may provide for the payment of such assessments in such number of substantially equal annual installments, not exceeding 20, as it determines, and may provide for interest charges on any deferred payments. Any person who has elected to pay his assessment in more than one installment, may make payment at any time in full of the whole or such part of such assessment as still remains unpaid. 
(Code 1961, § 2-66) 
Sec. 2-70. - Use of assessment proceeds. 
    The proceeds of such assessments, whether or not pledged for the payment of securities, shall be segregated from other funds of the municipality and shall be used only to pay for the construction or reconstruction of the flood or erosion control system or particular portion thereof in respect to which such assessments are made or, as the case may be, for the payment of the interest on or principal of any securities issued to pay for such system or particular portion thereof. 
(Code 1961, § 2-67) 
Sec. 2-71. - Delinquent accounts. 
    Any assessment against benefited property not paid within 30 days of the due date shall thereupon be delinquent and shall be subject to interest from the due date at the same interest rate and in the same manner as provided by the general statutes in the case of delinquent taxes, provided, in the case of an assessment payable in installments, interest shall be computed on the entire unpaid balance of such assessment from the due date of the last installment which was paid, or from the due date of the assessment if no previous installment has been paid. Each addition of interest shall become, and be collectible as, a part of such assessment. Whenever any installment of an assessment becomes delinquent, any remaining unpaid installments of such assessment shall also become delinquent; provided, if all past due installments, together with interest and any other charges, have been paid in full, remaining installments may be paid without additional penalty, except for subsequent default, in accordance with the original installment schedule. 
(Code 1961, § 2-68) 
Sec. 2-72. - Cooperation with state and federal governments. 
    The flood and erosion control board established under this division, is authorized to negotiate, cooperate and enter into agreements with: 
(1)  The United States, 
(2)  The United States and the State of Connecticut, or 
(3)  The State of Connecticut, 
in order to satisfy the conditions imposed by the United States or the State of Connecticut in authorizing any system for the improvement of navigation of any harbor or river and for protection of property against damage by floods or by erosion, provided such system shall have been approved by the commissioner of environmental protection. 
(Code 1961, § 2-69) 
Sec. 2-73. - Agreements with state to control erosion and damage. 
    The board may enter into agreements with the state for the purpose of constructing projects or systems to prevent, correct and arrest erosion and flood damage, such as are provided in the general statutes. 
(Code 1961, § 2-70) 
Secs. 2-74-2-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - SAFETY COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-91. - Composition. 
    There shall be a safety commission consisting of the first selectman, the chief of police, the superintendent of schools, the building inspector, the town director of civil defense, the fire marshal and such other additional members, not in excess of five representing town agencies, as the first selectman shall, subject to the disapproval of the board of selectmen, from time to time, appoint. 
(Code 1961, § 2-75) 
Sec. 2-92. - Duties. 
    The duties of the safety commission shall be to make such recommendations, from time to time, as it deems appropriate, to the various boards and commissions in the town with respect to possible amendments, rules and regulations designed to foster the promotion of safety for the citizens of the town. 
(Code 1961, § 2-76) 
Secs. 2-93-2-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - WELFARE ADVISORY BOARD[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Welfare advisory boards authorized, G.S. § 7-127. 

Sec. 2-101. - Established; membership. 
    There shall be a municipal welfare advisory board for the town. The welfare advisory board shall consist of three persons not more than two of which shall be members of the same political party. Initially, one member shall be appointed for a term of three years, the second member shall be appointed for a term of two years and a third member shall be appointed for a term of one year. 
(Code 1961, § 2-96) 
Sec. 2-102. - Functions; compensation of members. 
(a)  The function of the welfare advisory board shall be to assist the first selectman in the administration of the town welfare program in such matters as the first selectman in his discretion shall determine and to render advise to the first selectman in the administration of the program. 
(b)  The members of the welfare advisory board shall serve without compensation. 
(Code 1961, § 2-96) 
Secs. 2-103-2-110. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - CIVIL PREPAREDNESS AGENCY[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference- Chief executive officer to control governmental functions during disaster, § 2-3. 
State Law reference- Civil preparedness, G.S. Title 28. 

Sec. 2-111. - Established; appointment of director. 
    There shall be created an agency of town government to be known as the civil preparedness agency. The civil preparedness agency shall be under the supervision of a director or coordinator of all disaster emergency functions. Such director/coordinator of the civil preparedness agency shall be appointed by the chief executive of the town. The director/coordinator of the civil preparedness agency will serve at the will of the chief executive and may be removed by the chief executive at any time. The director/coordinator may also be removed from his position as provided in section 28-7(b) of the general statutes. 
(Code 1961, § 2-97) 
State Law reference- Local organizations for civil preparedness authorized, G.S. § 28-7. 
Sec. 2-112. - Director's powers and duties. 
(a)  The director/coordinator of the civil preparedness agency is a staff man reporting directly to the chief executive officer of the town. 
(b)  As a staff man he will advise the chief executive officer on matters pertaining to civil preparedness and disaster emergency operations. He will coordinate the activities of all town agencies in disaster emergency situations but in no case will he assume command of any agency or department other than the civil preparedness agency unless directly ordered to do so by the chief executive officer. 
(c)  The director of the civil preparedness agency will coordinate the activities of all civil preparedness agency forces, both full-time and volunteer and will be responsible for the recruitment and training of needed civil preparedness personnel. As a staff man he will assist the chief executive in the preparation and updating of town emergency operations plans and standing operating procedures. 
(d)  The director of the civil preparedness agency will maintain contact with the state civil preparedness agency area office designated for the town and will cooperate with the state civil preparedness agency in preparation of required reports, procedures, and other necessary paper work to ensure the town receives all possible funding, equipment and other benefits available to the town through state and national civil preparedness agencies. 
(e)  The director of the civil preparedness agency will perform such other civil preparedness-related functions as may, from time to time, be assigned to him by the chief executive of the town. 
(Code 1961, § 2-98) 
Secs. 2-113-2-130. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-131. - Created; duties and purpose. 
    A communications commission is hereby created. It shall have charge of all communications equipment purchased and maintained by the town with funds appropriated by the town. The purpose of this commission is to provide coordination between the various departments in the town to ensure that any equipment purchased will be compatible with an integrated system. 
(Code 1961, § 2-99) 
Sec. 2-132. - Composition; appointment, term of members. 
(a)  The communications commission shall consist of six members. 
(b)  Two members shall be appointed to this commission for a term terminating three years from date of appointment. Two members shall be appointed to this commission for a term terminating two years from date of appointment. Two members shall be appointed for a term terminating one year from date of appointment. All subsequent members of this commission shall be appointed for a term of three years. Five of the members shall be representatives of the following: police department, civil defense association, ambulance association, fire commissioners and the public works. The sixth member shall not be a member of any of the above organizations. The appointments shall be made by the first selectman. 
(Code 1961, § 2-100) 
Secs. 2-133-2-140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - BEAUTIFICATION COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-141. - Composition; appointment, term of members. 
(a)  There shall be a beautification commission consisting of five members. 
(b)  Initially one member shall be appointed for a term of one year, two for a term of two years and two for a term of three years. Subsequent thereto, all members shall be appointed for the term of three years. 
(Code 1961, § 2-102) 
Sec. 2-142. - Duties. 
    The purpose of the beautification commission shall be to advise the board of selectmen of beautification and conservation projects of benefit to the town and to undertake same at the direction and under the supervision of the board of selectmen. The board shall consult with and cooperate with the conservation commission and the inland-wetlands and watercourse agency as to such projects. 
(Code 1961, § 2-102) 
Secs. 2-143-2-150. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 10. - EMPLOYEE SAFETY COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-151. - Created; membership; compensation. 
(a)  There is hereby created an employee safety committee of the town, consisting of 12 members and there shall not be more than two members from any one department. The first appointments for the organization of the committee shall be for a term to expire on November 17, 1981. Thereafter, appointments shall be made for one-year terms. Appointment shall be made by the first selectman. 
(b)  Members shall serve without remuneration and upon termination of employment, his term of office shall cease. 
(Ord. of 10-20-81(1), § 1) 
Sec. 2-152. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the employee safety committee is to promote safety among town employees and officers in the discharge of their duties and to reduce the amount of insurance liability claims. 
(Ord. of 10-20-81(1), § 2) 
Sec. 2-153. - Vacancies. 
    Vacancies on the employee safety committee shall be filled by the first selectman. Any such appointments shall be for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
(Ord. of 10-20-81(1), § 3) 
Charter reference- Vacancies on appointed boards, § 9.3. 
Sec. 2-154. - Organization; officers. 
    The employee safety committee shall elect one of its members each year to serve as chairman, vice-chairman, and secretary/treasurer. The committee will meet on a regular monthly basis to review and act upon any matter involving safety in municipal operations. 
(Ord. of 10-20-81(1), § 4) 
Secs. 2-155-2-160. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 11. - ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note- Codification of a nonamendatory ordinance adopted May 5, 1987, as Div. 11, §§ 2-160.1-2-160.7, of Ch. 2, Art. II was at the editor's discretion. 
Charter reference- Economic development commission, § 10.4. 

Sec. 2-160.1. - General. 
    The economic development commission shall have all duties outlined in section 10.4 of the Town Charter and the following sections. 
(Ord. of 5-5-87) 
Sec. 2-160.2. - Duties as advisory commission; reports. 
    The economic development commission on passage of this division will act as an advisory commission to the planning and zoning commission, zoning board of appeals, inland wetland commission, long range planning commission, zoning enforcement officer, and the building inspector concerning all industry in the Town of Seymour. The economic development commission will give a written report to the above boards, commissions, and officials of their findings as outlined in this division. 
(Ord. of 5-5-87, § A) 
Cross reference- Building inspector, § 4-26 et seq.; planning, Ch. 13; enforcement of zoning regulations by planning and zoning commission, zoning enforcement officer, App. A, § 1.4; zoning board of appeals, App. A, § 5.1 et seq.; conservation commission's duties under inland wetlands and watercourses regulations, App. C, § 4.3 et seq. 
Sec. 2-160.3. - Industry reports of operations. 
(a)  All industry locating and located in the Town of Seymour whether in existing buildings or adding on to existing buildings or new buildings, must submit a written report to the economic development commission on the type of building (square footage and number of floors), type of product to be manufactured, type of machines to be used, days of work per week, hours of work each day each shift, number of shifts per day, and an estimated amount of truck traffic that the industry will generate on a normal work week (Monday through Friday). 
(b)  The economic development commission upon receiving a written report from the industry locating, or located in Seymour will work with town counsel using all the zoning regulations in the Town of Seymour, give a written advisory report within 60 days to the planning and zoning commission, zoning board of appeals, inland wetland commission, long range planning commission, zoning enforcement officer, and the building inspector of their findings, whether the industry locating, or located in the Town of Seymour falls within the zoning regulations for that site. 
(Ord. of 5-5-87, §§ B, C) 
Sec. 2-160.4. - Expansion or change of industrial operations. 
(a)  Once an industrial operation is located in the Town of Seymour and plans to expand or plans to change any of its operations for more than 30 calendar days in any one year including, but not limited to, the type of product to be manufactured, any hazardous or toxic material to be stored or used in their operation, the addition of any new machinery that has not been included in their original proposal, days of work, hours of work, number of shifts, [or] increases of truck traffic generated by the industry, [such industrial operation] must submit in writing to the economic development commission of any and all changes the industry is requesting to make. The industrial operation may not make any changes referred to in this division until the economic development commission has submitted their written advisory report to the planning and zoning commission, zoning board of appeals, inland wetland commission, long range planning commission, zoning enforcement officer, and the building inspector, and [such changes have been] approved by the proper board, commission, and/or town officials. 
(b)  The economic development commission will advise in writing to the planning and zoning commission, zoning board of appeals, inland wetland commission, long range planning commission, zoning enforcement officer, and the building inspector within 30 days whether the industry requesting the change(s) in the expansion or operations conforms with Seymour's zoning regulations for that specific area of town that the industry has made their request. 
(Ord. of 5-5-87, §§ D, E) 
Sec. 2-160.5. - Review of commission's advisory report. 
    The planning and zoning commission, zoning board of appeals, inland wetland commission, long range planning commission, zoning enforcement officer and the building inspector will not issue any permits or sign any approvals until they have received and reviewed the written advisory report of the economic development commission and that all provisions of this division have been followed. Questions concerning the zoning regulations and/or legal questions will be in writing to town counsel and answered in writing by town counsel within ten days. 
(Ord. of 5-5-87, § F) 
Sec. 2-160.6. - Industry checks by zoning enforcement officer. 
    The zoning enforcement officer will periodically check any industry which has a previous history of violating the [zoning] ordinance. 
(Ord. of 5-5-87, § G) 
Sec. 2-160.7. - Penalties for violations. 
(a)  Any industry that continues to violate any part of this division or that has violated any part of this division will have to rectify the violation(s) within 30 calendar days. 
(b)  Any industry that continues to violate any part of this division will be responsible to pay to the Town of Seymour all the town's legal costs and any other costs to the town with regard to this division. 
(c)  Any industry that violates any part of this division that fails to rectify the violation(s) within 30 calendar days will be fined $200.00 each calendar day from the first day of the violation. 
(Ord. of 5-5-87, §§ (1)-(3)) 
Secs. 2-160.8-2-160.10. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 12. - ARTS AND CULTURE COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-160.11. - Established; responsibilities; appointments; terms. 
    This division establishes an arts and culture commission. The board shall be comprised of seven members who shall work for the advancement of arts and culture in Seymour. Their responsibilities will include, but not be limited to, the facilitation and operations of a municipal theater, arts programs and cultural events for the benefit of our community. Initial appointments will be as follows: Two members one year, two members two years, and three members three years. After that terms will be three years. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94(1)) 
Secs. 2-160.112-2-160.120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 13. - MUNICIPAL AQUIFER PROTECTION AGENCY[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted April 25, 2004, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, inclusion as Ch. 2, Art. II, Div. 13, §§ 2-160.121-2-160.123 was at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 2-160.121. - Designation and membership. 
(a)  In accordance with the provisions of Conn. Gen. Stat. Section 22a, et seq., the conservation commission is hereby designated as the Aquifer Protection Agency (hereinafter the "agency") of the Town of Seymour. 
(b)  Members of the conservation commission shall serve coexisting terms on the agency. The membership requirements of the agency shall be the same as those of the conservation commission including but not limited to the number of members, terms, method of selection and removal of members, and filling of vacancies. 
(c)  At least one member of the agency or staff of the agency shall complete the course in technical training formulated by the Commissioner of Environmental Protection of the State of Connecticut, pursuant to Conn. Gen. Stat. Section 22a-354v. 
(Ord. of 4-20-04(1), § 1) 
Sec. 2-160.122. - Regulations to be adopted. 
(a)  The agency shall adopt regulations in accordance with Conn. Gen. Stat. Section 22a-354p and R.C.S.A. Section 22a-354i-3. Said regulations shall provide for: 
(1)  The manner in which boundaries of aquifer protection areas shall be established and amended or changed. 
(2)  Procedures for the regulation of activity within the area. 
(3)  The form for an application to conduct regulated activities within the area. 
(4)  Notice and publication requirements. 
(5)  Criteria and procedures for the review of applications. 
(6)  Administration and enforcement. 
(Ord. of 4-20-04(1), § 2) 
Sec. 2-160.123. - Inventory of land use. 
(a)  In order to carry out the purposes of the aquifer protection program, the agency will conduct an inventory of land use within the area to assess potential contamination sources. 
(b)  Not later than three months after approval by the Commissioner of the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection of Level B Mapping of aquifers, the agency will inventory land uses overlying the mapped zone of contribution and recharge areas of such aquifers in accordance with guidelines established by the commissioner pursuant to Conn. Gen. Stat. Section 22a-354f. Such inventory shall be completed not more than one year after authorization of the agency. 
(Ord. of 4-20-04(1), § 3) 
Secs. 2-160.124-2-260-130. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 14. - FRIENDS OF THE BROAD STREET PARK COMMISSION[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted March 4, 2014, did not specifically amend the Code; hence inclusion as Ch. 2, Art. II, Div. 14, §§ 2-160.131-2-160.134 was at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 2-160.131. - Establishment, membership. 
    There shall be established a commission designated as the Friends of the Broad Street Park Commission. It shall consist of seven members appointed by the first selectman, subject to approval by the board of selectmen. The board shall select officers from the duly appointed members. All members shall serve a term of two years. 
(Ord. of 3-4-14(1), § A) 
Sec. 2-160.132. - Duties. 
    The commission shall be responsible for monitoring the condition of the Broad Street Park, making recommendations relating to the Broad Street Park including, but not limited to, the first selectman, the board of selectmen, the public works department and the parks commission. The commission shall report to the parks commission on its findings, conclusions and recommendations on no less than a quarterly basis. 
(Ord. of 3-4-14(1), § B) 
Sec. 2-160.133. - Fundraising. 
    The commission shall conduct and coordinate fundraising efforts for the purpose of maintaining and improving the Broad Street Park. All fundraising activities must be approved in advance by the first selectman. All funds raised must be reported to the finance department on town approved forms. All such funds shall be deposited into a Town of Seymour special revenue account. 
(Ord. of 3-4-14(1), § C) 
Sec. 2-160.134. - Expenditure of funds. 
    Subject to prior approval by the parks commission, the Broad Street Park Commission is authorized to spend funds raised for the benefit of the Broad Street Park. All such expenditures shall be set forth on a town requisition form. 
(Ord. of 3-4-14(1), § D) 
Secs. 2-160.135-2-160.140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 15. - STRATEGIC PLANNING COMMISSION[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted March 4, 2014, did not specifically amend the Code; hence inclusion as Ch. 2, Art. II, Div. 15, §§ 2-160.141, 2-160.142 was at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 2-160.141. - Establishment, membership. 
    There shall be established a commission to study the needs, challenges and conditions affecting the Town of Seymour. The commission shall be known as the strategic planning commission. It shall consist of seven members with minority representation considered, appointed by the first selectman, subject to approval by the board of selectmen. Each member shall serve a term of two years. 
(Ord. of 3-4-14(2), § A; Ord. of 7-19-16(2)) 
Sec. 2-160.142. - Duties. 
    The commission shall study and assess the conditions and needs of the town. It shall produce a written strategic planning report detailing a strategic plan for the next ten-year period and recommending strategic goals and priorities. The report shall be filed with the board of selectmen annually. The commission shall report annually its findings, conclusions and recommendations to the board of selectmen for appropriate action each December. The commission shall elect a chairperson by majority vote and hold meetings at least quarterly. On a semiannual basis, the commission shall, at a minimum, meet with the first selectman and the staff he or she deems necessary for the purpose of discussing the implementation of the strategic plan and measuring the progress, if any, achieved. 
(Ord. of 3-4-14(2), § B; Ord. of 7-19-16(2)) 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND OFFICIALS[12] 
Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Charter reference- Vacancies in elected offices, § 3.4; compensation of officials, § 4.2; general appointments, Ch. 9; engineer, § 10.5; town counsel, § 10.17; treasurer, § 10.19; officer's bonds, § 17.4. 
Cross reference- Building inspector, § 4-26 et seq.; registrars of voters' terms of office, § 5-7; housing code enforcement officer, § 9-61; tax collector to make payments of monies received to treasurer, § 15-1; records to be kept by treasurer, § 15-2; sewer inspector, § 17-86 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-161-2-170. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TOWN CLERK[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Charter reference- Town clerk, § 17.8. 
State Law reference- Town clerks, G.S. § 7-16 et seq. 

Sec. 2-171. - Compensation. 
    Effective May 1, 1982, the position of town clerk shall become a salaried position with the annual salary to be fixed annually by the board of finance and board of selectmen and approved at the annual town budget meeting. Effective May 1, 1982, all fees and commissions paid to the town clerk shall be forwarded to the town treasurer for deposit into the general fund account of the town. 
(Ord. of 4-7-82) 
Secs. 2-172-2-180. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ASSESSOR[14] 

Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
Charter reference- Finance and taxation, Ch. 12. 
Cross reference- Taxation and finance, Ch. 15. 
State Law reference- Appointment of town assessors, G.S. § 9-185. 

Sec. 2-181. - Office established; selection; term; compensation. 
(a)  There is hereby established the office of full-time assessor. The full-time assessor shall be employed by the first selectman from a list of applicants found qualified after a thorough examination at which at least one member of the board of selectmen shall be present. The examination shall be designed to determine the technical competence, general aptitude and suitability of the applicants. The full-time assessor shall hold office until his successor is duly employed and qualified, and shall be subject to discharge for cause. Cause shall not include discharge for political reasons. Such discharge for cause shall take place only after a hearing by the board of selectmen. He shall at no time engage in activities constituting a conflict of interest and shall be charged with the responsibility for the conduct of his department and for discharge of the duties of assessor as provided by law subject to the supervision of the board of assessors. His salary and mileage allowance shall be determined from time to time by the board of selectmen upon the recommendation of the board of finance. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to affect the terms of office of the assessor presently holding office in the town. 
(c)  The full-time assessor shall be covered by any civil service ordinance which may be enacted by the town and shall be subject to its provisions. 
(Code 1961, § 2-16) 
Secs. 2-182-2-190. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - JUSTICES OF THE PEACE[15] 

Footnotes: 
--- (15) --- 
Charter reference- Justices of the peace to be elected at the state elections, § 2.1(a); vacancies in the office of justice of the peace, § 3.4(d). 
Cross reference- Elections, Ch. 5. 
State Law reference- Election of justices of the peace, G.S. § 9-183(a). 

Sec. 2-191. - Number limited. 
    The number of justices of the peace for the town shall be limited to its present number of 300 in accordance with the provisions of Section 9-183a, C.G.S. 
(Code 1961, § 2-9; Ord. of 7-19-16(1)) 
Secs. 2-192-2-200. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - DEMOLITION OFFICER[16] 

Footnotes: 
--- (16) --- 
Charter reference- Administrative appointments, § 9.1. 
State Law reference- Municipalities to appoint demolition, officer, G.S. § 19-403e. 

Sec. 2-201. - Authorized. 
    The board of selectmen is authorized to designate an elector of the town to serve as demolition officer. 
(Code 1961, § 2-14) 
Secs. 2-202-2-210. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - FINANCE DIRECTOR[17] 

Footnotes: 
--- (17) --- 
Charter reference- Finance and taxation, Ch. 12. 
Cross reference- Taxation and finance, Ch. 15. 

Sec. 2-211. - Office established. 
    There is hereby established the office of full-time finance director, duly appointed by the first selectman. 
(Ord. of 10-20-81(2)) 
Sec. 2-212. - General statement of duties. 
    The finance director develops, installs, and maintains accounts financial and purchasing procedures; supervises the preparation of payrolls and accounts payable to the general fund of the town government; directs the purchasing program of the town, except the purchases of the board of education; coordinates fiscal activities of town offices, boards and commissions and reports same to the board of finance, town treasurer, and board of selectmen and assists the first selectman in preparing the annual operating and capital improvement budget. 
(Ord. of 10-20-81(2)) 
Sec. 2-213. - Supervision. 
(a)  Received. The finance director works under the administrative direction of the first selectman. 
(b)  Exercised. The finance director supervises clerical workers engaged in related accounting, payroll, and purchasing work as directed by the first selectman. 
(Ord. of 10-20-81(2)) 
Sec. 2-214. - Examples of duties. 
    The finance director reviews purchasing requisitions from department heads; maintains list of vendors and updates same; allocates expenditures to disbursements; makes deposits and records revenue; reconciles bank and cash balances monthly for all funds; reviews bank information and bond rating data; is responsible for monthly trial balances and cash balances on all funds; does other related work as directed by the first selectman. 
(Ord. of 10-20-81(2)) 
Sec. 2-215. - Minimum qualifications. 
    The finance director shall possess the following minimum qualifications: 
(1)  Knowledge, skill, and ability. Considerable knowledge of the principles and methods of centralized purchasing; thorough knowledge of accounting and auditing principles and practices and their computerized application to varied accounting transactions; ability to use business office machines; ability to make arithmetical computations with speed and accuracy; ability to deal effectively with members of the town government in the field of finance administration. 
(2)  Education, training, and experience. Graduation from an accredited college or business school with training in accounting or finance administration or not less than three-year's employment in the field of accounting, auditing or municipal finance administration, or in lieu thereof any equivalent combination of experience and training. 
(Ord. of 10-20-81(2)) 
Sec. 2-216. - Removal. 
    The full-time finance director shall hold office until his successor is duly employed and qualified and shall be subject to discharge for cause. Cause shall not include discharge for political reasons. Such discharge for cause shall take place only after a hearing by the board of selectmen. He shall at no time engage in activities constituting a conflict of interest and shall be charged with the responsibility for the conduct of the finance office. 
(Ord. of 10-20-81(2)) 
Secs. 2-217-2-225. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - EMPLOYEE BENEFITS 

Sec. 2-226. - State retirement act adopted by reference. 
    The town hereby accepts the provisions of sections 7-425 through 7-450 of the general statutes, an act entitled "Retirement of Municipal Employees," for all full-time employees of all departments and for the first selectman, town clerk and tax collector. 
(Code 1961, § 2-6) 
Sec. 2-227. - Retirement system divided into two classes. 
    In accordance with the authority set forth in section 7-426 of the general statutes and in accordance with section 218(d)(7) of the Social Security Act, the retirement system as it applies to the employees of the town is hereby divided into two separate and distinct parts, to be called part A and part B as follows: 
(1)  Part A is to be composed of positions of members of such system who have not expressed a desire for social security coverage and the positions covered by such system of individuals who are ineligible to become members of such system. 
(2)  Part B is to be composed of positions of members of such system who have expressed their desire for social security coverage and the positions of all individuals becoming members of such system after the date social security coverage is extended. 
(Code 1961, § 2-7) 
Sec. 2-228. - Participation in social security. 
(a)  The town shall apply for membership to participate in the Old Age and Survivors' Insurance System under Title II of the Social Security Act, as amended, in accordance with sections 7-451 through 7-455 of the general statutes, as of the first day of January, 1956, for all its employees in positions covered under the State Municipal Employees' Retirement System and the employees excluded by section 7-454 of the general statutes. The board of selectmen is authorized to execute on behalf and in the name of the town any and all agreements with the State Employees' Retirement Commission for the aforesaid purpose in accordance with and subject to the provisions of the general statutes and subject to the regulations promulgated by the State Employees' Retirement Commission pursuant to the general statutes. The board of selectmen is hereby authorized and directed to make deductions from the wages of the employees participating in the aforesaid Old Age and Survivors' Insurance System as required by section 7-453 of the general statutes and to forward the amount thereof together with the contribution of the town to the State Employees' Retirement Commission in the manner and form prescribed by such regulations. 
(b)  The town shall apply for membership to participate in the Old Age and Survivors' Insurance System under Title II of the Social Security Act as amended in accordance with sections 7-451 through 7-455 of the general statutes as of the first day of January 1956, for all its employees with the exception of services of an emergency nature, and the employees excluded by section 7-454 of the general statutes. The board of selectmen is authorized to execute on behalf and in the name of the town any and all agreements with the state employees' retirement commission for the aforesaid purpose in accordance with and subject to the provisions of the general statutes and subject to the regulations promulgated by the State Employees' Retirement Commission pursuant to the general statutes. The town treasurer is hereby authorized and directed to make deductions from the wages of the employees participating in the aforesaid Old Age and Survivors' Insurance System as required by section 7-453 of the general statutes and to forward the amount thereof together with the contribution of the town to the State Employees' Retirement Commission in the manner and form prescribed by such regulation. 
(Code 1961, § 2-8) 
Secs. 2-229-2-235. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - CODE OF ETHICS[18] 

Footnotes: 
--- (18) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. of May 18, 1993, did not specifically amend the Code; hence inclusion herein as superseding former Art. V, §§ 2-236-2-241, was at the discretion of the editor. See the Code Comparative Table. 
Charter reference- Board of ethics, § 10.6. 
Cross reference- Board of ethics, § 2-46 et seq. 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to adopt a code of ethical conduct, G.S. § 7-148(c)(10)(B). 

Sec. 2-236. - Declaration of policy. 
    There is hereby established a code of ethics for all town officers, employees and officials whether elected or appointed, paid or unpaid. The purpose of this code is to establish suitable ethical standards for all such officers, employees and officials by prohibiting acts or actions incompatible with the discharge of their public duties and the best interests of the Town of Seymour; and by directing disclosure of private financial interest or personal interest in matters affecting the town by such officers, employees, and officials. Any violation of this code of ethics may constitute a cause for suspension, removal from office or employment or other disciplinary actions as more particularly set forth in section 1-7(g). 
(Ord. of 5-18-93, § 1-1) 
Sec. 2-237. - Definitions. 
    As used in this code [article] the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
    Board means the Seymour Ethics Board. 
    Business with which he is associated means any sole proprietor, partnership, firm, corporation, trust or any other entity through which business for profit or not for profit is conducted in which the public official or town employee or member of his or her immediate family is a director, officer, owner, limited or general partner, beneficiary of a trust or holder of stock constituting five percent or more of the total outstanding stock of any class, provided, a public official or town employee, or member of his or her immediate family, shall not be deemed to be associated with a not-for-profit entity solely by virtue of the fact that the public official or town employee or member of his or her immediate family is an unpaid director or officer of the not-for-profit entity. 
    Confidential as used herein shall mean personal matters and financial matters which, if disclosed, would be of detrimental interest to the town and a violation of the trust placed in that person. 
    Employees shall include all employees of the town of all governmental bodies created under the provisions of the Town Charter. 
    Gift means a payment, subscription, advance, forbearance, rendering of services, deposit of money, or anything of value unless consideration of equal or greater value is received. "Gift" shall not include a political contribution otherwise reported as required by law; services provided without compensation by persons volunteering their time, a commercially reasonable loan made on terms not more favorable than loans made in the ordinary course of business; a gift received from an individual's spouse or the parent, brother, sister of such spouse, or such spouse or such individual, or the child or the spouse of such child; or food or beverage or both, costing less than $50.00 per person and consumed on a single occasion at which the person paying, directly or indirectly, for the food or beverage, or his representatives, is in attendance. 
    Immediate family means any spouse, children or dependent relatives who reside in the individual's household. 
    Interest shall include private financial benefit and interest other than financial, arising from blood or marriage relationships or close business or political association. 
    Officials shall include elected and appointed officials and officers, whether paid or unpaid, and members of all governmental bodies created under the provisions of the Town Charter, and all other town ordinances and applicable statutes. 
    Participating as used herein shall include the rendering of advice, or recommendation, investigation, approval, disapproval, or otherwise influencing a decision or action. 
    Words of the masculine gender shall include the feminine. 
(Ord. of 5-18-93, § 1-2) 
Sec. 2-238. - Conflict of interest prohibited. 
(a)  No officer, employee or official shall engage in or participate in any business, transaction or proceedings, or shall have an interest, direct or indirect, which is incompatible with the proper discharge of his official duties in the public interest or would tend to impair his independent judgment or action in the performance of his official duties. 
(b)  Any officer, employee or official has an interest which is in substantial conflict with the proper discharge of his duties or employment in the public interest and of his responsibilities as prescribed by the law of this state, and by the Charter, ordinances and regulations of the Town of Seymour, if he has reason to believe or expect that he, his spouse, a dependent child, or a business with which he is associated, as defined in section 1-2(f), will derive a direct monetary gain or suffer a direct monetary loss, as the case may be, by reason of his official activity. Any such officer, official or employee does not have an interest which is in substantial conflict with the proper discharge of his duties in the public interest and of his responsibilities as prescribed by the laws of this state, and by the Charter, ordinances and regulations of the Town of Seymour, if any benefit or detriment accrues to him, his spouse, a dependent child or a business with which he, his spouse or such dependent child is associated as a member of such profession, occupation or group to no greater extent than to any other member of such profession, occupation or group. Any such officer, official or employee who has a substantial conflict may not take official action on the matter. 
(c)  No former officer, employee, or official shall appear at any time before any town board or agency in which he was formerly employed, acting or participating on behalf of the town in connection with any matter or case with which he was associated while an officer, employee or official at any time within a period of one year after termination of his service with the town. Any such former officer, employee or official may, upon a written application to the board of ethics and filed with the town clerk, be released from this obligation after review of said written application and the relevant facts of his case by the board of ethics. 
(d)  No officer, employee or official shall solicit or accept any substantial gift, whether in the form of a service, loan, thing, or promise, which to his knowledge is interested in any manner in business dealings with the town. 
(e)  Any officer, employee or official who has a substantial or controlling financial or personal interest in any transaction or contract with the town, or in the sale or real estate, material, supplies, or services to the town, on which he may be called to act upon in his official capacity, shall refrain from voting upon or otherwise participating in the transaction on behalf of the town. Any such officer, employee or official shall also be required to disclose said interest to the town clerk and board of ethics in the manner, time, and form set forth in section 1-5 of this Code. 
(f)  No officer, employee or official shall appear in behalf of private interests before any board, agency or committee of the town; nor shall he represent private interest in any action or proceeding against the interest of the town in any litigation to which the town is a party. Nothing herein shall prohibit the officer, employee or official from appearing before any board or commission on his behalf. No officer, employee or official shall, without proper authorization, disclose confidential information concerning town affairs, nor shall he use such information to advance the financial interests or private interests of himself or others. 
(Ord. of 5-18-93, § 1-3) 
Sec. 2-239. - Non-discrimination. 
(a)  Any such complaints alleging a violation of this part [article] shall be referred to the Seymour Board of Selectmen and any investigation will be conducted pursuant to the provision of the Connecticut General State Statutes, Section 7-148i. 
(b)  No officer, employee or official shall discriminate against or favor any individual, or cause, based solely upon race, color, creed, sex or age. 
(c)  No officer, employee or official shall request or permit the use of town owned vehicles, equipment, facilities, materials, or property for personal convenience or profit, except when such are available to the public generally or are provided as municipal policy for the use of such officer, employee or official in the interest of the town. 
(d)  No officer, employee or official shall grant any special consideration, treatment, favor, or advantage to any person beyond that which is generally available to residents and/or taxpayers of the town. 
(Ord. of 5-18-93, § 1-4) 
Sec. 2-240. - Written disclosure of interest. 
    Any officer, employee or official having any financial or private interest as designated in section 1-3(e) shall file written disclosures of said interest with the town clerk and the board of ethics as soon as he becomes aware of such interest. Said written disclosure shall set forth in detail the nature and extent of such interest. 
(Ord. of 5-18-93, § 1-5) 
Sec. 2-241. - Board of ethics. 
(a)  There is hereby created a board of ethics which shall be charged with the administration of the code of ethics. 
(b)  The board of ethics shall consist of five members and three alternates as provided in the Charter of the Town of Seymour. Terms of members and alternates shall be as provided by Charter. Appointments shall be governed as provided by the Charter of the Town. In no event may any member of the board serve on said board for a period of more than five years in succession. Any member having served for five years in succession shall be ineligible for reappointment to the board for a period of two years after he last served on the board of ethics. Each member shall serve until his successor has been appointed. 
(c)  The board shall promulgate and adopt reasonable rules and regulations for the administration of its proceedings. The rules and regulations so promulgated and all amendments thereto shall be made available at the office of the town clerk to any elector of the town. 
(d)  If the board of ethics shall receive complaints against any officer, employee, or official of the town, the investigation and disposition of which have been delegated to other boards or commissions created by the Charter, then in that event the board of ethics shall forward the complaint received to the appropriate board or commission to which such complaints are forwarded. Said board or commission shall thereafter notify the board of ethics of the disposition made of said complaint, and the board of ethics shall review said disposition. 
(e)  The board of ethics may upon the written request of any officer, employee, or official, or resident of the town, or upon its own initiative render written advisory opinions concerning any matters relating to the code of ethics. 
(f)  All opinions and recommendations of the board of ethics, whether advisory or the result of a complaint, shall be kept on file within the board of ethics. 
(g)  A Quorum shall consist of four members of the board. 
(Ord. of 5-18-93, § 1-6) 
Sec. 2-242. - Complaint procedure. 
(a)  Upon the complaint of any person on a form prescribed by the board, signed under penalty of false statement, or upon its own complaint, the board shall meet and decide if there is sufficient evidence to warrant an investigation to determine if there is probable cause to believe there has been a violation of the code. 
(b)  If there is insufficient evidence to warrant an investigation to determine probable cause, or the complaint is beyond the purview of the authority and/or responsibility of the board, the complaint will be dismissed, the respondent will be notified of the complaint and decision not later than five days after so meeting by registered or certified mail and a copy of the complaint shall accompany such notice. The complainant will be notified of the receipt of the complaint not later than five days after so meeting. 
(c)  If the board determines that there is sufficient evidence to warrant an investigation to determine probable cause, it shall so notify any respondent against whom such complaint is filed by certified or registered mail not later than five days after so meeting. A copy of the complaint shall accompany said notice. The board shall also notify the complainant of its receipt of said complaint not later than five days after so meeting. 
(d)  An investigation to determine probable cause will be conducted by the board and any hearings regarding this matter will be held at the discretion of the board. 
(e)  If the board determines that there is no probable cause to believe the respondent is in violation of the code, the respondent and complainant will be so notified by certified or registered mail no later than three business days after the completion of the probable cause investigation. Said notice will include a summary of the board's reasons for making that finding. 
(f)  If an investigation indicates that probable cause exists for the violation of a provision of this code, the board shall initiate hearings to determine if there has been a violation of the code. The respondent and complainant will be so notified by certified or registered mail no later than three business days after completion of the probable cause investigation. The board shall also make public a finding of probable cause not later than five business days after termination of the investigation. 
(g)  The board shall report to the board of selectmen its findings as to whether or not a violation of the code of ethics has occurred, and may make recommendations as to the disposition to be made. The board of selectmen shall thereupon take such action as they may deem appropriate or take action in accordance with the provisions of the Town Charter. 
(Ord. of 5-18-93, § 1-7) 
Sec. 2-243. - Confidentiality. 
(a)  [Generally.] Pursuant to the provisions of Section 7-148h of the Connecticut General Statutes and the Charter for the Town of Seymour, the board of ethics is empowered to investigate allegations of unethical conduct, corrupting influence or activities levied against any municipal official, officer or employee. 
    The provisions of subsection (a) to (e) inclusive of section 1-82a (Connecticut General Statutes) shall apply to allegations before the board of ethics of such conduct, influence or activities, to an investigation of such allegations conducted prior to a probable cause finding, and to a finding of probable cause or no probable cause. The board of ethics may issue subpoenas or subpoenas duces tecum enforceable upon application to the superior court to compel the attendance of persons at hearings and the production of books, documents, records and papers. The respondent shall also have the right to be represented by legal counsel and to examine and cross-examine witnesses. 
(b)  Section 1-82a. Confidentiality of complaints and investigations; publication of findings. 
(1)  Unless the commission makes a finding of probable cause, a complaint alleging a violation of this part shall be confidential except upon the request of the respondent. A commission evaluation of a possible violation of this part prior to the filing of a complaint by the commission shall be confidential except upon the request of the subject of the evaluation. If the evaluation is confidential, any information supplied to or received from the commission shall not be disclosed to any third party by a subject of the evaluation, a person contacted for the purpose of obtaining information or by a commission or staff member. No provision of this section shall prevent the ethics commission from reporting the possible commission of a crime to the state's attorney. 
(2)  An investigation conducted prior to a probable cause finding shall be confidential except upon the request of the respondent. If the investigation is confidential, the allegation in the complaint and any information supplied to or received from the commission shall not be disclosed during the investigation to any third party by a complainant, respondent, witness, designated party, or commission or staff member. 
(3)  Not later than three business days after the termination of the investigation, the commission shall inform the complainant and the respondent of its findings and provide them a summary of its reasons for making that finding. The commission shall publish its finding upon the respondents' request and may also publish a summary for making such finding. 
(4)  If the commission makes a finding of no probable cause, the complaint and the record of its investigation shall remain confidential, except upon the request of the respondent and except that some or all of the record may be used in subsequent proceedings. No complainant, respondent, witness, designated party, or commission or staff member shall disclose to any third party any information learned from the investigation, including knowledge of the existence of a complaint, which the disclosing party would not otherwise have known. If such a disclosure is made, the commission may, after consultation with the respondent, if the respondent is not the source of the disclosure, publish its finding and a summary of its reasons therefor. 
(5)  The commission shall make public a finding of probable cause not later than five business days after the termination of the investigation. At such time the entire record of the investigation shall become public, except that the commission may postpone examination or release of such public records for a period not to exceed 14 days for the purpose of reaching a stipulation agreement pursuant to subsection (d) of section 4-177. 
(Ord. of 5-18-93, § 1-8) 
Sec. 2-244. - Savings clause. 
    Should any provision of this code of ethics conflict with any provisions of federal law or the State of Connecticut General Statutes, the provisions of the federal law or the State of Connecticut General Statutes shall prevail. 
(Ord. of 5-18-93, § 1-9) 
Sec. 2-245. - Amendments. 
    This code of ethics may be amended only by ordinance in conformity with the provisions of the Town Charter. 
(Ord. of 5-18-93, § 1-10) 
Secs. 2-246-2-250. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PURCHASING AND SELLING[19] 
Footnotes: 
--- (19) --- 
Charter reference- Duty of first selectman to establish purchasing procedures for the town, § 8.2; purchasing, § 17.6. 
Cross reference- Contracts to be reviewed by town counsel, § 2-2. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-251-2-260. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PURCHASING 

Sec. 2-261. - Scope. 
    The purpose of this division is to obtain the best available price for quality materials, goods and services provided by a responsible party, by requiring competitive bids for all such items furnished to the town over the value of $25,000.00 exempting those goods and services specifically exempted by this article. 
(Code 1961, § 2-26; Ord. of 2-5-08(3)) 
Sec. 2-262. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Emergency shall be defined as an unforeseen combination of circumstances which calls for immediate action by the town. 
    Goods shall mean any material, supply, service, product, and any intangible benefit or protection to be purchased or contracted for by the town. 
    Purchase shall mean any purchase for consideration or contract for purchasing, including a continuing order or contract made over a period of time by the board of selectmen or any other agency of the town except the board of education. 
    Services shall be defined to include the labor of any contractor, tradesman or artisan, but not to include the services of attorneys, physicians, architects or other persons in the professions who are prohibited by the rules of their professional associations, from entering into competitive bid processes. Such services are hereby defined to exclude any service usually performed, or which the board of selectmen deem can and should be performed by permanent town employees. 
(Code 1961, § 2-26.1) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 2-263. - Expenditures over twenty-five thousand dollars; bids; written contract; notice. 
    Whenever any services must necessarily be done to execute or perfect a particular municipal undertaking, or any goods or products are needed for any particular municipal purpose, and the several parts of said services or goods shall together involve the expenditure of more than $25,000.00, a written contract for such work or supply shall be made, under such regulations as the board of selectmen or other board authorized may by vote direct, which contract shall be founded on sealed bids or proposals made in compliance with public notice, and advertised by publication in a newspaper having a circulation in the town at least five days before the time fixed for opening such bids or proposals. 
(Code 1961, § 2-28; Ord. of 2-5-08(3)) 
Sec. 2-264. - Bids-Publicly opened by board of selectmen. 
    All bids or proposals shall be publicly opened by the board of selectmen or other authorized board which has advertised for the same whether or not there is a quorum. The awarding of bids shall require a majority vote of the board voting. 
(Code 1961, § 2-29) 
Sec. 2-265. - Same-Rejection; award to lowest bidder. 
    The board reserves the right to reject any and all bids. The board shall award the contract within 60 days of opening the bids to the lowest responsible qualified bidder; the quality of the articles supplied, the past experience with the bidder, their suitability to the requirements of the town government, delivery terms and other relevant factors being taken into consideration where it appears to be in the best interest of the town. 
(Code 1961, § 2-30; Ord. of 2-5-08(3)) 
Sec. 2-266. - Deposit of check or bid bond with board-Prerequisite to reception of bid. 
    Whenever proposals for furnishing supplies or doing work are invited by an advertisement by the board of selectmen, or other authorized board, such board is directed to require as a condition, precedent to the reception of any proposal, a bid bond or deposit with the board of a check drawn to the order of the town treasurer. This check or bid bond shall be required for goods and services over the amount of $25,000.00 unless specified in the standard conditions of bid or bid proposal package. This check or bid bond shall be for an amount of not less than five percent of the amount required by such bid to be paid by the town for the proposed services to be done or supplies to be furnished to the town. 
(Code 1961, § 2-31; Ord. of 6-29-98; Ord. of 2-5-08(3)) 
Sec. 2-267. - Same-Return of checks or bid bonds; forfeiture. 
    Within five days after it is decided who is the successful bidder, the board of selectmen or other authorized board shall release all such checks or bid bonds to the persons depositing the same, except the check or bid bond deposited by the successful bidder for such contract; and if the successful bidder shall refuse or neglect five days after due notice that the contract has been awarded to him to execute the same, the amount of the deposit made by him shall be forfeited to and retained by the town, as liquidated damages for such neglect or refusal, and shall be paid into the treasury of the town; but if the successful bidder shall execute the contract within the time aforesaid, the amount of his deposit shall be returned to him provided, when required, an acceptable performance bond has been furnished. 
(Code 1961, § 2-32) 
Sec. 2-268. - Purchases exempt from provisions requiring public bid. 
(a)  Any purchase or contract for purchasing which is authorized by town meeting action may be exempted from the provisions of this article by the action of the town meeting authorizing the purchase. 
(b)  Service of attorneys, physicians, architects or other persons prohibited by the rules of the profession governing the offer of their services are exempt. 
(c)  Any purchase or contract to purchase by the board of education is exempt. 
(d)  The provisions of this division shall not apply to purchases or contracts to purchase any commodity or service requiring an expenditure of less than $25,000.00, unless required by the town meeting action authorizing the purchase or contract to purchase or unless the board of selectmen or the board of education determines that the purchase or contract would be more advantageous if sealed bids were invited. 
(e)  1.  If the money is available in the budget, the provisions of this division shall not apply to the purchase of any goods or services which the board of selectmen by affirmative vote of at least four members determines: 
a.  To be needed by the town for some proper purpose; and 
b.  That such need is emergent in its nature to such a degree that the time required for the advertising and competitive bid requirements of this article would impose a substantial hardship upon the town; or 
c.  That a lower price for the purchase of any goods or services could be obtained by soliciting quotes rather than by inviting bids. 
(2)  The vote of the board of selectmen shall be taken at a duly called meeting and the board of selectmen shall state in writing the nature of the emergency and hardship, or the reasons why soliciting quotes would obtain a lower cost. After such determination is made by the board, the board of selectmen may award a contract for such goods or services so exempted from the requirements hereof. 
(3)  An "emergency" shall be defined as an unforeseen combination of circumstances which calls for immediate action by the town. 
(4)  If sufficient money is not available in the budget, the board of selectmen must request the necessary approval from the board of finance. 
(f)  The purchase or contract to purchase any replacement part of a single piece of equipment which is supplied by the dealer who originally furnished the equipment is exempt. 
(g)  Any purchase or contract to purchase made in conjunction with a consortium of municipalities organized to maximize the purchasing power of the member municipalities is exempt. 
(h)  Any purchase or contract to purchase from a contractor on the list of State Contracts Available to Agencies, Towns and Municipalities established following competitive bid and awarded by the State of Connecticut, Department of Administrative Services, Procurement Services is exempt. 
(Code 1961, § 2-33; Ord. of 10-16-84; Ord. of 11-19-02(1); Ord. of 2-5-08(3)) 
Sec. 2-269. - Bid procedures. 
(a)  The board of selectmen or any other spending agency requiring the purchase of the commodity or service, shall prepare specifications in sufficient detail to invite bids on the highest quality at the lowest price, competition will allow. 
(b)  The invitation to bid, the form to be used by bidders in making their proposals, the bond for performance, and the contract, if any, required to be executed by the lowest successful bidder, shall all be approved by the town counsel. 
(c)  In preparation of bid specifications, if any trade, product or copyright names are used in such specifications, the words "or equal" shall be included following the names of such branded item. All such specifications shall contain a general provision to the effect that the equal of the goods or services required will be accepted. 
(Code 1961, § 2-34) 
Sec. 2-270. - Bid preference for Seymour-based business. 
(a)  For the purpose of this section "Seymour-based business" shall mean a business with a principal place of business located within the town. A business shall not be considered "town-based business" unless evidence satisfactory to the first selectman has been submitted with each bid submitted by said business to establish said business has a bona fide principal place of business in Seymour. Such evidence may include evidence of ownership of or a long term lease of the real estate from which the principal place of business is operated or payment of property taxes on the personal property of the business to be used in performance of the bid. 
(b)  On any project the cost of which is less than $500,000.00 the lowest responsible bidder shall be determined in the following order. 
(1)  Any town-based bidder which has submitted a bid not more than five percent higher than the low bid provided such town-based bidder agrees to accept the award of the bid at the amount of the low bid. If more than one town-based bidder has submitted bids not more than five percent higher than the low bid and has agreed to accept the award of the bid at the amount of the low bid, the lowest responsible bidder shall be that one of such town-based bidders which submitted the lowest bid. 
(2)  The low bidder. 
(c)  On any project the cost of which is $500,000.00 or more, the provisions of paragraph (b) above shall not apply. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94(2)) 
Secs. 2-271-2-280. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SALE 

Sec. 2-281. - Scope. 
    The purpose of this division is to get the highest possible price for the property which a department of the town deems no longer of use to that department. This property shall be disposed of by sale, through the use of sealed bids. The sale shall be to the highest bidder as regards another department of the town which wishes to acquire or purchase the property. 
(Code 1961, § 2-35) 
Sec. 2-282. - Definition. 
    For the purposes of this division "property" shall mean all property other than real property. 
(Code 1961, § 2-36) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 2-283. - Advertising. 
    If the property to be sold has a value of less than $200.00, advertising shall consist of a notice on the town bulletin board in the town hall. If the value is in excess of $200.00 it shall be advertised in a paper of general circulation for one day at the direction of the first selectman. If the first selectman deems it appropriate, wider advertising shall be undertaken. The time of advertising may also be extended up to 15 days. The advertisement shall state: the property to be sold, the time and date on which bids shall close, any conditions pertinent to the sale, when bids shall be opened, how and when payment must be made, and the amount of deposit to be sent in with the bid. This section is subject to section 2-285. 
(Code 1961, § 2-37) 
Sec. 2-284. - Minimum price. 
    The head of the department seeking to dispose of the property in consultation with the first selectman, shall set a minimum price for which the property shall be sold. No bids will be accepted below the minimum price stated. If no bids are received for the minimum price, a new minimum price may be set and the property readvertised. The minimum price for property which can be used for trade-in on other property to be acquired by the department, shall be the amount of trade-in that has been offered for this property. 
(Code 1961, § 2-38) 
Sec. 2-285. - Other town departments desiring to purchase or acquire the property. 
    Before a notice advertising the property is sent out, after the first selectman and head of the department disposing of the property have set a minimum price, a notice shall be sent to all town departments on the type of property to be disposed of and the minimum price. Any department may buy this property for the minimum price without the property going out to public bid, or the first selectman at his discretion may transfer the property to any department without payment. 
All departments shall be given three working days to respond to the notice; then the notice shall be advertised for public bid. 
(Code 1961, § 2-39) 
Sec. 2-286. - Bids. 
(a)  All bids must be received by first selectman by the specified date. All bids must be sealed. All bids must be legibly printed or typed in letter form or on the town's bid form. All bids must be signed by the bidder. The bids must contain a description of the property bid on, the price bid, the name and address of the bidder. Each bid shall be accompanied by a certified check for at least five percent of the amount of the bid. Each bid shall be dated when received by the first selectman. In the event of identical bids, the first received shall be accepted. 
(b)  The bids shall be opened by the board of selectmen at their first meeting after the close of bids. The first selectman shall then post a notice of the highest bid on the town bulletin board in the town hall. The highest bidder shall also be notified by mail. Any bid, or all bids, may be rejected by the board of selectmen if they consider it in the best interest of the town. 
(Code 1961, § 2-40) 
Sec. 2-287. - Acceptance and payment. 
    The highest bid shall be accepted when payment of the full bid amount is made. The highest bidder is given three working days from the time of posting of the notice of the highest bid on the town hall bulletin board in which to make payment to the first selectman. If the highest bidder does not pay within the three days, the second highest bid shall be considered the highest bid, and the process shall be repeated. Payment shall be made by cash, certified check, or bank check. 
(Code 1961, § 2-41) 
Sec. 2-288. - Removal. 
    All property must be removed from town property within three working days after payment is made. If not removed, the property will be removed by the town at the purchaser's expense. 
(Code 1961, § 2-42) 
Secs. 2-289-2-294. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - HEARING PROCEDURE FOR TOWN CITATIONS AND FINES[20] 

Footnotes: 
--- (20) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted March 2, 2004, did not specifically amend the Code; hence inclusion as Ch. 2, Art. VI, Div. 4, §§ 2-295-2-302 was at the discretion of the editor. Subsequently, an amendment of September 1, 2009, effective September 22, 2009, amended Div. 4, §§ 2-295-2-302, in its entirety to read as herein set out. 

Sec. 2-295. - Hearing officer or committee. 
    The first selectman shall appoint one or more hearing officers or committee to conduct hearings authorized by ordinance or state statute in the manner as herein provided. The hearing officers or committee shall serve for a term of two (2) years and shall be appointed in accordance with applicable provisions of Article 9 of the Town Charter. Town employees, police officers or persons authorized under ordinance or statute to issue citations shall not be eligible to serve as citation hearing officers. 
(Ord. of 3-2-04(1), § A; Ord. of 9-1-09, § A) 
Sec. 2-296. - Notice to violator of citation. 
    At any time within twelve (12) months from the expiration of the final period for the uncontested payment of fines, penalties, costs or fees for any citation issued under any ordinance adopted pursuant to Section 7-148 of the Connecticut General Statutes for an alleged violation thereof the Town of Seymour shall, upon the direction of its hearing officer or committee send notice to the alleged violator. This notice shall include the following information: 
1.  The allegations against such person and the amount of the fines, penalties, costs or fees due; 
2.  That such person may contest his liability before a citation hearing Officer by delivering, by mail or in person, written notice of his intent to appeal within ten (10) days of the date of the notice; 
3.  That if such person does not demand a hearing an assessment and judgment shall be entered against him; and 
4.  That such person shall not receive further notice of the issuance of such judgment from the town. 
    This section shall only apply to enforcement action provided to the Town of Seymour under the Connecticut General Statutes. 
(Ord. of 3-2-04(1), § B; Ord. of 9-1-09, § B) 
Sec. 2-297. - Admission of liability. 
    Any person sent notice pursuant to section 2-296 of this division may admit liability for the alleged violation. He may pay, without requesting a hearing, by mail or in person, the full amount of the fines, penalties, costs or fees admitted to, directly to the administrative assistant to the first selectman. Payment to be made out to Town of Seymour. The administrative assistant shall provide such person with a receipt of such fine, penalties, costs or fees. Such payment shall be inadmissible in any proceeding, civil or criminal, to establish the conduct of such person or other person making the payment. 
(Ord. of 3-2-04(1), § C; Ord. of 9-1-09, § C) 
Sec. 2-298. - Admission of liability for failure to respond. 
    Any person who fails to deliver or mail a written demand for a hearing within ten (10) days of the date of the first notice provided under section 2-296 of this division shall be deemed to have admitted liability and the administrative assistant shall certify such person's failure to respond to the hearing officer or committee. The hearing officer or committee shall thereupon enter and assess the fines, penalties, costs or fees provided for by applicable ordinances and shall file his the decision in writing with the town clerk's office within fourteen (14) days of the date thereon. 
(Ord. of 3-2-04(1), § D; Ord. of 9-1-09, § D) 
Sec. 2-299. - Hearing procedure. 
    Any person requesting a hearing under section 2-296 of this division shall be given written notice of the date, time and place for the hearing. Such hearing shall be held not less than fifteen (15) days, nor more than thirty (30) days from the date of the mailing of this notice, provided that the hearing officer or committee shall grant, upon good cause shown, any reasonable request by any interested party for a postponement or continuance. Any person requesting a hearing under this ordinance may be represented by an attorney at his own expense. 
    The procedure for the hearings will be in accordance with the following: 
1.  An original or certified copy of the initial citation issued by the issuing official or policeman shall be filed with the administrative assistant to the first selectman and retained as a business record within the scope of section 52-180 and evidence of the facts contained therein. Such original or copy shall be introduced as evidence before the hearing officer. 
2.  The presence of the police officer or issuing official shall be required at the hearing if the violator so requests in writing no later than five (5) days before such hearing is scheduled. 
3.  A person wishing to contest his liability shall be present at such hearing and may present evidence in his behalf. If such person fails to appear, the hearing officer or committee may enter an assessment against him upon finding of proper notice and liability under the applicable ordinance. 
4.  The alleged violator may submit police reports, investigatory and citation reports and any other official documents by mail to the hearing officer or committee. The hearing officer may determine, after reviewing these documents, that the appearance of the violator is unnecessary. 
5.  A designated municipal official, other than the hearing officer or committee, may present evidence on behalf of the municipality at any hearing held under this ordinance. 
6.  Any hearing conducted under this ordinance shall be done in a fair, just and impartial manner. The hearing officer or committee shall conduct the hearing in the order and form and with such methods of proof as he they deems fair and appropriate. The rules regarding admissibility of evidence shall not be strictly applied but all testimony will be given under oath. 
7.  The entire hearing shall be tape recorded and such recording shall be retained by the town for one (1) year, or longer if directed by town counsel. 
(Ord. of 3-2-04(1), § E; Ord. of 9-1-09, § E) 
Sec. 2-300. - Hearing officer's or committee's decision. 
    The hearing officer or committee shall announce the decision at the end of the hearing. 
    If the hearing officer or committee finds that the person requesting the hearing is not liable for violations of town ordinances as charged, such hearing officer or committee shall dismiss the matter and enter his determination in writing accordingly. 
    If the hearing officer or committee determines that the person requesting the hearing is liable for violation of town ordinance, he shall forthwith enter and assess the fines, penalties, costs or fees against such person as provided by applicable ordinance. 
    All decisions of the hearing officer or committee shall be in writing and filed with the town clerk's office within fourteen (14) days of the date thereon. 
(Ord. of 3-2-04(1), § F; Ord. of 9-1-09, § F) 
Sec. 2-301. - Assessment and enforcements. 
    If the assessment of the hearing officer or committee is not paid on the date of its entry, the hearing officer or committee shall send by first class mail a notice of the assessment to the person found liable and shall file, not less than thirty (30) days nor more than twelve (12) months after such mailing a certified copy of the notice of assessment with the Clerk of the Superior Court in Derby or the geographical area in which Seymour is located. Notwithstanding any other provisions of the Connecticut General Statutes, the hearing officer's or committee's assessment, when so entered as a judgment, shall have the same effect as a civil money judgment and levy of execution in such judgment may issue without further notice to such person. 
(Ord. of 3-2-04(1), § G; Ord. of 9-1-09, § G) 
Sec. 2-302. - Appeal of assessment. 
    A person against whom an assessment has been entered pursuant to this section is entitled to judicial review by way of appeal; providing the appeal is instituted within thirty (30) days of the mailing of notice of such assessment, and the appropriate entry fee for small claims cases is paid to the superior court for the geographical area in which Seymour is located. Such person shall then be entitled to a hearing in accordance with the rules of the Judges of the Superior Court. 
(Ord. of 3-2-04(1), § H; Ord. of 9-1-09, § H) 
Chapter 2.3 - ADULTED-ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENTS 

Sec. 2.3-1. - Rationale and findings. 
(a)  Purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate sexually oriented businesses in order to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the town, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious secondary effects of sexually oriented businesses within the town. The provisions of this chapter have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content or reasonable access to any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is neither the intent nor effect of this chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of this chapter to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material. 
(b)  Findings and rationale. Based on evidence of the adverse secondary effects of adult uses presented in hearings and in reports made available to the board of selectmen, and on findings, interpretations, and narrowing constructions incorporated in the cases of Keeper's Inc. v. City of Milford, 807 F.3d 24 (2d Cir. 2015) (November 20, 2015); City of Littleton v. Z.J. Gifts D-4, L.L.C., 541 U.S. 774 (2004); City of Los Angeles v. Alameda Books, Inc., 535 U.S. 425 (2002); City of Erie v. Pap's A.M., 529 U.S. 277 (2000); City of Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986); Young v. American Mini Theatres, 427 U.S. 50 (1976); Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991); California v. LaRue, 409 U.S. 109 (1972); and Charette v. Town of Oyster Bay, 2 Fed. Appx. 112 (2d Cir. 2001); Beal v. Stern, 184 F.3d i17 (2d Cir. 1999); Buzzetti v. City of New York, i40 F.3d 134 (2d Cir. 1998); Marty's Adult World v. Town of Enfield, 20 F.3d 512 (2d Cir. 1994); Hickerson v. City of New York, 146 F.3d 99 (2d Cir. 1998); Casanova Entertainment Group, Inc. v. City of New Rochelle, i65 Fed. Appx. 72 (2d Cir. 2006); United States v. Kinzler, 55 F. 3d 70 (2d Cir. 1995); Gold Diggers, LLC v. Town of Berlin, 469 F. Supp. 2d 43 (D. Conn. 2007); Centerfolds, Inc. v. Town of Berlin, 352 F. Supp. 2d 183 (D. Conn. 2004); Derusso v. City of Albany, 205 F. Supp. 2d i6 (N.D.N.Y. 2002); Gammoh v. City of La Habra, 395 F.3d 1114 (9th Cir. 2005); World Wide Video of Washington, Inc. v. City of Spokane, 368 F. 3d 1186 (9th Cir. 2004); Ben's Bar, Inc. v. Village of Somerset, 316 F. 3d 702 (7th Cir. 2003); Andy's Rest. & Lounge, Inc. v. City of Gary, 466 F.3d 550 (7th Cir. 2006); Heideman v. South Salt Lake City, 165 Fed. Appx. 627 (10th Cir. 2006); H&A Land Corp. v. City of Kennedale, 480 F.3d 336 (5th Cir. Feb. 22, 2007); DLS, Inc. v. City of Chattanooga, 107 F.3d 403 (6th Cir. 1997); Colacurcio v. City of Kent, 163 F.3d 545 (9th Cir. 1998); Deja Vu of Nashville v. Metro. Govt of Nashville & Davidson County, 466 F.3d 391 (6th Cir. 2006); and based upon reports concerning secondary effects occurring in and around sexually oriented businesses, including, but not limited to, Austin, Texas-1986; Indianapolis, Indiana-1984; Garden Grove, California-1991; Houston, Texas-1983, 1997; Phoenix, Arizona-1979, 1995-98; Chattanooga, Tennessee-1999-2003; Los Angeles, California-1977; Whittier, California-1978; Spokane, Washington-2001; St. Cloud, Minnesota-1994; McCleary Report-2004; Littleton, Colorado-2004; Oklahoma City, Oklahoma-1986; Dallas, Texas-1997, 2004; Greensboro, North Carolina-2003; Amarillo, Texas-1977; New York, New York Times Square-1994; and the Report of the Attorney General's Working Group On The Regulation Of Sexually Oriented Businesses (June 6, 1989, State of Minnesota), the Board of Selectmen finds: 
(1)  Sexually oriented businesses, as a category of commercial uses, are associated with a wide variety of adverse secondary effects, including, but not limited to, personal and property crimes, prostitution, lewdness, public indecency, unsanitary conditions, potential spread of disease, obscenity, illicit drug use and drug trafficking, negative impacts on surrounding properties, blight, litter, and sexual assault and exploitation. 
(2)  Sexually oriented businesses should be separated from sensitive land uses to minimize the impact of their secondary effects upon such uses, and should be separated from other sexually oriented businesses, to minimize the secondary effects associated with such uses and to prevent an unnecessary concentration of sexually oriented businesses in one area. 
(3)  Each of the foregoing negative secondary effects constitutes a harm which the town has a substantial government interest in preventing and/or abating. This substantial government interest in preventing secondary effects, which is the town's rationale for this chapter, exists independent of any comparative analysis between sexually oriented and nonsexually oriented businesses. Additionally, the town's interest in regulating sexually oriented businesses extends to preventing future secondary effects of either current or future sexually oriented businesses that may locate in the town. The town finds that the cases and documentation relied on in this chapter are reasonably believed to be relevant to said secondary effects. 
(Ord. of 4-19-16(1)) 
Sec. 2.3-2. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this chapter, the words and phrases defined in the sections hereunder shall have the meanings therein respectively ascribed to them unless a different meaning is clearly indicated by the context. 
    Administrator means the police chief or his/her designee. 
    Adult bookstore or adult video store means a commercial establishment which, as one of its principal business activities, offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or more of the following: books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, compact discs, digital video discs, slides, or other visual representations which are characterized by their emphasis upon the display of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    A "principal business activity" exists where the commercial establishment: 
(1)  Has a substantial portion of its displayed merchandise which consists of said items; or 
(2)  Has a substantial portion of the wholesale value of its displayed merchandise which consists of said items, or has a substantial portion of the retail value of its displayed merchandise which consists of said items; or 
(3)  Derives a substantial portion of its revenues from the sale or rental, for any form of consideration of said items; or 
(4)  Maintains a substantial section of its interior business space for the sale or rental of said items; or 
(5)  Maintains an "adult arcade," which means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion-picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are regularly maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are characterized by their emphasis upon matter exhibiting specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult cabaret means a nightclub, bar, juice bar, restaurant, bottle club, or other commercial establishment, whether or not alcoholic beverages are served, which regularly features persons who appear semi-nude. 
    Adult motion-picture theater means a commercial establishment where films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions which are characterized by their emphasis upon the display of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas are regularly shown to more than five persons for any form of consideration. 
    Board means the Board of Selectmen of the Town of Seymour. 
    Characterized by means describing the essential character or quality of an item. As applied in this chapter, no business shall be classified as a sexually oriented business by virtue of showing, selling, or renting materials rated NC-17 or R by the Motion Picture Association of America. 
    Employ, employee, and employment describe and pertain to any person who performs any service on the premises of a sexually oriented business, on a full-time, part-time, or contract basis, whether or not the person is denominated an employee, independent contractor, agent, or otherwise. "Employee" does not include a person exclusively on the premises for repair or maintenance of the premises or for the delivery of goods to the premises. 
    Establish or establishment means and includes any of the following: 
(1)  The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new business; 
(2)  The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented business, to any sexually oriented business; or 
(3)  The addition of any sexually oriented business to any other existing sexually oriented business. 
    Hearing officer means an attorney, not otherwise employed by the town, who is licensed to practice law in Connecticut and retained to serve as an independent tribunal to conduct hearings under this chapter 2.3. 
    Influential interest means any of the following: 
(1)  The actual power to operate the sexually oriented business or control the operation, management or policies of the sexually oriented business or legal entity which operates the sexually oriented business; 
(2)  Ownership of a financial interest of 30 percent or more of a business or of any class of voting securities of a business; or 
(3)  Holding an office (e.g., president, vice president, secretary, treasurer, managing member, managing director, etc.) in a legal entity which operates the sexually oriented business. 
    Licensee means a person in whose name a license to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual or individuals listed as an applicant on the application for a sexually oriented business license. In the case of an employee, it shall mean the person in whose name the sexually oriented business employee license has been issued. 
    Nudity or a state of nudity means the showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or cleavage with less than a fully opaque covering, or the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple and areola. 
    Operate or cause to operate means to cause to function or to put or keep in a state of doing business. "Operator" means any person on the premises of a sexually oriented business who causes the business to function or who puts or keeps in operation the business or who is authorized to manage the business or exercise overall operational control of the business premises. A person may be found to be operating or causing to be operated a sexually oriented business whether or not that person is an owner, part owner, or licensee of the business. 
    Person means an individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association, or other legal entity. 
    Premises means the real property upon which the sexually oriented business is located, and all appurtenances thereto and buildings thereon, including, but not limited to, the sexually oriented business, the grounds, private walkways, and parking lots and/or parking garages adjacent thereto, under the ownership, control, or supervision of the licensee, as described in the application for a sexually oriented business license. 
    Regularly means and refers to the consistent and repeated doing of the act so described. 
    Semi-nude or state of semi-nudity means the showing of the female breast below a horizontal line across the top of the areola and extending across the width of the breast at that point, or the showing of the male or female buttocks. This definition shall include the lower portion of the human female breast, but shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the human female breasts exhibited by a bikini, dress, blouse, shirt, leotard, or similar wearing apparel provided the areola is not exposed in whole or in part. 
    Semi-nude model studio means a place where persons regularly appear in a state of semi-nudity for money or any form of consideration in order to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons. 
    This definition does not apply to any place where persons appearing in a state of semi-nudity did so in a modeling class operated: 
(1)  By a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; 
(2)  By a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or 
(3)  In a structure: 
a.  Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates a semi-nude person is available for viewing; and 
b.  Where, in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at least three days in advance of the class. 
    Sexual device means any three-dimensional object designed and marketed for stimulation of the male or female human genitals, anus, female breast, or for sadomasochistic use or abuse of oneself or others and shall include devices such as dildos, vibrators, penis pumps, and physical representations of the human genital organs. Nothing in this definition shall be construed to include devices primarily intended for protection against sexually transmitted diseases or for preventing pregnancy. 
    Sexual device shop means a commercial establishment that regularly features sexual devices. Nothing in this definition shall be construed to include any pharmacy, drugstore, medical clinic, or any establishment primarily dedicated to providing medical or health care products or services, nor shall this definition be construed to include commercial establishments which do not restrict access to their premises by reason of age. 
    Sexual encounter center means a business or commercial enterprise that, as one of its principal business purposes, purports to offer for any form of consideration, physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of the opposite sex when one or more of the persons is semi-nude. 
    Sexually oriented business means an adult bookstore or adult video store, an adult cabaret, an adult motion-picture theater, a semi-nude model studio, a sexual device shop, or a sexual encounter center. 
    Specified anatomical areas includes: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered: human genitals, pubic region; buttock; and female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and/or 
(2)  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
    Specified criminal activity means: 
(1)  Any of the following specified crimes for which less than five years elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is the later date: 
a.  Sexual assault or battery; 
b.  Prostitution, promoting prostitution, or keeping a house of prostitution; 
c.  Public indecency or indecent exposure; 
d.  Sexual abuse of a child or child pornography; 
e.  Sale or distribution of controlled substances or illegal drugs or narcotics; 
(2)  Any attempt, solicitation, or conspiracy to commit one of the foregoing offenses; or 
(3)  Any offense in another jurisdiction that, had the predicate act(s) been committed in Connecticut, would have constituted any of the foregoing offenses. 
    Specified sexual activity means any of the following: 
(1)  Intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation or sodomy; or 
(2)  Excretory functions as a part of or in connection with any of the activities described in subsection (1) above. 
    Substantial means at least 30 percent of the item(s) so modified. 
    Town means the Town of Seymour, Connecticut. 
    Transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business means any of the following: 
(1)  The sale, lease, or sublease of the business; 
(2)  The transfer of securities which constitute an influential interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or 
(3)  The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing the ownership or control. 
    Viewing room means the room, booth, or area where a patron of a sexually oriented business would ordinarily be positioned while watching a film, videocassette, digital video disc, or other video reproduction. 
(Ord. of 4-19-16(1)) 
Sec. 2.3-3. - Classification. 
    The classifications for sexually oriented businesses shall be as follows: 
(1)  Adult bookstore or adult video store; 
(2)  Adult cabaret; 
(3)  Adult motion-picture theater; 
(4)  Semi-nude model studio; 
(5)  Sexual device shop; 
(6)  Sexual encounter center. 
(Ord. of 4-19-16(1)) 
Sec. 2.3-4. - License required. 
(a)  Business license. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a sexually oriented business in the town without a valid sexually oriented business license. 
(b)  Employee license. It shall be unlawful for any person to be an "employee," as defined in this chapter, of a sexually oriented business in the town without a valid sexually oriented business employee license, except that a person who is a licensee under a valid sexually oriented business license shall not be required to also obtain a sexually oriented business employee license. 
(c)  Application. An applicant for a sexually oriented business license or a sexually oriented business employee license shall file in person at the office of the administrator a completed application made on a form provided by the administrator. A sexually oriented business may designate an individual with an influential interest in the business to file its application for a sexually oriented business license in person on behalf of the business. The application shall be signed as required by subsection (d) herein and shall be notarized. An application shall be considered complete when it contains, for each person required to sign the application, the information and/or items required in this subsection (c), accompanied by the appropriate licensing fee: 
(1)  The applicant's full legal name and any other names used by the applicant in the preceding five years. 
(2)  Current business address or another mailing address for the applicant. 
(3)  Written proof of age, in the form of a driver's license or a copy of a birth certificate accompanied by a picture identification document issued by a governmental agency. 
(4)  If the application is for a sexually oriented business license, the business name, location, legal description, mailing address and phone number of the sexually oriented business. 
(5)  If the application is for a sexually oriented business license, the name and business address of the statutory agent or other agent authorized to receive service of process. 
(6)  A statement of whether an applicant has been convicted of or has pled guilty or nolo contendere to a specified criminal activity as defined in this chapter, and if so, each specified criminal activity involved, including the date, place, and jurisdiction of each as well as the dates of conviction and release from confinement, where applicable. 
(7)  A statement of whether any sexually oriented business in which an applicant has had an influential interest, has, in the previous five years (and at a time during which the applicant had the influential interest): 
a.  Been declared by a court of law to be a nuisance; or 
b.  Been subject to a court order of closure or padlocking. 
(8)  An application for a sexually oriented business license shall be accompanied by a legal description of the property where the business is located and a sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared but shall be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. Applicants who are required to comply with the stage, booth, and/or room configuration requirements of this chapter shall submit a diagram indicating that the setup and configuration of the premises meets the requirements of the applicable regulations. 
The information provided pursuant to this subsection (c) shall be supplemented in writing by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the administrator within ten working days of a change of circumstances which would render the information originally submitted false or incomplete. 
(d)  Signature. A person who seeks a sexually oriented business employee license under this section shall sign the application for a license. If a person who seeks a sexually oriented business license under this section is an individual, he shall sign the application for a license as applicant. If a person who seeks a sexually oriented business license is other than an individual, each person with an influential interest in the sexually oriented business or in a legal entity that controls the sexually oriented business shall sign the application for a license as applicant. Each applicant must be qualified under this chapter and each applicant shall be considered a licensee if a license is granted. 
(e)  [ Applicant information confidential. ] The information provided by an applicant in connection with an application for a license under this chapter shall be maintained by the office of the administrator on a confidential basis, and such information may be disclosed only as may be required, and only to the extent required, by court order. 
(Ord. of 4-19-16(1)) 
Sec. 2.3-5. - Issuance of license. 
(a)  Business license. Upon the filing of a completed application for a sexually oriented business license, the administrator shall immediately issue a temporary license to the applicant if the completed application is from a preexisting sexually oriented business that is lawfully operating in the town and the completed application, on its face, indicates that the applicant is entitled to an annual sexually oriented business license. The temporary license shall expire upon the final decision of the town to deny or grant an annual license. Within 20 days of the filing of a completed sexually oriented business license application, the administrator shall either issue a license to the applicant or issue a written notice of intent to deny a license to the applicant. The administrator shall issue a license unless: 
(1)  An applicant is less than 18 years of age. 
(2)  An applicant has failed to provide information required by this chapter for issuance of a license or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form. 
(3)  The license application fee required by this chapter has not been paid. 
(4)  The sexually oriented business, as defined herein, is not in compliance with the interior configuration requirements of this chapter or is not in compliance with the locational requirements of the Town of Seymour's Zoning Regulations. 
(5)  Any sexually oriented business in which the applicant has had an influential interest, has, in the previous five years (and at a time during which the applicant had the influential interest): 
a.  Been declared by a court of law to be a nuisance; or 
b.  Been subject to an order of closure or padlocking. 
(6)  An applicant has been convicted of or pled guilty or nolo contendere to a specified criminal activity, as defined in this chapter. 
(b)  Employee license. Upon the filing of a completed application for a sexually oriented business employee license, the administrator shall immediately issue a temporary license to the applicant if the applicant seeks licensure to work in a licensed sexually oriented business and the completed application, on its face, indicates that the applicant is entitled to an annual sexually oriented business employee license. The temporary license shall expire upon the final decision of the town to deny or grant an annual license. Within 20 days of the filing of a completed sexually oriented business employee license application, the administrator shall either issue a license to the applicant or issue a written notice of intent to deny a license to the applicant. The administrator shall issue a license unless: 
(1)  The applicant is less than 18 years of age. 
(2)  The applicant has failed to provide information as required by this chapter for issuance of a license or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form. 
(3)  The license application fee required by this chapter has not been paid. 
(4)  Any sexually oriented business in which the applicant has had an influential interest, has, in the previous five years (and at a time during which the applicant had the influential interest): 
a.  Been declared by a court of law to be a nuisance; or 
b.  Been subject to an order of closure or padlocking. 
(5)  The applicant has been convicted of or pled guilty or nolo contendere to a specified criminal activity, as defined in this chapter. 
(c)  [ License information; posting. ] The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the number of the license issued to the licensee(s), the expiration date, and, if the license is for a sexually oriented business, the address of the sexually oriented business. The sexually oriented business license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business so that it may be read at any time that the business is occupied by patrons or is open to the public. A sexually oriented business employee shall keep the employee's license on his or her person or on the premises where the licensee is then working or performing. 
(Ord. of 4-19-16(1)) 
Sec. 2.3-6. - Fees. 
    The initial license and annual renewal fees for sexually oriented business licenses and sexually oriented business employee licenses shall be as follows: 
(1)  Business license. $250.00 for the initial fee for a sexually oriented business license and $100.00 for annual renewal. 
(2)  Employee license. $150.00 for the initial sexually oriented business employee license and $50.00 for annual renewal. 
(Ord. of 4-19-16(1)) 
Sec. 2.3-7. - Inspection. 
    Sexually oriented businesses and sexually oriented business employees shall permit the administrator and his or her agents to inspect, from time to time on an occasional basis, the portions of the sexually oriented business premises where patrons are permitted, for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the specific regulations of this chapter, during those times when the sexually oriented business is occupied by patrons or is open to the public. This section shall be narrowly construed by the town to authorize reasonable inspections of the licensed premises pursuant to this chapter, but not to authorize a harassing or excessive pattern of inspections. 
(Ord. of 4-19-16(1)) 
Sec. 2.3-8. - Expiration and renewal of license. 
(a)  Each license shall remain valid for a period of one calendar year from the date of issuance unless otherwise suspended or revoked. Such license may be renewed only by making application and payment of a fee as provided in this chapter. 
(b)  Application for renewal of an annual license should be made at least 90 days before the expiration date of the current annual license, and when made less than 90 days before the expiration date, the expiration of the current license will not be affected. 
(Ord. of 4-19-16(1)) 
Sec. 2.3-9. - Suspension. 
(a)  The administrator shall issue a written notice of intent to suspend a sexually oriented business license for a period not to exceed 30 days if the sexually oriented business licensee has knowingly violated this chapter or has knowingly allowed an employee or any other person to violate this chapter. 
(b)  The administrator shall issue a written notice of intent to suspend a sexually oriented business employee license if the employee has knowingly violated this chapter. 
(Ord. of 4-19-16(1)) 
Sec. 2.3-10. - Revocation. 
(a)  The administrator shall issue a written notice of intent to revoke a sexually oriented business license or a sexually oriented business employee license, as applicable, if the licensee knowingly violates this chapter or has knowingly allowed an employee or any other person to violate this chapter and a suspension of the licensee's license has become effective within the previous 12-month period. 
(b)  The administrator shall issue a written notice of intent to revoke a sexually oriented business license or a sexually oriented business employee license, as applicable, if: 
(1)  The licensee has knowingly given false information in the application for the sexually oriented business license or the sexually oriented business employee license; 
(2)  The licensee has knowingly or recklessly engaged in or allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises of the sexually oriented business; 
(3)  The licensee has knowingly or recklessly engaged in or allowed prostitution on the premises of the sexually oriented business; 
(4)  The licensee knowingly or recklessly operated the sexually oriented business during a period of time when the license was finally suspended or revoked; or 
(5)  The licensee has knowingly or recklessly engaged in or allowed any specified sexual activity to occur in or on the premises of the sexually oriented business. 
(c)  The fact that any relevant conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the revocation of the license, provided that, if any conviction which serves as a basis of a license revocation is overturned or reversed on appeal, that conviction shall be treated as null and of no effect for revocation purposes. 
(d)  When, after the notice and hearing procedure described in this chapter, the town revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for one year and the licensee shall not be issued a sexually oriented business license or sexually oriented business employee license for one year from the date revocation becomes effective. 
(Ord. of 4-19-16(1)) 
Sec. 2.3-11. - Hearing; denial, revocation, and suspension; appeal. 
(a)  When the administrator issues a written notice of intent to deny, suspend, or revoke a license, the administrator shall immediately send such notice, which shall include the specific grounds under this chapter for such action, to the applicant or licensee (respondent) by certified mail. The notice shall be directed to the most current business address or other mailing address on file with the administrator for the respondent. Within 15 days of the postmark of the notice, the respondent may deliver to the hearing officer a written appeal that shall include a statement of reasons why the respondent believes the license should not be denied, suspended, or revoked. If a written appeal is not received by the hearing officer within said 15 days, the written intent to deny, suspend, or revoke a license shall become a final denial, suspension, or revocation five days after the 15-day period has expired. 
(b)  If the respondent timely files a written appeal per the above paragraph, then within five days of the receipt of the written appeal, the hearing officer shall notify respondent in writing of the hearing date on respondent's denial, suspension, or revocation proceeding. 
(c)  Within 20 days of the receipt of respondent's written objection, the hearing officer shall conduct a hearing on the administrator's written notice of intent to deny, suspend, or revoke the license. At the hearing, the respondent shall have the opportunity to present argument and to be represented by counsel, present evidence and witnesses on his or her behalf, and cross-examine any of the administrator's witnesses. The administrator shall be represented by counsel and shall have the opportunity to present argument, present evidence and witnesses on his or her behalf, and cross-examine any of the respondent's witnesses. The hearing shall take no longer than two days, unless extended to meet the requirements of due process and proper administration of justice. The hearing officer shall issue a written decision, including specific reasons for the decision pursuant to this chapter, to the respondent within five days after the hearing. 
(d)  If the decision is to deny, suspend, or revoke the license, the decision shall become final on the fifteenth day after it is rendered, and the decision shall include a statement advising the respondent of the right to appeal or challenge such decision in any court of competent jurisdiction by any available procedure, including but not limited to any procedure provided by the Connecticut General Statutes, an application for a writ of certiorari or a writ of mandamus, a petition for temporary injunction, or an action for declaratory or injunctive relief pursuant to 42 U.S.C. § 1983. If the hearing officer's decision finds that no grounds exist for denial, suspension, or revocation of the license, the administrator shall, contemporaneously with the issuance of the decision, immediately withdraw the intent to deny, suspend, or revoke the license and to notify the respondent in writing by certified mail of such action. If the respondent is not yet licensed, the administrator shall contemporaneously therewith issue the license to the applicant. 
(e)  If any court action challenging the hearing officer's decision is initiated, the hearing officer shall prepare and transmit to the court a transcript of the hearing within ten days after receiving written notice of the filing of the court action. The hearing officer shall consent to expedited briefing and/or disposition of the action, shall comply with any expedited schedule set by the court, and shall facilitate prompt judicial review of the proceedings. 
(f)  The following shall apply to any sexually oriented business that is lawfully operating as a sexually oriented business, or any sexually oriented business employee that is lawfully employed as a sexually oriented business employee, on the date on which the completed business or employee application, as applicable, is filed with the administrator: Upon the filing of any court action to appeal, challenge, restrain, or otherwise enjoin the town's enforcement of the denial, suspension, or revocation, the administrator shall immediately issue the respondent a provisional license. The provisional license shall allow the respondent to continue operation of the sexually oriented business or to continue employment as a sexually oriented business employee and will expire upon the court's entry of a judgment on the respondent's appeal or other action to restrain or otherwise enjoin the town's enforcement of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 4-19-16(1)) 
Sec. 2.3-12. - Transfer of license. 
    A licensee shall not transfer his or her license to another, nor shall a licensee operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a license at any place other than the address designated in the sexually oriented business license application. 
(Ord. of 4-19-16(1)) 
Sec. 2.3-13. - Regulations pertaining to exhibition of sexually explicit films or videos. 
(a)  A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business which exhibits in a booth or viewing room on the premises, through any mechanical or electronic image-producing device, a film, video cassette, digital video disc, or other video reproduction characterized by an emphasis on the display of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas shall comply with the following requirements. 
(1)  Each application for a sexually oriented business license shall contain a diagram of the premises showing the location of all operator's stations, booths or viewing rooms, overhead lighting fixtures, and rest rooms, and shall designate all portions of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. Rest rooms shall not contain equipment for displaying films, video cassettes, digital video discs, or other video reproductions. The diagram shall also designate the place at which the license will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram shall be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and shall be drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. The administrator may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared. 
(2)  It shall be the duty of the operator, and of any employees present on the premises, to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted. 
(3)  The interior premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than five foot candles as measured at the floor level. It shall be the duty of the operator, and of any employees present on the premises, to ensure that the illumination described above is maintained at all times that the premises is occupied by patrons or open for business. 
(4)  It shall be the duty of the operator, and of any employees present on the premises, to ensure that no sexual activity occurs in or on the licensed premises. 
(5)  It shall be the duty of the operator to post conspicuous signs in well-lighted entry areas of the business stating all of the following: 
a.  That the occupancy of viewing rooms less than 150 square feet is limited to one person. 
b.  That sexual activity on the premises is prohibited. 
c.  That the making of openings between viewing rooms is prohibited. 
d.  That violators will be required to leave the premises. 
e.  That violations of these regulations are unlawful. 
(6)  It shall be the duty of the operator to enforce the regulations articulated in subsection (5)a through [e]. 
(7)  The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from an operator's station of every area of the premises, including the interior of each viewing room but excluding rest rooms, to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose. An operator's station shall not exceed 32 square feet of floor area. If the premises has two or more operator's stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the operator's stations. The view required in this paragraph must be by direct line of sight from the operator's station. It is the duty of the operator to ensure that at least one employee is on duty and situated in each operator's station at all times that any patron is on the premises. It shall be the duty of the operator, and it shall also be the duty of any employees present on the premises, to ensure that the view area specified in this paragraph remains unobstructed by any doors, curtains, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials or enclosures at all times that any patron is present on the premises. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a person having a duty under this section to knowingly fail to fulfill that duty. 
(Ord. of 4-19-16(1)) 
Sec. 2.3-14. - Loitering, exterior lighting, visibility, and monitoring requirements. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the operator of a sexually oriented business to: (1) post conspicuous signs stating that no loitering is permitted on such property; (2) designate one or more employees to monitor the activities of persons on such property by visually inspecting such property at least once every 90 minutes or inspecting such property by use of video cameras and monitors; and (3) provide lighting of the exterior premises to provide for visual inspection or video monitoring to prohibit loitering. If used, video cameras and monitors shall operate continuously at all times that the premises are open for business. The monitors shall be installed within an operator's station. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a person having a duty under this section to knowingly fail to fulfill that duty. 
(c)  No sexually oriented business shall erect a fence, wall, or other barrier that prevents any portion of the parking lot(s) for the establishment from being visible from a public right-of-way. 
(Ord. of 4-19-16(1)) 
Sec. 2.3-15. - Penalties and enforcement. 
(a)  A person who knowingly violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, or refuses to comply with or resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined a definite sum not exceeding $90.00 for each such violation. Each violation of this chapter shall be considered a separate offense, and any violation continuing more than one hour of time shall be considered a separate offense for each hour of violation. 
(b)  The town's legal counsel is hereby authorized to institute civil proceedings necessary for the enforcement of this chapter to prosecute, restrain, or correct violations hereof. Such proceedings, including injunction, shall be brought in the name of the town, provided, however, that nothing in this section and no action taken hereunder shall be held to exclude such criminal or administrative proceedings as may be authorized by other provisions of this chapter, or any of the laws in force in the town or to exempt anyone violating this Code or any part of the said laws from any penalty which may be incurred. 
(Ord. of 4-19-16(1)) 
Sec. 2.3-16. - Applicability of chapter to existing businesses. 
    Each previously-licensed sexually oriented business and sexually oriented business employee that is lawfully operating or employed on the effective date of this chapter may continue operation or employment, pursuant to this chapter, until the expiration of the annual license under which the business or employee is then operating. Upon the expiration of that previously-issued annual license, the business or employee must apply for a license under this chapter 2.3 in order to continue operation or employment, as the case may be. All sexually oriented businesses shall have 90 days from the effective date of this chapter 2.3 to conform their premises to the interior configuration requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 4-19-16(1)) 
Sec. 2.3-17. - Prohibited conduct. 
    It is unlawful for a sexually oriented business operator to knowingly violate the following regulations or to knowingly allow an employee or any other person to violate the following regulations. 
(1)  It shall be a violation of this chapter for a patron, employee, or any other person to knowingly or intentionally, in a sexually oriented business, appear in a state of nudity, regardless of whether such public nudity is expressive in nature. 
(2)  It shall be a violation of this chapter for a person to knowingly or intentionally, in a sexually oriented business, appear in a semi-nude condition unless the person is an employee who, while semi-nude, remains at least six feet from any patron or customer and on a stage at least 18 inches from the floor in a room of at least 1,000 square feet. 
(3)  It shall be a violation of this chapter for any employee who regularly appears semi-nude in a sexually oriented business to knowingly or intentionally touch a customer or the clothing of a customer on the premises of a sexually oriented business. 
(4)  It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to knowingly allow a person under the age of 18 years on the premises of a sexually oriented business. 
    A sign in a form to be prescribed by the administrator, and summarizing the provisions of subsections (1), (2), (3), and (4), shall be posted near the entrance of the sexually oriented business in such a manner as to be clearly visible to patrons upon entry. 
(Ord. of 4-19-16(1)) 
Sec. 2.3-18. - Scienter required to prove violation or business licensee liability. 
    This chapter does not impose strict liability. Unless a culpable mental state is otherwise specified herein, a showing of a knowing or reckless mental state is necessary to establish a violation of a provision of this chapter. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, for the purposes of this chapter, an act by an employee that constitutes grounds for suspension or revocation of that employee's license shall be imputed to the sexually oriented business licensee for purposes of finding a violation of this chapter, or for purposes of license denial, suspension, or revocation, only if an officer, director, or general partner, or a person who managed, supervised, or controlled the operation of the business premises, knowingly or recklessly allowed such act to occur on the premises. It shall be a defense to liability that the person to whom liability is imputed was powerless to prevent the act. 
(Ord. of 4-19-16(1)) 
Sec. 2.3-19. - Failure of town to meet deadline not to risk applicant/licensee rights. 
    In the event that a town official is required to act or to do a thing pursuant to this chapter within a prescribed time, and fails to act or to do such thing within the time prescribed, said failure shall not prevent the exercise of constitutional rights of an applicant or licensee. If the act required of the town official under this chapter, and not completed in the time prescribed, includes approval of condition(s) necessary for approval by the town of an applicant or licensee's application for sexually oriented business license or a sexually oriented business employee's license (including a renewal), the license shall be deemed granted and the business or employee allowed to commence operations or employment the day after the deadline for the town's action has passed. 
(Ord. of 4-19-16(1)) 
Sec. 2.3-20. - Severability. 
    This chapter and each section and provision of said chapter hereunder are hereby declared to be independent divisions and subdivisions and, not withstanding any other evidence of legislative intent, it is hereby declared to be the controlling legislative intent that if any provisions of said chapter, or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held to be invalid, the remaining sections or provisions and the application of such sections and provisions to any person or circumstances other than those to which it is held invalid, shall not be affected thereby, and it is hereby declared that such sections and provisions would have been passed independently of such section or provision so known to be invalid. Should any procedural aspect of this chapter be invalidated, such invalidation shall not affect the enforceability of the substantive aspects of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 4-19-16(1)) 
Sec. 2.3-21. - Conflicting Code provisions repealed. 
    Any provision(s) in the Town of Seymour Code of Ordinances specifically in conflict with any provision in this chapter is hereby deemed inoperative and repealed. 
(Ord. of 4-19-16(1)) 
Sec. 2.3-22. - Effective date. 
    This chapter shall become effective after publication as provided by law. 
(Ord. of 4-19-16(1)) 
Chapter 3 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Possession and transportation of intoxicating liquors by minors prohibited, § 11-18; possession, consumption of alcoholic beverages on school property prohibited, § 11-19; possession, consumption of alcoholic beverages in public parks, sidewalks, streets and other public ways prohibited, § 11-20. 
State Law reference- Liquor permits, G.S. §§ 30-14-30-62a; classes of liquor permits, G.S. § 30-15; liquor manufacturer's permit, G.S. § 30-16; liquor wholesaler's permit, G.S. § 30-17; hotel liquor permits, G.S. § 30-21; restaurant liquor permits, G.S. § 30-22; tavern permits, G.S. § 30-26; druggist liquor permit, G.S. § 30-36; storage of liquor, approval required, G.S. § 30-38; application for liquor permit, G.S. § 30-39; liquor permit fees, G.S. § 30-41; granting and denial of liquor permits, G.S. § 30-43; permit to specify location and revocability, G.S. § 30-52; revocation of liquor permit, G.S. §§ 30-55-30-59; prohibition against unauthorized sale of liquor, G.S. § 30-74; sales to minors, intoxicated persons and drunkards, G.S. § 30-86; hours and days of closing, G.S. § 30-91. 

Sec. 3-1. - Hours of sale. 
    The sale of alcoholic liquor by the package in places operating under a package store permit shall be lawful only during the hours as set forth in the Liquor Control Act of the general statutes and shall be unlawful during the days and hours prohibited under such act. 
(Code 1961, § 3-1) 
Chapter 4 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Housing authority, § 10.8; planning and zoning commission, § 10.11; zoning board of appeals, § 10.20. 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 6; flood damage prevention, Ch. 7; housing, Ch. 9; planning, Ch. 13 streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 14; utilities, Ch. 17; zoning, App. A; subdivisions, App. B. 
State Law reference- State building code applicable to all municipalities, G.S. § 19.395e. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 4-1. - State building code-Adopted. 
    The state building code as prepared by the state housing authority and as amended by the commissioner of public works, pursuant to section 19-395 of the general statutes shall be the building code of the town, subject to amendments set forth in this article. 
(Code 1961, § 5-7) 
Sec. 4-2. - Same-Amendment. 
    Section 107.7 of the state building code adopted by section 4-1 entitled "Restriction on Employees," is deleted from the building code. 
(Code 1961, § 5-8) 
Sec. 4-3. - Space heaters; definition; regulations; penalty. 
(a)  For the purpose of this section a space heater is defined as any heating unit designed to use solid, liquid or gaseous fuel, and which is designed to heat or is used to heat the area in which it is located, and which is not connected to a flue with a chimney. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to use or maintain any building, structure or dwelling unit, or for any property owner or his agent to permit use or maintenance in any building, structure or dwelling unit, any space heater unless it shall: 
(1)  Have a factory-installed flue collar; 
(2)  Be firmly affixed in a permanent position by a rigid connection; 
(3)  If a gas heater, be equipped with a factory-installed safety shutoff valve; 
(4)  Be firmly connected to a chimney by a flue or stack, horizontal flue travel not to exceed five feet, unless a greater length is approved in writing by the fire marshal; or if a gas heater, be of the through-the-wall vented type, combining air intake with vent as approved by the American Gas Association, provided that such through-the-wall installation be approved in writing by the fire marshal. 
For the purpose of this section it shall be deemed that a property owner has permitted the illegal use of a space heater, if, knowing that the premises are not centrally heated, he has failed to inform himself as to the legality of any heating apparatus used by the occupants of the property. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to install, sell, expose or offer for sale: 
(1)  Any gas burning space heater which does not have a factory-installed flue collar designed for permanent connection to a chimney flue or stack; 
(2)  Any gas burning space heater which is not equipped with a factory installed safety shut-off valve; 
(3)  Any and all space heaters designed to use all or any liquid fuel. 
(d)  From and after January first, 1964, it shall be unlawful to use or maintain in any building, structure or dwelling unit, or for any property owner to permit the use or maintenance in any building structure or dwelling unit of any space heater designed to use oil or any liquid fuel. For the purposes of this section, it shall be deemed that property owner has permitted the illegal use of a space heater if, knowing that the premises are not centrally heated, he has failed to inform himself as to the legality of any heating apparatus installed by the occupants of the property. 
(e)  During construction of any building, before occupancy thereof, space heaters may be temporarily installed and used if and when written permission therefor is issued by the fire marshal. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any person, persons, firm or corporation to install or offer to install in the town, any gas-fired space heating unit, unless such person, persons, firm or corporation shall have obtained from the fire marshal a permit to install said unit. 
(g)  Permits to install gas space heaters shall be issued by the fire marshal upon application and payment of a fee of $2.00. Each permit shall state the name and address of the seller of the heater, the name and address of the purchaser of the heater, the name and address of the person or firm which is to install the heater, and the address of the premises on which it is to be installed, and the manufacturer's name and model designation. 
(h)  Every person who shall install a space heater in violation of subsection (f) or (g) of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall upon conviction be punished by a fine of not more than $100.00 for each violation. 
(i)  The fire marshal shall be empowered to enter at all reasonable hours upon any premises in which any space heater has been installed or is believed by him to be in use in violation of any applicable codes and regulations for the purpose of inspecting such heater and its installation, whenever any such heater shall be fund to have been improperly installed or for any reason to be in an unsafe condition or hazardous or illegal to use, the fire marshal may in his discretion order the removal of such heater. 
(j)  Every person who shall violate any provision of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall upon conviction be punished by a fine of not more than $100.00. Each day of violation of any provision of this section shall constitute a separate and distinct violation. 
(Code 1961, § 5-16) 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 6. 
Sec. 4-4. - Display of building unit numbers. 
(a)  Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to establish an effective and easily recognizable system for the exact location of the various building units in the town, to ensure the rapid location of any building unit by emergency vehicles, such as, but not limited to, police, fire, and ambulance services. 
(b)  Definitions: 
(1)  Building unit shall mean apartment, condominium building or condominium unit, single-family dwelling, multifamily dwelling, motel, commercial establishment, industrial building, government building, and any other building or structure which may be occupied at any time by any person. 
(2)  Building unit number shall mean a number of no less than four inches in height placed on each building unit, which number is visible from the street. This definition shall apply to buildings less than 50 feet from the street. In the case of a building more than 50 from the street, the owner shall display a number on a mailbox or fence, or a post located on the side of the driveway or sidewalk. When a mailbox is on the curbline of the property, as numbered in accordance herewith, the building number shall be placed on both sides of the box and shall have numbers at least four inches high. All numbers are to be in a color which contrasts with the background. 
(2)  Building unit number shall mean a number of no less than two inches in height placed on each building unit, which number is visible from the street. This definition shall apply to buildings less than 50 feet from the street. In the case of a building more than 50 feet from the street, the owner shall display a number on a mailbox or fence, or a post, located on the side of the driveway or sidewalk. When a mailbox is on the curbline of the property, as numbered in accordance herewith, the building number shall be placed on both sides of the box and shall have numbers at least two inches high. All numbers are to be in a color which contrasts with the background. 
(c)  Requirements. It shall be the duty of the owner of a building unit to ascertain the proper building unit number from the building official and to display same as defined in subsection (b)(2) of this section. 
(d)  Enforcement. It shall be the duty of the police chief, or fire marshal to enforce the provisions of this section. 
(e)  Penalty. Any person who violates the provisions of this section shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $5.00 per week or part thereof. A week shall be considered to be seven consecutive calendar days from the point of initial violation. 
(f)  Compliance. Town building officials shall issue no certificate of occupancy as to new construction until the provisions of this section shall be complied with. 
(Ord. of 4-30-85, §§ (a)-(f); Ord. of 10-16-01(1)) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Secs. 4-5-4-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING INSPECTOR[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Officers and officials, § 2-161 et seq.; building inspector to administer flood prevention regulations, § 7-21; duties of building inspector re flood regulations, § 7-22; housing code enforcement officer, § 9-61 et seq. 
State Law reference- Authority of towns to appoint building official, G.S. § 19-396. 

Sec. 4-26. - Appointment; salary. 
    There shall be a building inspector appointed by the board of selectmen on the basis of written and oral tests given to applicants for the position by the state personnel office. His salary shall be fixed by the board of selectmen within the amount budgeted for the same. 
(Code 1961, § 5-1) 
Charter reference- General appointments, Ch. 10. 
Sec. 4-27. - Term. 
    The term of office of the building inspector shall commence on October 1, 1957, and the person appointed shall continue in office for a two-year term. 
(Code 1961, § 5-2) 
Sec. 4-28. - Removal. 
    The building inspector may be removed for cause, but no action for removal from office may be taken by the board of selectmen until after reasonable notice has been given and an opportunity shall have been afforded to the person charged to appear before the board and be heard thereon. No action for removal or suspension shall be for political purposes. 
(Code 1961, § 5-2) 
State Law reference- Removal of building official, G.S. § 19-395(b). 
Sec. 4-29. - Appeal by inspector from action of selectmen. 
    Any inspector who shall be aggrieved by the action of the board of selectmen may make application to any judge of the Superior Court, in and for New Haven County, in the nature of an appeal from such action, which application shall be made returnable not more than six days from the date of such order of the board of selectmen, and a copy thereof shall be served at least forty-eight (48) hours before the time at which it is made returnable on the first selectman. Such judge, having given such further notice as he may deem necessary, shall forthwith hear such application de novo, and may approve, modify, or revoke such order, and may award costs, at his discretion. During the pendency of such application, the contested order of the board of selectmen shall be in effect, subject to the power of the judge, if such order shall be modified or revoked, to make his decree effective as of the date of such order. 
(Code 1961, § 5-3) 
State Law reference- Appeal of dismissal by building official, G.S. § 19-395(c). 
Sec. 4-30. - Duties. 
    The building inspector shall work under the general direction of the board of selectmen, in order to have the work done to conform with policy. The duties of the inspector shall include the following: 
(1)  The issuance of building permits and licenses; 
(2)  The checking and approval of plot locations; 
(3)  The inspection of all building and home construction; 
(4)  Confirmation of approval of private water supply systems by proper regulatory body; 
(5)  Confirmation of approval by proper regulatory body of size and type of sewage disposal systems; 
(6)  The inspection and approval of systems installed; 
(7)  The making of inspections and recommendations; 
(8)  Handling complaints and nuisances; 
(9)  The preparation of reports, records and statistics; 
(10)  Making frequent personal contacts with members of the public concerning permits and zoning, and all sanitary regulations; 
(11)  Generally to assist the board of selectmen, the zoning and planning commission, zoning board of appeals, regulatory body in collecting data, and to handle all other requests of the officer and boards hereinbefore mentioned in matters pertaining to the adopted town health and building codes; 
(12)  He shall exercise all other powers and duties imposed by the general statutes. 
(Code 1961, § 5-4) 
State Law reference- Duties and powers of building officials, G.S. § 19-397. 
Sec. 4-31. - Hours of availability. 
    The building inspector is required to be available as determined and posted by the board of selectmen. 
(Code 1961, § 5-5) 
Sec. 4-32. - Levying of the building, inspection and permit fees. 
    The building inspector shall submit to the board of selectmen a schedule of recommended building and inspection fees. The recommended fees shall be subject to approval by resolution of the board of selectmen. Upon approval by the board, the fee schedule shall remain in force until changed or amended by the aforesaid procedure. 
(Code 1961, § 5-6) 
Secs. 4-33-4-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BUILDING COMMISSION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference- Appointed boards, Ch. 10. 
Cross reference- Boards, commissions, committees and agencies, § 2-21 et seq. 

Sec. 4-51. - Findings and determinations. 
    It is found and determined that there is a continuing need in the town for the construction of buildings and structures to serve the governmental needs of this community; that such construction can be most economically accomplished by a general evaluation of all of the building needs of the town considered by a single commission; that economics are possible through multiple purpose uses of structures; that future building needs should be evaluated and land purchased to accommodate those needs. 
(Code 1961, § 5-27) 
Sec. 4-52. - Established; composition; appointment, term of members; officers. 
(a)  There is hereby established a commission which shall be known as the municipal building commission, consisting of nine members who shall be electors of the town. The members of the commission shall be appointed by the first selectman in the instance of the initial appointment; two for terms of five years, two for terms of four years, one for a term of three years, one for a term of two years and one for a term of one year, and thereafter, all members shall be appointed for a term of five years. All terms shall begin on January first of the year in which such appointment is made. The commission shall elect from among its members a chairman, a vice-chairman, a secretary and a treasurer, and in the absence of any such officers except the chairman, the commission may elect other members to temporarily serve. Replacement appointments shall be for the remaining term of the original appointment. 
(b)  There shall be two additional members appointed upon passage of the ordinance from which this section derives to increase the membership from seven to nine, one for a term to expire February 18, 1982, and one for a term to expire January 18, 1981; thereafter they shall be appointed for a term of five years. 
(Code 1961, § 5-28; Ord. of 7-12-78) 
Sec. 4-53. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  The building commission may within the limit of any funds appropriated, recommend to the board of selectmen for their approval, the employment of architects, engineers, estimators and any other professional consultants it may deem necessary and the preparation of preliminary designs or plans. The commission may further recommend to the board of selectmen the purchase of any land or building by the town. All such plans and recommendations written or oral reports, facts, studies, comparisons of alternatives and other information as may aid the selectmen in their final determination. The board of selectmen may act on such recommendations, request such further studies, plans, interviews, or may consider information otherwise available for its consideration and final action. 
(b)  The building commission may prepare for approval by the board of selectmen such contracts as have been authorized by the board pursuant to subsection (a) of this section for the construction, reconstruction or alteration of any building or structure which has been funded and approved by the town. It may, in the name of the town, purchase any land or building which has been authorized. It shall whenever possible, apply for federal, state or other grants or loans in connection with any such construction or land purchases. 
(c)  The building commission shall consult with other building commissions and committees and make its recommendations concerning the plans of such commissions and committees. 
(d)  The building commission shall not supersede the function of presently existing building committees; that is, the fire house building committee and the school building committee as to their presently-charged functions. 
(Code 1961, § 5-29; Ord. of 7-12-78) 
Secs. 4-54-4-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BOARD OF BUILDING APPEALS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Charter reference- Appointed boards, Ch. 10. 
Cross reference- Boards, commissions, committees and agencies, § 2-21 et seq. 
State Law reference- Board of building appeals authorized, G.S. § 19-402. 

Sec. 4-66. - Established. 
    There is hereby established a municipal board of building appeals. 
(Code 1961, § 5-17) 
Sec. 4-67. - Appointment; composition. 
    The board of building appeals shall consist of five members who shall be appointed by the first selectman. 
(Code 1961, § 5-17) 
Sec. 4-68. - Qualifications of members. 
    All of the members of the board of building appeals shall meet the qualifications as set forth in the state building code. 
(Code 1961, § 5-17) 
Sec. 4-69. - Terms of members. 
    Initially, the members of the building board of appeals shall be appointed for the following terms: One member for a term of five years; one member for a term of four years; one member for a term of three years; one member for a term of two years; and one member for a term of one year. Thereafter each new member shall be appointed for a term of five years. 
(Code 1961, § 5-17) 
Sec. 4-70. - Functions; duties; methods of procedure. 
    The functions, duties and methods of procedure of the board of building appeals shall be governed by section 19-402 of the general statutes and amendments thereto and applicable provisions of the state building code. 
(Code 1961, § 5-17) 
Sec. 4-71. - Vacancies. 
    Vacancies on the board of building appeals shall be filled by appointment by the first selectman. 
(Code 1961, § 5-17) 
Charter reference- Vacancies in appointed boards, § 9.3. 
Secs. 4-72-4-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - KEY (KNOX) BOXES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance of March 6, 1990, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, designation of §§ 1-6 of the ordinance as Art. V, §§ 4-101-4-106, was at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 4-101. - Applicability. 
    This article shall apply to all commercial buildings and apartment buildings containing six units or more. 
(Ord. of 3-6-90, § 1) 
Sec. 4-102. - Key box required. 
    When a building covered under section 4-101 is protected by an automatic alarm system, or access to or within a structure, or an area on that property, is unduly difficult because of secured openings, and where immediate access is necessary for life saving or fire fighting purposes, the board of fire commissioners may require a key box to be installed in an approved location. The key box shall be a type approved by the board of fire commissioners. 
(Ord. of 3-6-90, § 2) 
Sec. 4-103. - Contents. 
    The key box shall contain: 
(1)  Keys to locked points of ingress whether on the interior or exterior of such buildings. 
(2)  Keys to locked mechanical equipment rooms. 
(3)  Keys to locked electrical rooms. 
(4)  Keys to elevator controls. 
(5)  Keys to other areas as directed by the fire official. 
(Ord. of 3-6-90, § 3) 
Sec. 4-104. - Approval. 
    All key boxes shall be approved by the board of fire commissioners prior to installation. 
(Ord. of 3-6-90, § 4) 
Sec. 4-105. - Violations; penalties. 
    If a tenant changes a lock without the landlord's knowledge, they will be fined $25.00 per day until they purchase and install a lock that would fit the master key of said building. If a landlord, after being ordered to do so by the board of fire chiefs, fails to order and install a "Knox Box," the landlord will be fined the sum of $50.00 per day (after 15 days) until said landlord orders the "Knox Box." 
(Ord. of 3-6-90, § 6) 
Sec. 4-106. - Effective date. 
    This article shall take effect March 27, 1990. 
(Ord. of 3-6-90, § 5) 
Secs. 4-107-4-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - IDENTIFYING EMBLEMS REQUIRED ON BUILDINGS WITH TRUSS CONSTRUCTION 

Sec. 4-121. - Applicability. 
    This article shall apply to all commercial buildings and residential buildings with three or more living units. 
(Ord. of 3-18-97) 
Sec. 4-122. - Identifying emblems required. 
    An identifying emblem shall be affixed to the front of structures with truss construction. The emblem shall be of a bright color, or made of reflective material. The shape of the emblem shall be an isosceles triangle and the size shall be 12 inches horizontally by six inches vertically. 
    The following letters, of a size and color to make them conspicuous, shall be printed on the emblem "F" to signify a floor with truss construction, "R" to signify a roof with truss construction, or "F/R" to signify both a floor and a roof with truss construction. 
    The emblem shall be permanently affixed to the left of the main entrance door at a height between four to six feet above the ground and shall be installed and maintained by the owner of the building. 
(Ord. of 3-18-97) 
Sec. 4-123. - Compliance. 
    Any affected buildings must comply with the provisions of this article within 90 days of the effective date of this ordinance or be subject to a fine of $50.00 per day up to a maximum fine of $5,000.00. 
(Ord. of 3-18-97) 
Sec. 4-124. - Truss building-Isosceles triangle signs. 
    In accordance with this article, all commercial buildings and apartment buildings with three or more living units must have an emblem to identify truss construction. 
    The emblem shall be of a bright and reflective color, or made of reflective material. The shape of the emblem shall be an isosceles triangle and the size shall be 12 inches horizontally by six inches vertically, with letters if a size be printed on the emblem, as shown in diagram below. 

    The emblem shall be permanently affixed to the left of the main entrance door at the height of between four feet and six feet above the ground, and shall be installed and maintained by the owner of the building. 
(Ord. of 3-18-97) 
Secs. 4-125-4-145. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - ANTI-BLIGHT POLICY[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted Apr. 19, 2016, effective June 1, 2016, amended art. VII in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. VII, §§ 4-146-4-154, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from §§ 1-9 of an ordinance adopted Oct. 1, 2013. See the Code Comparative Table for prior derivation. 

Sec. 4-146. - Declaration of policy. 
    This article is enacted pursuant to Section 7-148, C.G.S. et seq. 
    It is hereby found and declared that there may exist within the Town of Seymour (the "town") a number of real properties which are vacant and/or in a blighted or dilapidated condition and that the continued existence of such properties contributes to the decline of neighborhoods. It is further found that the existence of such properties adversely affects the economic well-being of the town and is inimical to the health, safety and welfare of its residents. It is further found that many of the properties can be rehabilitated, reconstructed, demolished and/or reused so as to provide decent, safe and sanitary housing and commercial facilities, and that such rehabilitation, reconstruction, demolition and/or reuse would eliminate, remedy and prevent the adverse conditions described above. 
(Ord. of 4-19-16(2), § 1, eff. 6-1-16) 
Sec. 4-147. - Creation or maintenance of the blighted premises or dilapidated building or structures prohibited. 
    No owner of real property located in the town shall allow, create, maintain or cause to be created or maintained any blighted premises or dilapidated building or structure. 
(Ord. of 4-19-16(2), § 2, eff. 6-1-16) 
Sec. 4-148. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this article, the following words, terms and phrases shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. 
    Antique vehicle means a passenger car or truck that is at least 25 years old. 
    Blighted premises means any building structure or parcel of land in or upon which at least one of the following conditions exist: 
(1)  A building structure or parcel of land is in a condition which creates a serious threat to the safety, health, morals and/or general welfare of the community as determined by the blight enforcement officer, building inspector or zoning enforcement officer of the town; 
(2)  Illegal activity is occurring as documented by the police department or other enforcement agency; 
(3)  A fire hazard(s) as determined by the fire marshal; 
(4)  Missing, damaged or boarded windows or doors; damaged or missing gutters; damaged, decayed or missing siding of 100 square feet or more; collapsing or missing walls, roofs or parts of walls or roofs; or walls or roofs in need of repair; 
(5)  Structurally faulty foundation, porch, garage, outbuilding or any other accessory building that is/are in need of repair; 
(6)  Fencing that has not been maintained in a reasonable condition; 
(7)  Garbage and trash which is not contained; 
(8)  Brush, grass, weeds or similar vegetation (excluding flowers, ornamental grass, fruits and vegetables, and areas maintained in their original naturally wooded state, or a natural field state or used as farmland) which reach and remain at a height of 12 inches or greater for a period ten days or longer; 
(9)  Two or more abandoned or unregistered motor vehicles located on the premises (unless the premises is a junkyard licensed by the State of Connecticut); 
(10)  The open storage of car parts; 
(11)  The outdoor storage of indoor furniture and appliances within the ordinary public view; and/or 
(12)  Firewood which is not neatly stacked within the ordinary public view. 
    Capable individual means a person who can be reasonably expected to perform maintenance and yard work around a property or premises, which shall include children above 16 years of age, without a physical or mental disability as defined herein. (The town may request documentation to verify such disability.) 
    Dilapidated means any building or structure or part thereof that does not qualify for a certificate of use and occupancy, or which is deemed an unsafe building or structure, and any dwelling or dwelling unit which is designated as unfit for habitation as defined in the state building code and the Ordinances of the Town of Seymour. 
    Elderly individual means an individual 65 years of age or older who does not have a household member available who is capable of providing necessary maintenance. 
    Hobby vehicle means a vehicle of any age, such as a fire truck or ambulance, retained and preserved as a hobby. 
    Individual with disability means, in the case of an owner occupied residence, an individual who has a disability meeting the definitions for a mental or physical disability as defined under the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 and who does not have another household member capable of providing the necessary maintenance. 
    Low income individual means, in the case of an owner occupied residence, an individual, or where more than one person resides in the premises, a family unit, that has an income below the highest level of income established by the State of Connecticut's Elderly Tax Relief Program. 
    Motor vehicle collector means a person who: 
(1)  Owns one or more antique or hobby vehicle(s); and 
(2)  Acquires, collects or disposes of an antique or hobby vehicle or vehicle parts for personal use to restore and preserve an antique or hobby vehicle of any age and because of its historic interest. 
    Neighborhood means an area of the town comprising premises or parcels of land any part of which is within a contiguous radius of 1,500 feet of any other parcel within the town. 
    Ordinary public view means the view from the average grade surrounding the subject property from public property, a public right-of-way or private property in reasonably close proximity to the subject property. 
    Vacant means a period of 60 days or longer during which space subject to this article is not legally occupied (except in the case where the property is properly secured and regularly maintained). 
(Ord. of 4-19-16(2), § 3, eff. 6-1-16) 
Sec. 4-149. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The blight enforcement officer is charged with the enforcement of this article. He or she may request assistance from the building inspector, zoning enforcement officer, police department and/or the fire marshal. 
(b)  Blight complaints shall be submitted on a blight complaint form prescribed by the blight enforcement officer, which form shall be available on the town website and in the Seymour Town Hall. 
(Ord. of 4-19-16(2), § 4, eff. 6-1-16) 
Sec. 4-150. - Special consideration. 
    Special consideration shall be given to individuals who are elderly, disabled or active members of any branch of the military service in the town's effort to correct blighted conditions. If an individual is unable to maintain a reasonable level of upkeep of an owner occupied residence because he or she is an elderly individual or an individual with disability and no capable person resides in the residence, the blight enforcement officer shall give the person adequate time to correct the problem. Except as noted below, the blight enforcement officer shall provide adequate time to correct a blight problem to a low income individual who owns and occupies a residence that is designated as blighted. The blight enforcement officer may request documentation to verify that an individual is elderly, disabled or low income. 
(Ord. of 4-19-16(2), § 5, eff. 6-1-16) 
Sec. 4-151. - Violations. 
(a)  Warning. The blight enforcement officer shall take steps to contact the owner(s) and occupant(s) of the property alleged to be in violation of this article in person or by phone to explain the alleged violation and request the same to be remediated. The blight enforcement officer may also provide a verbal or written warning for remedial action citing the alleged violation and provide a reasonable period of time for the same to be remediated. If the violation is not corrected or if the blight enforcement officer is unable to contact the owner(s) and occupant(s) within 14 days after determining that a violation exists, the blight enforcement officer shall then invoke the provisions below. 
(b)  Notice of violation. A notice of violation Form shall be issued by the blight enforcement officer when required and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The address of the affected property; 
(2)  The exact nature of the blight condition; 
(3)  A statement including the provisions of section 4-150 of this article; 
(4)  The time period allowed for remedial action, which period of time shall not exceed 60 days unless additional time is approved by the blight enforcement officer, except for overgrown brush, grass and weeds, which must be corrected within ten days; 
(5)  The civil penalties for continued violation of this article; and 
(6)  The name, email address and business telephone number of the blight enforcement officer. 
The blight enforcement officer shall provide the owner(s), occupant(s) and lienholder(s) with a notice of violation under this article by leaving a copy of such violation notice form with the owner or affixed to the premises. He or she shall also forward a copy of the same by certified mail, return receipt request to the owner(s), occupant(s) and lienholder(s). In the event that the owner(s) and/or occupant(s) do not claim such form at the post office, the blight enforcement officer shall leave a copy of the notice at the entryway of the premises. 
(c)  Civil penalties. 
(1)  The owner(s) and occupant(s) shall have 14 days from the date notice is provided to remediate the blight conditions prior to any enforcement action being taken. Neither the blight enforcement officer nor any other municipal official shall have the right to enter any dwelling house or structure on the property. 
(2)  The civil penalty for continuous violation of this article shall be $100.00 per day following the expiration of 14 days after the notice of violation has been provided to the owner(s) and/or occupant(s) of the property. In addition to the civil penalties, the property owner(s) and occupant(s) shall be responsible for all costs associated with the violation, including, but not limited to, attorney's fees, court costs and mailing costs. 
(3)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, any person who is a new owner or new occupant of the property shall, upon request, be granted a 30-day extension of the notice and opportunity to remediate the violation. The term "new owner" means any person or entity who has taken title to a property within 30 days of the notice of violation, and the term "new occupant" means any person who has taken occupancy of a property within 30 days of the notice of violation. 
(4)  Upon application to the board of selectman, the board, after hearing and for cause shown, may reduce or abate civil penalties and costs imposed hereunder. 
(d)  Anti-blight lien. Any unpaid civil penalty imposed by the town pursuant to the provisions of this article shall constitute a lien upon the real estate against which the civil penalty was imposed from the date of such civil penalty. Each such lien may be continued, recorded and released in the manner provided by the Connecticut General Statutes for continuing, recording and releasing property tax liens. 
(Ord. of 4-19-16(2), § 6, eff. 6-1-16) 
Sec. 4-152. - Citation procedures. 
(a)  Issuance of citations. 
(1)  The first selectman of the town shall appoint one or more citation hearing officers, other than police officers or employees or persons who issue citations, to conduct the hearings authorized by this section. 
(2)  Any citation may be issued by in-hand service or by certified mail, return receipt requested. If the person named in the citation fails or refuses to accept the certified mail, the citation may be sent by regular United States mail. 
(3)  Any person receiving a citation shall be allowed a period of 30 days from his or her receipt of the citation to make an uncontested payment of the fine to the town. If the citation has been sent by regular mail pursuant to the provisions set forth above, the date and receipt of the citation shall be considered three business days after the mailing of the same. 
(4)  If a person who has been issued a citation does not make uncontested payment of the civil penalty specified in the citation to the town within the time allowed under subsection (3) above, the town shall send a notice to the person cited informing him or her as follows: 
a.  Of the allegations against him or her and the amount of the civil penalties; 
b.  That he or she may contest his or her liability before a citation hearing officer by delivering in person or mail written notice within ten days of the date thereof; 
c.  That if he or she does not demand such a hearing, an assessment and judgment shall be entered against him or her; and 
d.  That such judgment may issue without further notice. 
(5)  If the person who has been sent notice pursuant to subsection (4) above wishes to admit liability for any alleged violation, he or she may, without requesting a hearing, pay the full amount of the civil penalty in person or by mail to the blight enforcement officer. Any person who does not deliver or mail a written demand for a hearing within ten days of the date of the notice provided for in subsection (4) above shall be deemed to have admitted liability and the blight enforcement officer shall certify such person's failure to respond to the citation hearing officer. The citation hearing officer shall thereupon enter and assess the civil penalties, fees and costs provided by this article and shall follow the procedures as set forth in subsection (d) below. 
(b)  A person who chooses to appeal a citation may request a hearing. He or she shall be given written notice of the date, time and place for the hearing by in-hand service or by certified mail, return receipt requested. The hearing shall be held not less than 15 days nor more than 30 days from the date of mailing of the notice. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the citation hearing officer may grant upon good cause shown any reasonable request by an interested party for postponement or continuance. The presence of the blight enforcement officer shall be required at the hearing to present evidence on behalf of the town. If the property owner or occupant fails to appear on the date and at the time and place of the hearing, the citation hearing officer shall examine the file and whatever documents the property owner or occupant may have submitted prior thereto and, upon a finding of proper notice and liability, shall declare the property owner or occupant to be in default and shall summarily assess civil penalties, fees and costs. Otherwise, the citation hearing officer shall conduct the hearing in the order and form and with such methods of proof as he or she deems fair and appropriate. The rules regarding admission of evidence shall not be strictly applied. All testimony shall be given under oath. If the citation hearing officer shall determine that the property owner or occupant is not liable, the citation hearing officer shall dismiss the matter and enter his or her determination on the record in writing. If he or she determines that the property owner or occupant is liable, the citation hearing officer shall forthwith enter and assess the civil penalties, fees and costs against the property owner or occupant as provided by this article. 
(c)  If the person who receives the citation does not agree with the citation hearing officer's assessment, he or she may appeal the decision to the Superior Court in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Connecticut General Statutes. 
(d)  If the citation hearing officer's assessment is not paid on the date of its entry, the citation hearing officer shall send by first class mail a notice of assessment to the person found liable and shall file, not less than 30 days or no more than 12 months after the mailing, a certified copy of the notice of assessment with the Clerk of Superior Court requesting that the court enter judgment in accordance with the citation hearing officer's assessment. Notwithstanding any provisions of the Connecticut General Statutes, the citation hearing officer's assessment, when so entered as a judgment, shall have the effect of a civil money judgment and a levy of execution on such judgment may issue without further notice to such person. 
(Ord. of 4-19-16(2), § 7, eff. 6-1-16) 
Sec. 4-153. - Town regulations. 
    Nothing in this article shall limit the power and authority of the town building inspector, fire marshal, health district or the planning and zoning commission to enforce their respective regulations. The penalties and power of this article shall be in addition to and not in lieu of any other enforcement regulation or procedure exercised by the town building inspector, fire marshal, health district or planning and zoning commission. 
(Ord. of 4-19-16(2), § 8, eff. 6-1-16) 
Sec. 4-154. - Exceptions. 
(a)  This article shall not apply to operable unregistered motor vehicles owned by persons serving in the Armed Forces of the United States outside the State of Connecticut. 
(b)  This article does not apply to a vehicle or vehicle parts: 
(1)  Completely enclosed in a building in a lawful manner not visible from the street; or 
(2)  Stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed vehicle dealer or junkyard, or that is an antique or hobby vehicle stored by a motor vehicle collector on the collector's property, if the vehicle or parts and the outdoor storage area, if any, are: 
a.  Maintained in an orderly manner; 
b.  Not a health hazard; and 
c.  Screened from ordinary public view by appropriate means, including a fence, rapidly growing trees, shrubbery, car cover, or tarp. 
No more than two vehicles are allowed under this exemption. 
(c)  [This article does not apply to] any vehicle which is operational and which is being sold by owner on his or her property. 
(Ord. of 4-19-16(2), § 9, eff. 6-1-16) 
Secs. 4-155-4-170. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT[7] 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference- Flood damage prevention, Ch. 7; planning, Ch. 13; illicit stormwater discharges, § 17-111 et seq.; soil erosion and sediment control, App. A, § 15.0; subdivisions, App. B; regulations for the protection and preservation of inland wetlands and watercourses, App. C. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 4-171. - Purpose and authority. 
    In accordance with the provisions of Chapters 98, 124, 126, 440, 444 and 446h of the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut, as amended, the Town of Seymour hereby adopts the following stormwater management ordinance for the following purposes: 
(1)  To protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety, and general welfare by establishing minimum requirements and procedures to control the adverse impacts associated with post-construction stormwater runoff. Proper management of stormwater runoff will minimize damage to public and private property, reduce the effects of development on land and wetlands, control stream channel erosion, reduce local flooding, improve water quality, and maintain after development, as nearly as possible, the pre-development runoff characteristics. 
(2)  The provisions of this article are pursuant to Connecticut State Statutes 7-148 (c)(8)(A) 1 , [] 8-2 (a) , 8-25 , and 22a-36 to 22a-45 inclusive , and 8-2(b) and shall apply to all development occurring within the incorporated area of the Town of Seymour, Connecticut. The application of this ordinance and provisions expressed herein shall be the minimum stormwater management requirements and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by state statute. The agencies defined in section 4-173 as the "responsible agency" shall be responsible for the coordination and enforcement of the provisions of this ordinance. 
(Ord. of 2-5-08(1), § 1.0) 
Footnotes: 
--- () --- 
Municipal Powers: The municipality has the power to "Provide for the protection and improvement of the environment including, but not limited to, coastal areas, wetlands and areas adjacent to waterways in a manner not inconsistent with the general statutes. 
Regulations: The zoning commission is authorized to adopt regulations "...to secure safety from ...flood and other dangers; to promote health and the general welfare..." 
Subdivision of land: Authorizes the zoning commission to see "...that proper provision shall be made for... drainage..." and "that proper provision shall be made for protective flood control measures..." 
The Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Act. 
"In any municipality that is contiguous to Long Island Sound the regulations adopted under this section shall be made with reasonable consideration for restoration and protection of the ecosystem and habitat of Long Island Sound and shall be designed to reduce hypoxia, pathogens, toxic contaminants and floatable debris in Long Island Sound. Such regulations shall provide that the zoning commission consider the environmental impact on Long Island sound of any proposal for development." 

Sec. 4-172. - Incorporation by reference. 
    For the purpose of this article, the Connecticut Stormwater Quality Manual (as amended) is incorporated by reference by the Town of Seymour, Connecticut and shall serve as the official guide for stormwater principles, methods, and practices. 
(Ord. of 2-5-08(1), § 1.1) 
Sec. 4-173. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this article, the following definitions describe the meaning of the terms used in this article: 
    Adverse impact means any deleterious effect on waters or wetlands, including their quality, quantity, surface area, species composition, aesthetics or usefulness for human or natural uses which are or may potentially be harmful or injurious to human health, welfare, safety or property, to biological productivity, diversity, or stability or which unreasonably interfere with the enjoyment of life or property, including outdoor recreation. 
    Agricultural land management practices means those methods and procedures used in the cultivation of land in order to further crop and livestock production and conservation of related soil and water resources. 
    Applicant means any person, firm, or governmental agency who executes the necessary forms to procure official approval of a project or a permit to carry out construction of a project. 
    Aquifer means porous water bearing geologic formation generally restricted to materials capable of yielding an appreciable supply of water. 
    BMP (best management practice) means a structural device or nonstructural practice designed to temporarily store or treat stormwater runoff in order to mitigate flooding, reduce pollution, and provide other amenities. 
    Clearing means the removal of trees and brush from the land but shall not include the ordinary mowing of grass. [ Note: The IWC definition of "clear-cutting is a timber harvest that removes all trees down to a two-inch diameter at breast height. "Clearing" for the purposes of stormwater management has to do with the removal of vegetative cover.] 
    DEP means the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection. 
    Design Manual means the most current edition of the Connecticut Stormwater Quality Manual that serves as the official guide for the stormwater management principles, methods, and practices. 
    Detention structure means a permanent structure for the temporary storage of runoff, which is designed so as not to create a permanent pool of water. 
    Develop land means to change the runoff characteristics of a parcel of land in conjunction with residential, commercial, industrial, municipal, or institutional construction or alteration. 
    Direct discharge means the concentrated release of stormwater to tidal waters or vegetated tidal wetlands from new development or redevelopment projects in the critical area. 
    Drainage area means an area that contributes runoff to a single point measured in a horizontal plane, which is enclosed by a ridgeline. 
    Easement means a grant or reservation by the owner of land for the use of such land by others for a specific purpose or purposes, and which must be included in the conveyance of land affected by such easement. 
    Exemption means those land development activities that are not subject to the stormwater management requirements contained in this article. 
    Extended detention means a stormwater design feature that provides gradual release of a volume of water in order to increase settling of pollutants and protect downstream channels from frequent storm events. Methods for designing extended detention BMPs are specified in the Design Manual. 
    Extreme flood volume means the storage volume required to control those infrequent but large storm events in which overbank flows reach or exceed the boundaries of the 100-year floodplain. 
    Flow attenuation means prolonging the flow time of runoff to reduce the peak discharge. 
    Grading means any act by which soil is cleared, stripped, stockpiled, excavated, scarified, filled or any combination thereof. 
    Infiltration means the passage or movement of water into the soil surface. 
    IWC means the Inlands Wetlands Commission of the Town of Seymour, Connecticut 
    Off-site stormwater management means the design and construction of a facility necessary to control stormwater from more than one development. 
    On-site stormwater management means the design and construction of systems necessary to control stormwater within an immediate development. 
    Peak runoff attenuation means controlling by structural practices the volume to prevent an increase in the frequency of out of bank flooding generated by development. 
    Groundwater recharge volume (GRV) means that portion of the water quality volume used to maintain groundwater recharge rates at development sites. Methods for calculating the groundwater recharge volume are specified in the Design Manual. 
    Redevelopment means any construction, alteration, or improvement exceeding 5,000 square feet of land disturbance performed on sites where existing land use is commercial, industrial, municipal, institutional or multifamily residential. 
    Responsible agency 
(a)  The Inland Wetlands Commission (IWC) and its agent/s for stormwater runoff impacting wetlands and watercourses. (For the purposes of only this paragraph, the definition of "wetlands" and "watercourse" is the definition used in the most current version of the Inland Wetland and Watercourses regulations of the Town of Seymour.) 
(b)  The IWC, it's agent/s and the town engineering for stormwater runoff from roads and sidewalks. 
(c)  The IWC, it's agent/s and the town engineering for all other stormwater runoff. 
    Responsible official is the official or officials in The IWC designated to deal with stormwater management issues. 
    Retention structure means a permanent structure that provides for the storage of runoff by means of a permanent pool of water. 
    Retrofitting means the construction of a structural BMP in a previously developed area, the modification of an existing structural BMP, or the implementation of a nonstructural practice to improve water quality over current conditions. 
    Sediment means soils or other surficial materials transported or deposited by the action of wind, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
    Site means: 
(a)  For "new development" any tract, lot or parcel of land or combination of tracts, lots, or parcels of land, which are in one ownership, or are contiguous and in diverse ownership where development is to be performed as part of a unit, subdivision, or project. 
(b)  For "redevelopment" the area of new construction as shown on an approved site plan, or the original parcel. The IWC shall make final determination of the applicable area. 
    Stabilization means the prevention of soil movement by any of various vegetative and/or structural means. 
    Stormwater management means the selective use of various management measures to effectively address the adverse water quality and quantity impacts of urban stormwater runoff. 
    Stormwater management plan means a set of drawings or other documents that describe the potential water quality and quantity impacts associated with a development project after construction. A stormwater management plan also identifies selected source controls and treatment practices to address those potential impacts, the engineering design of the treatment practices, and maintenance requirements for proper performance of the selected practices. 
    Stream channel protection means restricting peak flows from storm events that result in flow conditions where the stream is flowing to the full extent of its banks so the damaging effects to the channel of increased runoff from urbanization can be reduced. Methods for calculating stream channel protection are specified in the most current edition of the Connecticut Stormwater Quality Manual. 
    Stripping means any activity that removes the vegetative surface cover including tree removal, clearing, grubbing and storage or removal of topsoil. 
    Variance means the modification of the minimum stormwater management requirements for specific circumstances such that strict adherence to the requirements would result in necessary hardship and not fulfill the intent of this article. 
    Waiver means the relinquishment from stormwater management requirements by the IWC for a specific development on a case-by-case review basis. 
(a)  Qualitative stormwater management waiver includes water quality volume and groundwater recharge volume design parameters. 
(b)  Quantitative stormwater management waiver includes stream channel protection, peak runoff attenuation, and extreme flood volume design parameters. [See note on definition regarding extreme flood volume.] 
    Watercourse means any natural or artificial stream, river, brook, lake, pond, marsh, swamp, bog, ditch, channel, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, wash, and all other bodies of water, natural or artificial, vernal or intermittent, public or private in and including any adjacent area that is subject to inundation from overflow or flood water. 
    Watershed means the total drainage area contributing runoff to a single point. 
    Water quality volume means the volume of runoff generated by one inch of rainfall on the site. 
(Ord. of 2-5-08(1), § 2.0) 
Sec. 4-174. - Appeals. 
    Any person aggrieved by the action of any official charged with the enforcement of this article, as the result of the disapproval of a properly filed application for a permit, issuance of a written notice of violation, or an alleged failure to properly enforce this ordinance in regard to a specific application, shall have the right to appeal in a manner prescribed in the regulations and procedures of the IWC and the State of Connecticut. 
(Ord. of 2-5-08(1), § 10.0) 
Sec. 4-175. - Penalties. 
    Any person convicted of violating the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to a fine of not more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) or imprisonment not exceeding one year or both for each violation with costs imposed in the discretion of the court. Each day that a violation continues shall be a separate offense. In addition, the IWC may institute or cause to be instituted injunctive, mandamus or other appropriate action or proceedings of law to correct violations of this article. Any court of competent jurisdiction shall have the right to issue temporary or permanent restraining orders, injunctions or mandamus, or other appropriate forms of relief. 
(Ord. of 2-5-08(1), § 12.0) 
Sec. 4-176. - Severability. 
    If a court of competent jurisdiction holds any portion of this article invalid or unconstitutional, such portion shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this article. It is the intent of the Town of Seymour that this article shall stand, even if a section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion may be found invalid. 
(Ord. of 2-5-08(1), § 11.0) 
Secs. 4-177-4-190. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - APPLICABILITY 

Sec. 4-191. - Scope. 
    No person shall develop land for residential, commercial, industrial, municipal, or institutional uses without having provided stormwater management measures that control or manage runoff from such development, except as provided within this division. The stormwater management measures must be designed consistent with the Design Manual and constructed according to an approved plan for new development or the policies stated in section 4-194 for redevelopment. 
(Ord. of 2-5-08(1), § 3.1) 
Sec. 4-192. - Exemptions. 
    The following development activities are exempt from the provisions of this article and the requirements of providing stormwater management: 
(1)  Agricultural land management practices; 
(2)  Developments that do not disturb over 5,000 square feet of land area over the total project. 
(Ord. of 2-5-08(1), § 3.2) 
Sec. 4-193. - Waivers; watershed management plans. 
(a)  Stormwater management quantitative control waivers may be granted to projects when the inland wetlands commission (IWC) determines that circumstances exist that prevent the reasonable implementation of quantity control practices. 
(b)  Stormwater management qualitative control waivers apply only to: 
(1)  In-fill development projects where stormwater management implementation is not feasible; 
(2)  Redevelopment projects if the requirements of section 4-194 are satisfied; or 
(3)  Sites where The IWC determines that circumstances exist that prevent or make unnecessary the reasonable implementation of quality control practices. 
(c)  Waivers granted must: 
(1)  Be on a case-by-case basis; 
(2)  Consider the cumulative effects of the waiver policy; and 
(3)  Reasonably ensure the development will not adversely impact stream quality. 
(Ord. of 2-5-08(1), § 3.3) 
Sec. 4-194. - Redevelopment. 
(a)  The recharge, stream channel protection, and peak runoff attenuation requirements specified in the Design Manual do not apply to redevelopment projects unless specified by the IWC. 
(b)  All redevelopment projects shall reduce existing site impervious areas by at least 20 percent. Where site conditions prevent the reduction of impervious area, then stormwater management practices shall be implemented to provide qualitative control for at least 20 percent of the site's impervious area. The elements and principles of stormwater qualitative control are noted in the design manual. When a combination of impervious area reduction and stormwater practice implementation is used, the combined area shall equal or exceed 20 percent of the site. [ Note: For redevelopment "site" in the definitions section is defined as "...the area of new construction as shown on an approved site plan, or the original parcel. Determination of the applicable area shall be made by the IWC. 
(c)  Where conditions prevent impervious area reduction or on-site stormwater management, the IWC may consider practical alternatives including: [check legality of these alternatives] 
(1)  Watershed or stream restoration; 
(2)  Retrofitting; or 
(3)  Other practices approved by the IWC. 
(Ord. of 2-5-08(1), § 3.4) 
Sec. 4-195. - Variance. 
    The IWC may grant a written variance from any requirement of Division 3 of this article (Stormwater Management Criteria) if there are exceptional circumstances applicable to the site such that strict adherence will result in unnecessary hardship and not fulfill the intent of this article. A written request for variance shall be provided to the IWC and shall state the specific variances sought and reasons for their granting. The IWC shall not grant a variance unless and until the person developing land provides sufficient justification. 
(Ord. of 2-5-08(1), § 3.5) 
Secs. 4-196-4-210. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT CRITERIA 

Sec. 4-211. - Minimum control requirements. 
(a)  The minimum control criteria established in this division and the Design Manual are as follows: 
(1)  Shall require that the groundwater recharge volume, water quality volume, and peak runoff attenuation for the two-year frequency storm event is used to design BMPs according to the Design Manual. Control of the ten-year frequency storm event is required according to the Design Manual if the IWC determines that historical flooding problems exist and downstream floodplain development and conveyance system design cannot be controlled. 
(2)  Shall require that the groundwater recharge volume, water quality volume, and stream channel protection sizing criteria be used to design BMPs according to the Design Manual. 
(3)  The IWC may require more than the minimum control requirements specified in this ordinance if hydrologic or topographic conditions warrant or if flooding, stream channel erosion, or water quality problems exist downstream from a proposed project. 
(b)  Stormwater management and development plans where applicable, shall be consistent with adopted and approved watershed management plans or flood management plans as approved by the DEP in accordance with [site regulation or statute here if such exists]. 
(Ord. of 2-5-08(1), § 4.1) 
Sec. 4-212. - Stormwater management measures. 
    The structural and nonstructural stormwater management measures established in this article shall be used, either alone or in a combination, in developing a stormwater management plan. 
(1)  Nonstructural stormwater management measures. 
a.  The following nonstructural stormwater management practices shall be applied according to the Design Manual to minimize increases in new development runoff: 
1.  Natural area conservation; 
2.  Disconnection of rooftop runoff; 
3.  Disconnection of non-rooftop runoff; 
4.  Sheet flow to buffers; 
5  Grass channels; and 
6.  Environmentally sensitive development. 
b.  The use of nonstructural stormwater management practices shall be encouraged to minimize the reliance on structural BMPs. 
c.  The minimum control requirements listed in section 4-211 may be reduced when nonstructural stormwater management practices are incorporated into site designs according to the Design Manual. 
d.  The use of nonstructural stormwater management practices may not conflict with existing state or local laws, ordinances, or policies. 
e.  Nonstructural stormwater management practices used to reduce the minimum control requirements must be recorded and remain unaltered by subsequent property owners. Prior approval from the IWC shall be obtained before nonstructural stormwater practices are altered. 
(2)  Structural stormwater management measures. 
a.  The following structural stormwater management practices shall be designed according to the Design Manual to satisfy the applicable minimum control requirements established in section 4-211. 
1.  Stormwater ponds; 
2.  Stormwater wetlands; 
3.  Stormwater infiltration practices; 
4.  Stormwater filtering practices; and 
5.  Water quality swales and grass drainage channels. 
b.  The performance criteria specified in the Design Manual with regard to general feasibility, conveyance, pretreatment, treatment and geometry, environment and landscaping, and maintenance shall be considered when selecting structural stormwater management practices. 
c.  Structural stormwater management practices shall be selected to accommodate the unique hydrologic or geologic regions of the state. 
(3)  Alternative structural and nonstructural stormwater management practices may be used for new development water quality control if they meet the performance criteria established in the Design Manual. Practices used for redevelopment projects shall be approved by the IWC. 
(4)  For the purposes of modifying the minimum control requirements or design criteria, the owner/developer shall submit at the request of the IWC an analysis of the impacts of stormwater flows downstream in the watershed. The analysis shall include hydrologic and hydraulic calculations necessary to determine the impact of hydrograph timing modifications of the proposed development upon a dam, highway, structure, or natural point of restricted stream flow. The point of investigation is to be established with the concurrence of the IWC. 
(Ord. of 2-5-08(1), § 4.2) 
Sec. 4-213. - Specific design criteria. 
    The basic design criteria, methodologies, and construction specifications, subject to the approval of the IWC shall be those of the Design Manual. 
(Ord. of 2-5-08(1), § 4.3) 
Secs. 4-214-4-220. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLANS 

Sec. 4-221. - Review and approval of stormwater management plans. 
(a)  For any proposed development, the developer shall submit a stormwater management plan or waiver application to the IWC for review and approval, unless otherwise exempted. The stormwater management plan shall contain supporting computations, drawings, and sufficient information describing the manner, location, and type of measures in which stormwater runoff will be managed from the entire development. The IWC shall review the plan to determine compliance with the requirements of this article prior to approval. The plan shall serve as the basis for all subsequent construction. 
(b)  Notification of approval or reasons for disapproval or modification shall be given to the applicant along with the IWC application approval. If a decision is not made within 60 days the applicant shall be informed of the status of the review process and the anticipated completion date. The stormwater management plan shall not be considered approved without the inclusion of the signature and date of signature of the responsible official on the plan. 
(Ord. of 2-5-08(1), § 5.1) 
Sec. 4-222. - Contents of the stormwater management plan. 
(a)  The developer is responsible for submitting a stormwater management plan that meets the design requirements of this article. The plan shall be accompanied by a report that includes sufficient information to evaluate the environmental characteristics of affected areas, the potential impacts of the proposed development on water resources, and the effectiveness and acceptability of measures proposed for managing stormwater runoff. An engineer licensed in Connecticut shall certify on the drawings that all clearing, grading, drainage, construction, and development shall be conducted in strict accordance with the plan. If a stormwater management plan involves direction of some or all runoff off of the site, it is the responsibility of the developer to obtain from adjacent property owners any easements or necessary property interests concerning flowage of water. Approval of a stormwater management plan does not create or affect any right to direct runoff onto adjacent property without that property owner's permission. 
The minimum information submitted for support of a stormwater management plan or application for a waiver shall be as follows: 
(b)  Reports submitted for stormwater management plan approval shall include: 
(1)  A brief narrative description of the project; 
(2)  Geotechnicial investigations including soil maps, borings, site-specific recommendations, and any additional information necessary for the proposed stormwater management design; 
(3)  Descriptions of all watercourses, impoundments, and wetlands on or adjacent to the site or into which stormwater directly flows; 
(4)  Hydrologic computations, including drainage area maps depicting pre development and post development runoff flow path segmentation and land use that demonstrate compliance with Division 3 of this article; 
(5)  Hydraulic computations; 
(6)  Structural computations; 
(7)  Unified sizing criteria volume computations according to the Design Manual; and 
(8)  Any other information required by the IWC. 
(c)  Construction drawings submitted for stormwater management plan approval shall include the following: 
(1)  A vicinity map; 
(2)  Topography survey showing existing and proposed contours, including the area necessary to determine downstream analysis for proposed stormwater management facilities; 
(3)  Any proposed improvements including location of buildings or other structures, impervious surfaces, storm drainage facilities, and all grading; 
(4)  The location of existing and proposed structures and utilities; 
(5)  Any easements and rights-of-way; 
(6)  The delineation, if applicable, of the 100-year floodplain and any on-site wetlands; 
(7)  Structural and construction details for all components of the proposed drainage system or systems, and stormwater management facilities. 
(8)  All necessary construction specifications; 
(9)  A sequence of construction; 
(10)  Data for total site area, disturbed area, new impervious area, and total impervious area; 
(11)  A table showing the unified sizing criteria volumes described in the Design Manual; 
(12)  A table of materials to be used for stormwater management facility planting; 
(13)  All soil boring logs and locations; 
(14)  A maintenance schedule; 
(15)  Certification by a Connecticut certified engineer that all stormwater management construction will be done according to this plan; 
(16)  An as-built certification signature block to be executed after project completion; and 
(17)  Any other information required by the IWC. 
(Ord. of 2-5-08(1), § 5.2) 
Sec. 4-223. - Preparation of the stormwater management plan. 
(a)  A professional engineer licensed in the state shall design and prepare a stormwater management plans as necessary to protect the public and the environment. 
(b)  If a stormwater BMP requires either a dam safety permit from DEP or small pond approval from the IWC shall require that a professional engineer licensed in the state prepare the design. 
(Ord. of 2-5-08(1), § 5.3) 
Secs. 4-224-4-230. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - PERMITS 

Sec. 4-231. - Permit requirement. 
    A grading or building permit may not be issued for any parcel or lot unless a stormwater management plan has been approved or waived by the IWC as meeting all the requirements of this article. Where appropriate, a building permit may not be issued without: 
(1)  Recorded easements for the stormwater management facility and easements to provide adequate access for inspection and maintenance from a public right-of-way; 
(2)  A recorded stormwater management maintenance agreement; 
(3)  A cash bond; and 
(4)  Permission from adjacent property owners as necessary. 
(Ord. of 2-5-08(1), § 6.1) 
Sec. 4-232. - Permit fee. 
    A non-refundable permit fee will be collected at the time the stormwater management plan or application for waiver is submitted. The permit fee will provide for the cost of plan review, administration, and management of the permitting process, and inspections by the IWC of all projects subject to this article. A permit fee schedule shall be established by the IWC based upon the relative complexity of the project and may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. of 2-5-08(1), § 6.2) 
Sec. 4-233. - Permit suspension and revocation. 
    Any grading or building permit issued by the IWC may be suspended or revoked after written notice is given to the permittee for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Any violation(s) of the conditions of the stormwater management plan approval. 
(2)  Changes in site runoff characteristics upon which an approval or waiver was granted. 
(3)  Construction is not in accordance with the approved plan. 
(4)  Noncompliance with correction notice(s) or stop work order(s) issued for the construction of the stormwater management facility. 
(5)  An immediate danger exists in a downstream area in the opinion of the inland wetlands and watercourses commission, IWWC. 
(Ord. of 2-5-08(1), § 6.3) 
Sec. 4-234. - Permit conditions. 
    In granting the plan approval, the IWC may impose such conditions that may be deemed necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this article and the preservation of the public health and safety. 
(Ord. of 2-5-08(1), § 6.4) 
Secs. 4-235-4-240. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - SURETY, LETTER OF CREDIT AND/OR INSURANCE 

Sec. 4-241. - Required. 
    The IWC shall require from the developer a surety, letter of credit and /or insurance prior to the issuance of any building and/or grading permit for the construction of a development requiring a stormwater management facility. The amount of the security shall not be less than the total estimated construction cost of the stormwater management facility. The surety, letter of credit and /or insurance required in this section shall include provisions relative to forfeiture for failure to complete work specified in the approved stormwater management plan, compliance with all of the provisions of this ordinance, and other applicable laws and regulations, and any time limitations. The surety, letter of credit and /or insurance shall not be fully released without a final inspection of the completed work by the IWC submission of "as-built" plans, and certification of completion by the IWC that the stormwater management facilities comply with the approved plan and the provisions of this article. A procedure may be used to release parts of the surety, letter of credit and /or insurance held by the IWC after various stages of construction have been completed and accepted by the IWC. The procedures used for partially releasing performance surety, letter of credit and/or insurance must be specified by the IWC in writing prior to stormwater management plan approval. 
(Ord. of 2-5-08(1), § 7.0) 
Secs. 4-242-4-250. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - INSPECTION 

Sec. 4-251. - Inspection schedule and reports. 
(a)  The developer shall notify the engineer responsible for inspections at least 48 hours before commencing any work in conjunction with the stormwater management plan and upon completion of the project when a final inspection will be conducted. 
(b)  The developer shall retain a professional engineer licensed in the state to conduct inspections. Written inspection reports shall be made of the periodic inspections necessary during construction of stormwater management systems to ensure compliance with the approved plans. 
(c)  Written inspection reports shall be provided to the developer and the IWC and shall include: 
(1)  The date and location of the inspection; 
(2)  Whether construction was in compliance with the approved stormwater management plan; 
(3)  Any variations from the approved construction specifications; and 
(4)  Any violations that exist. 
(d)  The owner/developer and on-site personnel shall be notified in writing when violations are observed. Written notification shall describe the nature of the violation and the required corrective action. 
(e)  No work shall proceed until the IWC its agent/s or the town engineer approves the work previously completed. The inspector shall provide the developer and the IWC with the results of the inspection reports as soon as possible after completion of each required inspection. 
(Ord. of 2-5-08(1), § 8.1) 
Sec. 4-252. - Inspection requirements during construction. 
(a)  At a minimum, inspections shall be made and documented at the following specified stages of construction: 
(1)  For ponds: 
a.  Upon completion of excavation to sub-foundation and when required, installation of structural supports or reinforcement for structures, including but not limited to: 
(i)  Core trenches for structural embankments; 
(ii)  Inlet and outlet structures, anti-seep collars or diaphragms, and watertight connectors on pipes; and 
(iii)  Trenches for enclosed storm drainage facilities. 
b.  During placement of structural fill, concrete, and installation of piping and catch basins; 
c.  During backfill of foundations and trenches; 
d.  During embankment construction; and 
e.  Upon completion of final grading and establishment of permanent stabilization. 
(2)  Wetlands-At the stages specified for pond construction in subsection 4-252(a)(1), during and after wetland reservoir area planting, and during the second growing season to verify a vegetation survival rate of at least 50 percent. 
(3)  For infiltration trenches: 
a.  During excavation to subgrade; 
b.  During placement and backfill of underdrain systems and observation wells; 
c.  During placement of geotextiles and all filter media; 
d.  During construction of appurtenant conveyance systems such as diversion structures, pre-filters and filters, inlets, outlets, and flow distribution structures; and 
e.  Upon completion of final grading and establishment of permanent stabilization; 
(4)  For infiltration basins-At the stages specified for pond construction in subsection 4-252(a)(1) and during placement and backfill of underdrain systems. 
(5)  For filtering systems: 
a.  During excavation to subgrade; 
b.  During placement and backfill of underdrain systems; 
c.  During placement of geotextiles and all filter media; 
d.  During construction of appurtenant conveyance systems such as flow diversion structures, pre-filters and filters, inlets, outlets, orifices, and flow distribution structures; and 
e.  Upon completion of final grading and establishment of permanent stabilization. 
(6)  For open channel systems: 
a.  During excavation to subgrade; 
b.  During placement and backfill of underdrain systems for dry swales; 
c.  During installation of diaphragms, check dams, or weirs; and 
d.  Upon completion of final grading and establishment of permanent stabilization. 
(7)  For nonstructural practices-upon completion of final grading, the establishment of permanent stabilization, and before issuance of use and occupancy approval. 
(b)  The IWC may, for enforcement purposes, use any one or a combination of the following actions: 
(1)  A notice of violation shall be issued specifying the need for a violation to be corrected if the stormwater management plan noncompliance is identified; 
(2)  A stop work order shall be issued for the site by the IWC its agent/s or the town engineer if a violation persists; 
(3)  Bonds or securities may be withheld or the case may be referred for legal action if reasonable efforts to correct the violation have not been undertaken; or 
(4)  In addition to any other sanctions, a civil action or criminal prosecution may be brought against any person in violation this article. 
(c)  Any step in the enforcement process may be taken at any time, depending on the severity of the violation. 
(d)  Once construction is complete, as-built plan certification shall be submitted by a professional engineer licensed in the state to ensure that constructed stormwater management practices and conveyance systems comply with the specifications contained in the approved plans. At a minimum, as-built certification shall include a set of drawings comparing the approved stormwater management plan with what was constructed the IWC may require additional information. 
(Ord. of 2-5-08(1), § 8.2) 
Secs. 4-253-4-260. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - MAINTENANCE 

Sec. 4-261. - Maintenance inspection. 
(a)  The IWC shall ensure that all stormwater management systems are inspected for performance of preventative maintenance. Inspection shall occur during the first year of operation and at least once every three (3) years thereafter. In addition, a maintenance agreement between the owner and the IWC shall be executed for privately owned stormwater management systems as described in section 4-262. 
(b)  The IWC shall maintain inspection reports for all stormwater management systems. 
(c)  Inspection reports for stormwater management systems shall include the following: 
(1)  The date of inspection; 
(2)  Name of inspector; 
(3)  The condition of: 
a.  Vegetation or filter media; 
b.  Fences or other safety devices; 
c.  Spillways, valves, or other control structures; 
d.  Embankments, slopes, and safety benches; 
e.  Reservoir or treatment areas; 
f.  Inlet and outlet channels or structures; 
g.  Underground drainage; 
h.  Sediment and debris accumulation in storage and forebay areas; 
i.  Any nonstructural practices to the extent practicable; and 
j.  Any other item that could affect the proper function of the stormwater management system. 
(4)  Description of needed maintenance. 
(d)  After notification is provided to the owner of any deficiencies discovered from an inspection of a stormwater management system, the owner shall have 30 days or other time frame mutually agreed to between the IWC and the owner to correct the deficiencies. The IWC shall then conduct a subsequent inspection to ensure completion of the repairs. 
(e)  If repairs are not undertaken or are not done properly, then enforcement procedures of subsection 4-262(c) shall be followed by the IWC. 
(f)  If, after an inspection by the IWC the condition of a stormwater management facility presents an immediate danger to the public health or safety, because of an unsafe condition or improper maintenance, the IWC shall take such action as may be necessary to protect the public and make the facility safe. Any cost incurred by the Town of Seymour shall be assessed against the owner(s), as provided in subsection 4-262(c). 
(Ord. of 2-5-08(1), § 9.1) 
Sec. 4-262. - Maintenance agreement. 
(a)  Prior to the issuance of any building permit for which stormwater management is required, the IWC shall require the applicant or owner to execute an inspection and maintenance agreement binding on all subsequent owners of land served by a private stormwater management facility. Such agreement shall provide for access to the facility at reasonable times for regular inspections by the IWC or its authorized representative to ensure that the facility is maintained in proper working condition to meet design standards. 
(b)  The applicant and/or owner shall record the agreement in the land records of the town. 
(c)  The agreement shall also provide that, if after notice by the IWC its agent/s or the town engineer to correct a violation requiring maintenance work, satisfactory corrections are not made by the owner(s) within a reasonable period of time (30 days maximum), the IWC may perform all necessary work to place the facility in proper working condition. The owner(s) of the facility shall be assessed the cost of the work and any penalties. This may be accomplished by placing a lien on the property, which may be placed on the tax bill and collected as ordinary taxes by the town. 
(Ord. of 2-5-08(1), § 9.2) 
Sec. 4-263. - Maintenance responsibility. 
(a)  The owner of the property on which work has been done pursuant to this ordinance for private stormwater management facilities, or any other person or agent in control of such property, shall maintain in good condition and promptly repair and restore all grade surfaces, walls, drains, dams and structures, vegetation, erosion and sediment control measures, and other protective devices. Such repairs or restoration and maintenance shall be in accordance with approved plans. 
(b)  A maintenance schedule shall be developed for the life of any stormwater management facility and shall state the maintenance to be completed, the time period for completion, and who shall perform the maintenance. This maintenance schedule shall be printed on the approved stormwater management plan. 
(Ord. of 2-5-08(1), § 9.3) 
Chapter 4.5 - CIVIL SERVICE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- The Civil Service Ordinance of Sept. 6, 1994, Arts. I-XVI, has been included herein as a new Ch. 4.5, as herein set out, at the discretion of the editor. Minor changes have been made by the editor to provide consistency in numbering and style. Section catchlines have been largely provided by the editor. 
Charter reference- Board of library directors, § 5.1; civil service commissioner, § 10.3; town employees, § 11.1 et seq. 
Cross reference- Administration, § 2-1 et seq.; building inspector, § 4-26 et seq.; fire department, § 6-21 et seq.; housing code enforcement officer, § 9-61 et seq.; library, § 12-16 et seq.; sewer inspector, § 17-86 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - PURPOSE 

Sec. 4.5-1. - Civil service established. 
    There is hereby established a civil service system for the Town of Seymour. The civil service commission shall have such duties and responsibilities as are granted to it by Charter in section 10.3 and sections 11.1-11.3 of said Charter. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94, § 1.01) 
Sec. 4.5-2. - Purpose. 
    It shall be the purpose of the civil service system to provide the means for selecting and/or promoting employees in the classified service solely on the basis of proven ability to perform the duties required as set forth by the specific job descriptions set forth in this ordinance. 
    It is hereby declared the personnel policy of the Town of Seymour that employment by the town in the classified service shall be based solely on merit and fitness, free of personal and political considerations. Appointments shall be based on systematic tests and evaluation. It is the desire of the town that high morals shall be maintained by the fair administration of the merit system established under this ordinance. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94, § 1.02) 
Secs. 4.5-3-4.5-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 4.5-21. - Definitions of words and terms used in this chapter. 
    The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
    Appointing authority: The board of selectmen has the power and shall be the appointing authority for all civil service positions with the exception of the position of head librarian. With relation to the head librarian, the appointing authority shall be the library board of directors. 
    Civil service positions: The classified service positions shall be full time non-union employees of the Town of Seymour. The following will not be included within the classified service: 
(a)  Elective officials and persons appointed to fill vacancies in elective offices. 
(b)  Members of boards and other officers who are administrative appointments of the first selectman and the board of selectman unless otherwise provided by Charter. 
(c)  Employees of the board of education. 
(d)  Persons employed for a temporary or part time position. 
    Eligibility list: The eligibility list shall consist of those who have completed all elements of the testing procedure established by this ordinance. Said list shall include the applicant's name, final grade and rank. This list shall remain in effect for a period of one year. 
    Eligible person for positions: The candidates who rank the highest as recommended by the civil service commission shall be eligible for consideration and appointment to the position to be filled. The civil service commission shall present a list of such persons to the appointing authority for interview and appointment. 
    Full time employee: A full time employee shall be an employee who is employed in a civil service position as a permanent full time employee for 30 or more hours weekly. Any person who is permanently employed in one or more positions for a cumulative time of 30 hours or more hours will be considered full-time. 
    Any person holding a full time position in the municipal government as of June 1, 1984 shall be retained without preliminary or performance tests and shall thereafter be subject to all other respects to the provisions of this chapter. 
    Permanent employee: A permanent employee shall be an employee who successfully completes the probationary period and has been permanently appointed as provided in these policies and procedures. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94, §§ 2.01-2.07) 
Secs. 4.5-21-4.5-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE 

Sec. 4.5-31. - Applicability. 
    The following procedure applies to members of the classified service who have completed the probationary period. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94, § 3.0) 
Sec. 4.5-32. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the grievance procedure shall be to settle employees' grievances on as low an administrative level as possible and practical so as to insure efficiency and employee morale. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94, § 3.1) 
Sec. 4.5-33. - Grievance defined. 
    A grievance is defined as a dispute between an employee and/or the department head and the town, over the interpretation or application of a specific section in the civil service ordinance, Town Charter or regulations. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94, § 3.2) 
Sec. 4.5-34. - Filing of grievances. 
    Grievances must be filed in writing within 14 calendar days of the incident giving rise to the grievance. All grievances shall be administered in accordance with the procedure set forth below. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94, § 3.3) 
Sec. 4.5-35. - Representation by counsel. 
    An employee may be represented by counsel at each and every step of the grievance procedure. The employee shall bear the sole cost of the employment of said counsel. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94, § 3.4) 
Sec. 4.5-36. - Working day defined for purposes of grievance procedure. 
    For the purpose of the grievance procedure, a working day is defined as Monday through Friday including holidays. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94, § 3.5) 
Sec. 4.5-37. - Grievance procedure-Step 1. 
    An employee, or his or her legal counsel, if represented, may submit a written grievance in accordance with this section to the first selectman, or in his absence, to his designee and the appropriate department head. The first selectman, or said designee and the appropriate department head will make an effort to resolve the grievance and will render an answer in writing to the grievance within ten working days of receipt of the grievance. This answer will be provided to the aggrieved employee and to his counsel, if represented. In the case of the head librarian, the grievance will be submitted to the library board of directors. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94, § 3.6) 
Sec. 4.5-38. - Same-Step 2. 
    If the aggrieved employee and the counsel is not satisfied with the decision rendered by the first selectman or his designee and the said department head, they may submit the grievance in writing to the full board of selectmen within seven working days of the decision. The full board of selectmen shall consider the grievance at its next scheduled meeting, which shall not be more than 15 days after the receipt of the grievance by the board of selectmen and shall render an answer to the grievance within seven working days after such scheduled meeting, to the aggrieved employee and his counsel, if represented. In the case of the head librarian, the second step of the grievance procedure shall be to the library board of directors. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94, § 3.7) 
Sec. 4.5-39. - Same-Step 3. 
    If the aggrieved employee and his legal counsel, if represented, are not satisfied with the decision rendered by the board of selectmen (or library board of directors) they may appeal in writing to the full civil service commission, not later than ten calendar days after receipt of the decision of the board of selectmen (or library board of directors). The full civil service commission shall schedule a hearing with the aggrieved employee and his legal counsel, if represented, at the next scheduled meeting after receipt of the 
appeal. The full civil service commission will decide only one grievance per session. The full civil service commission shall make the final decision on the grievance after a full hearing. Such decision will be in writing and shall be made within ten working days of the hearing. The full civil service commission will hear both sides involved in the grievance. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94, § 3.8) 
Secs. 4.5-40-4.5-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CLASSIFICATION 

Sec. 4.5-51. - Classification plan. 
(a)  The following constitute the positions to be included within the classification plan of the civil service system. 
(1)  Finance director; 
(2)  Foreman of public works; 
(3)  Head librarian; 
(4)  Superintendent-Waste water control. 
(b)  The duties, responsibilities and minimum qualifications of the aforesaid civil service positions shall be as set forth in this section. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94, §§ 4.1, 4.2; Ord. of 11-19-02(2)) 
Secs. 4.5-52-4.5-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - COMPENSATION 

Sec. 4.5-61. - Salary schedule to be established. 
    For each classified position, the town shall establish a schedule which shall contain a minimum salary and a maximum salary. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94, § 5.1) 
Sec. 4.5-62. - Consideration for pay increases. 
    At the recommendation of the first selectman with the approval of the majority of the board of selectmen, employees in civil service will be considered for pay increases, once per year. The board of selectmen will make these recommendations to the board of finance by February 15 to be effective July 1 of the same year. In the case of the head librarian, any such recommendations shall be made by the library board of directors. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94, § 5.2) 
Sec. 4.5-63. - Satisfactory service required for salary increase. 
    Increase in salary for individual employees shall be primarily based upon satisfactory service. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94, § 5.3) 
Sec. 4.5-64. - Minimum rate of pay. 
    The minimum rate of pay for a particular position shall normally be offered for recruitment purposes. The first selectman may with the approval of the board of selectmen, offer a rate of pay above the minimum provided, however, that the qualifications of the applicant are superior to those of competing applicants, and/or employees cannot be secured at the minimum rate due to a shortage of qualified applicants available at the minimum rate. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94, § 5.4) 
Sec. 4.5-65. - Compensation upon reassignment. 
    If a town employee is temporarily reassigned to a position of higher level pay, compensation will be based upon the higher salary for the duration of the reassignment. Reassignment must be for a period of at least 30 days to receive a higher salary. If reassigned at a lower level of pay, compensation will be based upon employee's present salary. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94, § 5.5) 
Sec. 4.5-66. - Compensation for probational employees. 
    The compensation for probational employees will be set forth for each position in the compensation schedule established in section 4.5-61. Such compensation will not be adjusted except with the majority approval of the board of selectmen. Probationary employees will not receive entry level salary until the probationary period has been completed. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94, § 5.6) 
Sec. 4.5-67. - Vacation leave. 
    Permanent full time employees under civil service will be entitled to the following vacation time: two weeks after 12 months employment, three weeks after five years employment. One extra day for each additional year of employment after ten years with a maximum of four weeks after 15 years of continuous employment. After 20 years of continuous employment the maximum vacation will be five weeks. Any vacation leave shall be taken within the fiscal year in which it was earned. Any existing contract dealing with affected employees will be honored. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94, § 5.7) 
Sec. 4.5-68. - Paid holidays. 
    The following holidays shall be observed by all permanent full time employees and shall be granted with pay: 
New Years Day 
Martin Luther King Day 
Presidents' Day 
Good Friday 
Memorial Day 
Independence Day 
Labor Day 
Columbus Day 
Veteran's Day 
Election Day 
Thanksgiving Day 
Day after Thanksgiving 
Christmas Eve Day 
Christmas 
The half day on December 31. 
    When a holiday falls on a Saturday, the day before the holiday will be observed. When the holiday fails on a Sunday, the day after the holiday will be observed. There will however, be no compensation day given if Christmas Eve Day or December 31 falls on a Saturday or Sunday. In the case of the head librarian, at the discretion of the library board of directors, the library may remain open on the following holidays: Martin Luther King Day, Presidents' Day, Columbus Day, Election Day and the day after Thanksgiving. If the library is opened on such days the head librarian shall be entitled to such "floating holiday" in compensation. Said floating holiday shall be taken within two weeks of the holiday upon which the library remains open. In the case of the foreman of the department of public works, such employee shall be entitled to the same holidays as granted under the contract provided for the union members of the department of public works. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94, § 5.8) 
Sec. 4.5-69. - Sick leave. 
    All permanent full time employees shall be granted sick leave with pay at the rate of one and one-quarter (11/4) days per month. 15 sick days per year are the maximum allowed. After five consecutive sick days are used under this section, a doctor's slip must be presented before an employee may be permitted to return to work. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94, § 5.9) 
Sec. 4.5-70. - Accumulation of unused sick leave. 
(a)  No unused sick leave of any employee may be accumulated after April 1, 1985. Employees may retain the unused sick leave accumulated prior to April 1, 1985 but no further accumulations earned after that date will be permitted, Unused sick leave accumulated prior to April 1, 1985 may be used in one of the following ways: 
(1)  The employee may use sick accumulation as sick leave. 
(2)  The employee may use such accumulation until termination of his employment, as vacation time subject to the approval of the board of selectmen or of the library board of directors subject to departmental needs. 
(3)  The employee may elect to retain such accumulation until termination of his employment, at which time the employee shall be paid at 50 percent of his prevailing day rate as of January 1, 1994, times the number of days accumulated. 
(b)  As of April 1, 1985 in the final pay period of each fiscal year, each employee shall be paid 66 2/3 percent the value of each sick day remaining unused for that year. Should an employee be paid for a day subsequently used, the day shall be deducted from the employee's next pay check. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94, § 5.10) 
Sec. 4.5-71. - Leave of absence without pay. 
    The first selectman with the majority vote of the board of selectmen (or the library board of directors in the case of the head librarian) may grant leave of absence without pay to any employee, upon the employee's request. Such leave shall be for a period not to exceed three months. This leave of absence must be due to illness or personal problems. No employee will be granted a leave of absence to work at another job. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94, § 5.11) 
Sec. 4.5-72. - Paid personal leave. 
    Each full time employee will be allowed three personal days off each year. If these are not used, no compensation will be given. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94, § 5.12) 
Sec. 4.5-73. - Group insurance. 
    Group insurance will be granted to all civil service employees and retirees who retire after the age 591/2 at the town's expense in accordance with the town's group insurance plan, or such plan as the town may adopt in the future. Such insurance benefits may be offered to said employee's families at the employee's expense. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94, § 5.13) 
Sec. 4.5-74. - Retirement benefits. 
    Retirement benefits will be granted in accordance with the municipal retirement plan. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94, § 5.14) 
Sec. 4.5-75. - Funeral leave. 
    All full time civil service employees will be allowed funeral leave as follows: 
(1)  Three days for spouses, children, parents, parents-in-law, brother and sister. 
(2)  One day for other relatives who shall include uncle, aunt, cousin, brother-in-law, sister-in-law. 
    Permission to attend the funeral service of a close acquaintance without compensation may be obtained from the first selectman or in the case of the head librarian, from the library board of directors. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94, § 5.15) 
Sec. 4.5-76. - Leave for jury duty. 
    Employees shall be granted leaves of absence for required jury duty. Such employees shall receive the portion of their regular salary which will together with their pay for jury duty or fees equal their total salary for the same period. Pay vouchers shall be submitted to ascertain the pay due to the employee. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94, § 5.16) 
Sec. 4.5-77. - Military training duty leave. 
    Military training duty leave shall be granted to regular employees when they are required to serve on active reserve or on National Guard duty. Such employees shall receive that portion of their regular salary which will with their pay for military service equal their total salary for the same period. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94, § 5.17) 
Sec. 4.5-78. - Compensation for use of private automobile for official town business. 
    An employee authorized by the immediate supervisor to use his private automobile for official town business shall be compensated at a rate established by the board of selectmen. Claims must be submitted weekly to the supervisor. Vehicles must be properly insured indemnifying the town against liability. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94, § 5.18) 
Sec. 4.5-79. - Accumulated vacation leave and extra hours worked. 
    Upon adoption of this ordinance all accumulated vacations and extra hours worked which have been approved by the department head will be honored. All new vacation days and extra time must adhere to the above provisions. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94, § 5.19) 
Secs. 4.5-80-4.5-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - RECRUITMENT 

Sec. 4.5-91. - Announcement of vacancies. 
(a)  The first selectman (or the library board of directors with regard to the position of head librarian) shall make known all permanent vacancies for all positions in civil service to the civil service commission within ten days of notification of vacancies. The civil service commission will post announcements for such vacancies in at least one newspaper having general circulation in the area, and in such other places they deem necessary at the time such permanent vacancies are given to said commission in writing from the first selectman (or the library board of directors). All persons on the eligibility list or employees who wish to transfer will be considered. 
(b)  Any announcement for vacancies shall include the following: 
(1)  Job title; 
(2)  Salary ranges; 
(3)  Nature of work; 
(4)  Minimum qualifications; 
(5)  Closing date for application and 
(6)  Any additional information regarding the position deemed necessary by the civil service commission. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94, §§ 6.0, 6.1) 
Sec. 4.5-92. - Application for employment. 
    Application shall be made on forms provided by the first selectman (library board of directors). All applications will be available at the first selectman's office (or the library board of directors) and when completed will be returned there. When all applications have been returned and the closing date has passed the first selectman (or the library board of directors) will turn the applications over to the civil service commission for review. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94, § 6.2) 
Sec. 4.5-93. - Security of personal information. 
    As part of the application procedure, references provided by the applicants shall be reviewed by the civil service commission. All such information is to be treated as privileged information. All such personal information will be secured in locked files and/or compartments in the first selectman's office. The board of selectmen and/or the library board of directors will determine who has access to the files. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94, § 6.3) 
Sec. 4.5-94. - Grounds for rejection of application. 
    The civil service commission shall be authorized to reject any application for the following reasons: 
(1)  Lack of education, experience, and/or qualifications. 
(2)  Conviction of a felony, infamous crime, or crime involving moral turpitude. 
(3)  Falsifying any part of the application. 
(4)  Use of political pressure or bribery to secure the position. 
(5)  Direct or indirect knowledge of the contents of any part of the examination to which the applicant was not entitled. 
(6)  Involvement in the completion, administration or correction of the examination. 
(7)  Failure to submit completed examination within the allotted time. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94, § 6.4) 
Sec. 4.5-95. - Notification of rejections. 
    Whenever an application is rejected, the civil service commission shall notify the applicant, in writing, certified mail, return receipt requested of such rejection. The letter shall include a notice informing the applicant of his right to review pursuant to section 4.5-96 hereof. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94, § 6.5) 
Sec. 4.5-96. - Right of review. 
    Any applicant whose application has been rejected may request in writing a review of said application. Such request shall be made prior to any examination for the position in question. The decision of the civil service commission shall be final. The civil service commission shall have the power to allow the applicant to take part in the examination pending their review of the appeal. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94, § 6.6) 
Sec. 4.5-97. - Policy of non-discrimination. 
    No person applying for a position with the Town of Seymour shall be discriminated against because of race, religion, sex, age, national origin or political affiliation. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94, § 6.7) 
Secs. 4.5-98-4.5-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - EXAMINATIONS 

Sec. 4.5-111. - Examination may be required. 
    All appointments to positions within the civil service of the Town of Seymour shall be made as provided herein. The examination and testing for each position shall be set forth in each job description where examinations are required. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94, § 7.0) 
Sec. 4.5-112. - Examination process. 
    The impartial examination process shall be of a practical nature and shall relate to subjects which in the opinion of the civil service commission fairly measure the relative capabilities of persons examined to execute the duties and responsibilities of the position sought. For positions involving semi-skilled or unskilled labor or custodial work, the civil service system may adopt or authorize use of other procedures as they determine may be appropriate, while assuring a selection of such employees on the basis of merit and fitness, unless otherwise provided by the job description. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94, § 7.1) 
Sec. 4.5-113. - Types of examination. 
    Except as otherwise provided by ordinance, the type of examination shall be determined by the civil service commission and may include, but shall not be limited to, written, oral, physical, mental and/or performance or any combination thereof. The department head shall be consulted as to the type of examination given in each instance. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94, § 7.2) 
Sec. 4.5-114. - Examinations to be openly competitive. 
    All examinations shall be of an open competitive nature and all applicants meeting the prescribed requirements shall be allowed to participate, except as noted in section 4.5-117 of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94, § 7.3) 
Sec. 4.5-115. - Use of outside testing agencies. 
    The civil service commission shall be allowed to contract with any competent agency or individual for the purpose of preparing and for administering such examinations. In the absence of such contract, the civil service commission or a portion thereof, shall perform said duties or may delegate their performance. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94, § 7.4) 
Sec. 4.5-116. - Notification of applicants. 
    All qualified applicants shall be notified, in writing of the time, place and date of the examination by the civil service commission. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94, § 7.5) 
Sec. 4.5-117. - Applicant required to pass each part of examination. 
    In any examination process which requires more than one test, the applicant shall be required to achieve the passing grade for each test in order to continue the examination process. If the applicant fails to achieve the passing grade in any part of the examination process then he will not be allowed to continue and shall be notified in writing by the civil service commission. If the applicant in such an examination achieves a passing grade in any part of the examination process, than he shall be allowed to continue and shall be notified in writing by the civil service commission of his grade and the date of the next part of the examination process. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94, § 7.6) 
Sec. 4.5-118. - Promotional examinations. 
    Promotional examinations within the civil service system shall be of a competitive nature and shall in general be as provided in sections 4.5-112 and 4.5-113 with due allowance for difference due to the promotional nature of the examination. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94, § 7.7) 
Sec. 4.5-119. - Right of employees to apply for examinations. 
    No department head or administrator shall deny any employee permission to apply for any examination. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94, § 7.8) 
Sec. 4.5-120. - Notification of final grade. 
    Each applicant who has completed all phases of the examination procedure shall be notified in writing by the civil service commission of his final grade rank. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94, § 7.9) 
Sec. 4.5-121. - Right to inspect examination papers. 
    Each applicant shall be entitled to inspect his examination papers and/or grading papers, under conditions prescribed by the civil service commission. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94, § 7.10) 
Sec. 4.5-122. - Passing grade to be announced in advance. 
    The passing grade for each examination or part thereof shall be determined and announced in advance by the civil service commission. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94, § 7.11) 
Secs. 4.5-123-4.5-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - APPOINTMENTS 

Sec. 4.5-131. - Eligibility list prepared. 
    The civil service commission shall prepare an eligibility list of all applicants who have successfully completed the testing procedure. Said eligibility list shall include the applicant's name, final grade and rank. This list shall remain in effect for a period of one year and may be extended by the civil service commission for an additional one year. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94, § 8.0) 
Sec. 4.5-132. - Annual update of eligibility list. 
    The civil service commission or its designee shall on/or before the anniversary date of the eligibility list, contact those persons whose names appear on said list to inquire whether or not they wish to have their names remain on said list. Those applicants who desire their names to be removed shall notify the civil service commission in writing and said notice shall be attached to the eligibility list. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94, § 8.1) 
Sec. 4.5-133. - Use of eligibility list in filling vacancy. 
    When a vacancy is to be filled, the civil service commission shall certify to the appointing authority the names of the top three persons from the eligibility list. A recommendation to the appointing authority shall also be made from the applicable department head. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94, § 8.2) 
Sec. 4.5-134. - Appointing authority to approve eligible applicant. 
    The appointing authority, i.e., the board of selectmen or library board of directors, shall select an applicant from said certified list. Said selection shall be by majority vote of the board of selectmen or library board of directors where a quorum is present. The applicant chosen shall be notified in writing by certified mail of such appointment and shall accept said appointment within seven days. One representative of the civil service commission and the appropriate department head shall have the right to be present when the appointing authority considers the appointment. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94, § 8.3) 
Sec. 4.5-135. - Failure of applicant to accept position. 
    If the applicant fails to accept within the allowed time period, then the appointing authority shall select another applicant from the certified list. This procedure shall be continued until a successful candidate accepts the position or until the certified list is exhausted. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94, § 8.4) 
Sec. 4.5-136. - Provisional appointment without examination. 
    Provisional appointments without examination may be made only when there is no certified list, for no more than six months and except as provided in section 4.5-137, only of persons qualified. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94, § 8.5) 
Sec. 4.5-137. - Emergency appointment. 
    In the event of an emergency, the appointing authority may appoint any individual to a position to prevent the stoppage of public business and/or loss or serious inconvenience to the public for a period not greater that 60 days. Such appointment shall be valid only for the duration of said emergency but in any event not longer than 60 days. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94, § 8.6) 
Secs. 4.5-138-4.5-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - PROBATION 

Sec. 4.5-151. - Probationary period required for new employees. 
    All new employees shall be required to serve a probationary period of six months. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94, § 9.0) 
Sec. 4.5-152. - Performance reports. 
    During the probationary period of any new employee, the supervisor in charge of the department shall submit to the appointing authority a written performance report at the end of 30 days, 90 days and three weeks prior to the end of the employee's probationary period. Such reports and their approval by the appointing authority are definite requisites for permanent appointment and the privileges that accompany it. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94, § 9.1) 
Sec. 4.5-153. - Termination after thirty working days. 
    An employee may be terminated at any time after 30 working days of probationary period by the appointing authority on the written recommendation of the department head that the employee failed to meet the minimum standards for the performance of the job. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94, § 9.2) 
Sec. 4.5-154. - Notice of unsatisfactory performance or deficiencies. 
    Within two months from the beginning of a probationary period, the department head shall, in writing, notice the employee if he (she) is not performing satisfactorily. The notice shall detail the areas of the job in which the department head feels the employee is not performing to standard. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94, § 9.3) 
Sec. 4.5-155. - No appeal of termination during probationary period. 
    There shall be no appeal of the decision to terminate a probationary employee. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94, § 9.4) 
Sec. 4.5-156. - Successful completion of probationary period. 
    Upon successful completion of the stated probationary period, the first selectman shall notify the employee of his permanent status with the Town of Seymour. In the case of the head librarian, the library board of directors shall make such notification. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94, § 9.5) 
Secs. 4.5-157-4.5-170. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - CONDUCT OF EMPLOYEES 

Sec. 4.5-171. - Annual evaluation of employees. 
    All employees shall be evaluated annually by their respective department heads, in writing on forms supplied by the first selectman or in the case of the head librarian, by the library board of directors. A copy of said evaluation shall be signed by both the employee and the department head and forwarded to the first selectman or in the case of the head librarian by the employee and a representative of the library board of directors and forwarded to the library board of directors. After such review by said officials, the evaluations shall be placed in the employee's file. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94, § 10.0) 
Sec. 4.5-172. - Evaluation of department heads and head librarian. 
    Evaluations of department heads will be made by the first selectman. Evaluations of the head librarian will be made by the library board of directors. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94, § 10.1) 
Sec. 4.5-173. - Review of evaluations. 
    All evaluations will be reviewed by the board of selectmen or in the case of the head librarian, by the library board of directors, before being placed in the employee's file. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94, § 10.2) 
Sec. 4.5-174. - Length of basic work week. 
    The basic work week shall consist of 35 hours unless provided otherwise by the board of selectmen or in the case of the head librarian by the library board of directors. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94, § 10.3) 
Sec. 4.5-175. - Responsibility of department heads. 
(a)  Department heads will be responsible for all employees in their departments. Any problems concerning an employee will be reported by the department head to the first selectmen who will report same to the board of selectmen where appropriate action will be taken. In the case of the head librarian, any problems concerning same will be reported to the library board of directors where appropriate action will be taken. 
(b)  Department heads will conduct their departments in a professional manner. All problems with department heads will be addressed and action taken by the board of selectmen or in the case of the head librarian by the library board of directors. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94, §§ 10.4, 10.5) 
Sec. 4.5-176. - Jurisdiction over employees. 
    All employees employed in civil service will come under the jurisdiction of the first selectman and the board of selectmen with the exception of the head librarian who will come under the jurisdiction of the library board of directors. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94, § 10.6) 
Sec. 4.5-177. - Employees to follow rules and regulations. 
    All civil service employees shall follow all the rules and regulations for civil service and the civil service ordinance. Regulations governing civil service may be amended by the majority vote of the board of selectmen. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94, § 10.7) 
Sec. 4.5-178. - Political activity by employees. 
    Political activity concerning members of the civil service shall be in accordance with section 11.2 of the Charter. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94, § 10.8) 
Secs. 4.5-179-4.5-190. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - RETIREMENT 

Sec. 4.5-191. - Retirement policy. 
    All employees of the civil service system shall be subject to the rules as to retirement as established by the town's retirement policy and/or ordinance as same may be amended from time to time by said town. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94, § 11.1) 
Sec. 4.5-192. - Participation in Connecticut Municipal Retirement System. 
    Said employees shall also be subject to the town's participation in the Connecticut Municipal Retirement System. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94, § 11.2) 
Secs. 4.5-193-4.5-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - DISCIPLINARY PROCEDURES 

Sec. 4.5-201. - Reasons for disciplinary action. 
    Disciplinary action against any employee shall be taken only for one or more (but not limited to) the following reasons: 
(1)  Dishonesty -defined as including falsification of records, financial dishonesty, fraud, theft and willful misrepresentation; 
(2)  Insubordination -defined as refusal to carry out orders of the department head, or first selectman or of any person delegated authority over the employee; 
(3)  Action detrimental to the town -defined as the use of alcohol, drugs or excess of temperament which impede the conduct of daily business; 
(4)  Violence, threats of violence or insults -defined as assaults upon fellow workers, or on any person who is transacting business, verbal abuse which includes but is not limited to abusive language directed at any of the foregoing or participation in any action which endanger the bodily safety of any of the foregoing; 
(5)  Criminal conduct -defined as a conviction of a misdemeanor involving the theft of property or misappropriation of funds or of any felony committed while in the employ of the Town, or theft or destruction of town property; 
(6)  Deficiency in performance of work -defined as inefficiency, habitual tardiness, or absenteeism, the performance of unauthorized services for others during work hours; the refusal or failure to perform a designated quantity and quality of work; or fraudulently obtaining sick or injury leave. 
(7)  Unauthorized political activity -defined as engaging in political activity prohibited by section 11.2 of the town Charter; and 
(8)  Any other conduct materially impairing the efficiently with which the town government provides services to the citizens of the community. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94, § 12.1) 
Sec. 4.5-202. - Classes of disciplinary action. 
    There shall be three classes of disciplinary action. These classes progress from Class I to Class III, depending on the repetition and/or severity of the offense. Class I disciplinary action can be taken at the discretion of the individual department head. Any action taken in Class II may be taken with the approval of the first selectman. Class III disciplinary action may only be taken with the approval of the majority of the board of selectmen. With regard to the head librarian, all disciplinary action may only be taken with the approval of the majority of the library board of directors and the references to the department head and first selectman shall be intended to refer to the library board of directors concerning the head librarian. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94, § 12.2) 
Sec. 4.5-203. - Disciplinary action-Class I. 
    Class I disciplinary action consists of a written reprimand. After oral discussions with the employee and the department head, a copy of said reprimand is sent to the first selectman to be placed in the employee's permanent file. The employee, upon receipt of said reprimand, may request a hearing with the first selectman to discuss the nature of the disciplinary action. The first selectman, may, upon hearing the employee's and department head statements, decide whether or not to place the written reprimand in the employee's permanent file. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94, § 12.3) 
Sec. 4.5-204. - Same-Class II. 
(a)  A Class II disciplinary action shall consist of suspension without pay. This may be imposed after a series of repeated offenses or after a serious offense. The employee must be notified at least three days before the effective date of any such action. This letter of notification must clearly state the nature of the offense, the length of the suspension and the fact that the employee may appeal the ordered absence without pay. A maximum penalty under Class II action shall be a suspension to a maximum of five working days. 
(b)  Within the three-day notification period, the individual may request an appointment with the first selectman who on the basis of the employee's and department head's statements and/or results of an investigation may determine whether of not the suspension will remain in effect. The letter of notification to the employee must bear the signatures of both the department head and the first selectman. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94, §§ 12.4, 12.5) 
Sec. 4.5-205. - Same-Class III. 
(a)  There are two sections to a Class III disciplinary action and they are as follows: 
(1)  Demotion: The transfer of an employee to a lower grade and 
(2)  Dismissal: The complete separation of an employee from employment with the town. 
(b)  The procedure for both sections of Class III are the same. Any action taken in this class must be approved by the board of selectmen except in the case of the head librarian which shall require the approval of a majority of the board of library directors. The signature of the first selectman and the department head or the president of the library board of directors must appear on the letter of notification which is sent to the individual and the civil service commission by certified mail. 
(c)  The letter of notification must clearly state the nature of the offense, advise the employee of his right to appeal to the civil service commission and state that the appeal must be taken within 14 days of the effective date of action. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94, §§ 12.6, 12.7) 
Secs. 4.5-206-4.5-210. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - SEPARATIONS 

Sec. 4.5-211. - Separations generally. 
(a)  The tenure of every employee shall be conditioned upon behavior, satisfactory performance of duties, satisfactory attendance and continued capability for the job position. 
(b)  Resignation, layoff, dismissal, disability, death and retirement are considered separations. All separations shall be accomplished in the manner indicated. At the time of separation and prior to final payment to the employee, all records, assets or other items of town property in the employee's custody shall be transferred to the department head or in the case of a department head to the first selectman. In the case of the head librarian such transfer shall be made to the library board of directors. Any amount due because of shortage in the above accounting shall be withheld from the employee's final compensation or collected through other appropriate action. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94, §§ 13.0, 13.1) 
Sec. 4.5-212. - Payment for earned salary and vacation leave. 
    Employees who leave the town service in good standing shall receive payment for all earned salary and vacation leave subject to deductions made pursuant to section 13.1(b). Effective April 1, 1985 such payments shall include sick leave earned. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94, § 13.2) 
Sec. 4.5-213. - Reasons for separation. 
    Employees may be separated from employment with the town for the following reasons: 
(1)  Disciplinary termination: As set forth in Article XII. 
(2)  Medical termination: Upon certification by a physician that the individual is not physically or, in the alternative, mentally capable of carrying out the duties of his position. If there is a disagreement between the employee and the town as to the existence of such disability, the employee shall have the right of appeal to the civil service commission. 
(3)  Resignation: Any employee in good standing desiring to leave the position shall submit a written resignation stating the effective date. Such notice should be at lest 14 days prior to the desired date of termination. The department head may permit a shorter period of notice because of unusual circumstances. The resignation shall be forwarded to the first selectman with a statement by the department head as to the resigned employee's service performance. In case of the head librarian such notice shall be forwarded to the library board of directors. A copy of such notice shall be placed in the personnel file of the employee. 
(4)  Reduction of force: 
a.  When a position must be discontinued or abolished because of lack of work or lack of funds, the department head and/or the first selectman may recommend that such action of discontinuance be taken. The first selectman with the concurrence of a majority of the board of selectmen may discontinue such positions because of lack of work or funds. In the case of the head librarian, the library board of directors may take such action by a majority vote of the board. 
b.  The first selectman by virtue of a majority vote of the board of selectmen shall determine the order of layoff of employees on basis of the relative suitability for the jobs that remain and the length of continuous service with the town. If it is found that two or more persons in a department in which a layoff is to be made have equal ratings, the order of layoff in such cases shall be in the inverse order of the date of initial employment. In the case of the head librarian, the library board of directors shall have the power to determine the order of layoff. 
c.  In normal circumstances permanent employees subject to layoff shall be notified in writing two calendar weeks prior to the effective date. 
d.  Any laid-off employee shall have the right to be recalled if the position again becomes open. Notice of recall shall be given in writing by certified mail, return receipt requested and must be accepted in writing [within] ten days of receipt. If the employee elects not to return to work, his employment with the town shall be automatically terminated. 
(5)  Failure to meet performance standards during first 30 days of probationary period: At any time subsequent to the first 30 days during the probationary period, the first selectman, upon the recommendation of the department head may separate an employee whose performance does not meet required standards with the concurrence of a majority vote of the board of selectmen. In the case of the head librarian, such action may be taken with the concurrence of a majority vote of the library board of directors. 
(6)  Death: Separation shall be effective as of the date of death. All compensation due shall be paid to the estate of the employee, except for such sums as by law may be due to the surviving spouse. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94, § 13.3) 
Secs. 4.5-214-4.5-220. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIV. - RECORDS 

Sec. 4.5-221. - First selectman. 
    The first selectman shall maintain adequate records of the proceedings of the board of selectman and of his own official acts. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94, § 14.1) 
Sec. 4.5-222. - Civil service commission. 
    The civil service commission shall maintain an adequate record of the examination record of every candidate and the employment record of every employee. Said records shall be kept and maintained in the first selectman's office. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94, § 14.2) 
Secs. 4.5-223-4.5-230. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XV. - CIVIL SERVICE POSITION DESCRIPTIONS 

Sec. 4.5-231. - Positions to be included in the civil service. 
    The following are the job descriptions of the positions to be included in the civil service system of the town: 
(1)  Finance director: 
a.  Any employee in this class is responsible for the receipt, custody, investment and disbursement of all town funds; the administration of municipal debts; the maintenance of accounting records; and the preparation of financial reports covering all town activities and all funds. 
b.  Work is performed under the general direction of the first selectman and is subject to the administrative review through discussions, reports and observation and to an annual financial audit. Supervision is exercised over account clerk and clerical employees. 
(2)  Foreman of public works: Supervises work in the construction, maintenance and repair or operation of the town's public works facilities and services. Is responsible for planning, organizing and supervising the daily work of subordinate supervisory, skilled and unskilled workers and equipment operations engaged in road maintenance, grounds maintenance, equipment maintenance and related activities. Supervises transfer station. Works under general supervision of first selectman. 
(3)  Head librarian: The library administrator, responsible for all library functions. Independent judgement and authority are exercised in making decisions related to overseeing the annual budget, directing the staff, caring for the library's equipment and collection and producing a comprehensive program of library service to the community. Directly responsible to the board of library directors. Responsible for work of all library staff and volunteers. 
(4)  Superintendent of waste water control: Exercises supervision of the Seymour Water Pollution Control Plant. The superintendent is responsible for the supervision of other employees at the waste water control plant. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94, § 15.1; Ord. of 11-19-02(2)) 
Sec. 4.5-232. - Cost of educational requirements. 
    Any cost of any educational requirements necessary to qualify for the positions covered by this ordinance will be paid for by the Town of Seymour. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94, § 15.2) 
Sec. 4.5-233. - Copies of civil service ordinance and personnel rules to be available. 
    Copies of this ordinance and personnel rules and amendments thereto will be available at Town Hall and all members of the civil service system will be provided with a copy of same. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94, § 15.3) 
Secs. 4.5-234-4.5-240. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVI. - LEGALITY 

Sec. 4.5-241. - Severability. 
    Should any part of this ordinance be declared illegal, the board of selectmen declares that is would have adopted all the other provisions notwithstanding such illegality of a part and all remaining parts shall remain in effect. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94, § 16.1) 
Chapter 5 - ELECTIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Elected boards, Ch. 2; general elections, Ch. 3. 
Cross reference- Election of justices of the peace, § 2-191. 
State Law reference- Elections, G.S. Title 9. 

Sec. 5-1. - Open hours of polls. 
    At all municipal elections the polls shall remain open for voting from 6:00 a.m. until 8:00 p.m. 
(Code 1961, § 7-1) 
Sec. 5-2. - First voting district established. 
    The town hereby establishes a first voting district in conformity with the general statutes with the polling place to be at the Middle School. All legally qualified residents on the following streets are included in the first voting district: 
Bank Street 
Beecher Street 
Beecher Place 
Bellevue Terrace 
Big Dipper Drive 
Bissell Place 
Brook Street 
Bryson Avenue 
Bungay Court 
Bungay Road Nos. 1 to 38 
Bungay Terrace 
Castle Street 
Cedar Street 
Chaden Road 
Cherry Street 
Chickadee Lane 
Church Street 
Clifton Street 
Colony Street 
Colony Street Extension 
Culver Street 
Curry Hill Road 
Day Street 
Derby Avenue 
DeWolfe Street 
Edgewood Place 
Elm Street 
Emery Street 
Emma Street 
Evening Star Drive 
Falbo Drive 
Farrel Street 
First Avenue 
First Street 
Frank Court 
Franklin Street 
Garden Street 
George Street 
Glenbrook Drive 
Gloria Road 
Grand Street 
Halsey Street 
Henry Street 
High Street 
Hill Street 
Hillside Avenue 
Hillside Place 
Hine Street 
Hotchkiss Terrace Drive 
Hull Place 
Humphrey Street 
Jay Lane 
Johnson Avenue 
Johnson Terrace 
Jupiter Drive 
Karlak Street 
Kaslow Street 
Knorr Avenue 
Kozey Lane 
Kulas Terrace 
Lakeview Avenue 
Lane Street 
Lorraine Avenue 
Main Street 
Manners Avenue 
Maple Street Nos. 2 to 102 
Marie Drive 
Martha Street 
Meadow Street 
Miles Road 
Morning Star Drive 
Moss Avenue 
Mountain Road Nos. 5 to 23 
Munson Drive 
New Street 
New Haven Road Nos. 10 to 56 
Nichols Street 
North Street Nos. 12 to 93 
North Main Street 
North Star Drive 
Oakwood Drive 
Old Drive 
Olsen Drive 
Omar Street 
Oriole Lane 
Patton Avenue 
Pearl Street Nos. 3 to 49 
Pershing Avenue 
Pond Street 
Prospect Street 
Pulver Place 
Ray Street 
Rennay Road 
Reservoir Manor 
Richards Avenue 
Rider Avenue 
Rimmon Street 
Rimmondale 
River Street 
Roberts Street 
Robin Road 
Rocky Glen 
Rosko Street 
Sanford Street 
School Street 
Scott Avenue 
Second Avenue 
Seymour Avenue 
Shelton Street 
Short Street 
Smythe Street 
South Main Street 
Spruce Street 
Stoddard Street 
Swan Avenue 
Third Avenue 
Tracy Terrace 
Union Street 
Vine Street 
Wakeley Street 
Washington Avenue 
West Street 
West Church Street 
Westerman Avenue 
Whippoorwill Lane 
Willow Street 
Wood Street 
Woodcrest Road 
Woodside Avenue 
Wooster Street 
Wycliffe Terrace 
State Law reference- Authority of towns to establish voting districts, G.S. § 9-169. 
Sec. 5-3. - Second voting district established. 
    The town hereby establishes a second voting district in conformity with the general statutes with the polling place to be at Bungay School. All legally qualified residents on the following streets are included in the second voting district: 
Ansmour Road 
Argonne Terrace 
Balance Rock Road 
Benham Road 
Botsford Road 
Brookdale Road 
Buckingham Road 
Bungay Road No. 52 and up 
Canfield Road 
Cemetery Road 
Dauria Drive 
Davis Road 
Deerfield Drive 
Dogwood Drive 
Dolan Circle 
Dolan Road 
Edgehill Terrace 
Edward Lane 
Elain Drive 
Elmwood Drive 
Field Street 
Forest Road 
Fox Drive 
Frances Drive 
Gary Park Drive 
Glen Circle 
Great Hill Road 
Great Meadow Road 
Hemlock Road 
High Ridge Road 
Hillside Terrace 
Holbrook Road 
Housatonic Terrace 
Hull Road 
Jacko Drive 
Jefferson Street 
Kathy Drive 
Lantern Drive 
Laurel Lane 
Maiden Lane 
Mannweiler Drive 
Mountain Road No. 35 and up 
Oak Hill Road 
Old Town Road 
Partridge Drive 
Peach Drive 
Poplar Drive 
Ridge Road 
Riviera Terrace 
Roosevelt Drive 
Rose Drive 
Sagamore Drive 
Skyline Terrace 
Smith Haven Drive 
Southwest Road 
Spindle Road 
Spruce Brook Road 
Squantuck Road 
Stanley Drive 
Steephill Road 
Summit Drive 
Sunset Terrace 
Terrace Road 
Tibbets Road 
Titus Lane 
Tomlinson Road 
(Code 1961, § 7-2) 
State Law reference- Authority of towns to establish voting districts, G.S. § 9-169. 
Sec. 5-4. - Third voting district established. 
    The town hereby establishes a third voting district in conformity with the general statutes with the polling place to be at the Chatfield School. All legally qualified residents on the following streets are included in the third voting district: 
Anne Avenue 
Argyle Circle 
Beach Street 
Birchwood Drive 
Broadview Avenue 
Brothers Court 
Bunting Road 
Capricorn Drive 
Castle Lane 
Chamberlin Road 
Charles Road 
Chatfield Street 
Chestnut Court 
Chestnut Street 
Clinton Road 
Edward Road 
Eleanor Road 
French Street 
Gilyard Street 
Haddad Road 
Heritage Drive 
Hickory Lane 
Highland Avenue 
Highland Street 
Legion Road 
Lynne Terrace 
Maple Street No. 106 and up 
Mayfair Avenue 
Molsick Road 
New Haven Road No. 57 and up 
North Street No. 93 and up 
Old Ansonia Road 
Old Quarry Road 
Pearl Street No. 56 and up 
Potter Road 
Paramount Drive 
Prospect Avenue 
Rimmon Road 
Sargeant Terrace 
Silvermine Road 
Skokorat Street 
Smith Street 
Spring Street 
Walnut Street 
Walnut Street Extension 
Walter Road 
(Code 1961, § 7-2.1) 
State Law reference- Authority of towns to establish voting districts, G.S. § 9-169. 
Sec. 5-5. - Board for admission of electors-Composition. 
    The board for admission of electors in the town shall consist of the town clerk and the registrars of voters to act under the provisions of section 9-15a of the general statutes. 
(Code 1961, § 5-4) 
Charter reference- Board of admission for electors, § 3.5. 
Sec. 5-6. - Same-Sessions. 
    The board for admission of electors is authorized to hold sessions to examine the qualifications of electors and admit to the elector's oath those found qualified on such day of the third full week beginning with Sunday of each of the months of June and July of the odd-numbered years as the board for admission of electors may designate. 
(Code 1961, § 7-3) 
Sec. 5-7. - Registrars of voters; term of office. 
(a)  The registrars of voters for the town shall be elected for a term of four years commencing with the election on November 7, 1978. 
(b)  Such term of office shall begin on the Wednesday following the first Monday of January succeeding their election. 
(Ord. of 10-17-78) 
Charter reference- Vacancy in registrar of voters, § 3.4(c). 
Chapter 6 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Board of fire commissioners, § 10.7. 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 4; health and sanitation, Ch. 8; housing, Ch. 9; sale of fireworks prohibited, § 11-3; permit required for use or display of fireworks, § 11-4; use of fire alarms, § 11-21; false alarms, § 11-22; approaching fire department vehicles, § 16-34; parking near fire station, § 16-64(4); parking near a fire hydrant, § 16-64(7). 
State Law reference- Fire marshals and fire hazards, G.S. § 29-291 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Fire zones. 
(a)  Definition. A "fire zone" is a designated, unobstructed passageway sufficient in size to permit free passage of fire and other emergency equipment from a public highway to all necessary areas or portions of any private or public property, as hereinafter set forth. 
(b)  Establishment by fire marshal. Whenever the fire marshal shall determine that the reasonable safety of persons occupying, or using, any premises, public or private, having a capacity of at least 15 persons, requires the establishment of a fire zone for orderly access of fire and other emergency equipment, for the protection of public safety, he shall establish such fire zone by written order and cause to be made public, announcement of such fire zone establishment, by posting the same on the town post in town hall. He shall cause a copy of such order to be delivered to the owner or owners, or agents thereof, of any private land on which such fire zone is established. 
(c)  Order establishing fire zone; appeal to board of selectmen. Whenever the fire marshal establishes a fire zone, he shall file one copy of his order with the town clerk and one copy with the board of police commissioners. Any person aggrieved by such order may file, with the town clerk, within 15 days after the date of such order, written notice of appeal, setting forth therein reasons of aggrievement. A copy of the appeal shall be transmitted forth with by the town clerk to the board of selectmen. After hearing, the board of selectmen may affirm, modify or rescind such order. 
(d)  Signs delineating fire zone; cost; lien. Upon establishment of a fire zone, the board of police commissioners shall cause to be erected or installed, adequate signs, markings and other devices to delineate the fire zone. Signs, markings, and other devices erected or installed on privately owned premises, shall be the cost of the private owner, and may be billed for, and collected, in the same manner as municipal taxes, provided the board of police commissioners causes a notice of lien to be filed on the land records within 60 days after such erection or installation. 
(e)  Parking, etc., in fire zone; fine for violations. No person shall park, or permit to stand, a motor vehicle in a fire zone which has been established in accordance with this section, except when actually picking up or discharging passengers. Any person violating this section shall be fined not more than $25.00. The registered owner of a motor vehicle shall be presumed to be the operator of such vehicle. 
(f)  Notice of violation; appearance at police department and payment prior to time specified in notice. Whenever a vehicle is found standing in violation of subsection (e), a police officer shall serve upon the owner or operator of such vehicle, or place upon such vehicle, a notice directing the owner or operator thereof to appear at the police department prior to a time specified in the notice. If any person receiving the notice shall appear as directed, and shall pay an amount as specified in the notice, not exceeding $2.00, such payment shall bar a prosecution for violation of subsection (e). 
(Code 1961, § 9-15) 
Sec. 6-2. - Unauthorized removal, use of equipment; use outside town. 
(a)  If any person shall take or remove any of the ladders or implements for extinguishing fires belonging to the town from the place where deposited, except in case of fire or inspection, or shall use any such ladders or other implements, or cause the same to be used when so taken, such person shall pay a fine of $5.00. 
(b)  No fire apparatus belonging to the town shall be taken outside the town without the express permission of the chief or his assistants. 
(Code 1961, § 9-9) 
Sec. 6-3. - Fire marshal's office inspection and permit fees. 
    The fire marshal shall submit to the board of selectmen a schedule of recommended fire inspection, permit and document fees, when requested by the board of selectmen. Upon approval by the board of selectmen, the fee schedule shall remain in effect until changed or amended by the board of selectmen. 
    Fee schedule should include but not limited to: a) Liquor license permit. b) Day care license. c) Healthcare facility permit. d) Residential board and care facilities. e) Theater license. The above includes fees for new applications and a fee for renewals. The state or local certificate or permit shall not be given until Fee has been collected. 
    There shall be fees for f) Tank truck inspections for certificate. g) Burning permit. h) Blasting permit. i) Wood stove installation. The state or local certificate or permit shall not be given until fee has been collected. 
(Ord. of 4-20-04(2)) 
Sec. 6-4. - Request for a copy of information that the office of the fire marshal has in its possession. 
    There will be charges as approved by the board of selectmen. 
(Ord. of 4-20-04(2)) 
Sec. 6-5. - Plan reviews 
    When any person, firm, business, or other entity submits a plan, application or other documents in connection with building permit for review and or approval to the office of the fire marshal, there will be a fee for the review and approval. The board of selectmen will adopt a fee schedule for the following: a) Building plans by the square foot. b) Fire alarm/detection plan by the building area. c) Automatic sprinkler plan by the building area. d) Special installations: items and fees to be set by the board of selectmen. Any Town of Seymour or board of education building, addition, or renovation is exempt from the fee schedule. 
(Ord. of 4-20-04(2)) 
Sec. 6-6. - Penalty. 
    Building permits will not be issued until both the building department and fire marshal fees are paid in full. 
(Ord. of 4-20-04(2)) 
Secs. 6-7-6-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE DEPARTMENT[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2. 
State Law reference- Authority of selectmen to establish fire department, provide for its government, G.S. 7-301; provisions concerning volunteer departments, G.S. §§ 7-314-7-323. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 6-21. - Officers, members. 
    The fire department shall consist of a fire chief, one or more assistant chiefs and duly enlisted volunteers. The chief and assistant chiefs shall be appointed annually prior to the last week in June by the board of fire commissioners, and shall hold office for one year from July 1 or until others are appointed in their stead or until they are disabled and incapacitated for such office. The board of fire commissioners shall fill any vacancy that may occur in the office of chief or assistant chiefs within a reasonable time of the occurrence thereof. The chief and assistant chiefs may be removed for cause by the board of fire commissioners after a full hearing. The chief and assistant chiefs shall be residents of the Town of Seymour. 
(Code 1961, § 9-1; Ord. approved 1-20-09(1), eff. 1-27-09; Ord. of 7-21-15(1)) 
Sec. 6-22. - Enlistment, qualifications of volunteers. 
    The department shall consist of not more than 200 people and shall be filled by voluntary enlistments from the citizens of the town and from the neighboring communities of Naugatuck, Beacon Falls, Oxford, Derby and Ansonia under such regulations as shall be established by the chief and assistant chiefs. Provided, however, that no person under the age of 18 years shall be a member of any company, nor shall any enlistment be allowed for a term less than 12 months. 
(Code 1961, § 9-2; Ord. of 7-21-15(1)) 
Sec. 6-23. - Duties of fire chief. 
(a)  The fire chief shall have the general superintendence of all fire apparatus belonging to the town, and shall see that the same are kept in good order and repair, ready for immediate use. 
(b)  He shall have the sole command at all fires over the assistant chiefs and other members of the fire department, and over all other persons who may be present at fires. 
(c)  He shall direct all proper measures for the extinguishment of fires, protection of property, and preservation of order, and he shall enforce the observance of all laws, ordinances and regulations respecting fires. 
(d)  If, at any fire he shall judge it necessary, in order to extinguish the same or prevent its spread, to demolish any building in town, he may require and cause such building to be demolished. 
(e)  He shall report to the town annually, giving an accurate schedule of the engines and other apparatus under his control and the state and condition of the fire department generally. 
(f)  He shall perform such other duties connected with the fire department as the town may from time to time require. 
(Code 1961, § 9-3) 
Sec. 6-24. - Duties of assistant chiefs. 
    It shall be the duty of the assistant chiefs to assist the chief in the discharge of his duties, to receive and communicate his orders at a fire, and to see that such orders are executed. In the absence of the chief, his duties and powers, in case of a fire, shall devolve upon the first assistant chief, and in case of the absence of the first assistant, said duties and powers shall devolve upon the next assistant chief present at such fire. 
(Code 1961, § 9-4) 
Sec. 6-25. - Powers of chief, assistant chiefs. 
    The chief and assistant chief shall severally have all power and authority necessary to preserve order and enforce their commands at fires, and they may use such force as may be necessary for that purpose, and may command and require the aid and assistance of any person in that behalf. 
(Code 1961, § 9-5) 
Sec. 6-26. - Duties of members at fires. 
    Whenever a fire shall break out in the town, it shall be the duty of the officers and members of the departments to respond with their apparatus and proceed to the fire in as orderly a manner as possible. Upon all such occasions, they shall exert themselves in the most orderly manner possible and shall obey all orders in relation thereto which the officer in command shall issue. When their services at such fire are no longer required, they shall return to their quarters and put their apparatus in complete order. 
(Code 1961, § 9-6) 
Sec. 6-27. - Drills and inspections. 
    The department shall be called out by the chief for the exercise and inspection of fire apparatus at such times and places as he shall appoint, and when so called out shall be under the direction of the chief, or, in his absence, one of the assistant chiefs. 
(Code 1961, § 9-7) 
Sec. 6-28. - Officers of fire companies. 
    Each fire company shall consist of a captain, two lieutenants, a secretary, a treasurer and a steward. They shall be elected by the members of such company and shall hold office for one year or until they are removed and others are elected in their stead. 
(Code 1961, § 9-10) 
Sec. 6-29. - Removal of company officers, members. 
    Any officer or member of any company may be removed or dismissed from the fire department by the fire chief and assistant chiefs for neglect of duty, disorderly conduct or disobedience to his superior officers. 
(Code 1961, § 9-11) 
Sec. 6-30. - Company records. 
    The secretary of each fire company shall keep a fair and exact roll of the members of such company, with the dates of enlistment and discharge of each member, and a faithful record of the election of officers and of the delinquency of members, which records shall be open to inspection by the chief or his assistants at all reasonable times. 
(Code 1961, § 9-12) 
Sec. 6-31. - Bylaws of companies. 
    Each company shall have power to adopt a constitution and bylaws for its regulation and government, provided, however, that no part of the same shall be inconsistent with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1961, § 9-13) 
Sec. 6-32. - Installation of fire hydrants. 
    The fire chief, with the approbation of the fire commissioners of the town is authorized, within the limit of the appropriation for that purpose each year, to install fire hydrants where needed, and in such places as they deem necessary, without prior approval or authorization at any town meeting. 
(Code 1961, § 9-14) 
Sec. 6-33. - Volunteer fire company members and emergency medical technicians; leave from employment; exemptions. 
(a)  This section is enacted pursuant to Public Act No. 89-379 passed by the General Assembly of the State of Connecticut. 
(b)  The Town of Seymour and any person, firm or corporation located within the limits of the town which employs ten or more persons at one location shall allow any active member of a volunteer fire company as defined in Section 7-324 and amendments of the Connecticut General Statutes or any emergency medical technician to leave his place of employment without loss of pay, vacation time, sick leave or earned overtime accumulation to respond to an emergency to which a volunteer fire company or emergency medical service organization of the municipality is responding. 
(c)  No employer shall: 
(1)  Discharge, discipline or reduce the wages, vacation time, sick leave or earned overtime accumulation of any employee because such employee is a member in a volunteer fire company or emergency medical service organization; or 
(2)  Require refusal to respond to an emergency as a condition of continued employment. 
    The requirements of this section shall not be altered by any collective bargaining agreement. 
(d)  Any such member or technician who participates pursuant to this section shall register with the volunteer fire department or emergency medical service organization located in the town. Each volunteer fire company or emergency medical service organization shall maintain a list of individuals employed within the town and available to respond to an emergency between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. 
(e)  The services of a member of a volunteer fire company or emergency medical service organization who leaves a place of employment to respond to an emergency shall be provided in accordance with any internal operating procedures established by the volunteer fire company or emergency medical service organization. 
(f)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to any employee who is the only person who is capable of operating a particular machine at a particular business. Such person is exempted from the provisions of this section and may not invoke its provisions. 
(g)  The provisions of this section shall not be applicable to any employee of the police departments of the town and such persons are exempted from the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. of 4-21-92) 
Sec. 6-34. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TAX ABATEMENT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted October 16, 2001, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, inclusion as Ch. 6, Art. II, Div. 2, §§ 6-35-6-41 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Cross reference- Taxation and finance, ch. 15. 

Sec. 6-35. - Purpose. 
    The Town of Seymour is served by volunteer firefighters of the Seymour Fire Department (hereinafter "volunteer firefighters") and volunteer emergency medical service providers of the Seymour Ambulance Association, Inc. (hereinafter "volunteer EMS members"). 
    Pursuant to Connecticut General Statute § 12-81 as amended, a municipality may by ordinance provide tax relief for volunteer firefighters and EMS members in an effort to attract new volunteers and retain existing volunteers. Such tax relief may provide either: (1) an abatement of up to $1,000.00 in property taxes due for any fiscal year, or (2) an exemption applicable to the assessed value of real or personal property up to an amount equal to the quotient of $1,000,000.00 divided by the mill rate, in effect at the time of assessment, expressed as a whole number of dollars per $1,000.00 of assessed value. 
    In an effort to encourage service with the Seymour Fire Department and the Seymour Ambulance Association, Inc., and in recognition of the benefit that volunteer firefighters and EMS members make to the public safety and well being of its residents, the Town of Seymour has elected to make an abatement of up to $1,000.00 in property taxes due for any fiscal year available to eligible volunteers as described herein on the terms and condition hereinafter set forth. 
(Ord. of 10-16-01(2), § I) 
Sec. 6-36. - Definitions. 
    [The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
    Abatement means the reduction in property taxes of the volunteer as provided by this division. 
    Certification date means January 31, 2002 for the program year commencing January 1, 2001 and for each fiscal year thereafter. 
    Fiscal year means the budget year beginning July 1 of the calendar year immediately following the grand list year. 
    Grand list year means October 1 st of each calendar year. 
    Program year means the calendar year beginning January 1, 2002 and each calendar year thereafter. 
    Volunteer means a resident of the Town of Seymour who volunteers his or her services as a regular, active member in good standing of the Seymour Fire Department or the Seymour Ambulance Association, Inc. 
(Ord. of 10-16-01(2), § II) 
Sec. 6-37. - Abatement. 
    Each eligible volunteer shall be entitled to an abatement in property taxes as provided herein otherwise due from that volunteer for the fiscal year following the certification date. This tax abatement is only available to volunteers who are not delinquent in any tax obligation to the Town of Seymour. 
(Ord. of 10-16-01(2), § III) 
Sec. 6-38. - Eligibility. 
    Volunteers shall be eligible for a tax abatement on any real or personal taxable property for taxes owed to the Town of Seymour by such volunteer providing the volunteer meets the appropriate standards as set forth in the point system approved and adopted by the Seymour Board of Fire Commissioners and the Board of Trustees of the Seymour Ambulance Association, Inc., and ratified by the Seymour Board of Selectmen. 
    The first abatement will apply to taxes on the grand list of October 1, 2001 when tax payments are due in July 1, 2002. The following schedule shall be followed as it relates to the maximum benefit: 
July 1, 2002-$500.00; 
July 1, 2003 and thereafter-$1,000.00. 
    The amount of an abatement for an eligible volunteer shall be determined by the applicable point system approved, adopted and reviewed periodically by the Seymour Board of Fire Commissioners and the Board of Trustees of the Seymour Ambulance Association, Inc., and ratified by the Seymour Board of Selectmen. The board of selectmen shall review and approve each agency's point system by January 1, 2002 and every two years thereafter. In the event the board of selectmen does not ratify the point system adopted by one of the agencies covered by this division, the last point system ratified by the board of selectmen will remain in effect until a new point system is ratified. Eligibility point totals shall be based upon the total points accumulated over a calendar year beginning on January 1 st and ending on December 31 st . Accumulation of points will start January 1, 2001. 
(Ord. of 10-16-01(2), § IV) 
Sec. 6-39. - Certification. 
    Annually, on or before February 15 of each year beginning in the year 2002, the Seymour Board of Fire Commissioners and the Board of Trustees of the Seymour Ambulance Association, Inc., shall submit to the first selectman a list of the members of their respective organizations who are eligible volunteers for the tax abatement as provide herein. Each list shall contain for each volunteer the name, address, number of points as applicable, claimed amounts of abatement of taxes, and list of property taxed on the grand list as of the previous October 1 grand list. The Seymour Fire Department and the Seymour Ambulance Association, Inc. shall maintain accurate written records of their members' attendance and participation in and performance of their duties upon which the determinations of eligibility for each volunteer shall be based. 
    Volunteers shall not be entitled to any tax abatement for any program year in which the volunteer has not been credited with the requisite number of points under the point system ratified by the board of selectman. Eligibility earned in one program year cannot be carried forward or backward in any other program year. 
(Ord. of 10-16-01(2), § V) 
Sec. 6-40. - Application. 
    Annually, on or before March 1 of each year the first selectman shall forward to the tax collector the final certified list with his approved endorsement thereon. The tax collector shall then apply said abatement as follows: 
(1)  First; to any real estate taxes for real property on the Town of Seymour assessment list standing in the eligible volunteer's name, regardless of whether said property is held jointly, and upon which the volunteer resides for the grand list for which the tax bill is being prepared; and 
(2)  Second; to any motor vehicle or personal property taxes for a motor vehicle or personal property on the Town of Seymour assessment list standing in the eligible volunteer's name, regardless of whether said property is held jointly, for the grand list for which the tax bill is being prepared; and 
(3)  Lastly; to any other real estate taxes for real property on the Town of Seymour assessment list standing in the eligible volunteer's name, regardless of whether said property is held jointly, for the grand list for which the tax bill is being prepared. 
(4)  Any tax abatement earned but not fully credited in any program year may not be taken as a future credit or result in a payment to the volunteer. 
(Ord. of 10-16-01(2), § VI) 
Sec. 6-41. - Miscellaneous. 
(a)  Any volunteer who, regardless of reason, loses his or her status as a regular, active member in good standing and then regains said status, may include years previously served in the Seymour Fire Department or the Seymour Ambulance Association, Inc. after one full year of regular membership. 
(b)  The sale or transfer of any real or personal property to which an abatement has been applied shall disqualify said property from abatement for the remainder of the fiscal year on a monthly pro-rata basis. In the event of the death of a volunteer, the abatement afforded hereafter shall terminate at the end of the applicable year in which the member dies. 
(c)  Volunteers who are members of both agencies may accumulate points under the point systems established by each agency and combine the points to receive a tax abatement up to but not greater than $1000.00. 
(Ord. of 10-16-01(2), § VII) 
Secs. 6-41-6-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OPEN BURNING 

Sec. 6-61. - Declaration of policy. 
(a)  It is hereby found and declared that there may exist within the Town of Seymour that the open burning of wood, leaves and other materials for recreational use, for the cooking or preparation of food or for the clearing of property may create a nuisance to people surrounding or near the property in which the open burning is being done. It is also declared that people surrounding or near properties in which open burning is being performed have a right to expect that the burning will not create a significant unsafe, unhealthy or hazardous environment for them to be in. The open burning must not create a condition in which a fire hazard is created or a condition in which the open burning can cause a fire to spread beyond its initial area. 
(b)  This article shall not supersede Connecticut regulations that apply to open burning, outside wood burning furnaces or emissions from chimneys from structures. This article shall not apply to emissions from chimneys from building structures. 
(c)  The town issued brush burning permits in no way relieves any individual from their responsibility for any damage or injury caused by their fire to another person's property or person. 
(Ord. of 9-16-08(1), § 1) 
Sec. 6-62. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this article, the following words, terms and phrases shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
    Bonfire shall mean an outside fire of considerable size for the sole purpose of celebrating an event or occurrence either on private or public property. A fire equal in size or larger than a typical automobile could be considered a bon type fire. 
    Brush fire shall mean the burning of shrubs, vegetation or prunings the diameter of which is not greater than three inches at the widest point for the purpose of clearing property or for the prevention, control, or destruction of diseases and pests and vegetation management. 
    Ceremonial burning shall mean the open burning of materials such as flags for the purpose of disposing of said material that is fit and proper. 
    Fire training fire shall be methods of fire inside a structure or in the open environment for the purpose of training firefighters to enhance their skill performance. 
    Fire pit shall mean an outside area of earth ground or a hole in earth ground that may or may lot be surrounded by noncombustible materials with the intent of controlling the potential spread of a fire. 
    Nuisance shall mean a situation in which a recreation, bonfire, fire training, cooking or brush burning type fire creates an environment on or in property, other than the property where the fire is occurring, which is considered to be unhealthy, hazardous, reasonably annoying, uncomfortable, unsafe, creating a traffic hazard, creating a persistent odor or would cost resources to eliminate the odor from the property. This shall apply to but not be limited to smoke, soot, fumes, odors, vapors, noxious gases, products of combustion, heat and incomplete products of combustion. 
    Open burning shall mean the burning of any matter in such a manner that the products of combustion resulting from the burning are emitted directly into the ambient air without passing through an adequate stack or flue. Definition from Connecticut General Statues 22a-174-1-(59). 
    Open burning official shall mean any person designated by the Town of Seymour under Connecticut General Statues to enforce Connecticut Open Burning Regulations, this article and any applicable regulations. 
    Permit shall mean any paper or electronic form to document the approval of open burning that has been designated by the State of Connecticut or Town of Seymour to serve as the approval. 
    Recreational fire shall mean an outside fire created for the purpose of experiencing the outside natural environment, for the human consumption of beverages or food and the cooking or smoking of food for human consumption and ceremonial purposes. The fire shall be fueled by combustible materials, flammable or combustible gas or liquid which is normally used to create this type of fire. Some typical words describing a recreation fire includes campfire, barbecue, grill fire and fire pit. 
    Recreational fire appliances shall mean a commercially or privately manufactured device in which the intent of its manufacturing was to contain or control a recreation type fire. 
    Resident shall mean an individual seeking to burn on the property where he or she resides. 
    Windy conditions shall mean a wind velocity of 15 mph or more. Refer to CT.Weather.com then go to Brush Fire Conditions. 
(Ord. of 9-16-08(1), § 1) 
Sec. 6-63. - Permit requirements. 
(a)  It shall not be required to obtain a permit for the following type fires: 
(1)  Outdoor recreational type fires fueled by combustible materials, flammable or combustible gas or liquid. 
(2)  Outdoor fires to abate an immediate fire hazard provided that the abatement fire is supervised by a responsible fire department member. 
(3)  Fires in salamanders or other similar devices used by construction or other workers for heating purposes, fires that are essential to street installation, paving activities, building roofing activities, repairing of utilities and other similar work. 
(b)  It shall be required to obtain a permit for the following type fires: 
(1)  Fires in which the intent is to burn brush, trees, fields or woods in the clearing or cleaning up of property. Consideration should be given to the possibility of a practical and alternative method for the disposal of the material to be burned, including but not limited to chipping, cutting for forest products, land filling, piling for protective cover for wildlife and stockpiling, cost and access. 
(2)  Bon type fires. 
(3)  Fires for the training of firefighters in the methods of extinguishment and fire operations whether outside or inside structures. 
(4)  Ceremonial fires. 
(Ord. of 9-16-08(1), § 1) 
Sec. 6-64. - Regulations. 
(a)  Recreational, bonfire and brush type fires shall not create a nuisance to surrounding neighbors, homeowners, people and property. 
(b)  Recreational type fires shall be contained in either a fire pit or recreational fire appliance. 
(c)  Recreational, bonfire and brush type fires shall not be burned for more than three consecutive days. 
(d)  Recreational, bonfire and brush type fires must be arranged and burning in a fire safe manner. The size of the pre-burn piled materials and burning materials shall be of proper size and height that creates a fire safe arrangement. The size of the lot in which the open burning occurs will be a consideration regarding its fire safe manner. 
(e)  Processed wood, garbage, grass, paper, metals, rubber, painted materials, demolition waste, cardboard, construction waste material, plastic, flammableand combustible liquids, hazardous materials, and any other materials that are prohibited by Connecticut regulations or deemed hazardous to burn by the open burning official or the fire marshal shall not be allowed to be burned. The burning of loose leaves shall not be allowed unless it is incidental to the collection of materials being burned. This section does not apply to fire training burn permits issued for the sole purpose of fire fighting training. 
(f)  Burning construction materials and waste at construction sites shall not be allowed. 
(g)  The burning of brush shall not be allowed when the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection has issued a high or extreme level of fire danger or a smog (air pollution) alert. 
(h)  Recreational type fires shall not be allowed when the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection has issued an extreme level of fire danger or a smog alert. 
(i)  A recreational type fire must be monitored and supervised by a person of at least 14 years of age and be able to make responsible decisions to adequately control it and will be in charge of such fire as long as it remains burning. 
(j)  Brush burning type fires must be monitored and supervised by a person of at least 16 years of age and be able to make responsible decisions to adequately control it and will be in charge of such fire as long as it remains burning. 
(k)  Brush burning shall have some type of a fire extinguishing method immediately available to the supervising person. 
(l)  Brush burning shall not take place within 25 feet or a public roadway. 
(m)  All burning conditions shall be determined by the open burning permit official or fire marshal. Said officials have the right to deny any brush burning permit if they determine that the issuance of said permit may create a nuisance, environmental hazard or fire hazard. 
(n)  Brush burning shall be permitted only between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. Sunday thru Saturday. All brush fires must be extinguished by 5:00 p.m. This does not apply to fire training burning permits issued for the purpose of training fire fighters. 
(o)  There shall be no brush burning during windy conditions. Under these conditions all issued brush burning permits are void. 
(p)  A brush burning permit shall be valid for a maximum of 14 days. The validation time period shall be determined by the open burning official or fire marshal. 
(q)  Brush type fire permit shall be given to the resident to dispose of brush on the property where he/she resides. 
(r)  The burning of fresh cut trees, limbs and leaves shall be prohibited. The trees, limbs or leaves must be reasonably aged. This shall be determined by the fire marshal or open burning official. 
(s)  Any fire training open burning is required to have an open burning permit. The open burning official or the fire marshal shall have the authority to issue a permit for such training. 
(t)  A copy of the brush burning permit and fire training permit shall be kept in the possession of the applicant at the burning site at all times during the burning. 
(Ord. of 9-16-08(1), § 1) 
Sec. 6-65. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The open burning official(s) and fire marshal are charged with the enforcement of this article. They can request assistance from the police department, fire department or Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection, as necessary. The police department and fire department may also enforce this article if the circumstances create an effective enforcement. They can request assistance for an open burning official or fire marshal, when necessary. 
(b)  The open burning official(s) or fire marshal shall provide the homeowner, resident or person responsible for the open burning a notice of written warning violation when the open burning is in violation of this article and any part of it. The written warning violation notice shall be left with the proper person or affixed to the residence in a conspicuous location. When necessary, a copy of the written violation shall be sent to the responsible person(s) by certified mail and return receipt requested. In the event that the responsible person does not claim such form at the Post Office, the open burning official(s) or fire marshal shall have such notice served by a judicial marshal. 
(c)  The open burning official(s), fire marshal, police department or fire departmeni determines that in the best interest of public safety and/or the intent of this article, the open burning must immediately cease, they have the authority to have the open burning extinguished, as soon as possible. 
(d)  Nothing in this article shall limit the power and authority of the open burning permit official(s) or fire marshal to enforce their respective regulations or other related Connecticut Regulations regarding open burning. 
(e)  Open brush burning is not allowed without a permit. Brush burning without a permit is illegal and the individual(s) responsible for the burning may be subject to arrest by the police department or any other authorized person(s). 
(f)  Any open burning official or fire marshal may revoke or cancel a burn permit if it is deemed that the open burning is creating a nuisance, fire hazard, unsafe condition, environmental hazard or for any other reasonable condition. 
(g)  The notice of written violation form, as a minimum shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The effected property. 
(2)  The exact nature and ordinance section(s) of the violation(s). 
(3)  A copy of this article. 
(4)  The penalty or fine for the violation of this article. 
(5)  The penalty(s) or fine(s) for continued violation of this article. 
(6)  The procedure to appeal this violation(s). 
(7)  The name and business telephone number(s) of the open burning official or fire marshal finding such violation(s). 
(8)  A copy of the ordinance establishing hearing procedure for town citations and fines. 
(Ord. of 9-16-08(1), § 1) 
Sec. 6-66. - Penalties. 
(a)  A maximum of one written warnings shall be allowed to the homeowner, resident or responsible person(s) for the violation of this article. 
(b)  After the first written warning in a calendar year, the homeowner, resident or responsible person shall be fined $100.00 for each additional written warning. This process shall continue up to the third written warning. 
(c)  If the violations continue after the third written warning, the open burning official(s) or fire marshal shall seek an order from the court system for a cease and deceased order cf the open burning that the previous written warnings were issued for. 
(Ord. of 9-16-08(1), § 1) 
Sec. 6-67. - Appeals procedure. 
(a)  The homeowner, resident or person responsible for the open burning may appeal the action of the open burning official(s) or fire marshal within ten days of his receipt of the official written notice form stated in subsection 6-65(g). The appeal shall be made in compliance with the town ordinance establishing hearing procedures for town citations and fines. Any penalties or fines imposed by this article may he appealed in the manner provided by the same town ordinance establishing hearing procedure for town citations and fines. 
(b)  The effected person(s) can request a hearing on actions taken by town officials by following the town's hearing procedure. 
(Ord. of 9-16-08(1), § 1) 
Chapter 7 - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- An Ordinance adopted and effective October 19, 2010, amended Ch. 7 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 7, §§ 7-1-7-11, 7-21-7-26, 7-41-7-43, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. of July 12, 1978, §§ 1.1-1.4, 2.1, 3.1, 3.3-3.6, 4.1-4.6, 5.1-5.3; Ord. of Jan. 8, 1991, §§ 1-8; Ord. of June 18, 1991. 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 4; Housatonic Lake authority, § 13-36 et seq.; regulations for the protection and preservation of inland wetlands and water courses, App. C. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 7-1. - Statutory authorization. 
    The legislature of the state has in the general statutes delegated the responsibility to local government units, to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry; therefore, the board of selectmen does ordain the following in this chapter. 
(Ord. of 10-19-10) 
Sec. 7-2. - Finding of fact. 
(a)  The flood hazard areas of the town are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in areas of special flood hazards which increase flood heights and velocities and, when inadequately anchored, damage uses in other areas. Uses that are inadequately flood proofed, elevated or otherwise protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss. 
(Ord. of 10-19-10) 
Sec. 7-3. - Statement of purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed: 
(1)  To protect human life and health; 
(2)  To minimize expenditures of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(3)  To minimize the need to rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding, generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(4)  To minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
(5)  To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard; 
(6)  To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the second use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future flood blight areas; 
(7)  To ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard; and 
(8)  To ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions. 
(Ord. of 10-19-10) 
Sec. 7-4. - Definitions. 
    Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter it's most reasonable application. 
    Appeal means a request for a review of the building inspector's interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance. 
    Area of special flood hazard means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as zone A1, A4, A6, A8, A11, A12, A13, A17, and A18, on the town's flood insurance rate map. 
    Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
    Base flood elevation (BFE) means the elevation of the crest of the base flood or 100-year flood. The height in relation to mean sea level expected to be reached by the waters of the base flood at pertinent points in the floodplains of coastal and riverine areas. 
    Basement means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
    Building means a walled and roofed building which is principally above ground, including a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank, or other man-made facilities or infrastructures. 
    Development means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, the construction of buildings or structures; the construction of additions, alterations or substantial improvements to buildings or structures; the placement of buildings or structures; mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment; the storage, deposition, or extraction of materials; and the installation, repair or removal of public or private sewage disposal systems or water supply facilities. 
    Exiting manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured home are to be affixed (including, as a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before July 12, 1978, the effective date of the floodplain management ordinance adopted by the community. 
    Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufacturing homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads.) 
    Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) is the federal agency that administers the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). 
    Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland waters; 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
    Flood insurance study means the official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency that included flood profiles, the flood insurance rate map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood. 
    Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood, without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a foot. 
    Functionally dependent use or facility means a use or facility that cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities. The term does not include seafood processing facilities, long-term storage, manufacturing, sales or service facilities. 
    Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register. 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district. 
(3)  Individually listed on the Connecticut inventory of historic places, provided such as been approved by the Secretary of the Interior. 
(4)  Individually listed on the town inventory of historic places, provided that the town's historic preservation program has been duly certified by the state, or if the town program is not so certified, the structure may be listed directly by the Secretary of the Interior. 
    Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, buildings access or storage, in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor. 
    Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel, or contiguous parcels, of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
    Manufactured home means a structure that is transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis, and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term also includes recreational vehicles and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 days or longer. 
    Market value means the market value of the structure as determined by the cost approach to value method prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. 
    Mean sea level (MSL) means the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) are referenced. 
    New construction means a structure for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after July 12, 1978, the effective date (not the revision date) of the ordinance from which this chapter derives, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
    New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after July 12, 1978, the effective date of the floodplain management regulation adopted by the community. 
    Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: (a) built on a single chassis; (b) 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; (c) designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and (d) designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as a temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
    Start of construction includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was issued provided the actual start of construction repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of a structure (including a manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation or placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
    Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally aboveground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank, or other man-made facilities or infrastructures. 
    Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to it's before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of its market value before the damage occurred. 
    Substantial improvement means any combination of reconstruction, rehabilitation, repairs, addition or other improvement to a structure, taking place over a one year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure as determined by the cost approach to value either (1) before the start of construction or (2) before the damage occurred, where the structure has sustained substantial damage. Substantial improvement is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not include either: 
(1)  Any project for improvement of a structure required to correct existing violations of any state or local health, sanitary or safety code requirements which have been identified by the appropriate code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or 
(2)  Any alteration of a historic structure provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
    Variance means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this chapter. 
    Violation means a failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management ordinance. A structure or other development without required permits, lowest floor elevation documentation, flood-proofing certificates or required floodway encroachment calculations is resumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
    Water surface elevation means the height, in relation to the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
(Ord. of 10-19-10) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 7-5. - Methods of reducing flood losses. 
    In order to accomplish its purpose, this chapter includes methods and provisions for: 
(1)  Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities; 
(2)  Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(3)  Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel floodwaters; 
(4)  Controlling filling, grading, dredging and other developments which may increase flood damage; and 
(5)  Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards on other areas. 
(Ord. of 10-19-10) 
Sec. 7-6. - Lands to which this chapter applies. 
    This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the jurisdiction of the town. 
(Ord. of 10-19-10) 
Sec. 7-7. - Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. 
    The areas of special flood hazard within the Town of Seymour are identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in its flood insurance study (FIS) for New Haven County, Connecticut, dated September 29, 2010, accompanying flood insurance rate maps (FIRM), dated December 17, 2010, and other supporting data applicable to the Town of Seymour, and any subsequent revisions thereto, are adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. Since mapping is legally adopted by reference into this chapter it must take precedence when more restrictive until such time as a map amendment or map revision is obtained from FEMA. The area of special flood hazard includes any area shown on the FIRM as Zones A and AE, including areas designated as a floodway on a FIRM. Areas of special flood hazard are determined utilizing the base flood elevations (BFE) provided on the flood profiles in the flood insurance study (FIS) for a community. BFE's provided on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) are only approximate (rounded up or down) and should be verified with the BFE's published in the FIS for a specific location. A copy of this report is on file in the office of the town clerk. 
(Ord. of 10-19-10) 
Sec. 7-8. - Compliance. 
    No structure or land within an area designated as a special flood hazard shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. of 10-19-10) 
Sec. 7-9. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
    This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easement, covenant, or deed restriction. However, where this chapter and other ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. of 10-19-10) 
Sec. 7-10. - Interpretation. 
    In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally constructed in favor of the governing body; 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. of 10-19-10) 
Sec. 7-11. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
    The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increase by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the town, any officer or employee thereof, or the Federal Emergency Management Agency, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully thereunder. 
(Ord. of 10-19-10) 
Sec. 7-12. - Severability. 
    If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this chapter should be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, such decision shall not affect the remaining portions of this chapter, which shall remain in full force and effect; and to this end the provisions of this chapter are hereby declared to be severable. 
(Ord. of 10-19-10) 
Secs. 7-13-7-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administration generally, Ch. 2. 

Sec. 7-21. - Designation of building inspector as local administrator. 
    The building inspector is hereby appointed to administer and implement this chapter by granting or denying development permit applications in accordance with its provisions. 
(Ord. of 10-19-10) 
Cross reference- Building inspector, § 4-26 et seq. 
Sec. 7-22. - Duties and responsibilities of the building inspector. 
    The duties of the building inspector shall include, but not limited to: 
(1)  Permit review by the building inspector. 
a.  Review all development permits to determine that the permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied; 
b.  Review all development permits to determine that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies from which prior approval is required; 
c.  Review all development permits to determine if the proposed development adversely affects the flood carrying capacity of the area of special flood hazard. For purposes of this chapter, "adversely affects" means that the cumulative effect of proposed development when combined with all other past existing and anticipated development that increases the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point, above the level as shown on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM). 
(2)  Use of other base flood data. When base flood elevation and floodway data has not been provided in accordance with section 7-7, the building inspector shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer sections 7-42 and 7-43 hereof. 
(3)  Information to be outlined and maintained by the building inspector. 
a.  Obtain and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest habitable floor, including basement of all new or substantially improved structures; 
b.  For all new or substantially improved flood proofed structures, verify and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level, and maintain the flood proofing is effective and maintain the flood proofing certifications required in section 7-42; 
c.  Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter. 
(4)  Alteration of watercourses. 
a.  Notify adjacent communities and the state department of environmental protection prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
b.  Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of the watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished. 
(5)  Interpretation of FIRM boundaries. Make interpretations, where needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretations as provided in section 7-24. 
(Ord. of 10-19-10) 
Cross reference- Duties and responsibilities of building inspector, § 4-30. 
Sec. 7-23. - Development permit. 
    A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development begins within any area of special flood hazard established in section 7-7. Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the building inspector and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including) of all basement structures; 
(2)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has been flood proofed; 
(3)  Certification by a professional engineer licensed in the state, that the flood proofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the flood proofing criteria in section 7-42; 
(4)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. 
(Ord. of 10-19-10) 
Sec. 7-24. - Appeals procedure. 
(a)  The flood and erosion control boar, as established by the town, shall hear and decide appeals from the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  The flood and erosion control board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision or determination made by the building inspector in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. 
(c)  Those aggrieved by the decision of the flood and erosion control board or any aggrieved taxpayer, may appeal such decision to the Supreme Court, as provided in the general statues. 
(d)  In passing upon such applications, the board shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified on other sections of this chapter, and: 
(1)  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
(2)  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
(3)  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its content to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
(4)  The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community; 
(5)  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
(6)  The availability of alternative locations, for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage; 
(7)  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
(8)  The relationship of the proposed use of the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area; 
(9)  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
(10)  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and 
(11)  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, water systems, and streets and bridges. 
(Ord. of 10-19-10) 
Sec. 7-25. - Variance procedure. 
    The flood and erosion control board established by the town shall hear and decide variance from the requirements of this chapter as follows: 
(1)  Variance may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size, contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing items in section 7-24 have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increase. 
(2)  Upon consideration of the factors of section 7-4(d) and the purpose of this chapter, the flood and erosion control board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose of this chapter. 
(3)  Variances may be issued for the repair of historic structures upon a determination that: 
a.  The proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure; and 
b.  The variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(4)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base discharge would result. 
(5)  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
(6)  Variances shall only be issued upon a showing of good and sufficient cause, a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and a determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to the public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public as identified in section 7-24, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(7)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increase risk resulting from the reduced lowest flood elevation. 
(Ord. of 10-19-10) 
Sec. 7-26. - Building inspector to maintain record of appeals; report variance. 
    The building inspector shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(Ord. of 10-19-10) 
Cross reference- Building inspector, § 4-26 et seq. 
Sec. 7-27. - Enforcement and penalties. 
    Enforcement of this chapter and penalties established hereunder shall be governed by Sections 16 and 20 of the zoning regulations and Section 8 of the land subdivision regulations. 
(Ord. of 10-19-10) 
Secs. 7-28-7-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

Sec. 7-41. - General standards. 
    In all areas of special flood hazards the flowing standard are required: 
(1)  Anchoring. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy. 
(2)  Construction materials and methods. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage, and by methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 
(3)  Utilities: 
a.  Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipments, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
b.  All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system. New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharge from the systems into floodwaters, and on-site waste disposal systems, shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(4)  Manufactured homes. In all areas of special flood hazards, no manufactured homes shall be placed, nor shall any substantial improvement to an existing manufactured home or mobile home park be permitted, nor shall any expansion of any manufactured home park be permitted. This includes manufactured homes placed or substantially improved outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision, or in a new manufactured home park or subdivision, or in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as a result of a flood. Recreational vehicles placed on sites within all areas of special flood hazard shall be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days and be fully licensed and ready for highway use. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions. 
(5)  Aboveground storage tanks. Aboveground storage tanks (oil, propane, etc.) which are located outside or inside of the structure must either be elevated above the base flood elevation (BFE) on a concrete pad, or be securely anchored with tie-down straps to prevent flotation or lateral movement, have the top of the fill pipe extended above the BFE, and have a screw fill cap that does not allow for the infiltration of flood water. 
(6)  Portion of structure in flood zone. If any portion of a structure lies within the special flood hazard area (SFHA), the entire structure is considered to be in the SFHA. The entire structure must meet the construction requirements of the flood zone. The structure includes any attached additions, garages, decks, sunrooms, or any other structure attached to the main structure. Decks or porches that extend into a more restrictive flood zone will require the entire structure to meet the standards of the more restrictive zone. 
(7)  No structure entirely or partially over water. New construction, substantial improvements and repair to structures that have sustained damage cannot be constructed or located entirely or partially over water unless it is a functionally dependent use or facility. 
(Ord. of 10-19-10) 
Sec. 7-42. - Specific standards. 
    In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation data has been provided, as set forth in sections 7-7 and 7-22 of this chapter, Section 16 of the Zoning Regulations of the Town of Seymour, and Section 8.0 of the Subdivision Regulations of the Town of Seymour, the following provisions are required: 
(1)  Residential construction: New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above base flood elevations; 
(2)  Nonresidential construction: New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the level of the base flood elevation or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall be flood proofed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water; have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect licensed by the state shall review and/or develop structural design specifications and plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with acceptable standards of practice for meeting the flood proofing specifications for type A and type B constructions contained in "Flood proofing Regulations" the Office, Chief of Engineers, U.S. Army, Washington D.C. June 1972 relative to the water tight performance standards of this section. Such certification shall be provided to the building inspector as set forth in section 7-23. 
(3)  Enclosed areas below the base flood elevation: In all new construction and substantial improvements to existing structures, fully enclosed areas below the base flood elevation shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of flood waters. Such areas shall be useable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or limited storage and shall be designed to preclude finished living space. Plumbing and other utility connections are prohibited below the base flood elevations. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
a.  A minimum of two openings having a net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed areas subject to flooding shall be provided. 
b.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. 
c.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of flood waters. 
(Ord. of 10-19-10) 
Sec. 7-43. - Floodways. 
    The following restrictions shall apply to all land and water areas within any floodway designated on the Flood Insurance Rate Map, Town of Seymour: 
(1)  In a zone where base flood elevations have been determined, but before a floodway is designated, no new constructions, substantial improved, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted which will increase base flood elevations more than one foot at any point along the watercourse when all anticipated development is considered cumulatively with the proposed development. 
(2)  Should data be requested and/or provided, the town shall adopt a regulatory floodway based on the principle that the floodway must be able to convey the waters of the base flood without increasing the water surface elevation more then one foot at any point along the watercourse. 
(3)  Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 7-7 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters which carry debris and potential projectiles and have erosion potential, no encroachments including full, new construction, substantial improvements or other development shall be permitted unless certification with supporting technical data is provided by a licensed professional engineer demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in any (0.00 fee) increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(4)  Any encroachment permitted under subsections (1) and (3) above shall meet all of the flood hazard reduction standards of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 10-19-10) 
Sec. 7-44. - Compensatory storage. 
    The water holding capacity of the floodplain, except those areas which are tidally influenced, shall not be reduced. Any reduction caused by filling, new construction or substantial improvements involving an increase in footprint to the structure, shall be compensated for by deepening and/or widening of the floodplain. Storage shall be provided on-site, unless easements have been gained from adjacent property owners; it shall be provided within the same hydraulic reach and a volume not previously used for flood storage; it shall be hydraulically comparable and incrementally equal to the theoretical volume of flood water at each elevation, up to and including the 100-year flood elevation, which would be displaced by the proposed project. Such compensatory volume shall have an unrestricted hydraulic connection to the same waterway or water body. Compensatory storage can be provided off-site if approved by the municipality. 
(Ord. of 10-19-10) 
Sec. 7-45. - Equal conveyance. 
    Within the floodplain, except those areas which are tidally influenced, as designated on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) for the community, encroachments resulting from filling, new construction or substantial improvements involving an increase in footprint of the structure, are prohibited unless the applicant provides certification by a registered professional engineer demonstrating, with supporting hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice, that such encroachments shall not result in any (0.00 feet) increase in flood levels (base flood elevation). Work within the floodplain and the land adjacent to the floodplain, including work to provide compensatory storage shall not be constructed in such a way so as to cause an increase in flood stage or flood velocity. 
(Ord. of 10-19-10) 
Chapter 8 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 4; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 6; housing, Ch. 9; junkyard locations, § 10-1; blasting, § 10-4; massage parlors, § 10-5; removal of ice, snow from sidewalks, § 14-6; excavation regulations, § 14-21; driveway regulations, § 14-37; sewers, § 17-26 et seq. 
State Law reference- Uniform Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act, G.G. §§ 21a-91-21a-120; city health authorities generally, G.S. §§ 19a-200-19a-230. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 8-1. - Ambulances services. 
(a)  The board of selectmen is authorized pursuant to section 7-148 of the general statutes, to provide for the furnishing by the municipality or any person of ambulance service to the town. 
(b)  Use of the town ambulances shall be extended to all the residents of the town, to be taken to and from all hospitals and places of confinement, both public and private, and wherever located within the confines of the state. This privilege may be extended beyond the confines of the state provided the service can be furnished by volunteers from the Seymour Ambulance Association, and provided the distance is not greater than 200 miles one way. 
(Code 1961, §§ 10-3, 10-7) 
Sec. 8-2. - Reserved. 
Sec. 8-3. - District department of health; participation by town; expenses. 
    The town will participate in a district department of health in accordance with sections 19-105 through 19-111 of the general statutes and the contribution of the town to the expenses of the district department of health shall be as budgeted by the proper fiscal procedures of the town. 
(Code 1961, § 10-8) 
Secs. 8-4-8-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. of Oct. 15, 1991, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, inclusion herein as superseding former Art. II, §§ 8-21-8-34, was at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 8-21. - Statement of purpose; general description. 
(a)  This article is being passed by the town as part of a long term plan for disposal of the town's garbage and other solid waste, to replace the town's existing program. 
(b)  The town anticipates that it will soon sign final contracts which will require the town to dispose of its "acceptable solid waste," as defined in the contracts, at the Bristol Resource Recovery Facility (the "facility") and to designate the facility as the exclusive area for the disposal of all acceptable solid waste generated within the town. 
(c)  This article first creates a procedure which requires everyone engaged in the business of collecting solid waste to register for that purpose with the town. 
(d)  Until the designated compliance date, the town will require each solid waste collector to follow its existing solid waste management plan. 
(e)  Under this article, the town will notify businesses and individuals of the designated compliance date. At that time, solid waste collectors will be required to deliver solid waste in accordance with the notice requirements of this article. Those notice requirements will give everyone the flexibility needed to respond to construction and operating schedules at the facility. 
(f)  There will be times when solid waste will not be acceptable at the facility. These include the period and times when it is closed, either because of the need for cleaning or repair, or because the facility may not be large enough to burn all solid waste available at a particular time. In addition, some solid waste generated in town cannot be burned at the facility; this will include unburnable materials, hazardous waste, and bulky items like tree stumps, large quantities of construction or demolition debris, etc. The town will make alternate arrangements to dispose of that material, as provided in this article. 
(Ord. of 10-15-91, § 1) 
Sec. 8-22. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this article: 
    Acceptable solid waste means the type of solid waste normally collected and disposed of in the town, including, but not limited to: garbage, trash, rubbish, refuse, offal, beds, mattresses, sofas, bicycles, baby carriages, automobile or small vehicle tires, as well as processable portions of commercial and industrial solid waste, and logs if no more than four feet long and/or six inches in diameter, branches, leaves, twigs, grass and plant cuttings, excepting, however, unacceptable waste and hazardous waste. 
    Hazardous waste means that portion of solid waste which by reason of its composition or characteristics is (a) hazardous waste as defined in the Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 U.S.C. SS 6901 et seq., and the regulations thereunder, or in Section 22a-209-1 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies, and any succeeding legislation or regulations or amendments to the foregoing; or (b) any other materials which any governmental agency or unit having appropriate jurisdiction shall determine from time to time is harmful, toxic or dangerous, or otherwise ineligible for disposal through a resource recovery facility. 
    Person means a natural person, corporation, trust, estate, partnership, association, joint venture, government, governmental subdivision or agency, or any other legal or commercial entity. 
    Solid waste means all discarded materials or substances including but not limited to garbage, refuse, sludges from air or water pollution control facilities or water supply treatment facilities, rubbish, ashes, contained gaseous materials, incinerator residue, demolition and construction debris, offal and other discarded materials and substances resulting from industrial, commercial, mining, and agricultural operations and from community activities, but not including sewage and other highly diluted water-carried materials or substances and those in gaseous form or solid or dissolved materials in irrigation return flows or industrial discharges, or source, special nuclear or by-product materials within the meaning of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended. 
    Solid waste collector means a person engaged in the business of collecting, transporting or disposing of solid waste generated within the boundaries of the town. 
    Town means the Town of Seymour. 
    Unacceptable waste means that portion of solid waste, excluding hazardous waste, but including, without limitation, explosives, pathological and biological waste, radioactive materials, ashes, foundry sand, sewage sludge (unless processed to permit incineration), cesspool and other human waste, human remains and animal carcasses, motor vehicles, including such major motor vehicle parts as automobile transmissions, rear ends, springs and fenders, agricultural and farm machinery and equipment, marine vessels and major parts thereof, any other large machinery or equipment (including white goods), liquid wastes, or nonburnable construction materials and/or demolition debris, that (a) may present a substantial endangerment to public health or safety, (b) may cause applicable air quality or water effluent standards to be violated by the normal operation of a resource recovery facility, or (c) has a reasonable possibility of adversely affecting the operation of a resource recovery facility, unless such unacceptable waste is delivered in minimal quantities and concentrations as part of normal collections in which case it constitute acceptable waste. 
(Ord. of 10-15-91, § 2) 
Sec. 8-23. - Obligation to register. 
    Any person who operates or wishes to operate as a solid waste collector in the town shall apply for registration as a solid waste collector with the town in the manner prescribed by this article. Any person operating as a solid waste collector within the town 30 days after the effective date of this article will be subject to the requirements and penalties provided in this article. 
(Ord. of 10-15-91, § 3) 
Sec. 8-24. - Registration forms and fees. 
(a)  All persons desiring to register as solid waste collectors must apply to the director of public works on forms provided by that department. Those forms shall require the registrant to furnish all information requested, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  The name of the business; 
(2)  The names of all partners, officers or proprietors of the business; 
(3)  A listing and description of the vehicles to be used for solid waste hauling in the town; 
(4)  The names and addresses of all customers presently served, if any, within the town; 
(5)  The approximate tonnage of solid waste expected to be collected each week; 
(6)  The names of all other communities serviced by the registrant; and 
(7)  Evidence of insurance in the amount of at least $1,000,000.00 or such other amounts as the board of selectmen shall determine. 
(b)  A registered solid waste collector shall update the information required by subsection (a) at least once each year at the time the registration is renewed. 
(c)  Registration shall be effective until the following June 30 and shall be renewed on an annual basis during the month of June of each year. 
(d)  The initial registration fee shall be $50.00 and each annual renewal fee shall be $50.00. The annual registration period shall be from July 1 to June 30 of the following year and registration fees shall not be prorated. 
(Ord. of 10-15-91, § 4) 
Sec. 8-25. - Administrative enforcement. 
(a)  The director of public works shall mail written notice of the approval or denial of an application for registration as a solid waste collector to the applicant within 15 days after submission of the application. Registration shall be deemed effective as of the date of mailing of notice of approval. 
(b)  The director of public works may refuse to grant registration to any applicant, or may suspend the registration of any registered solid waste collector, if that person (i) violates any provision of this article, (ii) is not insurable in accordance with this article or (iii) is otherwise deemed to be unsuitable. A denial or suspension of registration may not exceed a period of 180 days for any one violation; provided, that repeated or willful violations of this article may result in permanent refusal or revocation of registration. 
(c)  No denial, suspension or revocation notice is effective until the person adversely affected has been notified in writing of that decision and the reason for it, and has been afforded a prompt opportunity to appear at an informal hearing before the director of public works for the purpose of responding to those reasons. 
(d)  Any person aggrieved by an initial denial, suspension or revocation of registration may appeal that decision to the board of selectmen by filing a notice of appeal with the town clerk within 15 days after either (1) notice of the initial decision is mailed to that person, or (2) the informal hearing provided under subsection (c) of this section is held and the decision affirmed by that official. The clerk shall immediately notify the board of selectmen of that appeal. 
(e)  A hearing shall be scheduled before the board of selectmen for a date not more than 30 days after the notice of appeal is filed. The hearing may be postponed or continued to a later date not more than one time and the later date must be no more than two weeks after the original date. Written notice of the hearing shall be given by the clerk to the person taking the appeal and to any person who requests notice of the hearing. The hearing may be at a regular or special meeting of the board of selectmen. 
(f)  At that hearing, the person aggrieved shall be permitted to present evidence and cross-examine witnesses. No formal rules of evidence shall apply, but the board of selectmen may exclude irrelevant or duplicative evidence. The board of selectmen shall make its decision within 45 days of the date of the notice of appeal is filed. That period may, but need not be, extended by any period of postponement which is requested for the convenience of the person bringing the appeal. The decision may (1) uphold the decision denying, suspending or revoking the registration, (2) reverse the decision and order the registration granted or reinstated, or (3) order the registration granted or reinstated with modifications. The decision of the board of selectmen shall be final. 
(Ord. of 10-15-91, § 5) 
Sec. 8-26. - Penalty. 
    Every person who violates any provision of this article shall be guilty of a violation, as defined in SS53a-27(a), C.G.S. and shall be subject to maximum fine of $200.00 for each day that the violation continues. 
(Ord. of 10-15-91, § 6) 
Sec. 8-27. - Prohibition on collection, transportation and disposal by unregistered collectors. 
    Beginning 30 days after the effective date of this article, all unregistered solid waste collectors and all solid waste collectors whose registration has been suspended or revoked are prohibited from engaging in the business of collecting, transporting or disposing of solid waste generated within the town. 
(Ord. of 10-15-91, § 7) 
Sec. 8-28. - Location for disposal. 
    Every solid waste collector and every other person disposing of solid waste generated within the town shall dispose of that solid waste as follows: 
(1)  Until the effective date of this article the disposal of the town's acceptable solid waste shall be in accordance with exiting procedures and agreements. 
(2)  After a disposal site for the town's acceptable solid waste has been designated, and after the town has been notified in accordance with its contracts that the site is available for use, the director of public works shall give notice of those facts as provided in subsection (3). After the notice is published, all persons disposing of acceptable solid waste in the town must comply with the requirements of that notice not later than the date specified for compliance in the notice. 
(3)  Notice that a designated disposal site for acceptable solid waste is available for either partial or full use shall be published in the same manner as is required for hearings before ordinances are adopted by the town. In addition, individual notice of those facts shall be mailed to every person who is registered in the town as a solid waste collector. The notice shall specify the date after which all persons disposing of acceptable solid waste in the town must use that disposal site, and shall generally state any other necessary requirements for that disposal, such as limitations on the amount of acceptable solid waste which may or must be delivered, or the dates or times at which delivery must be made. 
(4)  In addition to designating a disposal site for acceptable solid waste, the town may from time to time designate or identify additional sites for disposal of unacceptable waste, hazardous waste, or acceptable solid waste in excess of the amount to be disposed of at the primary designated site. Those sites may include transfer stations for the convenience of residents, landfills, or any other type of facility deemed appropriate by the town. If any person will be required to use a particular site, that site shall be designated in the manner provided in Section 22a-220a, C.G.S. 
(Ord. of 10-15-91, § 8) 
Secs. 8-29-8-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - NOISE 

Sec. 8-46. - Short title. 
    The title of this article shall be "The Town of Seymour Noise Control Ordinance." 
(Ord. of 6-27-83, § 1) 
Sec. 8-47. - Purpose. 
    It is recognized that people have a right to and should be ensured an environment free from excessive sound and vibration that may jeopardize their health or safety or welfare or degrade the quality of life. This article is enacted to protect, preserve and promote the health, safety, welfare and quality of life for the citizens of the town through the reduction, control and prevention of noise. 
(Ord. of 6-27-83, § 2) 
Sec. 8-48. - Definitions. 
    The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article. 
    Ambient noise or background noise shall mean noise of a measurable intensity which exists at a point as a result of a combination of many distant sources individually indistinguishable. 
    Commercial zone shall mean commercial district, as defined in the zoning regulations of the town and all uses associated therewith either permitted as a right or as a special use. Central commercial: CBD-1 central business district; general commercial C-2; recreational commercial RC-3. 
    Construction shall mean any site preparation, assembly, erection, substantial repair, alteration or similar action, but excluding demolition of public or private rights-of-way, structures, utilities, or similar property. 
    Construction equipment shall mean any equipment or device operated by fuel or electric power used in construction or demolition. 
    Daytime hours shall mean the hours between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. Monday through Sunday, and the hours between 7:00 a.m. through 9:00 p.m. on holidays which fall into these parameters. 
    Decibel shall mean a logarithmic unit of measure used in measuring magnitudes of sound which symbol is dB. 
    Demolition shall mean any dismantling, intentional destruction or removal of structures, utilities, public or private right-of-way surfaces or similar property. 
    Domestic power equipment shall mean, but not be limited to, power saws, drills, grinders, lawn and garden tools and other domestic power equipment intended for use in residential areas by a homeowner. 
    Emergency shall mean any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual or imminent physical trauma or property damage which demands immediate action. 
    Emergency vehicle shall mean any motor vehicle authorized by the state to have sound warning devices such as sirens and bells which can lawfully be used when responding to an emergency. 
    Emergency work shall mean work made necessary to restore property to a safe condition following an emergency, or work required to protect persons or property from exposure to imminent danger. 
    Impulse noise shall mean sound of short duration, usually less than one second, with an abrupt onset and rapid decay. 
    Industrial zone shall mean industrial district as defined by the zoning regulations of the town, limited and general: Limited industrial LI-1; general industrial GI-2. 
    Motor vehicle shall be defined as per section 14-1(26) of the general statutes. 
    Muffler shall mean a device for abating sounds such as escaping gases. 
    Nighttime hours shall mean the hours between 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Monday through Sunday, except that night shall mean the hours between 9:00 p.m. Saturday and 9:00 a.m. Sunday. 
    Noise shall mean any sound, the intensity of which exceeds the standards set forth in section 8-52. 
    Noise level shall mean the sound pressure level as measured with a sound level meter using the A-weighting network. The level so read is designated dB(A) or dBA. 
    Premises shall mean any building, structure, land, or portion thereof, including all appurtenances, and shall include yards, lots, courts, inner yards and real properties without buildings or improvements, owned or controlled by a person. The emitter's premises includes contiguous publicly dedicated street and highway rights-of-way, all road rights-of-way and waters of the state. 
    Property line shall mean that real or imaginary line along the ground surface and its vertical extension which separates real property owned or controlled by any person from contiguous real property from the public right-of-way. 
    Public right-of-way shall mean any street, avenue, boulevard, highway, sidewalk, alley, park, waterway, railroad or similar place which is owned or controlled by a governmental entity. 
    Recreational vehicle shall mean any internal-combustion engine powered vehicle which is being used for recreational purposes. 
    Residential zone shall mean residential district as defined in zoning regulations of the town. Residence R-40 residential, 40,000 square feet; residence R-15 residential 15,000 square feet; residence TH-townhouses; residence GA-garden apartment. The boundaries are established in the zoning regulations of the town as shown on the zoning map. 
    Sound shall mean a transmission of energy through solid, liquid or gaseous media in the form of vibrations which constitute alterations in pressure or position of the particles in the medium and which, in air, evoke physiological sensations, including but not limited to, an auditory response when impinging on the ear. 
    Sound level meter shall mean an instrument used to take sound level measurements and which should conform, as a minimum to the operational specifications of the American National Standards Institute for sound level meters St. 4-1971 (Type S2A). 
    Sound pressure level shall mean 20 times the logarithm to the base ten of the ratio of the pressure of a sound to the reference pressure of 20 micronewtons per square meter (20 × 106 6 Newtons/meter 2 ), and is expressed in decibels (dB). 
(Ord. of 6-27-83, §§ 3.1-3.27) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 8-49. - Noise level measurement procedures. 
    For the purpose of determining noise levels as set forth in this article, the following guidelines shall be applicable: 
(1)  All personnel conducting sound measurements shall be trained in the current techniques and principles of sound measuring equipment and instrumentation; 
(2)  Instruments used to determine sound level measurements shall conform to the sound level meters as defined by this article. 
(Ord. of 6-27-83, § 4.2) 
Sec. 8-50. - Sound level measurements. 
    The general steps listed below shall be followed when preparing to take sound level measurements: 
(1)  The instrument manufacturer's specific instructions for the preparation and use of the instrument shall be followed; 
(2)  The sound level meter shall be calibrated before and after each set of measurements and shall be approved by the department of environmental protection; 
(3)  When measurements are taken out of doors, a wind screen shall be placed over the microphone of the sound level meter as per the manufacturer's instructions; 
(4)  The sound level meter shall be placed at an angle to the sound source as specified by the manufacturer's instructions and at least four feet above the ground. It shall be so placed as not to be interfered with by individuals conducting the measurements; 
(5)  Measurements shall be taken at a point that is located at least one foot beyond the boundary of the emitter's premises within the receptor's noise zone. The emitter's premises includes his individual unit of land or group of contiguous parcels under the same ownership as indicated by public land records. 
(Ord. of 6-27-83, § 4.3) 
Sec. 8-51. - Noise levels-Generally. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to emit or cause to be emitted any noise beyond the boundaries of his premises in excess of the noise levels established in this article. 
Sec. 8-52. - Same-Standards. 
(a)  No person and/or property owner in a residential zone shall emit noise beyond the boundaries of his premises exceeding the levels stated herein and applicable to adjacent residential, commercial or industrial zones: 
Receptor's Zone Emitter's 
Zone Indus- 
trial Commer- 
cial Resi- 
dential/ 
Day Resi- 
dential/ 
Night Residential 62 dBA 55 dBA 55 dBA 45 dBA  
(b)  No person and/or property owner in a commercial zone shall emit noise beyond the boundary of his premises exceeding the levels stated herein and applicable to adjacent residential, commercial or industrial zone: 
Receptor's Zone Emitter's 
Zone Indus- 
trial Commer- 
cial Resi- 
dential/ 
Day Resi- 
dential/ 
Night Commercial 62 dBA 62 dBA 55 dBA 45 dBA  
(c)  No person and/or property owner in an industrial zone shall emit noise beyond the boundary of his premises exceeding the levels stated herein and applicable to adjacent residential, commercial or industrial zones. 
Receptor's Zone Emitter's 
Zone Indus- 
trial Commer- 
cial Resi- 
dential/ 
Day Resi- 
dential/ 
Night Industrial 70 dBA 66 dBA 61 dBA 51 dBA  
(Ord. of 6-27-83, § 5.2) 
Sec. 8-53. - High background noise levels and impulse noise. 
(a)  In those individual cases where the background noise levels caused by sources not subject to this article, exceed the standards contained in section 8-52, a source shall be considered to cause excessive noise if the noise emitted by such source exceeds the background noise levels by five dBA, provided that no source subject to the provisions of this article shall emit noise in excess of 80 dBA at any time, and provided that this section does not decrease the permissible levels of other sections of this article. 
(b)  No person shall cause or allow the emission of impulse noise in excess of 80 dB peak sound pressure level during the nighttime to any residential noise zone. 
(c)  No person shall cause or allow the emission of impulse noise in excess of 100 dB peak sound pressure level at any time to any zone. 
(Ord. of 6-27-83, § 5.3) 
Sec. 8-54. - Exclusions. 
    The levels enumerated in sections 8-52 and 8-53 shall not apply to noise emitted by or related to: 
(1)  Natural phenomena; 
(2)  Any bell or chime from any building clock, school or church; 
(3)  Any siren, whistle, or bell lawfully used by emergency vehicles or any other alarm systems used in an emergency situations, provided, however, that burglar alarms not terminating within 30 minutes after being activated shall be unlawful; 
(4)  Warning devices required by OSHA or other state or federal safety regulations; 
(5)  Farming equipment or farming activity. 
(Ord. of 6-27-83, § 5.4) 
Sec. 8-55. - Exemptions. 
    The following shall be exempt from the provisions of this article, subject to special conditions as spelled out: 
(1)  Noise generated by any construction equipment which is operated during daytime hours, provided that the operation of construction equipment during nighttime hours shall not exceed the maximum noise levels as specified in section 8-52; 
(2)  Noise created as a result of or relating to an emergency; 
(3)  Noise from domestic power equipment such as, but not limited to, power saws, sanders, grinder, lawn and garden tools or similar devices operated during daytime hours with proper muffler equipment; 
(4)  Noise from snow-removal equipment with proper muffler equipment; 
(5)  Noise from demolition work conducted during daytime hours, provided that when considered emergency work, demolition shall be exempted at all times from the noise levels set in this article; 
(6)  Noise created by any aircraft flight operations which are specifically preempted by the Federal Aviation Administration; 
(7)  Noise created by any recreational activities which are permitted by law and for which a license or permit has been granted by the town, including, but not limited to parades, sporting events, concerts, and firework displays; limiting time to be included on permit; 
(8)  Noise created by blasting other than that conducted in connection with construction activities shall be exempted, provided that the blasting is conducted between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. local time, at specified hours previously announced to the local public, or provided that a permit for such blasting has been obtained from local authorities; 
(9)  Noise created by refuse and solid waste collection, provided that the activity is conducted during daytime hours. 
(Ord. of 6-27-83, § 5.5) 
Sec. 8-56. - Prohibited noise activities. 
    The following activities are prohibited: 
(1)  Vehicle horns. No person shall, at any time, sound any horn or other audible signal device of a motor vehicle unless it is necessary as a warning to prevent or avoid a traffic accident. 
(2)  Truck idling. No person shall operate an engine or any standing motor vehicle with a weight in excess of 10,000 pounds manufacturer's gross vehicle weight (GVW) for a period in excess of ten minutes when such vehicle is parked on a residential premise or on a town road next to a residential premise. 
(3)  Exhaust discharge. No person shall discharge into the ambient air the blowdown of any steam vent of the exhaust of any stationary internal-combustion engine or air compressor equipment unless such discharge be through a muffler, as defined by section 8-48 or through an apparatus providing equal noise reduction. 
(Ord. of 6-27-83, § 6.3) 
Sec. 8-57. - Motor vehicle noise. 
(a)  All motor vehicles operated within the limits of the town shall be subject to the noise standards and decibel levels set forth in the regulations authorized in section 14-80a of the general statutes. 
(b)  No sound amplifying devices on or within motor vehicles shall emit noise in excess of the noise levels as specified in section 8-52. 
(Ord. of 6-27-83, § 7.2) 
Cross reference- Traffic and motor vehicles, Ch. 16. 
Sec. 8-58. - Recreational vehicle noise. 
    No person shall create or cause to create any unreasonable loud or disturbing noise due to the operation of the recreational vehicle. A noise shall be deemed to be unreasonably loud and a violation of this article when the noise so generated exceeds the noise level standards set forth in section 8-52. 
(Ord. of 6-27-83, § 8.1) 
Sec. 8-59. - Inspections. 
(a)  For the purposes of determining compliance with the provisions of this article, the Chief of Police or his authorized agent, is hereby authorized to make inspections of all noise sources and take measurements and make tests whenever necessary to determine the quantity and character of noise. In the event that any person refuses of [or] restricts entry and free access to any part of a premises or refuses inspection, testing, or noise measurements of any activity, or process where inspection is sought, the Chief of Police or his authorized agent, through the town, may seek from the appropriate court a warrant or other appropriate order for the purpose of inspecting, testing or measuring noise. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to allow or permit the Chief of Police or his authorized agent, free access to any premises when the Chief of Police or his authorized agent, is acting in compliance with a warrant or other order for inspection. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate the provisions of any warrant or court order requiring inspection, testing or measurement of noise sources. 
(d)  No person shall hinder, obstruct, delay, resist, prevent in any way, interfere or attempt to interfere with any authorized person while in the performance of his duties under this article. 
(Ord. of 6-27-83, §§ 9.1-9.5; Ord. approved 1-20-09(2), eff. 1-27-09) 
Sec. 8-60. - Contracts. 
    Any written agreement, purchase order or contract whereby the town is committed to an expenditure of funds in return for work, labor, services, supplies, equipment, materials or any combination thereof, shall not be entered into unless such agreement, purchase order or instrument contains provisions that any equipment or activities which are subject to the provisions of this article will be operated, constructed, conducted or manufactures without violating the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 6-27-83, § 11.1) 
Sec. 8-61. - Penalties. 
(a)  The Chief of Police or his authorized agent, whenever he finds, after investigation, that any person is causing, engaging in or maintaining any condition or activity which, in his judgement, constitutes a violation of these regulations may, without hearing, issue a written warning to such person to discontinue, abate or alleviate such condition or activity. Such person or persons issued a written warning may appeal within ten days. The appeal shall be made in compliance with the town ordinance of March 2, 2004, which establishes a hearing procedure. Any subsequent fine or penalty imposed by this ordinance may be appealed in a manner provided by said appeal ordinance. If such person or persons continue after receiving a written warning, section (b) of this penalty section will be implemented. 
(b)  Any person in violation of any of the provisions of this article shall be fined in the amount of $100.00. Each day such violation continues after the time for correction of the violation has been given in an order, shall constitute a continuing violation and the amount of the fine shall be doubled for each day the violation continues, such fine shall not exceed $400.00 per day. 
(Ord. of 6-27-83, §§ 10.1, 10.2; Ord. approved 1-20-09(2), eff. 1-27-09) 
ARTICLE IV. - UNUSED MOTOR VEHICLES 

Sec. 8-62. - Short title. 
    This article shall be known as "The Town of Seymour Unused Motor Vehicle Ordinance." 
(Ord. of 2-7-89) 
Sec. 8-63. - Purpose. 
    It is the intent of this article that unused motor vehicles of all types be properly disposed of within 30 days and prohibited from accumulating in order to protect the physical environment and quality of life of all town residents. 
(Ord. of 2-7-89; Ord. of 9-6-94(3)) 
Sec. 8-64. - Definitions. 
    Street: The area between the street or right-of-way lines. 
    Unused motor vehicle: 
(1)  A motor vehicle which meets one or both of the following conditions: 
a.  It has been unregistered for a period of more than 30 consecutive days. 
b.  It is in a condition rendering it unsuitable for use on a public highway. 
(2)  An assemblage of used parts of a motor vehicle which the zoning enforcement officer determines a nuisance, or hazard, to public safety. 
(Ord. of 2-7-89) 
Sec. 8-65. - Exemptions. 
(a)  The following are exempt from the provisions of this article provided the premises has been duly licensed: 
(1)  Motor vehicle junkyards. 
(2)  Motor vehicle dealers (new and used). 
(b)  Any storage of unused motor vehicles which is conducted entirely within a building is exempt from the provisions of this article. 
(c)  This article shall not prohibit the repair of motor vehicles at the place of business of a duly licensed motor vehicle repairer, provided that such repair is undertaken with due diligence. This article shall not permit the extended storage of unused motor vehicles at such place of business. 
(Ord. of 2-7-89) 
Sec. 8-66. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  The deposition or storage of two or more unused motor vehicles is prohibited on any lot. 
(b)  Neither an unregistered nor an unused motor vehicle shall be stored, parked, or deposited within a public or private street or right-of-way at any time. 
(Ord. of 2-7-89) 
Sec. 8-67. - Penalties. 
    Penalty for the violation of this article shall be a fine of $25.00 per day until violation has been corrected. 
(Ord. of 2-7-89) 
Secs. 8-68-8-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - MANDATORY RECYCLING PROGRAM 

Sec. 8-81. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, the following definitions shall apply: 
    Cardboard means corrugated boxes and similar corrugated and kraft paper materials which have a minimum of contamination by food or other materials. 
    Generator means all individuals, households, firms, partnerships, corporations, associations, organizations, syndicates, trusts, companies, agencies, businesses, industries, churches, government offices both federal, state and local and their facilities, political or administrative subdivision of the State of Connecticut, schools, multiple unit dwelling complexes and social clubs within the Town of Seymour. Generator shall also mean persons or people as referred to in this article. Private dwellings or residential property shall mean all one-family and multifamily units to a maximum of six units in any building or complex. It shall not include apartment buildings or complexes larger than six units or cooperative housing ownership. 
    Glass food containers means a glass bottle or jar of any size or shape used to package food and beverage products suitable for human or animal consumption. 
    HDPE plastic containers means high density polyethylene bottle or jar of any size or shape used to package food, household laundry products or crankcase oil. 
    Leaves means any foliage of trees. For the purpose of this article leaves shall be bagged and placed at curb side in plastic bags for collection. 
    Metal food containers means an aluminum, bimetal, steel, tin plated steel, or other metallic can, plate or tray of any size or shape used to package food and beverage products suitable for human or animal consumption. 
    Newspaper means used or discarded newsprint which has a minimum of contamination by food or other materials. 
    Office paper means used or discarded high grade white paper and manila paper including but not limited to paper utilized for file folders, tab cards, writing, typing, printing, computer printing, and photocopying, which is suitable for recycling and which has a minimum of contamination. For the purpose of this article office paper generated by households is excluded. 
    Pet plastic food containers means a polyethylene terepthalate container of any size or shape used to package beverages. 
    Scrap metal means used or discarded items which consist predominantly of ferrous metals, aluminum, brass, copper, lead, chromium, tin, nickel, or alloys thereof, including but not limited to white goods and metal food containers. 
    Scrap tires means discarded rubber or synthetic rubber tires used by or manufactured for vehicles including but not limited to automobiles, airplanes, trucks, buses, and trailers. 
    Storage batteries means lead acid batteries or other batteries used in motor vehicles such as automobiles, boats, recreational vehicles, tractors, and like applications. 
    Waste oil means crankcase oil that has been utilized in internal combustion engines. 
    Yard waste means brush and boughs of trees. For the purpose of this article lawn clippings are excluded. 
(Ord. of 2-19-91, § 1) 
Sec. 8-82. - Program for residential properties. 
    A program for the mandatory separation from municipal solid waste in the town for the separation of newspapers, cans, bottles and glass was established. Owners or occupants of any residential properties who utilize the town or its authorized agents for collection of solid waste shall separate newspapers, cans, bottles and glass from all other solid waste products in such premises and shall dispose of such newspapers, cans, bottles and glass in containers at the appropriate location in accordance with this article. The town or its agents are not required to collect solid waste from any occupant or owner who includes newspapers, cans, bottles and glass with their solid waste or does not place and contain the separated items for collection (if available) in accordance with this article or authorized regulations. 
(Ord. of 2-19-91, § 2; Ord. of 9-6-94(4)) 
Sec. 8-83. - Method of placing materials for residential properties. 
    The occupant or owner of any residential property within the town shall place for disposal, removal or collection by curbside pickup the following named item in strict conformity with the regulations listed below. 
(1)  Glass food and beverage containers; 
(2)  Metal food and beverage containers; 
(3)  Newspaper; 
(4)  PET (polyethylene terepthalate) plastic food and beverage containers which are marked on the bottom of the container with the number "1" encircled by the recycling symbol; 
(5)  HDPE (high density polyethylene) plastic food and beverage containers which are marked on the bottom of the container with the number "2" encircled by the recycling symbol; 
(6)  Corrugated cardboard; 
(7)  Such other items as may be designated by the town. 
    The owner of each premises shall provide, at a suitable place upon such premises, sufficient area for receptacles for receiving and holding such recyclables during the intervals between collections. Recyclables containers shall be maintained in good condition free of holes and fissures and shall be returned to the town upon the resident vacating the premises. 
    The following recyclable items shall be prohibited from being placed in either the solid waste collection or the recyclable collection: 
(1)  Leaves; 
(2)  Scrap metals; 
(3)  Storage batteries; 
(4)  Waste oil. 
    The town will arrange for the items listed above to be accepted and removed at its transfer station facility. 
    All recyclable containers shall be maintained in good condition by the owners thereof, and promptly replaced when no longer fit for use. When the recyclables to be removed exceed in volume the capacities of the receptacles regularly employed, they may be wrapped in bundles and securely tied. The greatest dimension of such bulk articles shall be not more than three feet in length and not in excess of two feet in diameter. 
    All recyclables containers shall be kept clean and dry in a sanitary condition and their contents disposed of as provided in this article. This shall be facilitated by draining and cleaning the recyclable items where appropriate. 
    It shall be unlawful for anyone, other than the tenants or occupants of the premises on which recyclable containers are stored, or the regularly authorized agents, employees or licensees of the town, to disturb any recyclable containers or to remove their covers or any of the contents thereof, or to cause such recyclable containers or their contents to be strewn or scattered on the lawns, sidewalks, or streets. 
    Every agent, officer or employee of the town engaged in the work of collection and removing of garbage, recyclables, rubbish from private properties shall in no way interfere with, disturb, break, destroy, handle, take or use any article or substance or trespass upon any property of the householders, except insofar as the requirements of such collection shall warrant such handling, taking or using of the cans or receptacles containing such garbage. No employee shall remove or dispose of, for the employee's individual use or benefit, any of the contents of any can or receptacle used for the collection, removal or disposal of recyclables. 
(Ord. of 2-19-91, § 3; Ord. of 9-6-94(4)) 
Sec. 8-83.1. - Program for nonresidential properties. 
    On or after January 1, 1995 or on such earlier date as determined by the administrator of the recycling program, each person who generates solid waste from properties other than residential properties shall make provision for the separation from other solid waste of the following items required to be recycled: 
(1)  Corrugated cardboard; 
(2)  Glass food and beverage containers; 
(3)  Leaves; 
(4)  Metal food and beverage containers; 
(5)  Newspaper; 
(6)  White office paper; 
(7)  Scrap metal; 
(8)  Storage batteries; 
(9)  Waste oil; 
(10)  PET plastic food and beverage containers which are marked on the bottom of the container with the number "1" encircled by the recycling symbol; 
(11)  HDPE plastic food and beverage containers which are marked on the bottom of the container with the number "2" encircled by the recycling symbol; 
(12)  Such other items as may be designated by the administrator. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94(4)) 
Sec. 8-83.2. - Collection, recycling and sale of items required to be recycled for nonresidential properties. 
    The administrator of the recycling program shall take appropriate action to cause each owner of property used for business, institutional and other non-residential purposes, at such owner's expense, to collect and have recycled the items listed in section 8-83.1 which are generated from properties other than residential properties, in accordance with this article and any applicable state laws and regulations. 
    To assist the town in monitoring the separation, collection, recycling and sale of items required to be recycled that are generated from properties other than residential properties, the administrator of the recycling program may require such nonresidential generators to submit plans for recycling to the town and may require such generators to submit periodic reports to the town setting forth specified data relating to the amount and nature of items recycled. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94(4)) 
Sec. 8-84. - Storing of recyclables. 
(a)  Generally. During intervals between collection days, or collection by private licensed hauler, recyclables, garbage, waste and rubbish shall be kept and stored in a sanitary manner. 
(b)  Unlawful accumulations. The accumulation or deposit of recyclables or unsanitary material of any kind not otherwise provided for in this article, except in watertight metal or plastic container, is prohibited. 
(c)  Public places. No person shall place any recyclables in any street, alley or other public places or upon any private property, whether owned by such person or not, within this municipality except in proper containers or otherwise properly prepared for collection or under express approval granted by the foreman and/or assistant foreman. Nor shall any person throw or deposit any recyclables in any stream or other body of water. 
(d)  Accumulation of recyclables. Any uncontainerized accumulation of recyclables on any premises is hereby declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited. Where any recyclables have accumulated in any place, the foreman and/or assistant foreman shall serve notice thereof upon the owner of, or person in charge or control of, the land or building on which such recyclables appears, and the owner or other person shall within ten days of receipt of such notice cause the same to be removed. If neither the owner nor any person in charge or control of such land or building can be found by the foreman and/or the assistant foreman, they shall thereupon enter upon the property and remove such recyclables. The expense of such removal shall be charged to the owner of such property and may be collected by the town in an action at law. Failure to remove any accumulation of recyclables within ten days after written notice by the foreman and/or the assistant foreman by registered mail to remove same shall be deemed a violation of this article. 
(e)  Scattering of recyclables. No person shall cast, place, sweep or deposit anywhere within this municipality any recyclables in such a manner that it may be carried or deposited by the elements upon or in any street, sidewalk, alley, sewer, parkway or other public place, or into any occupied premises. 
(f)  Hazardous wastes. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to place hazardous wastes or similarly dangerous substances into any recyclables container or to transport any such substance to the IPC. 
(g)  Burning of recyclables within the town limits is prohibited. Nothing in this article shall be construed to permit the storage, collection or disposal of any kind of recyclables in such a way as to produce a nuisance. 
(Ord. of 2-19-91, § 4; Ord. of 9-6-94(4)) 
Sec. 8-85. - Scavenging prohibited. 
    No person shall trespass upon any land used by the town for the dumping of recyclables or at the transfer station for the purpose of scavenging. 
(Ord. of 2-19-91, § 5; Ord. of 9-6-94(4)) 
Sec. 8-86. - Illegal dumping, littering, mixing of recyclables prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall engage in any activity which violates: 
(1)  Subsection (a) of section 22a-250 of the general statutes; 
(2)  The provisions of article V of this chapter; 
(3)  Subsection (f) of section 22a-220a of the general statutes; or 
(4)  Subsection (i) of section 22a-220a of the general statutes. 
(b)  Any activity which violates subsection (a) of this section is considered to be a nuisance. 
(Ord. of 3-5-96, § 1) 
Editor's note- An Ord. of March 5, 1996, § 11 provided that the enforcement provisions of said ordinance, §§3-10, supercede section 8-86. Former section 8-86 pertained to violations and penalty, and derived from an Ord. of Feb. 19, 1991, § 6; and Ord. of Sept. 6, 1994(4). The enforcement provisions enacted by the Ord. of March 5, 1996, §§ 3-10, have been codified as new section 8-88. 
Sec. 8-87. - Environmental protection officials, appointment. 
    The board of selectmen shall appoint one or more persons as environmental protection officials to issue littering, dumping and recycling citations and enter orders authorized by this article. The environmental protection official shall be appointed in the same manner as members of boards and commissions of the municipality. Such officials shall not be persons appointed as hearing officers pursuant to section 8-88(b) of this article. 
(Ord. of 3-5-96, § 2) 
Sec. 8-88. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Citation, abatement, civil penalty. 
(1)  The environmental protection official may issue citations for any violation of section 8-86 of this article. Such citation shall be on a form as approved by the first selectman. 
(2)  The environmental protection official may order any person who has violated section 8-86 of this article to abate such violation and may issue a fine in accordance with the provisions of subsection (a)(3) of this section. 
(3)  Any person who engages in an activity which violates subsection (f) of 22a-220 of the Connecticut General Statutes, subsection (i) or 22a-220a of the Connecticut General Statutes or subsection (a) of 22a-250 of the Connecticut General Statutes shall be assessed a civil penalty for the first offense of up to $250.00 and for a second or subsequent offense a civil penalty of up to $1,000.00. Any person who engages in an activity which violates subsection (f) of 22a-220a of the Connecticut General Statutes shall be assessed a civil penalty of up to $1,000.00. 
(b)  Hearing officers, appointment. The board of selectmen shall appoint one or more persons to conduct littering, dumping and recycling violation hearings and enter orders authorized by this article. The hearing officer shall be appointed in the same manner as members of the municipal boards and commissions. A hearing officer shall not be authorized to issue citations or be employed by the municipality. 
(c)  Appeal form. 
(1)  Any person or persons to whom a citation is mailed or delivered pursuant to the provisions of this article shall have the right to file an appeal from any such citation by filing with the town clerk, within ten days from the date of receipt thereof, a written and dated appeal containing: 
a.  A description, or the address, of the premises or location involved in the citation. 
b.  The name and mailing address of each person participating in the appeal. 
c.  A brief statement setting forth the interest of such person in the premises described in the citation, if any. 
d.  A brief statement identifying the specific ordinance or statute under which the appeal is being brought, together with any facts supporting the appeal. 
e.  A statement of the relief sought, and any reasons why the citation should be reversed, modified or set aside. 
f.  A verification by the person or persons participating in the appeal as to the truth of the matters set forth in the appeal. 
(2)  The town clerk shall notify the first selectman of the receipt of the appeal. The first selectman shall appoint a hearing officer to hear the appeal. 
(d)  Setting hearing date, stay of enforcement. 
(1)  After receipt of any appeal filed pursuant to section (c) of this section, the hearing official shall provide written notice of the date, time and place of the hearing by causing a copy of such notice to be delivered personally to the appellant, or by mailing a copy to the appellant by certified mail, postage prepaid, to the address shown on the appeal. The hearing date shall be not less than 15 days nor more than 30 days from the date of mailing or delivery of such notice provided the hearing officer shall grant, upon good cause shown, any reasonable request by any interested party for postponement or continuance. 
(2)  Enforcement of any citation and abatement order of the environmental protection official shall be stayed during the pendency of a timely and properly filed appeal. 
(e)  Citation appeal hearing procedure. 
(1)  The rules of evidence for hearings pursuant to subsection (d) of this section shall be as follows: 
a.  Any oral or documentary evidence may be received, but the hearing officer shall, as a matter of policy, provide for the exclusion of irrelevant, immaterial or unduly repetitious evidence; 
b.  Hearing officer shall give effect to the rules of privilege recognized by law; 
c.  When a hearing will be expedited and the interests of the parties will not be prejudiced substantially, any part of the evidence may be received in written form; 
d.  Documentary evidence may be received in the form of copies or excerpts, if the original is not readily available, and upon request, parties and the hearing officer conducting the proceeding shall be given an opportunity to compare the copy with the original; 
e.  A party and such hearing officer may conduct cross-examinations required for a full and true disclosure of the facts; 
f.  Notice may be taken of judicially cognizable facts and of generally recognized technical or scientific facts within the hearing officer's specialized knowledge; 
g.  Parties shall be notified in a timely manner of any material noticed and they shall be afforded an opportunity to contest the material so noticed; and 
h.  The hearing officer's experience, technical competence, and specialized knowledge may be used in the evaluation of the evidence. 
The hearing officer, by way of mail, may accept from the appellant copies of police reports, investigatory and citation reports, and other official documents. 
(2)  Each appellant may be represented by an attorney. The presence of the environmental protection official shall be required at the hearing if the appellant so requests. An appellant shall appear at the hearing and may present evidence on his or her behalf. An environmental protection official or any municipal official, other than the hearing officer, may present evidence on behalf of the town. If an appellant fails to appear, the hearing officer may enter an assessment and order by default. 
(3)  The hearing officer shall render a written decision within ten business days of the completion of the hearing and file such decision with the town clerk. The decision of the hearing officer shall be final and shall be served upon the appellant, either personally or by certified mail, postage prepaid, within seven days of the date when such decision is entered. 
(f)  Appeal decision. 
(1)  If it is determined by the hearing officer that an appellant is not in violation of the provisions of this act, the matter shall be dismissed as to that appellant and the hearing officer shall enter such determination, in writing, and the record of the citation shall indicate such dismissal within ten business days of the filing of the decision with the town clerk. 
(2)  If it is determined that one or more appellants are in violation of any of the provisions of this act, and the issuance of the citation is proper, the hearing officer shall order each such appellant to pay the applicable fine and, if appropriate, shall forthwith order each such appellant to abate the described condition within 30 days from the date of such order. The hearing officer shall enter such determination in writing, and shall file such order with the town clerk. In the event that the abatement is not completed within 30 days of the date of such order, the hearing officer, upon certification from the environmental protection official that the abatement has not been completed, shall forthwith enter and assess against each such appellant a fine not to exceed $100.00 for each offense. If such assessment is not paid on the date of its entry, the hearing officer shall send by certified mail, return receipt requested, a notice of the assessment to the person or persons found liable and not less than 30 days nor more than 12 months after such mailing, file a certified copy of the notice of assessment with the town clerk. 
(g)  Enforcement of orders. The board of selectmen may take whatever means necessary to enforce the orders of the hearing officer. 
(h)  Funds deposited in general fund. Any funds collected pursuant to this act shall be placed in the general fund of the town. 
(Ord. of 3-5-96, §§ 3-10) 
Secs. 8-89-8-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - UNFIT BUILDING ORDINANCE 

Sec. 8-100. - Statement of purpose. 
    The following general provisions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article: 
(1)  It is hereby found that there exists, and may in the future exist, within the town, buildings, or parts thereof, which, by reason of their structure, equipment, sanitation, maintenance, overuse or occupancy, affect or are likely to affect adversely the public health (including the physical, mental and social well being of persons and families), safety and general welfare. To correct and prevent the existence of such adverse conditions and to achieve and maintain such levels of residential environmental quality as will protect and promote public health, safety and general welfare, it is further found that the establishment and enforcement of minimum building and adjacent property standards are required. 
(2)  Purposes. It is hereby declared that the purpose of this section is to protect, preserve and promote the physical and mental health and social well-being of the people, to prevent and control the incidence of diseases, to regulate privately and publicly owned buildings for the purpose of maintaining adequate sanitation and public health and to protect the safety of the people and to promote the general welfare by legislation which shall be applicable to all buildings now in existence and henceforth constructed. It is hereby further declared that the purpose of this section is to ensure that the quality of housing is adequate for protection of public health, safety and general welfare through administration and enforcement thereof. 
(Ord. of 6-29-98) 
Sec. 8-101. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, the following items shall have the meanings indicated: 
    Building applies to any structure which requires a building permit to be issued for its construction. Examples include but are not limited to; single and multi-family dwellings and dwelling units, garages, barns, storage units, etc. 
    Building constituting a risk to public safety applies to any building which shall be found by the board of condemnation to have any defects which would constitute a risk to public safety, including but not limited to: 
(1)  One, which is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, unsanitary, unsafe or vermin-infested that it creates a serious hazard to the health or safety of the occupants or the public. 
(2)  One which lacks hallway or porch illumination, ventilation, heating facilities minimum of 55 degrees Fahrenheit or sanitation facilities adequate to protect the health or safety of the occupants or the public. 
(3)  One which, because of its general condition or location, is unsanitary or otherwise dangerous to the health or safety of the occupants or the public. 
(4)  On which, for want of proper initial construction or proper repairs or by reason of age or dilapidated condition or from any other cause, may cause a fire or presents an unreasonable threat to life. 
    Certificate of occupancy refers to the final inspection process, being either conditional or non-conditional in context and applies to all newly constructed buildings as well as all structural renovations to existing buildings. 
    Contiguous or adjacent property to a building structure applies to all land, subterranean services and aboveground objects contained within the taxable boundaries. Examples of land included but are not limited to land, rivers, riverbeds and driveways. Examples of subterranean services include but are not limited to artesian or other forms of potable water wells, natural gas feeder lines, septic tanks, feeder pipe and fields; municipal sanitary sewer feeder pipe; and underground electrical utility feeder service if not owned or leased by the utility company servicing the region. Examples of aboveground objects include but are not limited to detached structures; trees in excess of 12 feet in height; statuary in excess of ten feet in height; gasoline, diesel, or kerosene fueled engines, including automobiles and campers; propane, or natural-gas-fired cooking grills; and temporary storage of boats in excess of 21 feet in length. 
    Dwelling applies to single-family, dual-family and multiple-family usage of a shelter, which is wholly or partly used or arranged or designed to be used for living or sleeping by human occupants. 
    Owner. The holder of the record title and all recorded interests therein on the day upon which a notice of condemnation hearing is issued. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94(5); Ord. of 9-29-98) 
Sec. 8-102. - Board of condemnation. 
    There shall be created a board of condemnation which shall consist of the first selectman, the building inspector, the town engineer, the police chief and the fire marshal of the town. A representative of the valley board of health will sit on this board as an ex-officio member. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94(5); Ord. of 9-29-98) 
Sec. 8-103. - Designation of buildings as unfit. 
    The designation of buildings, or contiguous or adjacent property to a building structure which constitute a menace to public safety shall be carried out by the board of condemnation pursuant to the definition of a building constituting a menace to public safety after a hearing. After giving reasonable notice to the building owner, such board may, as part of such hearing, inspect such building or contiguous or adjacent property to a building structure and the facts observed by such board at such inspection shall constitute evidence upon which it may base its findings. After receiving notice of such inspection, each such property owner must permit such inspection within five days of receiving such notice. Notice of the hearing shall be given by the board by posting it in a conspicuous place on such building or contiguous or adjacent property to a building structure at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing, a notice directed to all persons having or claiming any interest in such building or contiguous or adjacent property to a building structure, designating the building or contiguous or adjacent property to a building structure sought to be condemned, the reasons therefore and the time and place of the hearing. A copy of such notice shall be sent by registered mail, at least ten days prior to such hearing, to each owner at his last known address, or, if such address cannot, after due diligence, be ascertained, then to such owner at Seymour, Connecticut. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94(5); Ord. of 9-29-98) 
Sec. 8-104. - Determinations of board; service of notice. 
(a)  If the board of condemnation shall determine that a building or contiguous or adjacent property to a building structure constitutes a menace to public safety it shall find and determine what repairs or alterations are necessary or whether the total destruction of such building or contiguous or adjacent property to a building structure shall not constitute a menace to public safety. Such board shall also determine and limit the length of time within which such repairs, alterations or destruction of any such building or contiguous or adjacent property to a building structure shall be completed. The time so limited shall begin to run from the date upon which service of such findings shall be made on the owner of the premises, and such board may for good cause extend such time for a further period not exceeding 30 days. 
(b)  The findings of the board shall be in writing and shall be served upon the owner personally or sent by registered mail to his last known address by the fire marshal within ten days. If, after due diligence, the owner cannot be found or his address shall be unknown, such findings shall, in lieu of such service or registered mail notice, be posted for ten days in a conspicuous place on the building or contiguous or adjacent property to a building structure. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94(5); Ord. of 9-29-98) 
Sec. 8-105. - Abatement of nuisance; collection of costs; lien. 
    Every building or contiguous or adjacent property to a building structure found by the board of condemnation to constitute a menace to public safety shall, if not destroyed, altered or repaired within the time allowed by and in accordance with the findings of the board, be deemed to be a public nuisance; and every such nuisance may be abated summarily or by civil action. The municipality shall have a lien on the premises for the cost of such abatement which lien shall take precedence over any other encumbrance originating after commencement of the abatement work, provided that a notice of lis pendens thereof is recorded in the land records within 60 days after the completion of the abatement work. The municipality may recover the cost of such work from the owner by a civil action on complaint of the first selectman. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94(5); Ord. of 9-29-98) 
Sec. 8-106. - Removal of placards by board. 
    No building, or contiguous or adjacent property to a building structure which has been condemned and placarded as unfit for human habitation shall again be used for human habitation until written approval is secured from, and such placard is removed by, the board of condemnation. The board of condemnation shall remove such placard whenever the defects upon which the condemnation and placarding action were based have been eliminated. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94(5)) 
Sec. 8-107. - Defacing or removing placard. 
    No person shall deface or remove the placard from any building, or contiguous or adjacent property to a building structure, which has been condemned as unfit for human habitation and placarded as such. Any person who defaces or removes such placard shall be fined $50.00. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94(5); Ord. of 9-29-98) 
Sec. 8-108. - Certificates of occupancy. 
    For all residential building constructed after the adoption of this section, whether implicitly, explicitly or not at all so stated in section 29-265 of the Connecticut General Statutes, the state basic building code or any town building code derived therefrom, this article shall require, for public safety reasons, a certificate of occupancy prior to overnight occupancy. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94(5); Ord. of 9-29-98) 
Sec. 8-109. - Right to appeal. 
    Any person aggrieved by a final decision of the town or findings of the board as provided in article V, acting through the board of condemnation, shall have the right of appeal to the superior court within 15 days after receipt of notice of the findings. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94(5); Ord. of 9-29-98) 
Sec. 8-110. - Provisions of other ordinances, regulations, codes or statutes. 
    The provisions of this article shall be supplemental to existing municipal ordinances dealing with housing and/or public health, and shall not limit the provisions of other local, state or federal codes, regulations or statutes as they may apply. If any clause or provision of this article or other local state or federal code, regulation or statute conflict, the more stringent provision shall apply. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94(5); Ord. of 9-29-98) 
Secs. 8-111-8-119. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - TREES 

Sec. 8-120. - Statement of purpose. 
    Whereas trees are proven producers of oxygen, a necessary element for the survival of mankind; trees reduce the carbon dioxide content of the air and, in general, play a role in air purification; trees play a role in neutralizing waste water which passes through the ground from surface to ground water tables and lower aquifers; trees stabilize soil and play an important role in soil conservation, erosion control and flood control; trees are an invaluable physical and psychological addition to the town, making life more comfortable by providing shade and cooling both air and land, reducing noise levels and glare and breaking the visual monotony of the development of the land with their beauty; and the protection of trees within the Town of Seymour is not only desirable but essential to the present and future health, safety, and welfare of all citizens of the Town of Seymour. Be it therefore ordained that: 
(1)  It is the policy of the town to regulate and control planting, removal, maintenance and protection of trees and shrubs in the town in order to eliminate and guard against dangerous conditions which may result in injuries to persons using the public areas and public ways of the town, to promote and enhance the beauty of the town, to prevent damage to any public sewer, utility or water main, street, sidewalk, or other public property, to protect trees and shrubs located in public areas from undesirable and unsafe planting, removal, maintenance, and protection practices, and to guard all trees and shrubs on public areas within the town against the spread of disease or pests. The provisions of this article shall apply to all trees and shrubs presently or hereafter planted in or upon any public area; to all trees and shrubs planted in or upon private premises which shall endanger the life, safety or health of persons or property within the town. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94(6)) 
Sec. 8-121. - Definitions. 
    Maintenance and protection. The words "maintenance" and "protection" shall include all operations of trimming, pruning, spraying, infecting, fertilizing, treating, bracing, surgery, and cutting above or below ground. 
    Planting. The word "planting" shall mean the permanent placement of any tree or shrub above or below ground. 
    Public area. The words "public area" shall include all public ways, (parks) and other lands owned or leased by the town. 
    Public way. The words "public way" shall include all public streets, roads, boulevards, alleys and sidewalks. 
    Removal. The word "removal" shall mean the actual physical removal, or the effective removal through damaging, poisoning or other direct or indirect action resulting in or likely to result in, the death of a tree. 
    Trees and/or shrubs. The words "trees and/or shrubs" shall include all woody vegetation presently or hereafter planted on any public areas or private premises. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94(6)) 
Sec. 8-122. - Tree warden. 
    The town tree warden shall be appointed by the board of selectmen and shall have all powers, duties, and authorities ascribed to him/her as set out in the Connecticut Public Shade Tree Statute, particularly Connecticut General Statutes Sec. 23-58, 23-59, 23-60, 23-65, as the same may be amended, and this article. 
    In addition, the town tree warden shall be empowered to issue permits for the planting of trees or shrubs by private parties on public areas of public ways so long as said permits are in accordance with the Connecticut Public Shade Tree Statutes and the contents of this article. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94(6)) 
Sec. 8-123. - Shade tree commission. 
    There shall be a shade tree commission which shall be composed of three members appointed by the board of selectmen for staggered three-year terms to serve as advocates for the choice and care of attractive trees. Initially, one member shall be appointed for a term of one year, one member shall be appointed for a two-year term, and one member shall be appointed for a three-year term. 
    The requirements and duties of these members shall be: 
(1)  To have a working knowledge of the habitat, planting, growth, care, and placing of trees. 
(2)  To develop and maintain a working relationship with the town tree warden. 
(3)  To assist the warden in assuring that an appropriate tree or trees are planted in properly designated locations. 
(4)  To compose a list of desirable tree species appropriate to Seymour. 
(5)  To serve voluntarily as contact persons for the first selectman. 
(6)  To serve as warden's assistants on occasions when contractors, public utilities contractors or town laborers are working in or adjacent to town trees. 
(7)  To insure that the intent and provisions of this article are carried out to the fullest extent possible. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94(6)) 
Sec. 8-124. - Damage to trees and shrubs. 
    No person, company, utility, or government agency shall, in any public area or public way of the town, prune, remove, deface, cut, paint, mark, injure, mutilate, kill, or destroy any tree or shrub, permit any animal under their control to do so, permit any fire to injure any portion of any tree or shrub, permit any toxic chemical to seep, drain, or be emptied on or about any tree or shrub. During construction operations the contractor shall erect suitable protective barriers around public trees and shrubs which may be injured as a result of his/her activities. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94(6)) 
Sec. 8-125. - Fastening materials to trees and shrubs. 
    No person shall fasten any sign, playbill, picture, notice, advertisement, rope, wire, climbing spurs, or ether materials to, around, or through any public trees or shrubs, except in any emergency, such as storms or accidents. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94(6)) 
Sec. 8-126. - Public utilities. 
    Public utility work affecting trees or shrubs shall be limited to the actual necessities of the service of the company. Such work shall be reviewed by the town tree warden prior to being undertaken and such work shall be done in a neat and professional manner. The town tree warden shall, to the extent possible, supervise the work performed. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94(6)) 
Sec. 8-127. - Power to plant, remove, protect, and maintain trees and shrubs. 
    The town tree warden shall have the authority to plant, remove, maintain, and protect trees and shrubs on all public areas and public ways or which extend into or overhang the limits of all public areas and public ways as may be necessary to insure and preserve the symmetry and beauty of such grounds and ways. The town tree warden shall consult with the shade tree commission in regard to the performance of his/her duties. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94(6)) 
Sec. 8-128. - Public nuisance. 
    Any tree or shrub, or part thereof, growing upon private or public property which is interfering with the use of any public areas, infected with infectious plant disease, or endangering the life, health, or safety of persons or property is declared a public nuisance. If the town tree warden shall determine, with a reasonable certainty, any nuisance tree or shrub, as herein described, or any part thereof exists in or upon any public area or public way, he/she shall immediately cause it to be treated, trimmed, removed, or otherwise abated in such manner as to destroy or prevent the spread of the nuisances. If the town tree warden shall determine, with reasonable certainty, any nuisance tree or shrub, as herein described exists in or upon any private premises he/she shall, in writing, notify the owner or tenant having charge of such premises. Within 30 days after issuance of said notice, said person shall cause the treatment, trimming, or removal and destruction of said nuisance tree or shrub as directed in the written notice. No damage shall be awarded the owner for the destruction of trees or shrubs destroyed, pursuant to this article. In case the owner or tenant having charge of such premises shall refuse or neglect to comply with the terms of the written notice within 30 days after receiving it, the town tree warden shall cause the removal, treatment, or trimming of said nuisance tree or shrub. The expense thereof shall be charged to the owner of said premises of which said tree or shrub is located and, with respect to the cost for removing that portion interfering with any public area or public way, shall become a lien on the property upon recordation of notice thereof on the town land records. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94(6)) 
Sec. 8-129. - Appeals. 
    A person who receives an order from the town tree warden and objects to all or a part thereof, may, within eight days of receipt of said notice, notify the shade tree commission, in writing, of the nature of the objection and request a hearing thereon. Within eight days of the receipt of such notice of appeals the shade tree commission shall schedule a hearing before said commission or its designated subcommittee to hear the objection. The hearing shall be held within eight days of notice to the appellant. Within eight days after such hearing, the shade tree commission shall, in writing, notify the appellant and the town tree warden of its decision. The town tree warden shall be present at such hearing. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94(6)) 
Sec. 8-130. - Master street plan. 
    There shall be a master street tree plan. The master street tree plan shall consist of town-wide, street-by-street written evaluation of all space and site factors which will aid in the determination of the tree species best suited to a particular planting site in regard to growing habits, shape, form, health, disease, and pest resistance, conflicts with wires, lights, pavement, traffic pedestrians, sidewalks, environmental pollution, sewers, and space availability. The evaluation of the space and site factors and the species selection for a particular street shall be made by the town tree warden, with the advice of the shade tree commission. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94(6)) 
Sec. 8-131. - Arboricultural specifications and standards. 
    The following specifications and standards are hereby established for the planting, trimming, and removal of trees and shrubs in the public ways and public places of the town: 
(1)  Planting. 
a.  The tree warden, in consultation with the shade tree commission, shall develop a list of species suitable for planting below overhead utility lines. No other species shall be permitted. Trees prohibited for planting in public places shall be identified by the commission. 
b.  All trees to be planted will be not less than two inches in diameter of trunk, at six inches above ground level. 
c.  No tree shall be planted closer than two feet from the curb line or outer line of the sidewalk, except by special permit from the tree warden. All trees shall be planted in line with each other and at a spacing of between 40 and 60 feet from each other, depending on the species of the tree. 
d.  No tree shall hereafter be planted at or within 20 feet of an intersection. 
(2)  Trimming. 
a.  All trees and shrubs, on public or private property, which have branches overhanging a public street, shall have said branches trimmed to a clearance height of 14 feet; all trees and shrubs, on public or private property, which have branches overhanging a public sidewalk, shall have said branches trimmed to a clearance height of ten feet. The town tree warden may waive the provisions of this section for newly planted trees if he/she determines they do not interfere with public travel, obstruct the light of any street light, or endanger public safety. 
b.  All dead wood, stubs, broken branches, badly formed branches, disease-infected and insect-infested branches and branches interfering with public travel, lighting, existing buildings and traffic signs shall be removed during the trimming operation, with consideration given to the symmetry and beauty of the tree or shrub. 
(3)  Removing. All public trees and shrubs which are marked for cutting shall be completely removed from the growing site and disposed of in an authorized manner. The stump shall be ground out to a depth suitable for future planting of trees or turf. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94(6)) 
Sec. 8-132. - Authority of the town tree warden to enter private premises. 
    The town tree warden or his/her representatives, after giving advance notice to the owner or tenant having charge, shall have the authority to enter upon private premises at reasonable times for the purposes of examining and inspecting any suspected nuisance tree or shrub or otherwise fulfilling its duties herein. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94(6)) 
Sec. 8-133. - Emergency tree removal. 
    When it is necessary to expedite the removal of damaged or destroyed trees in the interest of public safety, health, and general welfare, the first selectman may, by decree, suspend the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94(6)) 
Sec. 8-134. - Penalties. 
    Violation of section 8-124 of this article shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $100.00 or such greater amount as may be allowed by statute and such person shall be liable in a civil action for damages in accordance with Section 52-560 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as the same may be amended. Violation of section 8-125 of this article shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $50.00 or such greater amount as may be allowed by statute and such person may be subject to such criminal penalties as may be prescribed by statute. Each unauthorized pruning, removal, defacing, cutting, painting, marking, or injuring of a tree protected by this article or other act prohibited by sections 8-124 and 8-125 of this article shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94(6)) 
Sec. 8-135. - Severability. 
    If any provision of this article shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such declaration shall not invalidate any other provision of this article. The board of selectmen of the town declares they would have adopted each and every provision of this article separately regardless of the possible invalidity of any part thereof. 
(Ord. of 9-6-94(6)) 
Secs. 8-136-8-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - REMOVAL AND ABANDONMENT OF UNDERGROUND STORAGE TANKS 

Sec. 8-151. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to regulate the removal and abandonment of all underground storage tanks that hold fuel oil and chemicals, and which are currently excluded from regulations of the state department of environmental protection. 
(Ord. of 6-29-98) 
Sec. 8-152. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, the following definitions shall apply: 
    Abandoned. Rendered permanently unfit for use. 
    Liquid. Any liquid, including but not limited to oil and petroleum liquids. 
    NFPA 30. National Fire Protection Association Standard Number 30, entitled "Flammable and Combustible Liquids Code," as enforced by the state and local fire marshal pursuant to section 29-230 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended. 
    Oil or petroleum liquid or product. Oil or petroleum of any kind normally in liquid form, including but not limited to waste oils and distillation products such as fuel oil, kerosene, naphtha, gasoline, and benzene. 
    Owner. The person or municipality in possession of or having legal ownership of a facility. 
    Residential building. Any house, apartment, trailer, mobile home or other structure occupied by individuals as a dwelling. 
    Underground. When referring to a facility or facility component, means that ten percent or more of the volumetric capacity of the facility or the component is below the surface of the ground and that portion which is below the surface of the ground is not fully visible for inspection. 
(Ord. of 6-29-98) 
Sec. 8-153. - Removal or abandonment of existing underground tanks. 
    All existing buried tanks and buried piping used in connection with a residential building shall be removed or abandoned according to applicable building and fire codes and in accordance with NFPA 30 and schedule I hereof, [3] as the same may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. of 6-29-98) 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Schedule I is included as section 8-156. 

Sec. 8-154. - Enforcement; penalties for offenses. 
(a)  The fire marshal is designated as the enforcement official. The official shall have the responsibility of monitoring procedures and equipment associated with petroleum liquid tanks and shall coordinate monitoring and enforcement procedures with the building official. All applicable state and local building and fire codes must be complied with. 
(b)  If a tank is not removed or abandoned according to the above provisions, a certified letter shall be sent to the property owner indication that he/she is in violation of this article. If the violation is not corrected within 90 days after receipt of such notice, a fine of $90.00 per day may be imposed, not to exceed a total of $5,000.00. If the violation is not correctable, i.e. An improperly removed and disposed underground tank, a fine of $750.00 may be imposed. 
(Ord. of 6-29-98) 
Sec. 8-155. - Indemnification of town. 
    In no event shall the town's regulation of petroleum liquid storage tanks pursuant to this article constitute a recommendation, approval, endorsement or warranty of a petroleum liquid storage tank. The town shall not thereby be deemed to have acquired any special expertise with respect to any of the foregoing nor to have acquired or incurred any special duty, liability, or standard or care concerning any of the foregoing. Accordingly, the town shall not be responsible for or liable to any person or entity by the leaking of a petroleum liquid storage tank or by anything else claimed to have been caused or facilitated by the acts or omissions of the town in regulating petroleum liquid storage tanks or undertaking to do so. 
(Ord. of 6-29-98) 
Sec. 8-156. - Schedule I-Tank removal and abandonment; procedure. 
(a)  All removal and abandonment procedures for underground petroleum storage tanks shall be in accordance with the following state codes, as the same may be amended from time to time: Connecticut General Statutes 29-317. To the extent that anything in this schedule is inconsistent with said codes, the requirements of said codes shall govern. 
(b)  Before an underground petroleum storage tank is removed or abandoned in place, the building inspector or fire marshal shall be contacted by the homeowner and the building inspector or fire marshal shall cause appropriate inspection to be made to ascertain that the tank has been pumped free of petroleum, cleaned and that all pipe connections have been capped. 
(c)  Tank cleaning shall only be done by a contractor who is licensed to transport either waste oil or waste water soluble oil. 
(d)  No tank with evidence of contamination shall be removed without prior approval of the state department of environmental protection. If there is evidence that there is a leak in the tank, the state department of environmental protection and fire marshal shall be notified immediately. 
(e)  A tank that is to be abandoned in accordance with NFPA 30, appendix C, shall have flammable or combustible liquid removed from the tank and from all connecting lines. The suction, inlet, vent, and gauge lines must be disconnected. The tank then shall be filled completely with a inert solid material such as sand or concrete. All remaining underground piping shall be capped. 
(f)  A tank that is to be removed in accordance with NFPA 30, appendix C, shall have flammable or combustible liquid removed from the tank and from all connecting lines. The piping at all tank openings shall be disconnected and the connecting lines that are not to be used further shall be removed. After removal, the tank may be gas freed on the premises if it can be done safely at that location or may be transported to an area not accessible to the public and the gas freeing completed at that location. 
(g)  If a tank is to be disposed of as junk, it should be re-tested for flammable vapors and, if necessary, rendered gas-free. After junking, and before releasing to a junk dealer, a sufficient number of holes or openings shall be made in it to render it unfit for further use. 
(h)  No such underground storage tank shall, under any circumstances, be accepted for disposal by the town transfer station. 
(i)  After the tank has been disposed of, documentation that it has occurred properly shall be submitted to the fire marshal and the building department. The homeowner shall retain a copy of such documentation and must provide a copy of said documentation to any transferee of the property at the time the property is transferred. 
(j)  Before a new petroleum liquid storage tank is installed, an application for a permit therefor shall have been filed with, and a permit therefor shall have been issued by, the building department and a registration form shall have been completed and filed at the building department with respect thereto. Permit application forms and registration forms shall be available at the building department. 
(Ord. of 6-29-98) 
Secs. 8-157-8-170. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - ANIMALS 
DIVISION 1. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 8-171. - Removal of animal litter. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person owning, keeping, walking or in control of any dog or other animal to allow or permit such animal to defecate upon any private property owned by another person, or public property, including but not limited to parks and school grounds unless such person shall remove all feces so deposited by such animal before leaving the immediate premises. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to a guide dog accompanying any blind person. 
(c)  Any violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine of $25.00. 
(Ord. of 5-2-95) 
Secs. 8-172-8-180. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DOG ORDINANCE 

Sec. 8-181. - Purpose. 
    It is hereby declared that: 
(1)  Vicious dogs have become a serious and widespread threat to the safety and welfare of the citizens of our community. 
(2)  Unprovoked attacks by vicious dogs upon persons and animals throughout the country have occurred at an increasing rate. 
(3)  Many of these attacks have taken place in public places and have been attributable in large degree to the failure of owners to register, confine and properly control their vicious dogs. 
(4)  Existing laws are inadequate to deal with the threat to public health and safety posed by vicious dogs. 
(5)  The owning, keeping or harboring of vicious dogs is a nuisance. 
(Ord. of 11-21-95) 
Sec. 8-182. - Definitions. 
    As used in this division, the following words and terms shall have the following meanings, unless the context shall indicate another or different meaning or intent: 
    Enclosure. A fence or structure of at least six feet in height and at least five by ten feet, forming or causing an enclosure suitable to prevent the entry of young children and suitable to confine a vicious dog in conjunction with other measures which may be taken by the owner or keeper, such as tethering of the vicious dog. Such "enclosure" shall be securely enclosed and locked and designed with secure sides, top and bottom, shall be designed to prevent the dog from escaping from the enclosure and shall also provide protection from the elements for the dog. 
    Impounded. Taken into custody by the dog warden. 
    Owner. Any natural person or legal entity, possessing, harboring, having, keeping an interest in or having control or custody of the dog. 
    Vicious dog. 
(1)  Any dog: 
a.  Which, when unprovoked, in a vicious or terrorizing manner approaches any person in a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack upon the streets, sidewalks or any public grounds or places; 
b.  With a known propensity, tendency or disposition to attack unprovoked, to cause injury or to otherwise endanger the safety of human beings or domestic animals; 
c.  Which bites, inflicts injury, assaults or otherwise attacks a human being or domestic animal without provocation on public or private property; 
d.  Owned or harbored primarily or in part for the purpose of dog fighting or any dog trained for dog fighting; or 
e.  Not licensed according to state, city or town law. 
(2)  Notwithstanding the definition of a "vicious dog" above, no dog may be declared vicious if an injury or damage is sustained by a person over the age of seven years who, at the time such injury or damage was sustained, was committing a willful trespass or other tort upon premises occupied by the owner or keeper of the dog or was teasing, tormenting, abusing or assaulting the dog or was committing or attempting to commit a crime. No dog may be declared vicious if the dog was protecting or defending a human being within the immediate vicinity of the dog from an unjustified attack or assault. 
(3)  No dog may be declared vicious if an injury or damage was sustained by a domestic animal which, at the time such injury or damage was sustained, was teasing, tormenting or assaulting the dog. 
Sec. 8-183. - Registration requirements. 
(a)  No vicious dog shall be licensed by the town for any licensing period commencing after the effective date of this division unless the owner or keeper of such vicious dog shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  The owner or keeper shall present to the town clerk proof that the owner or keeper has procured liability insurance in the amount of at least $50,000.00, covering any damage or injury which may be caused by such vicious dog during the 12-month period for which licensing is sought, which policy shall contain a provision requiring the town to be named as additional insured for the sole purpose of providing a means of notification to the town clerk by the insurance company of any cancellation, termination or expiration of the liability insurance policy. 
(2)  The owner or keeper shall, at his/her own expense, have the licensing number assigned to such vicious dog tattooed upon such vicious dog by a licensed veterinarian and shall be placed at a location on said dog to be determined by the dog warden. The number shall be noted in the town clerk's file for such vicious dog if it is different from the licensing number when the vicious dog is registered in subsequent years. For the purposes of this section, "tattoo" shall be defined as any permanent numbering of a vicious dog by means of indelible or permanent ink with the number designated by the licensing authority or any other permanent, acceptable method of tattooing. 
(3)  The owner or keeper shall display a sign on his/her premises warning that there is a vicious dog on the premises. Said sign shall be visible and capable of being read from the street, road or highway, whether public or private, which abuts said premises. 
(4)  The owner or keeper shall sign a statement attesting that: 
a.  The owner or keeper shall maintain and not voluntarily cancel the liability insurance required by this section during the twelve-month period for which licensing is sought, unless the owner or keeper shall cease to own or keep the vicious dog prior to expiration of such license. Cancellation of the insurance policy for failure to pay the insurance premium shall be considered a voluntary cancellation. 
b.  The owner or keeper shall, on or prior to the effective date of such license for which application is being made, have an enclosure for the vicious dog on the property where the vicious dog will be kept or maintained. 
c.  The owner or keeper shall notify the town clerk and the dog warden within 24 hours if a vicious dog is on the loose, is unconfined, has attacked another animal or has attacked a human being or has died or has been sold or given away. If the vicious dog was been sold or given away, the owner or keeper shall also provide the town clerk and the dog warden with the name, address and telephone number of the new owner of the vicious dog. 
(5)  The owner or keeper of a vicious dog shall provide a certificate from a licensed veterinarian that the animal has been spayed or neutered, and the owner or keeper of said vicious dog shall be responsible for the cost of such spaying or neutering. 
(b)  The dog warden is hereby empowered to make whatever inquiry is deemed necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this division and said dog warden is hereby empowered to seize and impound any vicious dog whose owner or keeper fails to comply with the provisions hereof. In the event that the owner or keeper of the dog refuses to surrender the dog to the dog warden, the dog warden may request a police officer to obtain such search warrant and to seize the dog upon execution of the warrant. 
(Ord. of 11-21-95) 
Sec. 8-184. - Control of vicious dogs. 
    All vicious dogs shall be confined in an enclosure. It shall be unlawful for any owner or keeper to maintain a vicious dog upon any premises which does not have a locked enclosure. It shall be unlawful for an owner of a vicious dog to permit the dog to be outside the enclosure unless the dog is securely muzzled and restrained with a chain held by the owner or keeper having a minimum tensile strength of 300 pounds and not exceeding three feet in length and shall be under the direct control and supervision of the owner or keeper of a vicious dog. The muzzle shall be made in such a manner that will not cause injury to the dog or interfere with its vision or respiration but shall prevent it from biting any person or animal. 
(Ord. of 11-21-95) 
Sec. 8-185. - Prohibited activities. 
(a)  No person shall own or harbor any dog for the purpose of dog fighting, nor train, badger, bait or use any dog for the purpose of causing or encouraging said dog to unprovoked attacks upon human beings or domestic animals. 
(b)  No person shall possess with intent to sell or offer for sale or breed or buy or attempt to buy within the city any vicious dog. 
(Ord. of 11-21-95) 
Sec. 8-186. - Determination of viciousness. 
(a)  In the event that the dog warden has probable cause to believe that a dog is vicious, the board of police commissioners or its designee shall be empowered to convene a hearing for the purpose of determining whether or not the dog in question should be declared vicious. The board of police commissioners or its designee shall conduct or cause to be conducted an investigation and shall notify the owner or keeper of the dog that a hearing will be held, at which time he or she may have the opportunity to present evidence why the dog should not be declared vicious. The hearing shall be held promptly within no less than five nor more than ten days after service of notice upon the owner or keeper of the dog. The hearing shall be informal and shall be open to the public. 
(b)  After the hearing, the owner or keeper of the dog shall be notified in writing of the determination. If a determination is made that the dog is vicious, the owner or keeper shall comply with the provisions of this division in accordance with a time schedule established by the board of police commissioners or its designee but in no case more than 30 days subsequent to the date of the determination, he or she may bring an appeal in the superior court. The appeal to said superior court shall be in writing, shall set forth clearly and concisely the reasons for the appeal and shall be served upon the board of police commissioners in the manner prescribed by law for the service of civil process. 
(c)  In the event that the dog warden has probable cause to believe that the dog in question is vicious and may pose a threat of serious harm to human beings or domestic animals, the dog warden may seize and impound the dog pending the hearing and/or appeal. The owner or keeper of the dog shall be liable to the town for the costs and expenses, including shelter, food and veterinary expenses, necessitated by the seizure of such dog. 
(Ord. of 11-21-95) 
Sec. 8-187. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  Any vicious dog whose owner or keeper is found to be in violation of any of the provisions of this division other than the section governing registration of vicious dogs may be confiscated by the dog warden and destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner after the expiration of a five-day waiting period, exclusive of Sundays and holidays. In addition, the owner or keeper shall pay a fine of $1,000.00 and such costs and expenses necessitated by the seizure of the dog, including such expenses as may be required by the destruction of such dog. 
(b)  If any vicious dog shall, when unprovoked, attack, assault, wound, bite or otherwise injure or kill a human being or domestic animal, the owner or keeper of said dog shall pay a fine of $1,000.00, and the dog warden is empowered to confiscate and, after expiration of a five-day waiting period, exclusive of Sundays and holidays, may destroy said vicious dog. In addition, the owner or keeper shall pay such costs and expenses necessitated by the seizure of the dog, including such expense as may be required for the destruction of such dog. The penalties set forth herein shall not be in lieu of or limit the right of any victim to bring a civil action against the owner or keeper of a vicious dog, as provided for by state statute. 
(c)  If the owner or keeper of a dog impounded for an alleged violation of the provisions of this division shall believe that there shall not have been a violation of such division, such owner or keeper may appeal to the board of police commissioners or its designee within five days of impoundment. A hearing shall be conducted by the board of police commissioners or its designee within seven days from the filing of the appeal. The decision of the board of police commissioners or its designee may be appealed to the superior court by any aggrieved party within 30 days of the decision. The dog shall remain impounded pending an appeal. The appeal shall be in writing and shall set forth clearly and concisely the reasons for the appeal and shall be served upon the board of police commissioners in the manner prescribed by law for service of civil process. 
(d)  Every owner or keeper of any vicious dog found to be in violation of the section of this division governing registration of vicious dogs shall be fined $50.00 for the first offense and $99.00 for each and every subsequent offense until there is compliance. 
(e)  Responsibility of parents for ensuring compliance. In the event that the owner or keeper of the vicious dog is a minor, the parent or guardian shall be responsible for ensuring compliance with this division. 
(Ord. of 11-21-95) 
Sec. 8-188. - Exceptions. 
    This division shall not apply to: 
(1)  Kennels licensed in accordance with title 22, chapter 435, of the Connecticut General Statutes. 
(2)  K-9 or other dogs owned by the police department or any law enforcement officer which are used in the performance of police work. 
(Ord. of 11-21-95) 
Chapter 9 - HOUSING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Housing authority, § 10.8. 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 4; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 6; flood damage prevention, Ch. 7; health and sanitation, Ch. 8; planning, Ch. 13; utilities, Ch. 17; zoning, App. A; subdivisions, App. B. 
State Law reference- Authority to make rules relating to maintenance of safe and sanitary housing, G.S. § 7-148(c)(7)(A)(i); tenement and lodging houses, G.S. §§ 19-342-19-375. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 9-1. - Definitions. 
    The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter: 
    Basement shall mean a portion of a building located partly underground, but having less than half its clear floor-to-ceiling height below the average grade of the adjoining ground. 
    Cellar shall mean a portion of a building located partly or wholly underground, and having half or more than half of its clear floor-to-ceiling height below the average grade of the adjoining ground. 
    Dwelling shall mean any building which is wholly or partly used or intended to be used for living or sleeping by human occupants; provided that temporary housing as hereinafter defined shall not be regarded as a dwelling. 
    Dwelling unit shall mean any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking, and eating. 
    Extermination shall mean the control and elimination of insects, rodents, or other pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making inaccessible materials that may serve as their food; by poisoning, spraying, fumigating or trapping; or by any other recognized and legal pest elimination methods approved by the health officer. 
    Garbage shall mean the animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, and consumption of food. 
    Habitable room shall mean a room or enclosed floor space used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking or eating purposes, excluding bathrooms, water closet compartments, laundries, pantries, foyers, or communicating corridors, closets, and storage spaces. 
    Health officer shall mean the legally designated health authority of the town, or his authorized representative. 
    Infestation shall mean the presence, within or around a dwelling, of any insects, rodents, or other pests. 
    Multiple dwelling shall mean any dwelling containing more than two dwelling units. 
    Occupant shall mean any person over one year of age, living, sleeping, cooking or eating in, or having actual possession of, a dwelling unit or rooming unit. 
    Operator shall mean any person who has charge, care, or control of a building, or part thereof, in which dwelling units or rooming units are let. 
    Ordinary minimum winter conditions shall mean the temperature 15 degrees Fahrenheit above the lowest recorded temperature for the previous ten-year period. 
    Owner shall mean any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others: 
(1)  Shall have legal title to any dwelling or dwelling unit, with or without accompanying actual possession thereof; or 
(2)  Shall have charge, care, or control of any dwelling or dwelling unit, as owner or agent of the owner, or as executor, executrix, administrator, administratrix, trustee, or guardian of the estate of the owner. Any such person thus representing the actual owner shall be bound to comply with the provisions of this chapter, and of rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, to the same extent as if he were the owner. 
    Plumbing shall mean and include all of the following facilities and equipment: Water pipes, garbage disposal units, waste pipes, water closets, sinks, installed dishwashers, lavatories, bathtubs, shower baths, installed clothes-washing machines and any other similar supplied fixtures. 
    Roominghouse shall mean any dwelling, or that part of any dwelling containing one or more rooming units, in which space is let by the owner or operator to three or more persons who are not husband or wife, son or daughter, mother or father, or sister or brother of the owner or operator. 
    Rooming unit shall mean any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not for cooking or eating purposes. 
    Rubbish shall mean combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except garbage; and the term shall include the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke, and other combustible material, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass crockery, and dust. 
    Supplied shall mean paid for, furnished, or provided by or under the control of, the owner or operator. 
    Temporary housing shall mean any tent, trailer, or other structure used for human shelter which is designed to be transportable and which is not attached to the ground, to another structure, or to any utility system on the same premises for more than 30 consecutive days. 
    Meaning of certain words. Whenever the words "dwelling," "dwelling unit," "rooming house," "rooming unit," or "premises" are used in this chapter, they shall be construed as though they were followed by the words "or any part thereof". 
(Code 1961, § 11-1) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction, generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 9-2. - Promulgation of rules by health officer. 
    The health officer is hereby authorized to make and, after a public hearing has been held in accordance with the laws governing the conduct of public hearings by the health officer of the town, to adopt such written rules and regulations as may be necessary for the proper enforcement of the provisions of this chapter, provided that such rules and regulations shall not be in conflict with the provisions of this chapter. The health officer shall file a certified copy of all rules and regulations which he may adopt with the town clerk. Such rules and regulations shall have the same force and effect as the provisions of this chapter, and the penalty for violation thereof shall be the same as the penalty hereinafter provided for violation of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1961, § 11-2) 
State Law reference- Appointment, qualifications, terms of town health officers, G.S. § 19-74. 
Sec. 9-3. - Inspections by health officer. 
(a)  The health officer is hereby authorized and directed to make inspections to determine the condition of dwellings, dwelling units, rooming units, and premises located within the town, in order that he may perform his duty of safeguarding the health and safety of the occupants of dwellings and of the general public. 
(b)  For the purpose of making such inspections the health officer is hereby authorized to enter, examine, and survey at all reasonable times all dwellings, dwelling units, rooming units, and premises. 
(c)  The owner or occupant of every dwelling, dwelling unit, and rooming unit, or the person in charge thereof, shall give the health officer free access to such dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit and its premises, at all reasonable times for the purpose of such inspection, examination, and survey. 
(Code 1961, § 11-3) 
Sec. 9-4. - Right of owners to enter premises to make repairs. 
    Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall give the owner thereof, or his agent or employee, access to any part of such dwelling or dwelling unit, or its premises, at all reasonable times for the purpose of making such repairs or alterations as are necessary to effect compliance with the provisions of this chapter or with any lawful rule or regulation adopted or any lawful order issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1961, § 11-4) 
Sec. 9-5. - Effect of conflict with other provisions. 
    In any case where a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict with a provision of this Code relating to zoning, building, fire, safety, or health existing on the effective date of this chapter, the provision which establishes the higher standard for the promotion and protection of the health and safety of the people shall prevail. In any case where a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict with a provision of any other ordinance or provision of this Code existing on the effective date of this chapter which establishes a lower standard for the promotion and protection of the health and safety of the people, the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to prevail, and such other provisions are hereby declared to be repealed to the extent that they may be found in conflict with this chapter. 
(Code 1961, § 11-5) 
Sec. 9-6. - Condemnation-Defects warranting. 
    Any dwelling or dwelling unit which shall be found to have any of the following defects shall be condemned as unfit for human habitation and shall be so designated and placarded by the health officer: 
(1)  One which is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, insanitary, unsafe, or vermin infested that it creates a serious hazard to the health or safety of the occupants or of the public. 
(2)  One which lacks illumination, ventilation, or sanitation facilities adequate to protect the health or safety of the occupants or of the public. 
(3)  One which because of its general condition or location is insanitary, or otherwise dangerous, to the health or safety of the occupants or of the public. 
(Code 1961, § 11-6) 
Sec. 9-7. - Same-Designation by health officer; placarding of premises. 
    Any dwelling or dwelling unit condemned as unfit for human habitation, and so designated and placarded by the health officer, shall be vacated within a reasonable time as ordered by the health officer. 
(Code 1961, § 11-7) 
Sec. 9-8. - Same-Tampering with placard prohibited. 
    No person shall deface or remove the placard from any dwelling or dwelling unit which has been condemned as unfit for human habitation and placarded as such, except as provided in section 11-9. 
(Code 1961, § 11-8) 
Sec. 9-9. - Same-Occupancy prohibited until defect corrected. 
    No dwelling or dwelling unit which has been condemned and placarded as unfit for human habitation shall again be used for human habitation until written approval is secured from, and such placard is removed by, the health officer. The health officer shall remove such placard whenever the defect or defects upon which the condemnation and placarding action were based have been eliminated. 
(Code 1961, § 11-9) 
Sec. 9-10. - Same-Hearings. 
    Any person affected by any notice or order relating to the condemning and placarding of a dwelling or dwelling unit as unfit for human habitation may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the health officer, under the procedure set forth in section 11-11. 
(Code 1961, § 11-10) 
Sec. 9-11. - Notice by health officer of suspected violations. 
(a)  Whenever the health officer determines that there are reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any provision of this chapter or of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, he shall give notice of such alleged violation to the person or persons responsible therefor, as hereinafter provided. Such notice shall: 
(1)  Be put in writing; 
(2)  Include a statement of the reasons why it is being issued; 
(3)  Allow a reasonable time for the performance of any act it requires; 
(4)  Be served upon the owner or his agent, or the occupant, as the case may require. Provided that such notice shall be deemed to be properly served upon such owner or agent, or upon such occupant, if a copy thereof is served upon him personally, or if a copy thereof is sent by registered mail to his last known address, or if a copy thereof is posted in a conspicuous place in or about the dwelling affected by the notice, or if he is served with such notice by any other method authorized or required under the laws of this state. 
(b)  Such notice may contain an outline of remedial action which, is taken, will effect compliance with the provisions of this chapter and with rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto. 
(Code 1961, § 11-11) 
Sec. 9-12. - Hearings on notice of suspected violations-Procedure, scope. 
(a)  Any person affected by any notice which has been issued in connection with the enforcement of any provision of this chapter, or of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the health officer, provided that such person shall file in the office of the health officer a written petition requesting such hearing and setting forth a brief statement of the grounds therefor within ten days after the day the notice was served. 
(b)  Upon receipt of such petition the health officer shall set a time and place for such hearing and shall give the petitioner written notice thereof. The hearing shall be commenced not later than ten days after the day on which the petition was filed, provided, however, that upon application of the petitioner the health officer may postpone the date of the hearing for a reasonable time beyond such ten-day period, if in his judgement the petitioner has submitted a good and sufficient reason for such postponement. 
(c)  At such hearing the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to be heard and to show why such notice should be modified or withdrawn. 
(Code 1961, § 11-12) 
Sec. 9-13. - Same-Determinations and orders of officer after hearing; effect to failure to petition for hearing. 
    After such hearing the health officer shall sustain, modify, or withdraw the notice, depending upon his finding as to whether the provisions of this chapter and of the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto have been complied with. If the health officer sustains or modifies such notice, it shall be deemed to be an order. Any notice served pursuant to section 9-11 shall automatically become an order if a written petition for a hearing is not filed in the office of the health officer within ten days after such notice is served. After a hearing in the case of any notice suspending any permit required by this chapter or by any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, when such notice has been sustained by the health officer, the permit shall be deemed to have been revoked. Any such permit which has been suspended by a notice shall be deemed to be automatically revoked if a petition for hearing is not filed in the office of the health officer within ten days after such notice is served. 
(Code 1961, § 11-13) 
Sec. 9-14. - Same-Record required; appeals. 
    The proceedings at such hearing, including the findings and decision of the health officer, shall be summarized, reduced to writing, and entered as a matter of public record in the office of the health officer. Such record shall also include a copy of every notice or order issued in connection with the matter. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the health officer may seek relief therefrom in any court of competent jurisdiction, as provided by the laws of this state. 
(Code 1961, § 11-14) 
Sec. 9-15. - Emergency power of health officer. 
    Whenever the health officer finds that an emergency exists which requires immediate action to protect the public health, he may, without notice or hearing, issue an order reciting the existence of such an emergency and requiring that such action be taken as he deems necessary to meet the emergency. Notwithstanding the other provisions of this chapter, such order shall be effective immediately. Any person to whom such order is directed shall comply therewith immediately, but upon petition to the health officer shall be afforded a hearing as soon as possible. After such hearing, depending upon his finding as to whether the provisions of this chapter and of the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto have been complied with, the health officer shall continue such order in effect, or modify it, or revoke it. 
(Code 1961, § 11-15) 
Sec. 9-16. - Penalty for violation of chapter. 
    Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter, or any provision of any rule or regulation adopted by the health officer pursuant to authority granted by this chapter, shall upon conviction be punished by a fine of not less than $25.00 or more than $100.00, or by imprisonment for not less than 30 days or more than 90 days; and each day's failure to comply with any such provision shall constitute a separate violation. 
(Code 1961, § 11-16) 
Secs. 9-17-9-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 9-31. - Minimum plumbing standards for dwellings. 
(a)  In every dwelling or dwelling unit there shall be supplied the following: 
(1)  A kitchen sink; and 
(2)  A bathroom with plumbing including a lavatory, a bathtub or shower and a water closet. If a water closet is supplied in a separate compartment, a lavatory basin shall be also supplied therein. 
(b)  For every eight persons or fraction thereof housed in every roominghouse there shall be supplied a bathroom with plumbing including a lavatory, a bathtub or shower and a water closet. If the water closet is supplied in a separate compartment, a lavatory basin shall also be supplied therein. No required facilities shall be located in basement or cellar except by written approval of the health officer. 
(c)  All required plumbing shall be connected to a continuous source of water supply and to a sewage disposal system approved by the health officer. Wherever public sewers are available, such plumbing shall be connected thereto. 
(d)  All required plumbing other than the water closet shall be properly connected with both hot and cold waterlines. 
(e)  The water heating facilities shall be capable of supplying an adequate amount of water to every required kitchen sink, lavatory and bathtub or shower at a temperature of not less than 120 degrees Fahrenheit, whether or not the heating facilities on the premises are in operation. 
(Code 1961, § 11-21) 
Cross reference- Connection of dwellings to town sewers required, § 17-33. 
Sec. 9-32. - Maintenance of plumbing fixtures. 
    Every occupant of a dwelling unit and every proprietor of a roominghouse shall keep all plumbing fixtures therein in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(Code 1961, § 11-22) 
Sec. 9-33. - Garbage facilities and disposal. 
(a)  An adequate number of metal garbage cans with tightly fitting metal covers shall be provided for the use of occupants by all owners of dwellings or roominghouses. 
(b)  Every occupant of a dwelling, dwelling unit, or habitable room in a roominghouse shall dispose of his garbage or refuse in a clean and sanitary manner by placing it in the container herein required. 
(Code 1961, § 11-23) 
Cross reference- Rubbish cans in business district, § 8-2. 
Sec. 9-34. - Light and ventilation. 
    No person shall occupy or let to another for occupancy any dwelling, dwelling unit, or rooming unit which does not comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Every habitable room shall have at least one window or skylight facing directly to the outdoors. The minimum total window area measured between stops shall be at least ten percent of the floor area of each habitable room, except that when the only window in a room is a skylight type window the total area of such skylight shall equal at least 15 percent of the floor area. 
(2)  Every habitable room shall have at least one easily opened window or skylight with a total openable window area of at least 45 percent of the minimum window size required in this section except where there is a mechanical ventilating device provided of a type approved by the health officer. 
(3)  Every bathroom and water closet compartment shall comply with the light and ventilating requirements for habitable rooms contained in this section, except that no window or skylight shall be required in a bathroom or water closet compartment which is equipped with a mechanical ventilating system approved by the health officer. 
(Code 1961, § 11-24) 
Sec. 9-35. - Electrical and heating facilities. 
    No person shall occupy or let to another for occupancy any dwelling, dwelling unit, or rooming unit which does not comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Electrical fixtures. In all habitable rooms of dwellings, dwelling units and roominghouses located within 300 feet of available power lines there shall be supplied at least two separate floor or wall type electric convenience outlets, or one such convenience type outlet and one ceiling or wall type electric light fixture. In every water closet compartment, bathroom, laundry room, furnace room, and public hall there shall be supplied at least one ceiling or wall type electric light fixture. 
(2)  Heating. In every dwelling, dwelling unit and roominghouse there shall be supplied heating facilities which are capable of safely heating every habitable room, bathroom and water closet compartment to a temperature of at least 70 degrees Fahrenheit, at a distance three feet above floor level, under ordinary minimum winter conditions. 
(Code 1961, § 11-25) 
Sec. 9-36. - General structural and sanitation requirements. 
    No person shall occupy or let to another for occupancy any dwelling, dwelling unit, or roominghouse which does not comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Basic structure. Every foundation, floor, wall, ceiling, and roof shall be reasonably weathertight, watertight, in sound repair, and capable of affording privacy; 
(2)  Doors, windows, hatchways. Every window, exterior door and basement hatchway shall be reasonably weathertight, watertight, in sound working condition, and in good repair; 
(3)  Stairs and porches. Every inside and outside stair, every porch, and every appurtenance thereto shall be so constructed as to be safe to use and capable of supporting the load that normal use may cause to be placed thereon; and shall be kept in sound condition and good repair; 
(4)  Bathroom floors. Every water closet compartment and bathroom floor surface shall be constructed and maintained so as to be reasonably impervious to water and so as to permit such floor to be easily kept in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(Code 1961, § 11-26) 
Cross reference- Health and sanitation, Ch. 8. 
Sec. 9-37. - Maintenance, availability of required facilities. 
    Every supplied facility, piece of equipment or utility which is required under this article shall be so constructed and installed that it will function safely and effectively and shall be maintained in a satisfactory and sanitary working condition. No owner, operator or occupant shall cause any service, facility, equipment, or utility which is required under these regulations to be removed from or shut off from or discontinued for any owner or tenant occupied dwelling, except for such temporary interruption as may be necessary while actual repairs or alterations are in process, or during temporary emergencies when discontinuance of service is approved by the health officer. 
(Code 1961, § 11-27) 
Sec. 9-38. - Duty of owners and occupants to maintain clean premises. 
(a)  The owner shall keep all and part of a dwelling or roominghouse and the lot on which it is situated in good repair, sanitary, clean and free from vermin, rodents, dirt, filth, garbage or other thing or matter dangerous to life or health. 
(b)  Every occupant of a dwelling, dwelling unit, or habitable room in a roominghouse shall keep that part of the premises which he occupies or controls in a clean and sanitary condition. The tenant, if any, shall also be liable if a violation is caused by a willful act, assistance or negligence of his own or of that of any member of his family or household or his guests. 
(Code 1961, § 11-28) 
Sec. 9-39. - Space, dimension requirements. 
    No person shall occupy or let to another for the purpose of living therein any dwelling, dwelling unit, or habitable room which does not comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Floor space of unit. Every dwelling unit shall contain at least 150 square feet of floor space for the first occupant thereof and at least 100 additional square feet of floor space for every additional occupant thereof, the floor space to be calculated on the basis of total habitable room area. 
(2)  Floor space of bedrooms. In every dwelling unit of two or more rooms, and in every habitable room in a roominghouse, every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one occupant shall contain at least 70 square feet of floor space, and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than one occupant shall contain at least 50 square feet of floor space for each occupant thereof. 
(3)  Ceiling height. At least one-half of the area of every habitable room shall have a ceiling height of at least seven feet; and the floor area of that part of any room where the ceiling height is less than five feet shall not be considered as part of the floor area in computing the total floor area of the room for the purpose of determining the maximum permissible occupancy thereof. 
(Code 1961, § 11-29) 
Sec. 9-40. - Room arrangement. 
    No person shall occupy or let to another for the purpose of living therein any dwelling, dwelling unit, or roominghouse unless it shall have such room arrangements that access to a water closet compartment or bathroom intended for use by occupants of more than one sleeping room can be had without going through another sleeping room. Also room arrangements shall be such that access to a sleeping room can be had without going through another sleeping room or bathroom or water closet compartment. 
(Code 1961, § 11-30) 
Sec. 9-41. - Use of basement, cellar as habitable room. 
(a)  No cellar space shall be used as a habitable room or dwelling unit. 
(b)  No basement space shall be used as a habitable room or dwelling unit unless: 
(1)  The floor and walls are impervious to leakage of underground and surface runoff water and are insulated against dampness; 
(2)  The total window area in each habitable room is at least equal to the minimum window sizes required in section 9-34; 
(3)  Such required window area is located entirely above the grade of the ground adjoining such window area; 
(4)  The total of openable window area in each room is equal to at least the minimum as required in section 9-34, except where a mechanical device affording adequate ventilation and approved by the health officer is supplied. 
(Code 1961, § 11-31) 
Sec. 9-42. - Cleanliness of halls, passageways in multiple dwellings; dogs prohibited. 
    All walking spaces in halls or passageways commonly used by more than one occupant shall be kept free of brooms, mops, toys, chairs, furniture and similar objects. Occupants shall not tie dogs in halls or passageways commonly used by more than one occupant and shall maintain or handle their dogs or other animals so as to prevent their excreta from being deposited on roofs, stairways, halls and entrances. 
(Code 1961, § 11-32) 
Sec. 9-43. - Yards. 
    Every yard shall be properly graded and drained by the owner. Roominghouse operators and dwelling owners shall keep their yards clean and free of rodent infestation. 
(Code 1961, § 11-33) 
Sec. 9-44. - Pest control and extermination. 
(a)  Occupants. Every occupant of a dwelling containing a single dwelling unit shall be responsible for the extermination of any insects, rodents, or other pests on the premises; and every occupant of a dwelling unit in a dwelling containing more than one dwelling unit shall be responsible for such extermination whenever his dwelling unit is the only one infested. 
(b)  Owners. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this section, whenever infestation is caused by failure of the owner to maintain a dwelling in a ratproof or reasonably insectproof condition, extermination shall be the responsibility of the owner. Whenever infestation exists in two or more of the dwelling units in any dwelling, or in the shared or public parts of any dwelling containing two or more dwelling units, extermination thereof shall be the responsibility of the owner. 
(c)  Roominghouse operators. The operator of a roominghouse shall be responsible for any extermination which may be required. 
(Code 1961, § 11-34) 
Secs. 9-45-9-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - HOUSING CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- General appointments, Ch. 9. 
Cross reference- Officers and officials, § 2-161 et seq.; building inspector, § 4-26; health and sanitation, Ch. 8; sewer inspector, § 17-86 et seq. 

Sec. 9-61. - Office established. 
    There is hereby established the office of housing code enforcement officer within the town. 
(Code 1961, § 2-101) 
Sec. 9-62. - Duties. 
    The housing code enforcement officer shall administer and enforce the state housing code as set forth in the general statutes and town ordinances. He shall administer and execute a planned program of code enforcement. He shall coordinate the code enforcement program with the valley health district. He shall develop criteria for the measurement of program effectiveness and make periodic reports as required. He shall communicate with and seek cooperative efforts among town and regional agencies for code enforcement programs. 
(Code 1961, § 2-101) 
Sec. 9-63. - Qualifications; selection; removal. 
    The housing code enforcement officer shall be employed by the first selectman from a list of applicants. The qualifications for the position shall be established in a job description adopted by the board of selectmen. The housing code enforcement officer shall hold office until his successor is duly employed and qualified and shall be subject to discharge for cause. Cause shall not include discharge for political reasons. Such discharge for cause shall take place only after a hearing by the board of selectmen. He shall at no time engage in activities constituting a conflict of interest and he shall be charged with the responsibility for the conduct of his department and for the discharge of his duties as provided by law and as set forth herein. 
(Code 1961, § 2-101) 
Sec. 9-64. - Term. 
    The housing code enforcement officer's term shall commence December 6, 1976 and shall terminate on December 5, 1978. Subsequent appointments shall be for a term of two years. 
(Code 1961, § 2-101) 
Sec. 9-65. - Salary; mileage allowance. 
    The housing code enforcement officer's salary and mileage allowance shall be determined from time to time by the board of selectmen. 
(Code 1961, § 2-101) 
Chapter 10 - LICENSES, PERMITS AND MISCELLANEOUS BUSINESS REGULATIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Building permit fees to be levied, § 4-32; development permit required, § 7-23; permit required for use or display of fireworks, § 11-4; excavation permit required, § 14-21; traffic control permit, § 14-23; driveway permit required, § 14-36; sewer construction permits, § 17-51 et seq. 
State Law reference- Massage parlors, G.S. § 19a-92; hawkers and peddlers, G.S. § 21-36 et seq. 

Sec. 10-1. - Junkyard locations. 
    No further applications for motor junkyard permits shall be granted for any proposed site within the limits of the town except for such sites or locations where duly licensed motor vehicle junkyards are already in operation. 
(Code 1961, § 12-1) 
Sec. 10-2. - Hawkers, peddlers, vendors, canvassers and solicitors. 
(a)  Definitions: 
(1)  A "hawker" is defined as an itinerant or traveling trader, who carries goods about, in order to sell them, and who actually sells them to purchasers at that time, by offering for sale on the streets by outcry or by attracting the attention of persons by exposing goods in a public place, or by placards, labels or signals. 
(2)  A "peddler" or "vendor" is defined as any person, whether principal or agent, who shall travel from place to place or from house to house, taking or attempting to take orders for sales of goods, wares, merchandise or personal property of any nature whatsoever for future delivery, or for services to be performed in the future, or for services to be performed at any time without previous arrangement with such person so requesting such services, whether or not such individual shall carry or expose for sale a sample of the subject of such sale, or whether he is collecting advance payments on such sales or not. 
(3)  A "canvasser" is defined as any person who shall travel from place to place or from house to house eliciting survey or census information, or seeking to distribute materials for whatever purpose. 
(4)  A "solicitor" is defined as any person who shall travel from place to place or from house to house soliciting donations of either money, personal goods, or services for whatever purposes. 
(b)  License required: No person except those exempted by the statutes of the state shall engage in hawking, peddling, vending, canvassing or soliciting activities as defined in subsection (a) within the town, without having obtained from the chief of police a license therefor as required by this section. No person shall sell or offer for sale upon a public street, sidewalk or other public place any article whose purpose, whether intended or by common usage, is to be immediately consumed or used in such a way as to cause littering. Such articles which are hereby prohibited shall include, but are not necessarily limited to, spray string, stink bombs and such other similar articles which cause immediate littering to public places. 
(c)  License issuance; classes: Nontransferable licenses obtained January 1, 1989 shall expire December 31st of the calendar year in which they were issued. Licenses shall be in two classes: 
(1)  Class A for nonprofit activities; 
(2)  Class B for all others. 
All licenses in effect at the time of adoption of this section shall expire January first. 
(d)  Class A licenses: Class A licenses shall be issued to any legally declared nonprofit organization existing within the Town of Seymour or a certified representative of such an organization. 
(e)  Class B licenses: Class B licenses shall be issued to all other individuals or organizations. 
(f)  License processing period: A class B license shall not be issued prior to 21 days from the date of application and must be signed by the chief of police and the first selectman. A class A license may be issued prior to the 21-day processing period upon the recommendation of the chief of police and approval by the first selectman. 
(g)  License applications: Any person making an application for either a class A or a class B license shall furnish in writing, on a form to be furnished by the chief of police, the following information: 
(1)  Name and personal physical description of the applicant; 
(2)  Permanent home address and full local address or place of housing of the applicant; 
(3)  A detailed description of the nature of the services or goods to be sold, if any, including the name of the manufacture, publisher, distributor or parent company where applicable; 
(4)  The applicant shall furnish the name and address of the organization for whom he is undertaking any of the activities listed in subsection (a) of this section; 
(5)  The length of time for which the applicant wishes to engage in any of the activities listed in subsection (a) of this section; 
(6)  The place where goods or services are to be sold or distributed from; 
(7)  The make, model, color and registration number of the vehicles, if any, to be used by the applicant, whether or not it be owned by the applicant; 
(8)  The chief of police at his discretion, may require the applicant to submit fingerprints as may be necessary to complete a background investigation of the applicant's moral character; 
(9)  At the discretion of the chief of police, the applicant shall submit a photograph of himself, which will remain with the application for a period not to exceed five years. 
(h)  License fee generally: There shall be no fee for a class A license. The fee for a class B license shall be $200.00 for each individual obtaining such a license, or a fee of $500.00 for each vehicle used, not to exceed five persons. For holidays and special events as defined by the board of selectmen, the board of selectmen, at its discretion, may establish a special fee schedule for vendors. 
A license fee shall not be collected from any resident of the state who has resided within the state for a period of two years and who is a veteran who served in time of war as defined by section 27-103 of the general statutes. Any veteran applying for the fee exemption shall produce his military discharge papers for inspection, together with a certificate that the applicant is a resident of the state, upon demand by the chief of police. The issuance of a license shall not be deferred for more than seven days for such veteran. 
A resident taxpayer or a business located within the town or a charitable organization located within the town may apply to the board of selectmen for a waiver of the class B license fee. The board of selectmen may, at its discretion, grant such a waiver. 
(i)  Investigation of applicant; issuance of license: Upon receipt of an application by the chief of police, a reasonable investigation may be conducted by the police department under the direction of the chief of police, to confirm that the applicant is of good moral character and proposes to engage in a lawful activity. Said investigation shall be conducted within 21 days of the receipt of an application. After review and approval of the application by the chief of police and the first selectman, the chief of police shall issue an original permit to the applicant provided more than 21 days have expired since the filing of the application, except as otherwise provided in subsection (f) of this section, and provided that the applicant pays the fee as set forth in subsection (h) of this section. 
Each permit issued shall bear the original raised seal of the town clerk and any unauthorized use of said permit by anyone shall result in a fine of $100.00 for each offense. The applicants for vendors' licenses shall provide such insurance coverage as the town may require. 
(j)  License fee to be paid before issuance: No license shall be issued until the applicant shall have paid the required fee to the town clerk at the office of the town clerk. 
(k)  License to be carried by licensee; display of license: After the license has been issued by the chief of police, the license shall be carried by the licensee at all times while conducting activities listed in subsection (a). The license shall be exhibited by the licensee whenever he is requested to do so by any police officer or by any person so solicited. 
(l)  Suspension, revocation of license: Any such license issued by chief of police may be suspended by the chief of police for violation of any state or federal law, or whenever the holder of such permit shall in the judgement of the chief of police cease to possess the character qualifications required by this section for the issuance of such permit. If any license is suspended or revoked the holder of such license may within five days of notice of the suspension or revocation, file an appeal of the decision of the chief of police to the board of police commissioners. The board of police commissioners shall have the authority to sustain, amend or rescind the suspension or revocation. 
(m)  Penalty: Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $199.00 for each offense. 
(n)  Reserved. 
(o)  Special permit: Legally declared nonprofit organizations which host or sponsor an event which will be held at a single location and during which profit-making parties will be allowed to engage in any activities listed in subsection (a) of this section, must obtain a license as herein provided. The host or sponsor shall apply for a class A license which shall apply to and cover all nonprofit organizations participating in the event. The host or sponsor organization shall additionally collect a special $1.00 fee from each participating profit-making party in lieu of the individual class B fees required by subsection (h) of this section and return the collected fees to the town clerk. The host or sponsor shall also assume responsibility for all liabilities related to the event and shall ensure that the location of the event is left in the same condition as existed prior to the event. The collection of the special $1.00 fee shall become effective on January 1, 1977. 
(p)  Reserved. 
(q)  Any person granted a license under this section may not operate within 1,000 feet of an existing business of a like nature located within the town. 
(Code 1961, § 12-2; Ord. of 4-30-85; Ord. of 8-16-88, §§ (1)-(5); Ord. of 3-3-92; Ord. of 12-6-94(1); Ord. if 7-18-95; Ord. of 6-29-98) 
State Law reference- Hawkers and peddlers, G.S. § 21-36 et seq.; ordinances authorized, G.S. § 21-37. 
Sec. 10-3. - Trailers and trailer parks. 
(a)  Definitions. As used in this section: 
(1)  "Multiple dwelling" means any trailer designed and intended to accommodate more than one family. 
(2)  "Park" means trailer coach park. 
(3)  "Trailer coach" means any portable structure or vehicle so constructed and designed as to permit occupancy thereof for dwelling or sleeping purposes for one family. 
(4)  "Trailer coach park" means any plot of ground upon which two or more trailer coaches, occupied for dwelling or sleeping purposes, are located, regardless of whether or not a charge is made for such accommodation. 
(5)  "Trailer coach space" means a plot of ground available to an owner for use as a site for a trailer coach. 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
(b)  Parks prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or operate within the limits of the town, any multiple dwelling, any park, or any trailer coach park, within the contemplation of this section. 
(c)  License for coaches required; fee. It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or operate any trailer coach unless such person shall first obtain a license therefor. The license fee for each trailer coach shall be $25.00. 
(d)  Applications for coach licenses. Application for a trailer coach license shall be filed with and issued by the board of selectmen. Applications shall be in writing signed by the applicant, accompanied by the license fee and shall contain the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant; 
(2)  The location and legal description of the trailer coach; 
(3)  The description of the trailer coach space to be used exclusively for the site of said trailer coach. The lot site for the trailer shall be not less than 5,000 square feet where it is served by a public sewer system and a public water supply, and not less than 25,000 square feet on a lot not less than 100 feet wide where it is not served by a public sewer system and a public water supply; 
(4)  That the applicant has title to the trailer coach and also to the trailer coach space to be used as a site; 
(5)  That the applicant will conform to all municipal and state ordinances and laws existing pertaining to health, sanitation, nuisance and fire. 
(e)  Revocation; reissuance of coach licenses. The board of selectmen may revoke any license to maintain and operate any trailer coach when the licensee has been found guilty by a court of competent jurisdiction of violating any provision of this section. After such conviction, the license may be reissued if the circumstances leading to the conviction have been remedied. 
(f)  Penalty. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be fined no more than $25.00 for each offense. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1961, § 12-3) 
Sec. 10-4. - Blasting. 
(a)  Pre-blast inspections. 
(1)  Whenever blasting operations are to be conducted within 200 feet of a structure which is neither owned nor leased by the project contractor or the blaster, the following precautions shall be adhered to: 
a.  A pre-blast inspection of all structures within 200 feet range shall be conducted; 
b.  The inspection shall include both interior and exterior visible and accessible areas; 
c.  The inspection record shall be available for inspection by the owner of the structure. A copy of said report shall be forwarded to the fire marshal's office at least three working days prior to blasting operations. 
(2)  The requirements of this section shall be considered satisfied under the following conditions: 
a.  If three unsuccessful attempts have been made to notify the owner/occupant of the structure; 
b.  If the inspection or access to the structure is refused by the owner/occupant and a signed waiver is obtained; 
c.  In the event that a signed waiver is not obtained, notification shall be given to the owner/occupant of his rights via certified mail, return receipt requested; 
(3)  The fire marshal's office shall be notified of any structure which has not been inspected. 
(4)  The fire marshal or his representative may at his discretion at any time he deems necessary due to specific circumstances waive, reduce or expand the area or structures required to be inspected. 
(b)  Post-blast inspections. In the event of a complaint as stated in paragraph (d), post-blast surveys shall be conducted in accordance with the requirements set forth under paragraph (a)(1) through (4) and the results filed with the fire marshal or his representative within 60 days after said completion. 
(c)  Application for blasting. 
(1)  The contractor/blaster shall complete a state approved blasting application in the fire marshal's office. An application fee set by the board of selectman shall also be submitted with said application. 
(2)  The application will be for specific locations. In a major construction project, many blasting locations may be required and each site must have a separate blasting permit. 
(3)  The contractor/blaster shall discuss the possibilities of using jack hammering or other types of less dangerous charges than dynamite with the fire marshal or his representative before the issuance of a permit and shall comply with these requirements where possible. 
(4)  The contractor/blaster shall place warning signs of impending blasting on site at least 24 hours prior to commencing blasting activity. 
(d)  Insurance requirements. 
(1)  The contractor/blaster shall provide a certificate of insurance prior to the issuance of a blasting permit. 
(2)  The insurance certificate shall provide for blaster's liability coverage and should be a specific certificate for blasting operations conducted in Seymour. 
(3)  A minimum coverage limit to be provided is $1,000,000.00 and this amount may be expanded at the fire marshal's discretion based upon the amount of blasting to be conducted and area in which it will take place. 
(e)  Blasting damage complaints. 
(1)  Any person, firm or corporation alleging personal injury or property damage as a result of blasting operations shall make a written complaint to the fire marshal or his representative. 
(2)  The complaint shall include: 
a.  Date, time, location of incident; 
b.  Description of injury or property damage; 
c.  Name, address, signature of complainant, and date of complaint; 
d.  Name of blaster/contractor (if known). 
(3)  Upon receipt of the complaint, the fire marshal or his representative shall notify and require the blaster/contractor to whom the blasting permit was issued, to pick up and sign a copy of the complaint form. 
(4)  Within 30 days of being notified, the blaster/contractor shall make a proper response to the complainant. 
(5)  The fire marshal or his representative shall conduct an investigation into the allegations made in the complaint. Upon finding that there has been a violation of this section or state regulations he may take whatever necessary to insure the public safety. 
(f)  Precautions. 
(1)  The blaster shall take special precautions in the loading, delaying, initiation and/or confinement of each blast with mats or other methods so as to control the throw of fragments, and thus prevent bodily injury or property damage. 
(2)  The blaster shall provide approved seismic instrumentation to determine the actual magnitude of ground vibration. The operation shall be operated by a qualified person and the recordings shall be interpreted by a qualified person. The instrument shall be calibrated in accordance with the manufacturers recommendation. The fire marshal or his representative may on his own initiation and the expense of the contractor/blaster, order the use of such instrumentation conducted by a professional service. 
(3)  The blaster shall abide by any other requirements as specified on the permit application by the fire marshal or his designee. These may include, but are not limited to designing the first blast to a scale distance of 70, providing extra seismic monitoring, and notification to the fire marshal prior to blasting, etc. 
(g)  Definitions. 
(1)  Structure. For the purposes of pre-blast inspection surveys, structures intended for a full inspection would be those found to be normally occupied. Other structures such as sheds, wells, inground pools, etc. shall be documented in the report as to their locations on the property being inspected. 
(h)  Penalties. Any person in violation of any of the provisions in this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in the amount not to exceed $200.00. Each day such violation continues after the time for correction of the violation has been given in an order, shall constitute a continuing violation and the amount of the fine shall be doubled for each day the violation continues, such fine not to exceed $800.00 per day. 
(Code 1061, § 12-4; Ord. of 6-15-93) 
Sec. 10-5. - Massage parlors. 
(a)  Definitions. Unless the particular provision or the context otherwise requires, the definitions and provisions contained in this subsection shall govern the construction, meaning and application of words and phrases used in this section: 
(1)  Employee means any person over 18 years of age, other than a masseur, who renders any service in connection with the operation of a massage business and receives compensation from the operator of the business or patrons. 
(2)  Massage means any method of treating the superficial parts of a patron for medical, hygienic, exercise, or relaxation purposes by rubbing, stroking, kneading, tapping, pounding, vibrating, or stimulating with the hands or any instrument, or by the application of air, liquid or vapor baths of any kind whatsoever. 
(3)  Masseur means any person who engages in the practice of massage as herein defined. The use of the masculine gender shall include in all cases the feminine gender as well. 
(4)  Patron means any person over 18 years of age who receives a massage under such circumstances that it is reasonably expected that he or she will pay money or give any other consideration therefor. 
(5)  Recognized school means any school or institution of learning which has for its purpose the teaching of the theory, method, profession or work of massage, which school requires a resident course of study of not less than 70 hours before the student shall be furnished with a diploma or certificate of graduation from such school, following the successful completion of such course of study or learning. 
(b)  Permits required: 
(1)  Business permit. No person shall engage in or carry on the business of massage unless he has a valid massage business permit issued by the town pursuant to the provisions of this section for each and every separate office or place of business conducted by such person. 
(2)  Masseur's permit. No person shall practice massage as a masseur, employee or otherwise, unless he has a valid and subsisting masseur's permit issued to him by the town pursuant to the provisions of this section. 
(c)  Application for massage business permit. Any person desiring a massage business permit shall file written application with the police chief on a form to be furnished by the police chief. The applicant shall accompany the application with a tender of the correct permit fee as hereinafter provided and shall, in addition, furnish the following: 
(1)  The type of ownership of the business, i.e., whether individual, partnership, corporation or otherwise; 
(2)  The name, style, and designation under which the business or practice is to be conducted; 
(3)  The business address and all telephone numbers where the business is to be conducted; 
(4)  A complete list of the names and residence addresses of all masseurs and employees in the business, and the name and residence addresses of the manager or other person principally in charge of the operation of the business; 
(5)  The following personal information concerning the applicant, if an individual; and concerning each stockholder holding more than ten percent of the stock of the corporation, each officer and each director, if the applicant is a corporation; and concerning the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership; and concerning the manager or other person principally in charge of the operation of the business: 
a.  Name, complete residence address and residence telephone numbers; 
b.  The two previous addresses immediately prior to the present address of the applicant; 
c.  Written proof of age; 
d.  Height, weight, color of hair and eyes, and sex; 
e.  Two front-face portrait photographs taken within 30 days of the date of the application, and at least two inches by two inches in size; 
f.  The massage or similar business history and experience, including but not limited to whether or not such person in previously operating in this or another city or state under license or permit has had such license or permit denied, revoked or suspended and the reason therefor, and the business activities or occupations subsequent to such action of denial, suspension or revocation; 
g.  All criminal convictions other than misdemeanor traffic violation, fully disclosing the jurisdiction which convicted, and the offense for which convicted and the circumstances thereof; 
h.  A complete set of fingerprints taken and to be retained on file by the police chief or his authorized representative; 
i.  Diploma, certificate or other written proof of graduation from a recognized school by the person who shall be directly responsible for the operation and management of the massage business; 
(6)  Such other information, identification and physical examination of the person as shall be deemed necessary by the police chief to discover the truth of the matters hereinbefore required to be set forth in the application; 
(7)  Authorization for the town, its agents and employees to seek information and conduct an investigation into the truth of the statements set forth in the application and the qualifications of the applicant for the permit; 
(8)  The names and addresses of three adult residents of the county who will serve as character references. These references must be persons other than relatives and business associates; 
(9)  Written declaration by the applicant, under penalty of perjury, that the foregoing information contained in the application is true and correct, the declaration being duly dated and signed in the town. 
(d)  Application for masseur's permit. Any person desiring a masseur's permit shall file a written application with the police chief on a form to be furnished by the police chief. The applicant shall tender with the application the correct permit fee as hereinafter provided and shall, in addition, furnish the following: 
(1)  The business address and all telephone numbers where the massage is to be practiced; 
(2)  The following personal information concerning the applicant; 
a.  Name, complete residence address and residence telephone numbers; 
b.  The two previous addresses immediately prior to the present address of the applicant; 
c.  Written proof of age; 
d.  Height, weight, color of hair and eyes, and sex; 
e.  Two front-face portrait photographs taken within 30 days of the date of application and at least two inches by two inches in size; 
f.  The massage or similar business history and experience, including, but not limited to, whether or not such person in previously operating in the town or another city or state under license or permit has had such license or permit denied, revoked, or suspended and the reason therefor, and the business activities or occupations subsequent to such action of denial, suspension or revocation; 
g.  All criminal convictions other than misdemeanors or traffic violations, fully disclosing the jurisdiction in which convicted, and the offense for which convicted and the circumstances thereof; 
h.  A complete set of fingerprints taken and to be retained on file by the police chief or his authorized representative; 
i.  Diploma, certificate, or other written proof of graduation from a recognized school where the theory, method, profession or work of massage is taught; 
j.  A statement in writing from a licensed physician in the state that he has examined the applicant and believes the applicant to be free of all communicable diseases. 
(3)  Such other information, identification, and physical examination of the person deemed necessary by the police chief in order to discover the truth of the matters hereinbefore required to be set forth in the application; 
(4)  Authorization for the town, its agents and employees to seek information and conduct an investigation into the truth of the statements set forth in the application and the qualifications of the applicant for the permit; 
(5)  Written declaration by the applicant, under penalty of perjury, that the foregoing information contained in the application is true and correct, the declaration being duly dated and signed in the town. 
(e)  Approval by police chief. Upon receiving the application for a massage business or masseur's permit, the police chief shall conduct an investigation into the applicant's moral character and personal and criminal history. The police chief may, in his discretion, require a personal interview of the applicant, and such further information, identification and physical examination of the person as shall bear on the investigation. In case of applications for massage business permits, the police chief shall cause to be conducted an investigation of the premises where the massage business is to be carried on, for the purposes of assuring that such premises comply with all the sanitation requirements as set forth in this section and with the regulations of public health, safety and welfare. Before any permit shall issue under this section, the police chief shall first sign his approval of the application. 
(f)  Issuance or denial of massage business permit. The police chief shall issue a massage business permit within 45 days of receipt of the application unless he finds that: 
(1)  The correct permit fee has not been tendered to the city, and, in the case of a check or bank draft, honored with payment upon presentation; 
(2)  The operation, as proposed by the applicant, if permitted, would not comply with all applicable laws, including, but not limited to, the town's building, zoning, and health regulations; 
(3)  The applicant, if an individual; or any of the stockholders holding more than ten percent of stock of the corporation, any of the officers and directors, if the applicant is a corporation; or any of the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership; and the manager or other person principally in charge of the operation of the business, have been convicted of any crime involving dishonesty, fraud or deceit, unless such conviction occurred at least five years prior to the date of the application; 
(4)  The applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of fact in the permit application or in any document required by the town in conjunction therewith; 
(5)  The applicant has had a massage business, masseur, or other similar permit or license denied, revoked or suspended for any of the above causes by the town or any other state or local agency within five years prior to the date of the application; 
(6)  The applicant, if an individual, or any of the officers and directors, if the applicant is a corporation; or any of the partners if the applicant is a partnership; and the manager or other person principally in charge of the operation of the business, is not over the age of 18 years; and 
(7)  The manager or other person principally in charge of the operation of the business has not successfully completed a resident course of study or learning of not less than 70 hours from a recognized school where the theory, method, profession or work of massage is taught. 
(g)  Display of permits. The massage business permittee shall display his permit and that of each and every masseur employed in the establishment in an open and conspicuous place on the premises of the massage business. 
(h)  Fee. The permit fee for a massage business shall be $50.00 per year or any part thereof. The permit fee for masseurs shall be $10.00 per year or any part thereof. 
(i)  Revocation or suspension of permit. Any massage business or masseur's permit issued under this section shall be subject to suspension or revocation by the police chief for violation of any provision of this section, or for any grounds that would warrant the denial of issuance of such permit in the first place. The chief, upon such revocation or suspension, shall state his reasons in writing, specifying the particular grounds for such revocation or suspension. 
(j)  Keeping of records. Every person who operates a massage business or practices or provides a massage shall at all times keep an appointment book in which the name of each and every patron shall be entered, together with the time, date and place of service, and the services provided. Such appointment book shall be available at all times for inspection by the police chief or his authorized representatives. 
(k)  Transfers prohibited. No massage business and masseur permits are transferable, separate or divisible, and such authority as a permit confers shall be conferred only on the permittee named therein. 
(l)  Sanitation and safety requirements. All premises used by permittees hereunder shall be periodically inspected by the police chief or his authorized representatives for safety of the structure and adequacy of plumbing, ventilation, heating and illumination. The walls shall be clean and painted with washable mold-resistant paint in all rooms where water or steam baths are given. Floors shall be free from any accumulation of dust, dirt or refuse. All equipment used in the massage operation shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. Towels, linen and items for personal use of operators and patients shall be clean and freshly laundered. Towels, cloths, and sheets shall not be used for more than one patron. Heavy white paper may be substituted for sheets provided that such paper is changed for every patron. No massage service or practice shall be carried on within any cubicle, room, booth or any area within a massage establishment which is fitted with a door capable of being locked. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to eliminate other requirements of statute or ordinance concerning the maintenance of premises, nor to preclude authorized inspection thereof. 
(m)  Supervision. A permittee shall have the premises supervised at all times when open for business. Any business rendering massage services shall have one person who qualifies as a masseur on the premises at all times while the establishment is open. The permittee shall personally supervise the business, and shall not violate, or permit others to violate, any applicable provision of this section. The violation of any such provision by any agent or employee of the permittee shall constitute a violation by the permittee. 
(n)  Persons under age 18 prohibited on the premises. No person shall permit any person under the age of 18 years to come or remain on the premises of any massage business establishment, as masseur, employee or patron, unless such person is on the premises on lawful business. 
(o)  Alcoholic beverages prohibited. No person shall sell, give, dispense, provide or keep or cause to be sold, given, dispensed, provided or kept any alcoholic beverage on the premises of any massage business. 
(p)  Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to hospitals, nursing homes, sanitariums, Y.M.C.A.s, Y.W.C.A.s, or health clubs performing similar services and providing programs similar to those of the Y.M.C.A. and Y.W.C.A., or persons holding an unrevoked certificate to practice the healing arts under the laws of the state, or persons working under the direction of any persons or in any such establishment, nor shall this section apply to barbers or cosmetologists lawfully carrying out their particular profession or business and holding a valid, unrevoked license or certificate of registration issued by the state. 
(q)  Penalties. Any person, violating any of the provisions of this section, upon conviction, shall be punished in accordance with section 1-9. 
Sec. 10-6. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Per § 2.3-21, set forth in an ordinance adopted Apr. 19, 2016, which ordinance enacted a new ch. 2.3 pertaining to adult-oriented establishments, and at the town's direction, § 10-6, pertaining to regulation of adult-oriented establishments and derived from an ordinance adopted Sept. 6, 1994, has been repealed as a conflicting provision. 
Chapter 11 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 11-1. - Bazaars and raffles; state statute adopted. 
    The provisions of Public Act 409 of the 1955 session of the General Assembly, entitled, "An Act Concerning Bazaars and Raffles," is hereby adopted by reference by the town. 
(Code 1961, § 13-1) 
Sec. 11-2. - Bicycles on sidewalks. 
    All bicycles are prohibited from being used on any and all sidewalks in the town. 
(Code 1961, § 13-2) 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 14. 
Sec. 11-3. - Fireworks-Sale prohibited. 
    No person shall sell at wholesale or retail any firecrackers or other articles of fireworks dependent for their effect upon explosion or detonation or burning within the territorial limits of the town. 
(Code 1961, § 13-3) 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 6. 
Sec. 11-4. - Same-Permit required for use or display. 
    No person shall use or display fireworks within the territorial limits of the town, except that organizations properly registered with the state may be permitted to use or display the same on written application to the chiefs of the police and fire departments, provided the chiefs are satisfied that a reasonably high degree of control over the same will be exercised. 
(Code 1961, § 13-4) 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 6. 
Sec. 11-5. - Guns and firearms-Declaration of need for regulation. 
    It is hereby declared that enactment of sections 11-5 through 11-8 is essential as a matter of public necessity and proper for protection and preservation of health, property and the lives of the citizens of the town, to protect the public safety by prohibiting the selling, or offering for sale to any person under the age of 16 years of any air gun or rifle or pistol, BB gun, spring gun, or pistol or any other implement which impels with force a pellet of any kind or any firearm to any person under the age of 16 years and further prohibiting the possession, use or carrying of such a gun or device. 
(Code 1961, § 13-6) 
Sec. 11-6. - Same-Sale to children prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful and is hereby prohibited for any person to sell or offer for sale to any person under the age of 16 years any air gun or rifle or pistol, BB gun, spring gun or pistol, or rifle, or any other implement which impels with force a pellet of any kind or any gun or rifle or pistol which fires or which is designed or intended to fire a bullet, shell or pellet by means of gunpowder, or other chemical propellant which such devices are generally known as firearms, within the limits of the town. 
(Code 1961, § 13-7) 
State Law reference- Sale of pistols, revolvers to minors prohibited, G.S. § 29-34. 
Sec. 11-7. - Same-Ownership, possession, use by children prohibited; exception. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and is hereby prohibited for any person under the age of 16 years to own, possess, use or carry any air gun or rifle or pistol, BB gun, spring gun or rifle or pistol, or any other implement which impels with force a pellet of any kind or any gun, rifle or pistol which fires or which is designed or intended to fire a bullet, shell or pellet by means of gunpowder or other chemical propellant which such devices are generally known as firearms, within the limits of the town. 
(b)  Provided, however, that a person under 16 years of age can have the use of a rifle or other device described in this section, provided they are with their parents or guardians and under their supervision. 
(Code 1961, § 13-8) 
Sec. 11-8. - Same-Confiscation by police authorized. 
    The police department is hereby authorized, empowered and directed to seize, remove and destroy any gun, rifle, pistol or implement the use of which is prescribed by the terms of sections 11-5 through 11-7. 
(Code 1961, § 13-9) 
Sec. 11-9. - Policy-Prohibited. 
    Every person who in the town, whether as principal, agent or servant, shall keep or manage or have any interest in the keeping or managing of any room, place or shop for the purpose in whole or in part of playing, conducting or carrying on or of allowing any other person to play, conduct or carry on the game, business or scheme commonly known as policy; or in part who shall write, transfer, sell, deliver, or buy in whole or in part any of the slips, tickets, tokens, numbers of chances used in or connected with such game, business or scheme of policy or who shall in any other way knowingly taken any part whatever in such game, business or scheme of policy or in any part thereof shall be fined not more than $7.00. 
(Code 1961, § 13-12) 
Sec. 11-10. - Same-Permitting use of premises for. 
    Every person owning or controlling any building, room or place who shall knowingly let, lease or permit the same to be occupied, used or resorted to for the purpose of playing, conducting or carrying on in whole or in part of the game, business or scheme commonly known as policy shall be fined not more than $7.00. 
(Code 1961, § 13-13) 
Sec. 11-11. - Same-Self-incrimination no defense in prosecution for. 
    No person summoned as a witness on the part of the state in any prosecution under either section 11-9 or 11-10 shall be excused from testifying by reason that the evidence he may give will tend to disgrace or incriminate him, nor shall he thereafter be prosecuted for anything connected with the transaction about which he shall so testify. 
(Code 1961, § 13-14) 
Sec. 11-12. - Refrigerators, airtight containers-Leaving accessible to children prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to leave outside of any building or dwelling in a place accessible to children any abandoned, unattended or discarded iceboxes, refrigerators or any other container of any kind which has an airtight door or lock which may not be released for opening from the inside of the icebox, refrigerator or container. 
(Code 1961, § 13-15) 
Sec. 11-13. - Same-Removal of locks, doors required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to leave outside of any building or dwelling in a place accessible to children any abandoned, unattended or discarded icebox, refrigerator or any other container of any kind which has an airtight snap lock or any other devices therein without first removing the said snap lock or doors from said icebox, refrigerator or container. 
(Code 1961, § 13-16) 
Sec. 11-14. - Loitering. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    To loiter means standing around, moving slowly about, spending time idly, sauntering, delaying, lingering or lagging behind. 
(b)  In public areas prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter on the streets, sidewalks, crosswalks, walks in public parks or any other public area so as to impede and interfere with the use of the street, sidewalk, crosswalk, walk in a public park or other public area by any other person. Any policeman may order any person violating this section to cease and desist from interfering with the right of any other person to use the streets, sidewalks, crosswalks, walks in public parks or any other public area. 
(c)  Loitering on school grounds prohibited. A person having no reason or relationship involving custody of, or responsibility for a pupil or any other license or privilege to be there, shall not loiter on school grounds within the town during school hours or during those hours from dusk through dawn unless authorized by the school administrator or his duly authorized designee. 
(d)  On private property prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter on private property within the town without lawful business thereon or if ordered to quit the property by the owner thereof or his agent. 
(e)  Penalties. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in an amount of $50.00 dollars for the first offense and $100.00 for each offense thereafter. 
(Code 1961, § 13-18; Ord. of 3-2-04(2)) 
Sec. 11-15. - Same-Operation of motor vehicles on school grounds. 
    A person not having any reason or relationship involving custody of, or responsibility for a pupil or any other license or privilege to be within said school grounds, shall not operate a motor vehicle within said school grounds. 
(Code 1961, § 13-19) 
Cross reference- Traffic and motor vehicles, Ch. 16. 
Sec. 11-16. - Damages or injury on school property. 
    Any person whether or not having license or privilege to be on school grounds who willfully or maliciously causes damage to any school property or injury to any person on such grounds shall be liable for such damage or injury. 
(Code 1961, § 13-21) 
Sec. 11-17. - Liability of parents or guardians for actions of minors. 
    The parent or parents or guardian of an unemancipated minor or minors who violate section 11-14 or 11-15 or causes injury or damage shall be jointly or severally liable as provided by section 52-572 of the general statutes. 
(Code 1961, § 13-22) 
Sec. 11-18. - Alcohol possession by minors. 
(a)  Definitions. [The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
    Alcoholic liquor shall have the same meaning, as the same term is defined in Title 30, § 30-1 of the Connecticut General Statutes as amended from time to time. 
    Host shall mean to organize a gathering of two or more persons, or to allow the premises under one's control to be used with one's knowledge for a gathering of two or more persons for personal, social or business interaction. 
    Minor shall have the same meaning, as the same term is defined in Title 30, § 30-1 of the Connecticut General Statutes as amended from time to time. 
(b)  Possession. No minor shall be in possession of alcoholic liquors, whether in opened or closed containers or otherwise, within the Town of Seymour except, when accompanied by or in the presence of his or her parent, guardian or spouse who has attained the age required to possess alcoholic liquors. These restrictions shall apply to both public and private property. 
(c)  Hosting events. No person shall host an event or gathering at which the host knowingly allows alcoholic liquor to be consumed by or dispensed to any minor unless said minor is accompanied by or in the presence of his or her parent, guardian, or spouse who has attained the age required to possess, consume or dispense alcoholic liquors. This restriction shall apply to any event or gathering within the Town of Seymour, whether conducted on public or private property. 
(d)  Penalty. Any persons violating any provision of this act shall be subject to a fine of $99.00 and any person under the age of 16 shall be referred to juvenile court. 
(Ord. of 5-1-84; Ord. of 3-2-04(3)) 
Cross reference- Alcoholic beverages, Ch. 3; traffic and motor vehicles, Ch. 16. 
Sec. 11-19. - Possession, consumption of alcoholic beverages on school property prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and a violation of this section for any person within the boundaries of any school property to consume or have in his possession or control, alcoholic beverages of any kind. 
(b)  For the purpose of this section, school property shall include all property under the jurisdiction of the board of education including specifically all outdoor areas as well as school buildings. 
(Ord. of 5-1-84) 
Cross reference- Alcoholic beverages, Ch. 3; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 14. 
Sec. 11-20. - Possession, consumption of alcoholic beverages in public parks, sidewalks, streets and other public ways prohibited. 
(a)  Prohibition. The drinking of any alcoholic liquor, as the same is defined in section 30-1 of the general statutes or in succeeding statutes, or the possession of any open container which contains alcoholic liquor is hereby prohibited in public parks, or any street, roadway, boulevard, alley, public parking lot, private parking lot for ten cars or more or sidewalk within the town. 
(b)  Exception. The board of selectmen may upon application authorize the consumption of alcoholic beverages in any public park or on any street, roadway, boulevard, alley, parking lot or sidewalk within the town, under such conditions as it shall deem appropriate for the protection of the public. Adequate police protection as prescribed by the chief of police of the town shall be provided at the sole expense of the applicant. 
(c)  Penalty. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be subject to a fine of not more than $100.00 for each offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. 
(Ord. of 5-1-84) 
Cross reference- Alcoholic beverages, Ch. 3; parks and recreation, Ch. 12; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 14. 
Sec. 11-21. - Use of burglar, fire, hold-up and automatic telephone dialer alarms. 
(a)  Short title. This section shall be known and may be cited as an ordinance regulating burglar, holdup and fire alarm systems and users. 
(b)  Purpose and definitions. 
(1)  The purpose of this section is to provide minimum standards and regulations applicable to burglar, holdup and fire alarm users as defined in this section. And to encourage the installation of protective alarm systems in all dwellings, commercial, industrial and agricultural structures. 
(2)  For the purpose of this section, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words used in the plural number include the singular number and words in the singular include the plural number. The word shall is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
Alarm agent means any person employed by an alarm business whose duties include the altering, installing, maintaining, moving, repairing, selling, servicing, responding to or causing others to respond to an alarm device. 
Alarm business means any business operated by a person for a profit which engages in the activity of altering, installing, leasing, maintaining, moving, repairing, replacing, selling, servicing or responding to a burglar, holdup or fire alarm system, or which causes any of these activities to take place. 
Alarm system means an assembly of equipment and devices arranged to signal the presence of a hazard requiring urgent attention and to which police or fire are expected to respond. In this section, the term "alarm system" shall include the terms "automatic holdup alarm system," "burglar alarm systems," "holdup alarm systems" and "manual holdup alarm systems," "alarm systems" which monitor temperature, humidity or any other condition not directly related to the detection of an unauthorized intrusion into a premises or an attempted robbery or a fire or smoke condition at a premises is to be included in this section. 
Alarm user means any person on whose premises, or property, an alarm system is maintained within the town. 
Annunciator means the instrumentation on an alarm console at the receiving terminal of a signal line which through visual and/or audible signals announces when an alarm device at a particular location has been activated or it may also indicate line trouble. 
Automatic dialing device refers to an alarm system which automatically sends, over regular telephone lines, by direct connection or otherwise, a pre-recorded voice message or coded signal indicating the existence of the emergency situation that the alarm system is designed to detect. 
Burglar alarm system refers to an alarm system signaling an entry or attempted entry into the area protected by the system. 
Fire alarm system refers to a signal or message from a person or device indicating the existence of a fire or other emergency which requires fire department action. 
Town means the Town of Seymour, Connecticut. 
Direct connect means an alarm system which has the capability of transmitting system signals to and receiving them at an agency maintained by the local government: for example, a police communication center. 
Direct line means a telephone line leading directly to the communication center of an agency maintained by the local government that is only to report emergency signals. 
False alarm means the activation of an alarm system through mechanical failure, malfunction, improper installation or the negligence of the owner or lessee of an alarm system or of his employees or agents. Such terminology does not include, for example, alarms caused by hurricanes, tornadoes, earthquakes, violent weather conditions or other acts of God. False fire alarms shall not mean alarms transmitted because of a water main break or similar causes that occur outside of the protected property. False alarms, as defined in this section, also do not include those alarms that are transmitted with a criminal, malicious or mischievous intent. 
Holdup alarm system refers to an alarm signaling a robbery or attempted robbery, in which the signal transmission is initiated by the direct action of the person attacked or by an observer of the attack. 
Person means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind. 
Police chief means the chief of the police department of the Town of Seymour. 
Police or police department means the police department of the Town of Seymour. 
Fire marshal means the certified person designated as fire marshal by the Town of Seymour, or his designated representative. 
Fire department means those volunteer companies authorized by the Town of Seymour to provide fire protection services. 
Subscriber means a person who buys and/or leases, or otherwise obtains an alarm signaling system and thereafter contracts with or hires an alarm business to monitor and/or service the alarm device. 
Telephone company means the utility that furnishes telephone services to the Town of Seymour. 
(c)  Direct connections to the Seymour Police Department. Any direct line or automatic dialing device that terminates in the Seymour Police Department communications center is prohibited. 
(d)  Equipment maintenance. Each alarm user, at his expense, is required to maintain all components of the alarm system in good working order at all times to insure that the sensory mechanisms used in connection with such device be adjusted so as to suppress false indications of holdups or intrusions or fire or smoke conditions so that the device will not be activated by impulses due to short flashes of light, wind, rain, noises, vehicular noises or other forces unrelated to genuine alarms. 
(e)  Requirements. 
(1)  No alarm system shall be installed by any person other than a licensed person or other person meeting the requirements as set forth in the building and electrical codes of the state. No alarm system shall be installed unless an electrical permit to install the same has been obtained from the building official, or his designee, as required by the building and electrical codes of the state. 
(2)  All alarm systems which sound an audible signal which may be heard from the outside of the protected premises shall be equipped with a device which shall limit the duration of such audible sound to not more than 30 minutes, or to such other length of time as may be required from time to time by the state department of environmental protection. 
(f)  Enforcement. 
(1)  Enforcement and administration of this section shall be the function of the police chief, in the case of burglar and holdup alarms, and the fire marshal, in the case of fire alarms, or their designee, and shall be accomplished as provided in the following subsections. 
(2)  There are hereby imposed the following penalties upon an alarm user whose system transmits a false alarm: 
a.  For the first two false alarms within any twelve month period ..... No action 
b.  For the third such alarm ..... Written 
notice 
After the third such alarm, the alarm user will receive a written notification of the third false alarm from the police chief or fire marshal. The alarm user shall have five days from the date he receives the notification to correct the problem with the system, and shall notify the police chief or fire marshal, in writing, of such correction. The five-day period shall exclude Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays. There shall be no charge for false alarms occurring within the five-day period, nor shall such alarms be considered in determining penalties in accordance with this section. 
c.  Upon receipt of the fourth false alarm, the town shall charge a penalty of $100.00 for the fourth false alarm and each false alarm thereafter, in any one calendar year. 
(3)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (f)(2), there shall be no charge for the first alarm occurring within 30 days after the installation of an alarm system and such false alarm shall not be considered in determining penalties in accordance with the schedule set forth in subsection (f)(2). 
(4)  Failure of any alarm user, and/or alarm business or alarm agent supplier, to comply with the requirements of a written notice of a violation of any provision hereof within five days of receipt of such notice, exclusive of Saturday, Sunday and holidays, shall also constitute an offense punishable by a fine not to exceed $100.00. Such notice shall continue in force and effect until full compliance with requirements stated therein, and each and every failure to comply with such notice within 24 hours after the five days allowed for compliance shall constitute a separate offense, and stated fine shall be imposed for each offense. 
(g)  Alarm user identification. 
(1)  Immediately upon installation of an alarm system the police department shall be furnished, in writing, the following information: Name, address and telephone number of the alarm user and any other person authorized in an emergency to gain access to the protected area. A minimum of two names, addresses and phone numbers shall be supplied. In addition, the alarm company who installed the system, or is maintaining the system, or monitors the system, shall be supplied in accordance with this section. 
(2)  It shall be the responsibility of each alarm user to notify, in writing, the police department, with any changes in the list. 
(3)  Each commercial and financial institution within the town, shall notify the police department, in writing, within 30 days after the effective date of this section. 
(h)  Liability of the Town of Seymour. The town shall not be liable for any defects in operation of any signal line system, for any failure or neglect to respond appropriately upon receipt of an alarm from such source, for any failure or neglect of any person in connection with the installation, operation, disconnection or removal of equipment, the transmission of alarm signals, or the relaying of such signals or messages. 
(Ord. of 5-1-84, §§ 1-5; Ord. of 8-16-88, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 3-3-92, §§ 1-7; Ord. of 5-2-95) 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 6. 
Sec. 11-22. - Intentional false alarms. 
    If any person shall knowingly give a false alarm of fire in the town or knowingly proclaim that a fire is extinguished when it is not, such person, shall be fined $250.00 upon conviction. 
(Code 1961, § 9-8; Ord. of 5-2-95) 
Secs. 11-23-11-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - GRAFFITI ORDINANCE 

Sec. 11-41. - Graffiti. 
(a)  Definitions. For the purpose of this article, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
    Graffiti. Any letters, numbers, word or words, writings or inscriptions, symbols, drawings, carvings, stickers, etchings or any other marking of any nature whatsoever which defaces, obliterates, covers, alters, damages or destroys the real or personal property of another. This chapter shall not be construed to prohibit easily removable chalk markings on public sidewalks and streets used in connection with traditional children's games. 
    Broad tipped indelible markers. Any felt marker or similar implement containing a fluid that is not water soluble and which has a flat or angled writing surface greater than a quarter of an inch wide. 
(b)  Prohibited acts. 
(1)  No person shall write, paint or place any paint, chalk or any other substance or substances or otherwise mark, scratch, place, carve or etch graffiti on the real or personal property of another, whether said real or personal property be publicly or privately owned, unless the owner of such property has specifically consented to the same, prior to the commission of such act or acts. 
(2)  No person shall carry an aerosol spray paint can or broad tipped indelible marker or other marking devices into any public building or other public facility with the intent to violate the provisions of this or any other ordinance. 
(c)  Violations and penalties. Any person violating any provision of this article shall be punished by a fine of 100 dollars. 
(Ord. of 7-18-95) 
Sec. 11-42. - Sale of aerosol cans and markers to minors prohibited. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to deter the defacing of public and private property through the use of aerosol spray paint cans, broad tipped indelible markers and other marking devices. Within the town, the sale of such aerosol spray paint cans and broad tipped indelible markers and other marking devices to a person under 18 years of age is prohibited. 
(b)  Prohibited acts. 
(1)  No person shall sell, offer to sell, or otherwise transfer an aerosol spray paint can or broad tipped indelible marker or other marking devices to any person under 18 years of age unless such person is accompanied by a parent or guardian at the time of purchase. 
(2)  No person shall sell or offer for sale, or otherwise transfer an aerosol spray paint can or broad tipped indelible marker or other marking devices unless such aerosol spray paint can or indelible marker or other marking devices are held for sale or transfer in an enclosed device which is constructed to prevent removal of the merchandise except by authorized attendants or is stored out of sight in such a way as to prevent free access to the merchandise by the public. 
(c)  Violations and penalties. Any person who violates the any provision of this article shall be punished by a fine of 100 dollars for each offense. In addition thereto, in the discretion of the court, such person may be directed to remove any inscription, figure or mark of any type that is painted, written or drawn upon any structure. 
(Ord. of 7-18-95) 
Sec. 11-43. - Removal of graffiti required; penalty. 
    Any person who permits graffiti to remain on his or her property for a period of more than seven days after official notification to remove same shall be subject to a fine of 100 dollars. 
(Ord. of 7-18-95) 
Sec. 11-44. - Enforcement of article and penalties generally. 
    This entire article shall be enforced by the town police department. 
(Ord. of 7-18-95) 
Chapter 12 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Parks commission, § 10.10; recreation commission, § 10.10.1. 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 14; zoning regulations, App. A. 
State Law reference- Authority to provide for entertainment, amusements, concerts, celebrations and cultural activities, G.S. § 7-148(c)(4)(B); authority to establish, maintain, etc., parks, playgrounds, playfields, etc., G.S. § 7-148(c)(6)(A)(i). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 12-1. - Activities within public parks and recreation areas; fine for damage. 
(a)  The parks commission shall have, subject to approval of the board of selectmen, the authority to regulate the hours during which the public parks and recreation areas shall be open. The parks commission shall set the hours of opening and closing of the parks and recreation areas and may provide for the closing of entrances and exits to said parks and recreation areas during the hours which the parks are closed. 
(b)  The use of these areas shall be limited to the residents of Seymour and their guests. 
(c)  No person shall ride on or drive any motorized two, three, or four wheeled vehicle in any park or recreation area except in places especially designated by the town. This includes, but is not limited to: snowmobiles, motorcycles, mini bikes, dirt bikes, three- and four-wheeled all-terrain vehicles, automobiles, tractors, and trucks. Parking of licensed motor vehicles is permitted only in designated areas. 
(d)  No person or vehicle shall occupy any part of the park or recreation area after hours, which the town shall post, without written permission of the town. 
(e)  No games, other than those specifically designated by the town, shall be played in any park or recreation area by any person, except in such places especially designated by the town. 
(f)  No person shall swim or bathe in any waters in said park or recreation area, except in such areas especially designated by the town. 
(g)  Hunting and trapping are prohibited in any park or recreation area. No person shall carry or discharge firearms, or any other weapon in any park or recreation area. 
(h)  No person shall use fireworks, firecrackers, or any type of explosive device in any park or recreation area, unless specific written permission is granted by the town. 
(i)  Camping is prohibited in any park or recreation area unless specific permission is granted by the town. This includes the erection of tents, cabins, or other structures. 
(j)  Ground fires are prohibited in any park or recreation area, except in places specifically designated for this purpose. Picnic tables shall not be moved from their established place. 
(k)  Disorderly conduct, use of alcohol, narcotics, and controlled substances, obscene acts, and indecent conduct is prohibited, and all forms of activity creating hazards to human safety are prohibited. 
(l)  No unauthorized person shall post or distribute any notice, sign, or advertisement within any park or recreation area. No person shall sell, or offer for sale any goods or services within any park or recreation area. No person shall solicit subscriptions, contributions, services, or play any games of chance or have in their possession any gaming instrument. 
(m)  No person shall disturb any bird, bird's nest or eggs, or any other animal within said park or recreation area, except by written permission of the town. 
(n)  No person shall dig up or remove any sand, dirt, rock, or any substance whatsoever, make any excavation, or cause or assist in doing any of said things, within any park or recreation area, except by written permission of the town. 
(o)  No person shall throw, leave, or deposit any wastepaper, bottles, remains of food, or other litter or refuse in any park or recreation area except in the receptacles provided. 
(p)  No person shall pick any flowers or cut, break, dig up, or in any manner mutilate or injure any tree, shrub, plant, grass, drive, railing, seat, fence, structure, or other public property in any park or recreation area, or cut, carve upon, mark, or paste upon any tree, stone, fence, wall, building, monument or other object contained or located in any park or recreation area, except by written permission of the town. 
(q)  Any person who shall violate any of these rules and regulations, or who shall aid or abet in the violation of any of theses rules, shall be fined a maximum of $100.00 for each offense, and be responsible for any damages incurred by said violation. 
(Code 1961, § 14-1.1; Ord. of 10-16-01(3)) 
Cross reference- Alcoholic beverages, Ch. 3; hawkers, peddlers, vendors, canvassers and solicitors, § 10-2; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, Ch. 11. 
Secs. 12-2-12-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LIBRARY[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Authority of towns to establish public libraries, G.S. § 11-20. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 12-16. - Public library established. 
    The town hereby establishes a public library, the use of which under proper regulations shall be free to its inhabitants. 
Secs. 12-17-12-30. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BOARD OF DIRECTORS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference- Powers and duties of board of library directors, § 5.1. 
Cross reference- Boards, commissions, committees and agencies, § 2-21 et seq. 
State Law reference- Boards of directors for public libraries, G.S. § 11-21. 

Sec. 12-31. - Composition. 
    The board of directors of the public library of the town shall consist of nine members to be elected in the manner provided by statute. 
(Code 1961, § 14-3) 
Chapter 13 - PLANNING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Economic development commission, § 10.4; inland-wetlands and conservation commission, § 10.09; planning and zoning commission, § 10.11; zoning board of appeals, § 10.20. 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; economic development commission to act as an advisory commission, § 2-160.2; flood damage prevention, Ch. 7; housing, Ch. 9; parks and recreation, Ch. 12; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 14; utilities, Ch. 17; zoning, App. A; subdivisions, App. B; regulations for the protection and preservation of inland wetlands and water courses, App. C. 
State Law reference- Municipal planning commission, G.S. §§ 8-18-8-30a; creation of planning commissions, G.S. § 8-19; plan of development, G.S. § 8-23; requirement that municipal improvement proposals must be referred to planning commission, G.S. § 8-24; requirement that proposals concerning subdivisions of land be approved by planning commission, G.S. § 8-25; requisite of approval of subdivision plans by planning commission, G.S. § 8-26; appeals from planning commission, G.S. § 8-30; municipal redevelopment generally, G.S. §§ 8-124-8-139; authority for urban renewal projects, G.S. § 8-141; urban renewal plan, G.S. § 8-142; powers of redevelopment agency, G.S. § 8-143; powers of municipality concerning urban renewal, G.S. § 8-144; state aid for city redevelopment and urban renewal, G.S. §§ 8-151-8-162; federal aid for city redevelopment and urban renewal, G.S. §§ 8-163-8-169. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 13-1. - Town property exempt from planning and zoning regulations. 
    The municipal property of the town shall be exempt from the regulations of the planning and zoning commission pursuant to the provisions of section 8-2 of the general statutes; meaning hereby to exempt only such municipal property from the regulations. As to all other land not the property of the town or any of its agencies or authorities, the regulations of the planning and zoning commission are to remain in full force and effect. 
(Code 1961, § 19-6) 
Cross reference- Zoning, App. A. 
Secs. 13-2-13-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - VALLEY COUNCIL OF GOVERNMENTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Regional council of elected officials authorized, G.S. § 4-124c. 

Sec. 13-16. - Town authorized to join Valley Council of Governments. 
    The Town of Seymour shall be a member of the Naugatuck Valley Council of Governments in accordance with Section 4-124i through 124p, inclusive, of the Connecticut General Statutes. 
(Code 1961, § 6-31; Ord. of 10-16-01(4); Ord. of 6-4-14) 
Sec. 13-17. - Town's representative. 
    The representative of the town on the Naugatuck Valley Council of Governments shall be the first selectman. 
(Code 1961, § 6-32; Ord. of 6-4-14) 
Sec. 13-18. - Financial commitments. 
    Membership in the Naugatuck Valley Council of Governments shall in no way bind the town to any financial commitments or obligations except as may from time to time be provided by the annual budget meeting of the board of finance. 
(Code 1961, § 6-33; Ord. of 6-4-14) 
Sec. 13-19. - Withdrawal. 
    The town may withdraw from the Naugatuck Valley Council of Governments by repeal of this article. 
(Code 1961, § 6-34; Ord. of 6-4-14) 
Sec. 13-20. - Effect on functions of town boards or commissions. 
    Membership in the Naugatuck Valley Council of Governments shall in no way abrogate the functions of any of the town boards or commissions. 
(Code 1961, § 6-35; Ord. of 6-4-14) 
Cross reference- Boards, commissions, committees and agencies, § 2-21 et seq. 
Secs. 13-21-13-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - HOUSATONIC LAKE AUTHORITY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference- Appointed boards, Ch. 10. 
Cross reference- Municipal flood and erosion control board, § 2-61 et seq.; flood damage prevention, Ch. 7; regulations for the protection and preservation of inland wetlands and water courses, App. C. 

Sec. 13-36. - Town participation; membership. 
(a)  Declaration. It is found and determined that it would be for the betterment of the town if the town joined the Housatonic Lake Authority and participated in the activities of the authority as provided in section 7-151A of the general statutes. 
(b)  Membership in authority. It is hereby enacted and ordained that the town join and be a member of the Housatonic Lake Authority. There shall be a three-member delegation to the authority from the town. 
(Code 1961, § 2-18) 
Sec. 13-37. - Appointment of members, terms. 
    The members of the Housatonic Lake Authority shall be appointed by the first selectman in the instance of the initial appointment; one for a term of three years, one for a term of two years and one for a term of one year and thereafter all members shall be appointed for a term of three years. 
(Code 1961, § 2-18) 
Sec. 13-38. - Duties. 
(a)  The Housatonic Lake Authority shall act as agent for the town in cooperating with the state boating commission in the enforcement of the boating laws on bodies of water within the territorial limits of the town. 
(b)  The Housatonic Lake Authority shall be granted the power within the bodies of water within the territorial limits of the town to: 
(1)  Control and abate algae and aquatic weeds in cooperation with the state water resource commission in accordance with the general statutes; 
(2)  Study water management including but not limited to water depth and circulation and make recommendation for action to its member towns; 
(3)  Act as agent for the town with respect to filing applications for grants and reimbursement with the department of environmental protection and other state agencies in connection with state and federal programs; and 
(4)  Act as agent for the town with respect to receiving gifts for any of its purposes. 
(Code 1961, § 2-18) 
Sec. 13-39. - Vacancies. 
    Vacancies on the town's delegation to the Housatonic Lake Authority shall be filled by appointment of the first selectman. 
(Code 1961, § 2-18) 
Sec. 13-40. - Applicability of state statutes. 
    The method of withdrawal from the Housatonic Lake Authority shall be governed by section 7-101A of the general statutes. The authority will be operated under provision of section 7-151A of the general statutes. 
(Code 1961, § 2-18) 
Secs. 13-41-13-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - REGIONAL PLANNING AGENCY[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Boards, commissions, committees and agencies, § 2-21 et seq. 

Sec. 13-56. - Town participation. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of chapter 127 of the general statutes, the town hereby adopts the provisions of such chapter and elects to participate in the regional planning agency now or henceforth existing under authority of such chapter in a region as defined by the state development commission pursuant to the provisions of such chapter. 
(Code 1961, § 2-10) 
Secs. 13-57-13-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - OPEN SPACE ADVISORY BOARD[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance of Nov. 14, 1989, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, codification of §§ A-C of such ordinance as Art. V, §§ 13-81-13-83, was at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 13-81. - Created; responsibilities generally. 
    There is hereby created an open space advisory board which shall be responsible for advising the board of selectmen concerning the maintenance and development of open space within the town. 
(Ord. of 11-14-89, § A) 
Sec. 13-82. - Composition; terms; appointments. 
    The composition of the board shall be as follows: one member from the board of selectmen; one member from the planning and zoning commission; one member from the zoning board of appeals; one member from the Seymour Land Trust; one member from the parks commission; one member from the inland wetlands commission; and one member-at-large from the public. Each member shall be appointed for a term of one year and shall serve until his successor has been appointed. Each appointment shall be an administrative appointment of the first selectman. 
(Ord. of 11-14-89, § C) 
Sec. 13-83. - Advisory duties. 
    The open space advisory board shall collect and distribute information to the board of selectmen concerning the development of land within the town which is used by the town as open space and for passive recreation. The board shall consult with the board of selectmen and make recommendations to the board of selectmen concerning the maintenance and development of said land. Final decisions concerning said maintenance and development shall rest with the board of selectmen and other town boards and commissions empowered to act by Charter and town ordinances. 
(Ord. of 11-14-89, § B) 
Chapter 14 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Power of board of selectmen to accept or abandon town roads, § 7.2(e); power to take, purchase, lease, sell or convey real estate, § 7.2(b); board of public works, § 10.13. 
Cross reference- Health and sanitation, Ch. 8; bicycles on sidewalks prohibited, § 11-2; possession, consumption of alcoholic beverages on school property prohibited, § 11-19; possession, consumption of alcoholic beverages in public parks, sidewalks, streets, etc., prohibited, § 11-20; parks and recreation, Ch. 12; planning, Ch. 13; traffic and motor vehicles, Ch. 16; utilities, Ch. 17; zoning, App. A; subdivisions, App. B. 
State Law reference- Power of town to control the excavation of the highways and streets, G.S. § 7-148(c)(6)(C)(iii); to lay out construct, etc., streets, sidewalks, etc., G.S. § 7-148(c)(6)(C)(i); to provide for lighting the streets, etc., G.S. § 7-148(c)(4)(F); to provide for the planting, etc., of shade and ornamental trees on the streets and public grounds, G.S. § 7-148(c)(6)(A)(v); to keep open, etc., the streets, sidewalks, etc., G.S. § 7-148(c)(6)(C)(ii); to require owners or occupants of land adjacent to any sidewalk to remove snow, etc., G.S. § 7-148(c)(6)(C)(v); to regulate and prohibit the excavation, etc., of sidewalks, etc., G.S. § 7-148(c)(6)(C)(iv); to prohibit and regulate the discharge of drains from roofs of buildings over or upon the sidewalks, streets, etc., G.S. § 7-148(c)(6)(B)(iv); to keep the streets, sidewalks and public places free from undue noises and nuisances, etc., G.S. § 7-148(c)(7)(F)(i); highways and bridges, G.S. § 13a-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Trimming of trees overhanging highway. 
    The selectmen are ordered to notify persons having shade or other trees that have branches or limbs hanging over the highway to trim them off to a height above any passing vehicle. If not so trimmed the selectmen shall cause the same to be done. 
(Code 1961, § 17-1) 
Sec. 14-2. - Notice of intent to request streetlights. 
    Any party desiring electric lights placed on any street in the town shall notify the selectmen at least ten days before the resolution will be presented at any town meeting. 
(Code 1961, § 17-2) 
Sec. 14-3. - Height of awning over sidewalks. 
    All awnings shall be not less than seven feet above the sidewalk. 
(Code 1961, § 17-3) 
Sec. 14-4. - Construction and repair of sidewalks or curbs-Selectmen authorized to order. 
    The board of selectmen shall have authority as public convenience and necessity may require, to order sidewalks or curbs to be constructed or repaired. 
(Code 1961, § 17-4) 
Sec. 14-5. - Same-Supervision by selectmen; assessments for. 
    Whenever any sidewalk or curb shall be ordered constructed or repaired by the selectmen the work shall be done under the selectmen's supervision in a thorough and workmanlike manner and as economically as possible. The width, height, level, grade and material shall be determined by the selectmen. The selectmen shall then assess not to exceed two-thirds of the expense thereof against the person or property adjoining. Such sums assessed shall be ordered paid into the town treasury and if not paid within 30 days after notice is given, a lien shall be placed upon the premises adjoining such walk and shall be recorded in the town clerk's office within 60 days after completion. 
(Code 1961, § 17-5) 
Sec. 14-6. - Removal of ice, snow from sidewalks. 
(a)  The provisions of Section 7-163a, C.G.S. are hereby adopted and are set forth in subsections (b), (c), (d) and (e) hereof. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 13a-149, C.G.S. or any other general or special act, the town shall not be liable to any person for injury to person or property caused by the presence of ice or snow on a public sidewalk unless the town is the owner or person in possession and control of land abutting such sidewalk, other than land used as a highway or street, provided that the town shall be liable for its affirmative acts with respect to such sidewalk. 
(c)  The owner or person in possession and control of land abutting a public sidewalk shall have the same duty of care with respect to the presence of ice or snow on such sidewalk toward the portion of the sidewalk abutting his property as the town had prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section and shall be liable to persons injured in person or property where a breach of said duty is the proximate cause of said injury. 
(d)  No action to recover damages for injury to person or property caused by the presence of ice or snow on a public sidewalk against a person who owns or is in possession and control of land abutting a public sidewalk shall be brought but within two years from the date when the injury is first sustained. 
(e)  Whenever the public sidewalk shall be wholly or partially covered by snow or ice, it shall be the duty of the owner or person in possession and control of land abutting a public sidewalk to cause such sidewalk to be made safe and convenient by removing the snow therefrom within the first six hours of daylight immediately following the accumulation of such snow thereon or, in the case of ice, by covering the same with sand or other suitable material within the first six hours of daylight following the accumulation of such ice, and then renewing such treatment as often as may be necessary to keep such sidewalk safe and convenient. In case of the failure or neglect of the owner or person in possession and control of land abutting the public sidewalk to comply with this subsection, the selectman may cause the same to be done, and the expense thereof shall be collectible from the person so failing or neglecting. Any person who fails or neglects to comply with this subsection shall also be liable for a penalty or fine in an amount established in accordance with section 1-9, general penalty. 
(Code 1961, § 17-6; Ord. of 3-18-97; Ord. of 7-21-15(3)) 
Cross reference- Health and sanitation, Ch. 8. 
Sec. 14-7. - Acceptance of streets. 
(a)  Generally. The procedures set forth in this section shall be followed in the acceptance of all streets, highways or public ways in the town other than streets of record as of October 11, 1956. 
(b)  Conformity to regulations. All proposed streets shall be laid out, graded and constructed their entire length and full width, from street line to street line, in full accordance with the following specifications and these regulations and modes of procedure and any amendments thereto. 
(c)  Establishment of lines and grades. The owner shall engage the services of a registered engineer or surveyor to lay out the lines and grades of the streets, their entire width and length. 
(d)  Width. In accordance with such approved lines and grades the owner shall construct a roadway at least 30 feet wide centered between the street lines in the case of a 50-foot highway and at least 36 feet wide in the case of a 60-foot highway, having a crown of not more than eight inches as the selectmen or their representative may direct. No road shall be accepted unless it is at least 50 feet in width. 
(e)  Sidewalk shoulders. The shoulders of sidewalk areas shall be graded to the centerline grade at the gutter line and have a pitch of not more than one-half inch to the foot toward said gutter line from the street line. The slopes shall start at the street lines. 
(f)  Grade. The percentage of grade shall not be less than one percent or more than ten percent except that if in the opinion of the selectmen or the zoning and planning commission, these limits cause undue hardship, they may allow grades in excess of ten percent provided no appreciable hazard to health or safety is thereby created. 
(g)  Excavation depth; slope; subgrade. All sod and other vegetable matter shall be excavated and stumps removed where fills of less than four feet are made. Boulders and ledges shall be removed to a depth of at least 12 inches below finished grade. Slopes in cut or fill shall not be steeper than one on two and shall be neatly graded. The subgrade shall be brought to a uniform surface, the grade of which shall be inspected and approved by the selectmen or their representative before the surfacing may be done. 
(h)  Surfacing. Upon the proposed subgrade shall be spread a uniform gravel or broken stone surface which shall have a minimum depth after compaction of eight inches except, where ledge rock is encountered, the depth shall be increased to 12 inches after compaction. All surfacing materials shall be approved prior to placing by the selectmen or their representative. The finished surface shall be thoroughly compacted by wetting and rolling and shall be uniformly graded to the required cross-section. Upon this prepared surface there shall be spread a coating of MC1 road oil at the rate of three-fourths of a gallon per square yard. This coating shall be allowed to set and traffic shall not be allowed to use the roadway until the selectmen or their representative shall have determined that the oil has properly set. A seal coat of MC3 road oil shall be applied at the rate of not more than one-half of a gallon per square yard and shall be immediately covered with clean sand in sufficient quantity to prevent bleeding and picking up of the bitumen before traffic is allowed to use the roadway. 
(i)  Storm drains. All storm drains determined by the selectmen or their representative to be required by good construction practice and in a manner approved by the selectmen or their representative shall be constructed by the owner or developer at his sole expense. The storm drains shall include all necessary pipelines, catch basins, manholes and appurtenances sufficient and adequate to provide proper drainage. Wherever, in the opinion of the selectmen or their representative, the grades will cause excessive erosion, and at all catch basins, gutters shall be paved with bituminous concrete. 
(j)  Inspection and approval during construction. The construction on all the above improvements shall always be subject to inspection by the selectmen or their duly appointed representatives. No subgrades, storm or sanitary sewers, drains, culverts or bridge work shall be covered until inspected and approved, nor shall the gravel surface be oiled until inspected and approved. 
(k)  Location monuments. Reinforced concrete monuments of 1:2:4 mix, four inches square at the top, six inches square at the bottom and three feet long shall be set at angle points, points of curve and other critical or control points to define and locate the street rights-of-way. Each monument shall have a brass or iron rod at least six inches long in the top and shall be the point of reference. The tops of the monuments shall be set to the established grade. The monuments shall be set in place after all other street improvements are completed. The accuracy of location of such monuments shall be certified in writing by the land surveyor or engineer making the street layout before the acceptance of such street by the town. 
(l)  Final acceptance. Upon completion of the required improvements as set forth in this section including the setting of all monuments, the construction of all roads and the installation of all required drainage facilities and upon certification by the selectmen or their representative of the same in writing, the street shall be accepted by the town. 
(Code 1961, § 17-10) 
Sec. 14-8. - Acceptance of private roads as public highways. 
    No private road may be accepted as a public highway except in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)  Compliance with specifications; improvements. Upon approval of the acceptance of the private road by a town meeting warned for the purpose, the abutting owners or developer shall grade, surface and drain the private road in accordance with the specifications set forth in section 14-7; provided, however, the specifications may be waived by the board of selectmen where compliance would be impracticable or impose undue hardship upon the abutting owners and, in such event, the town shall make such improvements as shall be necessary to render the highways safe for public travel. 
(2)  Acceptance. Upon completion of such improvements certified to the town clerk in writing by the board of selectmen, the road shall become a public highway. 
(3)  Additional standards. No private road may become a public highway under this section unless is existed on October 11, 1956 and has occupied homes thereon at time of application. 
(Code 1961, § 17-11) 
Sec. 14-9. - Deposit of snow or ice on public street forbidden. 
(a)  No person shall plow, throw, deposit, place or cause to be thrown, deposited or placed any snow or ice on any public roadway or sidewalk in the town. 
(b)  Any owner, occupant or person having charge of premises violating any provisions of this section shall be fined in accordance with section 1-9 of this Code. 
(Ord. of 3-18-97) 
Sec. 14-10. - Street names. 
    The board of selectmen shall have the exclusive right to name and re-name streets in the town, after review of the proposed street name(s) by the emergency services committee. 
(Ord. of 6-29-98) 
Secs. 14-11-14-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STREET EXCAVATIONS, ETC.[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted July 19, 2015, effectively repealed the former art. II, §§ 14-21-14-23, and enacted a new art. II as set out herein. The former art. II pertained to excavations and derived from Code 1961, §§ 17-8, 17-9; an ordinance adopted Dec. 6, 1994; and an ordinance adopted Oct. 21, 2008. 
Cross reference- Sewer construction permits, § 17-51 et seq. 

Sec. 14-21. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article, the following words shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
    Engineer means the town engineer or his duly authorized representative. 
    Inspector means the town engineer or his duly authorized representative. 
(Ord. of 7-19-2016(3)) 
Sec. 14-22. - Permission of town required; unauthorized excavations, etc., may be closed, etc., by town. 
(a)  No person shall excavate within or under, or place any obstruction or substruction within, under, upon or over any town highway without direct permission of the town engineer. If any person shall violate the provisions of this section the town may, at its option, fill in or close any such excavation or remove or alter the same and the expense incurred by the town in such filling or removing or altering shall be paid by the person making such excavation or placing such obstruction or substruction. 
(b)  Any person violating any provision of this section shall be punished as provided by section 14-35.13. 
(Ord. of 7-19-2016(3)) 
Sec. 14-23. - Permit-Generally. 
(a)  The town engineer is hereby authorized and empowered to grant a permit for excavation or obstruction or substruction of any town roadway, subject to the provisions of this article. The authorization given by such engineer for such use of the highway shall be in writing in a form prescribed by him, which form is designated and known as a "permit." Such permit shall be issued on a multi-copy form prepared by the town engineer. A copy of all such permits issued by the town engineer shall be forwarded to the director of public works. In appropriate cases where the excavation shall substantially interfere with traffic or cause any highway to become completely impassable, the engineer shall also forward copies of such permit to the chief of police and to the chief of the fire department. 
(b)  Any applicant seeking a permit to perform work on a state highway must get a street opening permit from the town before applying for a state permit. This section will not supersede any regulations as set forth by the state department of transportation in regards to excavation in state highways. 
(c)  When issuing a permit on any highway that has been reconstructed or resurfaced within five years of the date of the permit application, the town reserves the right to designate the patch limits and requirements, which may include curb-to-curb milling and overlay of the affected area, at a minimum. 
(Ord. of 7-19-2016(3)) 
Sec. 14-24. - Same-Application, etc., generally. 
    An application, in writing, in a form prescribed by the engineer shall be made to the engineer at least five days prior to the time any excavation or obstruction for which a permit is required by the provisions of this article is to be commenced. The engineer may require a sketch of such proposed work, drawn to scale if he finds the same is necessary. The engineer may, in his discretion, extend the time limitation specified in this section or in any other section of this article. 
(Ord. of 7-19-2016(3)) 
Sec. 14-25. - Same-Rejection of applications. 
    When it appears that the work called for in an application required by section 14-24 would cause substantial or needless damage to a highway or create excessive disturbance to traffic or exceptionally dangerous conditions not commensurate with the benefits to the applicant, the request for such permit may be denied. The applicant will be informed of such rejection by letter from the engineer, stating the reasons for such rejection. The engineer shall reject the application of any person when such applicant has failed to perform work under a previously issued permit within the time required or in the manner required or when the applicant has failed to reimburse the town for recoverable charges billed under the terms governing a previous permit. 
(Ord. of 7-19-2016(3)) 
Sec. 14-26. - Same-Fees generally; engineer's monthly statement. 
    The engineer shall collect the sum of $150.00 for each permit issued by him under the provisions of this article. Such sum shall be payable prior to the time the permit is issued. All sums of money collected by the engineer shall be paid by him to the town treasurer on a monthly basis. The engineer shall submit a monthly statement to the finance department itemizing permit, inspection and patching fees collected during the month. 
(Ord. of 7-19-2016(3)) 
Sec. 14-27. - Same-Town work. 
    No contractor or subcontractor performing work directly for the town or any of its agencies or instrumentalities shall be required to pay any permit fee as provided for in section 14-26. 
(Ord. of 7-19-2016(3)) 
Sec. 14-28. - Same-Emergency permits generally. 
    Emergency permits may be granted by the engineer or by the inspector, in the case of broken gas or water mains or other such emergencies, but the person performing such excavation or creating such obstruction shall file a written application for a permit within 24 hours thereafter, in the manner prescribed by this article for non-emergency work. 
(Ord. of 7-19-2016(3)) 
Sec. 14-29. - Same-Emergency work. 
    When the town, or any of its agencies or instrumentalities, or any contractor or subcontractor performing work directly for the town or any of its agencies or instrumentalities, shall notify the engineer or the inspector that there is immediate need for any excavation or obstruction, or, in the case of redevelopment construction or demolition, that work must be performed immediately, the engineer or inspector shall grant an emergency permit as provided in section 14-28. 
(Ord. of 7-19-2016(3)) 
Sec. 14-30. - Same-Revocation of permit. 
    Any permit issued by the engineer pursuant to the provisions of this article is revocable immediately upon written notification or oral order given personally to the permittee by the engineer or inspector. 
(Ord. of 7-19-2016(3)) 
Sec. 14-31. - Bond or deposit required. 
    It is hereby made the duty of the engineer to determine the amount of the guarantee to be deposited with the town by the permittee in connection with each permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this article. He may accept either a certified or bank check or a surety bond with good and sufficient surety. Such bond to be in a form prescribed by the town counsel. No permit shall be issued until such deposit or bond has been filed with the engineer. An annual blanket surety bond, acceptable to the town counsel, may be deposited to avoid the inconvenience and expense of obtaining individual deposits or bonds for each permit requested. The engineer shall release such deposit or surety bond six months after the permanent top surface has been installed by either the town or the permit holder; provided, however, that such deposit or bond shall not be released unless all of the requirements of this article have been met. 
(Ord. of 7-19-2016(3)) 
Sec. 14-32. - Insurance required. 
    The applicant for a permit under the provisions of this article shall, before issuance of such permit, deliver to the town engineer an insurance policy written by an insurance company authorized to do business in this state, upon which the town is a named insured, which policy shall insure against bodily injury or property damage arising out of any action or activity or work of the applicant in connection with the work undertaken under such permit. Such policy shall have bodily injury and property damage limits of $1,000,000.00 minimum per each occurrence and shall have a $2,000,000.00 minimum general aggregate limit. 
(Ord. of 7-19-2016(3)) 
Sec. 14-33. - Time for performance. 
(a)  All work performed under the provisions of this article shall be completed in a manner satisfactory to the engineer before the expiration date established by the engineer which shall be shown on the permit. The permit holder may request the engineer to allow an extension of time. The extension of time may be granted in writing by the engineer. 
(b)  The inspector shall be notified at least 24 hours in advance of actually starting any work authorized under a permit. Failure of the permittee to notify the town will result in the revocation of the permit. Permits are void three months after their issue date. 
(Ord. of 7-19-2016(3)) 
Sec. 14-34. - Inspection. 
    The engineer or his agent is empowered to inspect all excavations for workmanship and materials. The excavations may not be permanently backfilled without the engineer or his agent, i.e. inspector, present at the site. The town will require the permittee to excavate and expose for inspection any portion of the excavation backfilled without inspection or authorization to backfill. The permittee shall be responsible for the payment of the hourly rate, as determined by the engineer, of the inspector for the time in which the inspector is observing the backfilling of the excavation. An estimate of the required inspector's time will be made and paid for at the time of permit application. In the event the actual inspection time exceeds the estimated time, the permittee shall pay the additional fee to the town within ten working days. Failure to pay said additional fee will result in the permittee forfeiting any rights to future permits until the outstanding balance is received. The town may, at its discretion, use the proceeds from the bond required in section 14-31 to pay any amounts due to the town. In the event that the actual inspection time is less than the estimated time the town will promptly refund any overcharge to the permittee. 
(Ord. of 7-19-2016(3)) 
Sec. 14-35. - Traffic protection. 
    It shall be the duty of every permittee under this article to make certain that the security of the travelling public is safeguarded and its rights are not unreasonably curtailed. If any excavation or obstruction shall be left upon any highway at night it shall be marked by flares, lanterns, lights, flashing beacons or other warning devices approved by the engineer. If the work performed under the highway shall make the travelled portion dangerous for the movement of vehicles, a sufficient number of watchmen, flagmen or police officers, as determined by the traffic authority, shall be assigned by the permittee to direct traffic. The cost of all watchmen, flagmen or police officers shall be the responsibility of the permittee. In the event the work of the permittee requires the closing of a public highway for any period of time, the permittee shall give written notice to the police department and the director of public works or his designated representative 24 hours in advance of any required closing. The director may determine the need for closing the highway and may require the work or work method be so altered so as to provide for traffic flow. The town engineer or the director of public works, or his agent, shall provide written notice to the police and fire departments in advance of closing any public highway. Any permittee who leaves an excavation in an unsafe condition or abandons a street opening shall be liable for all costs incurred by the town to correct such conditions. 
(Ord. of 7-19-2016(3)) 
Sec. 14-35.1. - Protection of tree roots. 
    The greatest care shall be exercised by persons performing work under the provisions of this article to protect tree roots from damage, not only when excavating but on all subsequent operations of construction and backfilling. When roots are encountered near the base of a tree the permittee shall tunnel under the roots as directed by the inspector. The inspector may require such other protection as shall be reasonable in regard to any particular instance. 
(Ord. of 7-19-2016(3)) 
Sec. 14-35.2. - Opening of pavement. 
    The pavement surface shall be removed with all edges cut to a neat, straight line, preferably cut with a concrete saw; however, such cutting can be accomplished with a spade point tool. Under no circumstances shall the pavement slab be subject to blows from a hammer or dropweight, but any concrete base or subbase under the pavement slab may be broken with a pneumatic tool using a bullpoint. 
(Ord. of 7-19-2016(3)) 
Sec. 14-35.3. - Size of excavation; placement of excavated material. 
    The size of the excavation shall be kept as small as practicable to carry on the work. No material removed in excavating shall be placed in the travelled path unless approved by the inspector. In any case, the material shall be placed so as to interfere as little as possible with the ordinary use of the highway. If such excavated material must be placed in gutters, suitable conduits first shall be installed temporarily in which to carry drainage beyond the obstruction. 
(Ord. of 7-19-2016(3)) 
Sec. 14-35.4. - Blasting. 
    When rock or other hard material must be removed by a permittee under this article, he may blast such material if the pavement or other structures will not be endangered thereby. Only a "blast man" licensed by the Commissioner of Emergency Services and Public Protection will be permitted to charge or set off blasts within the highway right-of-way. All state and municipal regulations concerning the same shall be fully complied with. The permittee shall be responsible for all damage. A mat or weight of logs or sand bags shall be placed over the charge to prevent shattered materials from scattering. 
(Ord. of 7-19-2016(3)) 
Sec. 14-35.5. - Tunneling or jacking. 
    Tunneling or jacking shall be permitted only when plans prepared by a registered engineer are submitted to and approved by the town engineer. 
(Ord. of 7-19-2016(3)) 
Sec. 14-35.6. - Backfilling. 
    Backfill in trenches within paved areas shall be placed in layers not more than 12 inches thick and shall be thoroughly compacted by tamping or other approved means to the satisfaction of the inspector. Compaction equipment shall be at the excavation site and must be utilized during all backfilling operations. The material used for backfill shall be subject to the inspection and approval of the inspector, and if in his opinion, the excavated material is unsuitable for backfill, the permittee shall be required to dispose of the unsuitable materials and replace them with materials that are suitable to the inspector. When backfill has been completed within 15 inches of the finished pavement or surface grade, the next 14 inches shall be filled and compacted, in two seven-inch layers, using an approved grade of bank-run gravel or processed aggregate. 
(Ord. of 7-19-2016(3)) 
Sec. 14-35.7. - Temporary patch. 
    As soon as the excavation has been backfilled and compacted, the pavement shall be replaced temporarily by the permittee. The temporary pavement shall consist of bituminous concrete, of a mixture approved by the inspector (ConnDOT Class 2), compressed to a minimum depth of two inches. The surface of the temporary pavement shall be flush at the edge of the existing pavement and extend above the surface of the surrounding permanent pavement by one inch in the center of the patch and shall be reasonably smooth. The permittee shall be responsible for the temporary pavement and shall see that the contractor or his own forces keep this pavement in repair until the permanent surface can be replaced by the town. Additional material shall be added by the permittee, as necessary, as the backfill settles. If the permittee does not maintain the temporary pavement adequately, the engineer may direct that necessary repairs be made by the department of public works to prevent accidents and the permittee will be charged by the town for this work. Failure on the part of the town to give notice that repairs are needed shall not relieve the contractor of any of the duties set forth herein. 
(Ord. of 7-19-2016(3)) 
Sec. 14-35.8. - Permanent patch. 
    The permanent repair of street openings shall be the responsibility of the town, except in the case of a particularly large or difficult project, in which case the engineer may require that the permittee be responsible for installation of the permanent patch. The town shall charge each permittee a fee for the cost of said permanent patch based on the area of the final patch as calculated by the engineer. The permanent patch shall be a minimum of two feet wider and two feet longer than the temporary patch. A permanent patch size will be estimated and paid for at the time of permit application. In the event the actual size of the permanent patch exceeds the estimated size of permanent patch, the permittee shall pay the additional fee to the town within ten working days. Failure to pay said additional fees will result in the permittee forfeiting any rights to future permits until the outstanding balance is received. The town may, at its discretion, use the proceeds from the bond required in section 14-31 to pay any amounts due to the town. In the event that the actual permanent patch is smaller than the estimated size of the permanent patch, the town will promptly refund any overcharge to the permittee. The unit prices charged for the installation of the permanent patch shall be determined by the engineer in accordance with current costs and construction practices. The engineer shall advertise for bids for the permanent patching of town streets in accordance with specifications prepared by the engineer every two years. 
(Ord. of 7-19-2016(3)) 
Sec. 14-35.9. - Resurfacing. 
    When issuing a permit on any highway that has been reconstructed or resurfaced within five years of the date of the permit application, the town reserves the right to designate the patch limits and requirements, which may include curb-to-curb milling and overlay of the affected area, plus an additional five feet on each end, at a minimum. 
(Ord. of 7-19-2016(3)) 
Sec. 14-35.10. - Reconstruction of curbs and sidewalks. 
    Every permittee under the provisions of this article shall reconstruct all curbs and sidewalks disturbed by any excavation made by him with materials similar to those of which they were originally constructed. 
(Ord. of 7-19-2016(3)) 
Sec. 14-35.11. - Removing manhole covers. 
    No person shall remove any manhole cover from any manhole owned or operated by the town without first securing the permission of the engineer to do so. 
(Ord. of 7-19-2016(3)) 
Sec. 14-35.12. - Termination of permit. 
    Six months after installation of the temporary patch, the permittee shall apply in writing for termination of the permit and release from any obligation involved thereafter. If in the opinion of the engineer or his agent the work is not satisfactorily completed or settlement is occurring, necessary repairs shall be undertaken by the permittee and an additional period of liability shall be established by the engineer or his agent. The installation of a permanent patch by the town to said opening shall terminate the permit and release the permittee from any obligations thereafter. 
(Ord. of 7-19-2016(3)) 
Sec. 14-35.13. - Penalties. 
    Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this article shall be fined not more than $500.00 for a first offense and $1,000.00 for each subsequent offense. 
(Ord. of 7-19-2016(3)) 
Sec. 14-35.14. - Appeals. 
    Any person, firm or corporation aggrieved by the imposition of a fine under section 14-35.13 shall have the right to appeal to the board of selectmen the imposition of said fine in writing. The appeal shall state the reasons why the fine should not be imposed. The board of selectmen's decision in said case shall be final. 
(Ord. of 7-19-2016(3)) 
ARTICLE III. - DRIVEWAYS 

Sec. 14-36. - Permit required. 
    No construction, alteration, or repairs shall be performed on any sidewalk, curb, or driveway, paved or otherwise within the public right of way of the town until all necessary permits have been obtained in accordance with sections 14-21 and 14-22. A grade line shall be obtained from the office of the town engineer after a permit has been obtained and before construction begins. 
(Code 1961, § 17-16; Ord. of 1-5-99) 
Cross reference- Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 10. 
Sec. 14-37. - Regulations. 
    The following regulations shall apply to curbs, sidewalks, and driveways: 
(1)  All curbs shall be constructed of concrete, granite, or machine formed bituminous concrete. Location and elevation shall be specified by the town engineer. 
(2)  Sidewalks shall be constructed and located in accordance with the land subdivision regulations of the town, except that sidewalks on existing streets shall be constructed or reconstructed in accordance with section 14-5 of this chapter. 
(3)  The number of driveways per lot, location, grade and other design standards shall be specified in the zoning regulations of the town. 
(4)  The driveway apron shall be paved with at least a two inch layer of class II bituminous concrete underlayment by at least eight inches of subbase. The driveway lip, or the vertical rise at the curb line, shall be two inches. 
(5)  When a driveway crosses a watercourse, culvert, or other drainage structure designed for at least a 25 year storm shall be provided. Drainage structures shall be designed and installed to bear a minimum weight of 55,000 pounds. 
(6)  The following shall apply to driveways serving more than one principal building: 
a.  The street address of each building served by the driveway shall be indicated by numbers at least three inches high where the driveway meets the town road. 
b.  The address of each building shall be indicated by numbers at least three inches high affixed to the building. 
c.  If a common driveway divides, the direction to each structure shall be clearly shown at the point of division. 
(7)  All phases of work involved in the construction and repair of curbs, sidewalks, and driveway aprons shall be subject to inspection by the department of public works, and the town engineer. 
(8)  Definitions: 
Apron. The driveway apron is that portion of a driveway between the curb line and the street line or front lot line and within the town right of way. 
Construction materials. All construction materials cited herein shall conform to CT DOT Standard Specifications for Roads, Bridges, and Incidental Construction, latest edition. 
(Code 1961, § 17-17; Ord. of 1-5-99) 
Chapter 15 - TAXATION AND FINANCE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Finance and taxation, § 12.1 et seq. 
Cross reference- Assessments for flood or erosion control system, § 2-65 et seq.; assessor, § 2-181 et seq.; finance director, § 2-211 et seq.; employee benefits, § 2-226 et seq.; purchasing and selling, § 2-251 et seq. 
State Law reference- Taxation, G.S. Title 12. 

Sec. 15-1. - Payments by tax collector to treasurer. 
    The collector of town taxes shall pay all moneys received by him over to the treasurer on or before the fifth day of each month. 
(Code 1961, § 8-1) 
State Law reference- Duty of collector to pay receipts to treasurer on or before the fifth of each month, G.S. § 12-147. 
Sec. 15-2. - Records of indebtedness and payments to be kept by treasurer. 
    The town treasurer shall keep a true and perfect registry of all notes or bonds issued in a book kept for that purpose stating the date, the amount and the person to whom the bond or note is given, the date and amount of interest paid thereon and the name of the holder of the note or bond at the time of such payment. 
(Code 1961, § 8-2) 
Sec. 15-2.5. - Retention of overpayment of property taxes. 
    The Tax Collector of the Town of Seymour is authorized to retain property tax overpayments in excess of the amount due provided the amount of the excess payment is less than $5.00. 
(Ord. of 10-16-01(5); Ord. of 4-20-04(3) 
Sec. 15-3. - Sale of property acquired for taxes. 
    The board of selectmen are hereby authorized and empowered to sell whatever property the town has acquired or may acquire by tax foreclosure on such terms as they may deem to be in the best interests of the town. The board of selectmen shall publish in the local paper a list of the properties to be sold. 
(Code 1961, § 8-3) 
Sec. 15-4. - Disposition of revenue from tax sales. 
    All proceeds received for any property which the town acquires, including conveyances in lieu of taxes or by foreclosure, shall be turned over to the tax collector, who shall apply said proceeds to the payment of the expenses involved, and the taxes for which the property was taken, and if any balance is left, it shall be turned over to the town treasurer. 
(Code 1961, § 8-4) 
Sec. 15-5. - Tax abatement. 
    Pursuant to section 12-81b of the general statutes; retroactively to October 1, 1975, any tax-exempt organization as defined by the general statutes subsections (7) to (16) inclusive, of section 12-81, may upon written request to the board of selectmen, request an abatement of the amount paid by the tax-exempt buyer to the private seller, prorated as of the recorded date of the sale, to cover taxes paid by the private seller to the town. The board of selectmen shall make a written request to the tax assessor for the computation of the prorated abatement as of the recorded date of sale. The board of selectmen shall then authorize the tax collector to issue a check to the tax-exempt organization in the amount of the prorated abatement. 
(Code 1961, § 8-5) 
Sec. 15-6. - Property tax abatement for solar energy systems. 
(a)  Pursuant to section 12-81 of the general statutes, the board of selectmen shall grant a property tax exemption for any building or addition to a building, the construction of which is commenced on or after October 1, 1976, and before October 1, 1991, which is equipped with a solar energy heating or cooling system, to the extent of the amount by which the assessed valuation of such real property equipped with such solar heating or cooling system exceeds the excess valuation of such real property with the conventional portion of the heating or cooling system exclusive of any portion of such system related to solar energy, provided this exemption shall apply to only the first 15 assessment years following construction of such building or addition. 
(b)  An addition to a building shall mean the solar energy heating or cooling system which is added to a building which was constructed or under construction prior to October 1, 1976. The building inspector shall verify the legitimacy of such systems and the assessor shall, with the advise of the building inspector, determine the exact amount that the system adds to the value of the building. 
(Code 1961, § 8-6) 
Sec. 15-7. - Water main assessments. 
(a)  The board of selectmen is hereby designated as the authority with all powers and duties to administer any extension of water mains as provided in section 7-137c of the general statutes. The tax collector shall be the collection agency of any assessments made by the board of selectmen by virtue of action taken under section 7-137c or section 7-137d of the general statutes. 
(b)  Any assessment levied by the board of selectmen shall comply with the statutory requirements of section 7-137c of the general statutes and the assessments against each owner of property which is capable of being served by the water main and which abuts such water main shall not exceed this special benefit to such property. Such assessments may be levied at any time, but shall not be payable until the property assessed has the availability of water. The board of selectmen may allow such assessments to be paid in installments over a period not exceeding 20 years or such lesser period as the board of selectmen shall determine, and the board of selectmen shall fix the rate of interest to be paid on the outstanding balance of the installments. The board of selectmen is hereby delegated the authority to determine the particulars of such assessments and to determine the notices to be given to such property owners against whom assessments are levied and for providing for the payment and collection of such assessments. 
(Ord. of 10-6-81; Ord. of 12-6-94(5)) 
Charter reference- General powers and duties of the board of selectmen, § 7.1. 
Cross reference- Utilities, Ch. 17. 
Sec. 15-8. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- An ordinance of September 6, 1994, repealed section 15-8 in its entirety. Former § 15-8 derived from an ordinance of January 23, 1984 and pertained to budget expenditure. 
Sec. 15-9. - Authorization to waive tax bill less than $5.01. 
(a)  Title. This section, which shall be known as "Authorization to waive tax bill less than $5.01," is adopted pursuant to the provisions of Connecticut General Statute § 12-144(c) as amended. 
(b)  Waiver. The board of selectmen is hereby authorized and empowered to waive any property tax due to the town in an amount less than $5.01, provided it takes such action before the tax due date. 
(Ord. of 11-19-02(3)) 
Sec. 15-10. - Tax exemption for motor vehicles equipped for disabled persons. 
(a)  Title. This section, which shall be known as "Tax Exemption for Motor Vehicles Equipped for Disabled Persons," is adopted pursuant to the provisions of Connecticut General Statutes § 12-81c(3). 
(b)  Definitions. 
    Person with disabilities means an individual who has a physical impairment or impairments which substantially limit major life activities, such as seeing, hearing, speaking, walking, breathing, performing manual tasks, learning, caring for oneself, and working. However, an individual with a minor non-chronic condition or a condition with a short duration shall not be considered to be person with disabilities for the purpose of this ordinance. 
    The phrase "any motor vehicle owned by a person with disabilities, or owned by the parent or guardian of such person, which vehicle equipped for purposes of adapting its use to the disability of such person" means any vehicle equipped with special hand, foot or hand and foot controls, wheelchair lifts or hoists, or other adaptation to assist physically disabled drivers, which is owned by them or their parent or guardian and used by such person with disabilities. 
(c)  Motor vehicle tax exemption. Any motor vehicle which is owned and used by a Seymour resident with disabilities or owned by the parent or guardian of such person, which is equipped for such disabled person, is hereby eligible for exemption from the motor vehicle tax of the Town of Seymour, provided that an application for such exemption is filed with the Seymour Assessor's Office in a timely manner pursuant to the provisions of subsection (d) of this section and the motor vehicle is found by the Seymour Assessor to satisfy the criteria set forth in this section for such an exemption. 
(d)  Procedures for application. An applicant for a motor vehicle tax exemption pursuant to this ordinance shall file an application with the assessor, annually, at any time from the assessment date to within two months after the tax due date. Said application shall contain all information reasonably required by the assessor to enable him to determine whether or not the applicant and the vehicle satisfy all the requirements set forth in this section. The assessor may require the submission of such supplemental information and documentation as he may reasonably require enabling him to determine if the applicant is entitled to said tax exemption. The assessor shall determine whether the applicant is eligible for said tax exemption pursuant to the provisions of this section. 
    The assessor, in making such determination, may inspect said motor vehicle and consider the extent to which motor vehicle has been modified, the purpose for which the vehicle is being used, and the exclusivity of the use of said vehicle. Failure to file an application for said exemption annually shall result in the loss of the tax exemption, but will not preclude any applicant from making application in subsequent years. 
(e)  Effective date. The provisions of this section shall become effective for the October 1, 2002 assessment year upon approval of the Seymour's Board of Selectmen. Notwithstanding the effective date of October 1, 2002, any such previous motor vehicle tax exemption approved by the assessor for assessment years 1998 through 2001 is hereby ratified and given retroactive effect. 
(Ord. of 11-19-02(4)) 
Sec. 15-11. - Permits and licenses to be withheld from delinquent taxpayers. 
(a)  [ Conditions for non-issuance of permits and licenses; revocation. ] 
(1)  No building permit, certificate of occupancy, and/or other construction permit for improvements or changes in real property shall be issued for any real property for which there are delinquent municipal taxes, including water and sewer rates, charges and/or assessments. 
(2)  Any license or permit for a business enterprise may be revoked, and no license or permit to operate a business enterprise shall be issued, if any taxes levied by the town against personal property used in such business are delinquent and have been so delinquent for a period of not less than one year. 
(b)  [ Delinquency list; tax collector certification. ] 
(1)  The Tax Collector of the Town of Seymour shall file with the building official, health district and board of selectmen a list of all properties and property owners who are delinquent under the terms of this section in the real property taxes, personal property taxes, sewer use taxes and any municipal assessments as of August 1 and February 1 of each year. 
(2)  Before approving or renewing any building application for property which appears on the tax collector's last filed delinquency list, the building official shall request the applicant to obtain written certification from the tax collector that the delinquent taxes haven been paid in full, including all statutory interest. 
(3)  The building official may grant a building application without the payment of all delinquent taxes if he certifies, in writing, that an emergency exists affecting the health and safety of the occupants of a building or property that is delinquent in property taxes. 
(4)  Before approving or renewing any license or permit to operate a business enterprise for property, the health district shall require the applicant to obtain written certification from the tax collector that delinquent taxes have been paid in full, including all statutory interest. 
(Ord. of 7-21-15(2), §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 15-12. - Additional property tax exemption for 100 percent disabled veterans. 
(a)  Effective for the assessment year commencing October 1, 2014, and each assessment year thereafter, Seymour shall provide that, in lieu of the additional exemption prescribed under Subsection 12-81g(a), C.G.S., any person entitled to an exemption from property tax in accordance with Section 12-81(20), C.G.S., reflecting any increase made pursuant to the provisions in Section l2-62g, C.G.S., who has a disability rating of 100 percent, as determined by the United States Department of Veterans Affairs, shall be entitled to an additional exemption from such tax in an amount equal to three times the amount of the exemption provided for such person pursuant to Section 12-81(20), C.G.S., provided such person's total adjusted gross income as determined for purposes of the federal income tax, plus any other income not included in such adjusted income, excluding veterans' disability payments, individually if unmarried, or jointly with spouse if married, during the calendar year ending immediately preceding the filing of a claim for any such exemption, is not more than $21,000.00 if such person is married or not more than $18,000.00 if such person is not married. 
(b)  Any claimant who, for purposes of obtaining an exemption under this section, willfully fails to disclose all matters related thereto or with intent to defraud makes any false statement shall forfeit the right to claim such additional veterans' exemption. 
(Ord. of 7-21-15(4)) 
Sec. 15-13. - Manufacturing exemption. 
(a)  Any manufacturer claiming exemption under Section 12-81(76), C.G.S., who failed to file a claim as required, and further failed to apply for extension per Section 12-81k, C.G.S., may seek relief for such exemption with the board of selectmen provided taxpayer files a manufacturing, machinery and equipment exemption claim form with the assessor prior to meeting with the board of selectmen. 
(b)  Effective for the October 1, 2015, grand list and subsequent grand list years, the deadline to meet with the board of selectmen for such year shall be prior to May 1, following such assessment date of October 1, at their regularly scheduled meeting. Such meeting shall be public. 
(c)  Effective for the October 1, 2014, grand list only, the deadline to meet with the board of selectmen shall be prior to January 1, 2016, at their regularly scheduled meeting. Such meeting shall be public. 
(d)  The board of selectmen may grant such exemption according to criteria set by such board on a case-by-case basis. 
(e)  Final decisions by board of selectmen shall be in the minutes of such meeting and assessor shall be notified of such decision by the first selectman within ten days of such meeting. 
(f)  None of the above shall be construed to override the assessor if the assessor deems such equipment does not qualify for exemption under Section 12-81(76), C.G.S. 
(Ord. of 10-20-15(1), §§ 1-6) 
Sec. 15-14. - Debt service fund. 
(a)  Creation; purpose; intent. There is hereby created within the financial accounts of the Town of Seymour a fund known as the "debt service fund." The purpose of said fund is to account for accumulations of resources in connection with the payment of principal and interest maturing in future years. 
(b)  Disclosure statement; financial activities. The debt service fund shall disclose and report all activities of the fund at the end of each fiscal year. All financial activities of the debt service fund shall be accounted for and reported in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP) as promulgated for state and local governments by the government accounting standards board (GASB). 
(Ord. of 6-6-18(1)) 
Chapter 16 - TRAFFIC AND MOTOR VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Operation of motor vehicles on school grounds, § 11-15; transportation of intoxicating liquors by minors, § 11-18; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 14. 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate traffic generally, G.S. § 7-148(c)(7)(B)(i); authority to regulate speed of vehicles, G.S. § 7-148(c)(7)(B)(ii); authority restricted, G.S. § 14-162. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 16-1. - Definitions. 
    Whenever in this chapter the following terms are used they shall the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section. 
    Alley. A public way within a block, generally giving access to the rear of lots or buildings, and not used for general traffic circulation. 
    Bicycle. Every device, propelled by human power upon which any person may ride, having two tandem wheels either of which is more than 20 inches in diameter. 
    Board of police commissioners. The duly appointed members of the board of police commissioners acting in their official capacity. 
    Crosswalk. That portion of the roadway included within the prolongation of the sidewalk lines at street intersections. 
    Driver. Every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a vehicle. 
    Emergency vehicle. Police vehicles, vehicles of the fire department, ambulances, vehicles carrying a state, or municipal officer or employee in response to an emergency call, and emergency vehicles of public service corporations on an emergency call. 
    Explosive. Any chemical compound or mechanical mixture that is commonly used or intended for the purpose of producing an explosion and which contains any oxidizing and combustive units or other ingredients in such proportions, quantities, or packing that an ignition by fire, by friction, by concussion, by percussion, or by detonator of any part of the compound or mixture may cause such a sudden generation of highly heated gases that the resultant gaseous pressures are capable of producing destructible effects on contiguous objects or of destroying life or limb. 
    Farm tractor. Every motor vehicle designed and used primarily as a farm implement for drawing plows, mowing machines, and other implements of husbandry. 
    Improved highway. A roadway of concrete, brick, asphalt, macadam or gravel. 
    Intersection. The area embraced within the prolongation of the property lines of two or more streets which join at an angle, whether or not such streets cross. 
    Laned roadway. A street, the roadway of which is divided into two or more clearly marked lanes for vehicular traffic. 
    Loading zone. The space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials. 
    Merging traffic. A maneuver executed by the drivers of vehicles on converging roadways to permit simultaneous or alternate entry into the junction thereof, wherein the driver of each vehicle involved is required to adjust his vehicular speed and lateral position so as to avoid a collision with any other vehicles. 
    Metal tires. Every tire the surface of which in contact with the roadway is wholly or partially metal or other hard, nonresilient material. 
    Motorcycle. Every motor vehicle having a saddle for the use of the rider and designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with the ground, but excluding a tractor. 
    Motor vehicle. Every vehicle which is self-propelled, but not operated upon rails. 
    Park. To stand a vehicle whether occupied or not, for a period of time greater than is reasonably necessary for the actual loading or unloading of persons. 
    Pedestrian. Any person afoot. 
    Pneumatic tire. Every tire in which compressed air is designed to support the load. 
    Property line. The line marking the boundary between any street and lots or property abutting thereon. 
    Public building. A building used by the municipality, the county, the state or the United States government. 
    Right-of-way. The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway. 
    Road tractor. Every motor vehicle designed and used for drawing other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry any load thereon either independently or any part of the weight of a vehicle or load so drawn. 
    Safety zone. That portion of a roadway reserved for the exclusive use of pedestrians, suitably marked or elevated. 
    School bus. Every motor vehicle operated by or for a public or governmental agency or by or for a private or religious organization solely for the transportation of pupils in connection with school activities. 
    Semitrailer. Every vehicle without motive power designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed that some part of its weight and that of its load rests upon or is carried by another vehicle. 
    Sidewalk. That portion of a street between the curbline or roadway and the adjacent property line designated for pedestrian use. 
    Solid tire. Every tire of rubber or other resilient material which does not depend upon compressed air for the support of the load. 
    Street or highway. The entire width between property lines or every way or place of whatever nature when any part thereof is open to the use of the public, as a matter of right, for the purpose of vehicular traffic. 
    Traffic. Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles and other conveyances whether singly or together while using any highway for the purpose of travel. 
    Trailer. Every vehicle without motive power designed for carrying passengers or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed that no part of its weight rests upon the towing vehicle. 
    Truck tractor. Every motor vehicle designed and used primarily for drawing other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry a load other than a part of the weight of the vehicle and load so drawn. 
    Urban district. The territory contiguous to and including any street which is built up with structures devoted to business, industry or dwelling houses situated at intervals of less than 100 feet for a distance of a quarter mile or more. 
    Vehicle. Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway except devices moving by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
    Yield right-of-way. When required by an official sign, means the act of granting the privilege of the immediate use of the intersecting roadway to traffic within the intersection and to vehicles approaching from the right or left, provided that when the roadway is clear the vehicle may proceed into the intersection. 
(Code 1961, § 13-A-1) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 16-2. - Obedience to police. 
    Members of the police department and special police assigned to traffic duty, are hereby authorized to direct all traffic in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, or in emergencies as public safety or convenience may require and it shall be unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order, signal or direction of a policeman. It shall be unlawful for any person not authorized by law, to direct or attempt to direct traffic, provided that this section shall not apply to emergency accident situations where a duly authorized officer of the law is not the scene. 
(Code 1961, § 13-A-2) 
Sec. 16-3. - Signs and signals. 
    It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to disobey the instructions of any traffic sign or signal placed in view by authority of the board of police commissioners or in accordance with the laws of the state, except on direction of a police officer. 
(Code 1961, § 13-A-3) 
Sec. 16-4. - Traffic-control signal legend. 
(a)  The following legend shall apply to all drivers and pedestrians. When traffic at an intersection is alternately directed to proceed and to stop by the use of signals exhibiting colored lights or lighted arrows, successively one at a time or in combination, only the colors green, red and yellow shall be used, except for special pedestrian-control signals carrying word legends, these lights shall apply to drivers of vehicles and pedestrians and shall indicate the following: 
(1)  Circular green alone. Vehicular traffic facing a green signal may proceed straight through or turn right or left unless a sign or marking at such place prohibits either such turn or straight through movement, except that such traffic shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians and vehicles lawfully within a crosswalk or the intersection at the time such signal was exhibited; pedestrians facing the green signal, except when directed by separate pedestrian-control signals, may proceed across the highway within any marked or unmarked crosswalk. 
(2)  Yellow. Vehicular traffic facing a steady yellow signal is thereby warned that the related green movement is being terminated or that a red indication will be exhibited immediately thereafter, when vehicular traffic shall stop before entering the intersection unless so close to the intersection that a stop cannot be made in safety; pedestrians facing a steady yellow signal, except when directed by separate pedestrian-control signals, are thereby advised that there is insufficient time to cross the roadway before a red indication is shown and no pedestrian shall then start to cross the roadway. 
(3)  Red alone. Vehicular traffic facing a steady red signal alone shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, if none, then before entering the intersection and remain standing until the next indication is shown; pedestrians facing a steady red signal alone, except when directed by separate pedestrian-control signals, shall not enter the roadway. 
(4)  Green arrow. Vehicular traffic facing a green arrow signal, shown alone or in combination with another indication, may cautiously enter the intersection only to make the movement indicated by such arrow, or such other movement as is permitted by other indications shown at the same time, but such vehicular traffic shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within a crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully within the intersection. 
(5)  Pedestrian signals. Whenever special pedestrian-control signals exhibiting the words "Walk" or "Don't Walk" are in place such signals shall indicate as follows: 
a.  Walk. Pedestrians facing such signals may proceed across the roadway in the direction of the signal and shall be given the right-of-way by the drivers of all vehicles; 
b.  Don't walk. No pedestrian shall start to cross the roadway in the direction of such signal, but any pedestrian who has partially completed his crossing on the walk signal shall proceed to a sidewalk or safety island while the "Don't Walk" signal is showing. 
(b)  When an illuminated flashing red or yellow signal is used in a traffic sign or signal, it shall require obedience by vehicular traffic as follows: 
(1)  Flashing red. When a red lens is illuminated by rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk at an intersection, or at a limit line when marked or, if none, then before entering the intersection, and the right to proceed shall be subject to the rules applicable after making a stop at a stop sign. 
(2)  Flashing yellow. When a yellow lens is illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles facing such signal may proceed through the intersection or past such signal only with caution. 
(c)  When lane-directions-control signals are placed over the individual lanes of a street or highway, vehicular traffic may travel in any lane over which a green arrow signal is shown, but shall not enter or travel in any lane over which a red X signal is shown. 
(d)  If a traffic-control signal, approved by the state traffic commission, is erected and maintained at a place other than an intersection, the provisions of this section shall be applicable except as to those provisions which by their nature can have no application. Any stop required shall be made at a sign or marking on the pavement indicating where the stop shall be made, but in the absence of any sign or marking the stop shall be made at the signal. 
(Code 1961, § 13-A-1) 
Sec. 16-5. - Unauthorized signs. 
    No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any highway any unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic-control device or railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic, nor shall any person place, maintain or display upon or in view of any highway any other sign which hides from view or interferes with the movement of traffic or effectiveness of any traffic-control device or any railroad sign or signal, and no person shall place or maintain nor shall any public authority permit upon any highway any traffic or signal bearing thereon any commercial advertising. Any such unauthorized device is hereby declared to be a nuisance, and may be removed by any policeman. 
(Code 1961, § 13-A-1) 
Sec. 16-6. - Interference with signs or signals. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to deface, injure, move or interfere with any official traffic sign or signal. 
(Code 1961, § 13-A-1) 
Sec. 16-7. - Animals or bicycles. 
    Every person riding a bicycle or an animal, or driving any animal drawing a vehicle upon any street, shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter applicable to the driver of a vehicle, except those provisions which can have no application to one riding a bicycle or driving or riding an animal, provided that, except in business districts, bicycles may be ridden on sidewalks. 
(Code 1961, § 13-A-1) 
Sec. 16-8. - Riding on running boards. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to ride upon the fenders, running boards or outside step of any vehicle except on municipal vehicles where required for municipal services. 
(Code 1961, § 13-A-4) 
Sec. 16-9. - Clinging to vehicles. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person on any street riding a bicycle, motorcycle or any toy vehicle to cling to or to attach himself or his vehicle to any moving motor vehicle or wagon. 
(Code 1961, § 13-A-4) 
Sec. 16-10. - Unattended animals. 
    It shall be unlawful to leave any horse or other draft animal unattended in any street without having such animal securely fastened. 
(Code 1961, § 13-A-4) 
Sec. 16-11. - Toy vehicles. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person upon skates, a coaster, sled or other toy vehicle, to go upon any roadway other than at a crosswalk. This section shall not apply to bicycles. 
(Code 1961, § 13-A-4) 
Sec. 16-12. - Unattended vehicles. 
    No vehicle shall be left unattended while the motor of such vehicle is running; and no vehicle shall be left without a driver on any hill or incline unless the vehicle is secured against moving. Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle unattended upon any bridge or where such vehicle constitutes an obstruction to traffic, such officer is hereby authorized to provide for the removal of such vehicle to the nearest garage or other place of safety. 
(Code 1961, § 13-A-4) 
Sec. 16-13. - Obstruction of traffic. 
    No vehicle shall be operated or allowed to remain upon the street in such a manner as to form an unreasonable obstruction to the traffic thereon. 
(Code 1961, § 13-A-4) 
Sec. 16-14. - Exemptions. 
    The provisions of this chapter regulating the movement or parking of vehicles shall not apply to the driver of any authorized emergency vehicle when responding to an emergency call, but such driver upon approaching a red or stop signal or any stop sign shall slow down as necessary for safety but may proceed cautiously past such red or stop sign or signal. At other times drivers of authorized emergency vehicles shall stop in obedience to a stop sign or signal. No driver of any authorized emergency vehicle shall assume any special privileges under the provisions of this chapter except when such vehicle is operated in response to an emergency call or in the immediate pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law, or except as may otherwise be provided by the general statutes. 
(Code 1961, § 13-A-1) 
Secs. 16-15-16-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OPERATION 

Sec. 16-31. - Through streets and one-way streets. 
(a)  One-way streets or alleys. It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle on any street or alley designated as a one-way street or alley by regulation of the board of police commissioners in any direction other than that so designated. 
(b)  Stop streets. The driver of a vehicle shall make a complete stop in obedience to a stop sign at an intersection where a stop sign is erected at one or more entrances thereto, and shall thereupon proceed cautiously yielding to the vehicles not so obliged to stop which are within the intersection or approaching so close as to constitute an immediate hazard, unless traffic at such intersection is controlled by a police officer on duty, in which event the directions of the police officer shall be complied with. 
(c)  Posting signs. The chief of police or any other person designated by the board of police commissioners shall post or cause to be posted suitable signs for all such through streets, one-way streets or alleys, and stop intersections as have been established by the board of police commissioners acting as the traffic authority of the town, provided that if such installation shall require the use of heavy equipment the board of police commissioners shall so notify the first selectman who shall cause such signs to be erected by the street department. 
(Code 1961, § 13-A-4) 
Sec. 16-32. - "U" turns. 
    It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to make a "U" turn on any street. 
(Code 1961, § 13-A-3) 
Sec. 16-33. - No left turn. 
    It shall be unlawful for the operator of any motor vehicle to turn left at any place when such turns are prohibited by posted sign. 
(Code 1961, § 13-A-3) 
Sec. 16-34. - Fire department vehicles; fires. 
(a)  Upon the approach of a fire department vehicle, drivers of vehicles shall comply with the provisions of his chapter relating to the approach of authorized emergency vehicles. It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle, other than one on official business, including police, firemen, ambulance drivers and the like to follow any fire apparatus in response to a fire alarm, closer than one block, or to park any vehicle within the block where fire apparatus has stopped to answer a fire alarm. 
(b)  It shall be further unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to drive over any unprotected hose of the fire department without the consent of the fire chief or the assistant in command. 
(Code 1961, § 13-A-3) 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 6. 
Sec. 16-35. - Speed restrictions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to drive any motor vehicle on any street not under the jurisdiction of the state, in an urban district within the town at a speed in excess of 30 miles per hour, or in an alley at a speed in excess of 15 miles per hour, or in a school zone in excess of 20 miles per hour. 
(b)  The board of police commissioners shall post appropriate signs as provided in section 16-31(c); provided further that the speed of all vehicles, having two or more solid tires shall not exceed ten miles per hour. 
(c)  The fact that the speed of a vehicle does not exceed the applicable maximum speed limit does not relieve the driver from the duty to decrease speed when approaching and crossing an intersection, when approaching and going around a curve, when approaching a hillcrest, when traveling upon any narrow or winding roadway or when special hazards exist with respect to pedestrians or other traffic by reason of weather or highway conditions; and speed shall be decreased as may be necessary to avoid colliding with any person or vehicle on or entering the highway in compliance with legal requirements and the duty of all persons to use due care. 
(Code 1961, § 13-A-4) 
Sec. 16-36. - Special speed limit while passing schools. 
    No person shall drive a motor vehicle at a speed in excess of 20 miles per hour while passing a school zone. School zones shall be marked by a posted sign marked "School Zone." 
(Code 1961, § 13-A-4) 
Sec. 16-37. - Operation of vehicles on approach of authorized emergency vehicles. 
(a)  Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle, when the driver is giving audible sign by siren, or bell, the driver of every other vehicle shall yield the right-of-way and shall immediately drive to a position parallel to, and as close as possible to the right-hand edge or curb of the highway clear of any intersection and shall stop or remain in such position until the authorized emergency vehicle has passed, except when otherwise directed by a police officer. 
(b)  This section shall not operate to relieve the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons using the highway. 
(Code 1961, § 13-A-4) 
Sec. 16-38. - One-way roadways and rotary traffic islands. 
(a)  Upon a roadway designated and signposted for one-way traffic a vehicle shall be driven only in the direction designated. 
(b)  A vehicle passing around a rotary traffic island shall be driven only on the right of such island. 
(Code 1961, § 13-A-4) 
Sec. 16-39. - Funeral processions to be identified. 
    A funeral composed of a procession of vehicles shall be identified by having the lights of each vehicle lighted. 
(Code 1961, § 13-A-4) 
Sec. 16-40. - Drivers in a procession. 
    Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the right-hand edge of the roadway as practical and shall follow the vehicle ahead as closely as practical and safe. 
(Code 1961, § 13-A-4) 
Sec. 16-41. - Driving through funeral or other procession. 
    No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral or other authorized procession while they are in motion and when such vehicles are conspicuously designated as required in section 16-39. 
(Code 1961, § 13-A-4) 
Secs. 16-42-16-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PARKING, STOPPING AND STANDING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Parking authorities, G.S. § 7-202 et seq.; creation, G.S. § 7-203; powers, G.S. § 7-204; financing of city parking authority, G.S. § 7-205; revenue bonds of city parking authority, G.S. § 7-206; rates and charges of municipal parking authority, G.S. § 7-207; parking vehicles, G.S. § 14-251; parking to obstruct driveways, G.S. § 14-252. 

Sec. 16-61. - Parking authority-Created. 
    Pursuant to section 7-203 of the general statutes there is hereby created a parking authority which shall be known as the Seymour Parking Authority. 
(Code 1961, § 18-1) 
Sec. 16-62. - Same-Membership; terms; compensation; organization; records. 
(a)  The parking authority shall consist of five members appointed by the first selectman, not more than three of whom shall be of the same political party. Those first appointed shall be designated to serve for one, two, three, four and five years respectively; and thereafter a member shall be appointed annually to serve for five years, except that any vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired portion of the term. 
(b)  The parking authority shall select from among its members a chairman, vice-chairman and secretary. The members of the authority shall serve without compensation, but may be reimbursed for necessary expenses. 
(c)  No action of the parking authority shall be valid unless authorized by a vote of the majority of its members. 
(d)  The parking authority shall maintain proper accounting and financial records and shall make an annual report to the first selectman. 
(Code 1961, § 18-2) 
Sec. 16-63. - Same-Powers. 
    The parking authority shall have the powers mandated as obligatory by the state general statutes. 
(Code 1961, § 18-2.1) 
Sec. 16-64. - No parking places. 
    At any time it shall be unlawful to permit any vehicle to stand in any of the following places, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a policeman or traffic-control device: 
(1)  In any intersection; 
(2)  In a crosswalk; 
(3)  Upon any bridge or the approach thereto; 
(4)  Within 25 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station; 
(5)  On any sidewalk; 
(6)  At any place where official signs prohibit parking; 
(7)  Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant. 
(Code 1961, § 13-A-5) 
Sec. 16-65. - Alleys. 
    No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet of the width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, an no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within an alley in such a position as to block the driveway entrance to any abutting property. 
(Code 1961, § 13-A-5) 
Sec. 16-66. - Cab and bus stands. 
    No vehicle other than a licensed taxicab shall be parked in any area designated by posted sign as a cab stand; and no vehicle other than a bus shall be parked in a place so designated as a bus loading zone. 
(Code 1961, § 13-A-5) 
Sec. 16-67. - Time limit parking. 
(a)  Except on Sundays or holidays, it shall be unlawful to park any vehicle for a longer consecutive period of time than that designated in any area designated by regulation of the board of police commissioners as a limited parking area and so marked. 
(b)  No vehicle shall be parked on a public highway between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. during the months of December, January, February and March. 
(Code 1961, § 13-A-5) 
Sec. 16-68. - Parking motor vehicles on private property. 
    It shall be unlawful to park any motor vehicle on any private property without the consent of the owner of the property. 
(Code 1961, § 13-A-5) 
Sec. 16-69. - Vehicles for sale. 
    It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle upon any street for the purpose of displaying it for sale, or to park any vehicle upon any business street from which vehicle merchandise is peddled. 
(Code 1961, § 13-A-4) 
Sec. 16-70. - Parking regulation attendants. 
(a)  The Seymour Parking Authority is hereby authorized to employ up to three parking regulation attendants who shall hold office during periods of satisfactory performance and whose duties shall be as hereinafter set forth. 
(b)  Parking regulation attendants are empowered to issue violation notices (tickets) on forms provided by the police department for all motor vehicle violations of vehicles parked upon business district streets or in business district parking lots in the town, in violation of the general statutes, the Code of Ordinances and regulations of the Seymour Parking Authority. 
(c)  Attendants shall serve under the direction of the chief of police who shall prescribe the hours of employment and direct the specific duties to be performed by parking regulation attendants. 
(d)  Parking regulation attendants shall receive such compensation as shall be duly authorized by the Seymour Parking Authority. 
(Code 1961, § 13-A-9; Ord. of 2-1-83, §§ 1-4; Ord. of 4-16-91) 
Sec. 16-71. - Business district parking. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words and phrases when used in this section shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection: 
    Business district streets. For purposes of this subsection, the business district streets in the town shall include the following: Main Street, Broad Street, River Street, Bank Street from street numbers 1 through 141, North Main Street from Bank Street to Main Street, Wakeley Street, First Street, and DeForest Street. 
    Business district parking lots. The parking lot areas located on Wakeley Street, Franklin Street, and the leased portions of the Strand Theater parking lot, located at the corner of North Main and Main Streets and the parking lot on Lower Main Street at the intersection of Broad Street. 
(b)  Business district street parking. It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle or to permit a vehicle to remain parked in one location on any business district street for a period longer than two hours between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday, inclusive, except as may be otherwise posted in designated areas approved by the Seymour Parking Authority. This restriction shall not apply to Sundays and the legal observances of the following holidays: New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day. Any vehicle parked for a period of longer than two hours on a business district street may be fined successively at intervals not less than two hours apart. 
(c)  Business district parking in parking lots. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle or to permit a vehicle to remain parked in any business district parking lot between the hours of 5:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. Monday through Friday, inclusive, without displaying an approved parking permit sticker for the particular parking lot wherein the vehicle is parked issued to the owner or driver of the vehicle by the Seymour Parking Authority. The parking permit sticker shall be affixed on the inside of the vehicle's front windshield at the bottom corner of the passenger side in such a manner that a parking attendant or police officer may easily view the sticker at a distance when standing in back of the vehicle. 
(2)  An application for a parking permit shall be made at the police department. If an application is approve, a parking permit sticker will be issued to the applicant. Applications will be approved or denied by the Seymour Parking Authority or by whomever the Seymour Parking Authority may designate to do so. Priority for such permits will be given to the owners and employees of businesses located in the business district and residents living within the business district. 
(3)  An annual fee shall be charged by the Seymour Parking Authority for the issuance or renewal of a parking permit. All parking permits shall expire and are subject to renewal on June thirtieth of each year. The fee shall be $10.00. If any parking permit is issued between December 31st and June 30th, the parking permit fee shall be $5.00 for the period from the time of issuance through June thirtieth. 
(4)  A parking permit sticker shall display a parking permit number and may be used only on the vehicle for which it was issued. A maximum of two parking permit stickers for two motor vehicles may be issued to each applicant. However, the individual to whom a permit has been issued may be issued a replacement sticker for another vehicle without paying an additional fee, if the previously issued sticker is surrendered, in order to transfer the permit to another vehicle owned or driven by the applicant upon completing the appropriate form or forms at the police department. If the previously issued parking permit sticker is not surrendered, a fee for a new parking permit sticker will be charged. 
(5)  Parking permit stickers are not transferable and cannot be used on any vehicle other than the vehicle for which the permit was issued. 
(6)  The Seymour Parking Authority, or whomever they designate to approve or deny applications for parking permits, may issue parking permit stickers to applicants with specific restrictions. 
(7)  A courtesy or temporary parking permit sticker may be issued at the discretion of the Seymour Parking Authority, or its designee, until such time as an application for a parking permit is granted or denied. 
(8)  Any vehicle not displaying the required parking permit sticker during the hours of 5:00 a.m. through 10:00 a.m. Monday through Friday, inclusive, shall be subject to a fine and/or may be towed at the owner's expense. 
(9)  All vehicles parked in the business district parking lots shall be parked in the spaces provided between the designated parking lines. Any vehicle not so parked shall be subject to a fine and/or may be towed at the owner's expense. 
(10)  In the event that the status of a parking permit holder changes so that he or she no longer qualifies for a parking permit, his or her parking permit and sticker shall be revoked immediately without any necessary action by the Seymour Parking Authority or other administrator of this parking program. There will be no rebate of the parking permit fee if the permit is revoked. 
(11)  Any person who transfers a parking permit sticker to an unauthorized vehicle shall be fined in accordance with section 1-9 and such person may have his parking permit revoked. The unauthorized vehicle may also be towed at the owner's expense. 
(Ord. of 2-1-83, §§ 1-3; Ord. of 4-16-91) 
Sec. 16-72. - Handicapped parking. 
(a)  Applicability. This section shall apply to all new and existing sites that have a parking area for 25 or more vehicles, including but not limited to, shopping centers, office buildings, commercial buildings, mercantile buildings, factories, warehouses, storage buildings, convalescent homes, apartment buildings and schools but excluding public parking areas controlled by the local traffic authority. In addition, the local traffic authority may designate handicapped parking spaces on town roads which shall be of such size and location as they may specify. 
(b)  Use of specially designated spaces. After establishment of specially marked parking spaces for handicapped persons, no persons shall park a motor vehicle in such space unless a handicapped person is either a passenger or operator of the vehicle, and the vehicle contains a designation issued by the commissioners of motor vehicles pursuant to the general statutes, which designation shall be visible as per the general statutes, or a handicapped designation issued by another state. Parking spaces for the handicapped shall be located as close as possible to elevators, ramps, walkways and entrances, and to curb cuts and other structures permitting sidewalk access to a handicapped person. The exact location and number of spaces shall be designated by the traffic authority or his designee, but in no event may the traffic authority designate fewer spaces than required by state law. 
(c)  Suggested number of spaces to be provided. On each site having parking spaces for at least 25 vehicles, the parking authority may require that one space shall be specially designated and reserved for handicapped parking. Additional spaces for handicapped parking may be required by the traffic authority in accordance with the following table: 
Total Parking On Site Number of Handicapped
Parking Spaces 25-50 1 51-100 2 101-150 3 151-200 4 201-300 5 301-400 6 401-500 7 501-1000 2% of total Over 1000 20 Plus 1 for each 100 over 1000  
(d)  Marking of spaces. Each such space designated for handicapped parking shall be not less than 15 feet in width, including three feet of cross hatch, unless the same would create a nonconforming condition, in which event, the existing parking stall width shall be permitted. Each space shall be designated by above grade signs with white lettering against a blue background and shall bear the words "HANDICAPPED PARKING STATE PERMIT REQUIRED." Such signs on markings shall be erected, installed and maintained by and at the expense of the owner, operator, lessee or tenant of said site and shall further indicate that unauthorized use of said space shall subject the violator to a fine. If the signs and markings called for in this section are not installed within 30 days after written request by the town traffic authority, the town may proceed to install the same and impose the costs thereof against the owner of the site. 
(e)  Penalty. Whenever any vehicle shall be found parked in violation of this section, any police officer or parking attendant may issue a citation for such violation, which citation shall provide for a fine, in the amount as stated on said citation, and said fine shall be payable to the police department within 48 hours after issuance. 
(f)  Owner's responsibility for violations. The registered owner of any vehicle parked in violation of this section shall be presumed to be the operator at the time of the violation. 
(Ord. of 2-2-82; Ord. of 4-16-91) 
State Law reference- Parking privileges of handicapped persons generally, G.S. § 14-253a; parking, privileges of handicapped veterans, G.S. § 14-254. 
Sec. 16-73. - Tickets. 
    For offenses against the provisions of this article, the police officers or parking regulation attendants, after making note of the registration number of the vehicle and the name of the offender where possible, may issue a traffic violation ticket on a form approved by the chief of police notifying the offender to appear at the police station. Such officer or parking regulation attendant may sign a complaint for the issuance of a warrant if the offender does not appear as the time and place so specified. 
(Ord. of 2-1-83; Ord. of 4-16-91) 
Sec. 16-74. - Prima facie proof. 
    The fact that an automobile which is illegally parked is registered in the name of a person shall be considered prima facie proof that such person was in control of the automobile at the time of such parking. 
(Code 1961, § 13-A-7; Ord. of 4-16-91) 
Sec. 16-75. - Parking violations. 
(a)  Any person accused of a violation of the provisions of this article or any regulation of the Seymour Parking Authority prohibiting parking a vehicle in a designated area, or restricting the length of time a vehicle may be parked there, may settle and compromise the claim against him or her for such illegal parking by paying to the town the sum as prescribed on the violation ticket, within the allotted time as directed on the violation ticket. If said fine is not paid within the allotted time, said fine shall double, in amount, every 48 hours until it reaches the amount of $50.00, at which time a warrant shall be applied for. 
(b)  The board of police commissioners may recommend from time to time to the board of selectmen modifications of parking fines. The board of selectmen shall be responsible for determining the amount of parking violation fines. 
(c)  The members of the police department, as well as parking regulation attendants, are hereby directed to refrain from instituting a prosecution for the alleged offense if the payment pursuant to this subsection has been made within 120 hours of the time of this issuance of the ticket. 
(Ord. of 2-1-83; Ord. of 4-16-91) 
Sec. 16-76. - Towing cars away. 
(a)  The police department, and all members thereof assigned to traffic duty, are hereby authorized to remove and tow away, or have removed and towed away by commercial towing service, any car or other vehicle illegally parked in any place where such parked vehicle creates or constitutes a traffic hazard, blocks the use of a fire hydrant, or obstructs or may obstruct the movement of any emergency vehicle or obstructs removal of snow between the first day of December and the ensuing March 31st. 
(b)  Cars towed away for illegal parking shall be stored in a safe place and shall be restored to the owner or operator of such car upon payment of the parking violation, at the police department, within 48 hours after the time such car was removed, plus costs of towing and storage. 
(Code 1961, § 13-A-7; Ord. of 4-16-91) 
State Law reference- Removal of abandoned motor vehicles by municipalities, G.S. § 14-150a. 
Sec. 16-77. - Pending criminal prosecutions. 
    Nothing within the provisions of this article shall be deemed to affect the disposition or prosecution of any criminal prosecution pending at the time of the enactment of this Code of Ordinances. 
(Code 1961, § 13-A-8) 
Chapter 17 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Board of public works, § 10.13; water pollution control authority, § 10.14. 
Cross reference- Health and sanitation, Ch. 8; housing, Ch. 9; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 14; zoning, App. A; subdivisions, App. B. 
State Law reference- Power of town to lay out, construct, etc., sewer and drainage systems and sewage disposal plants, G.S. § 7-148(c)(6)(b)(i); power of town to contract for the furnishing of water, G.S. § 7-148(c)(4)(G); power of town to create, etc., all things in the nature of public works and improvements, G.S. § 7-148(c)(6)(A)(ii); power of town to regulate the laying, etc., of water pipes, drains, sewers, etc., in the streets and public places, G.S. § 7-148(c)(6)(B)(iii); power of town to regulate and prohibit the construction, etc., of sinks, cesspools, G.S. § 7-148(c)(7)(C); municipal waterworks systems, G.S. § 7-234 et seq.; municipal sewerage systems, G.S. § 7-245 et seq.; sewer districts, G.S. § 7-324 et seq.; water resources, G.S. § 25-1 et seq.; sewer revenue bonds G.S. §§ 7-259-7-266. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 17-1-17-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SEWERS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 17-26. - Pipe depth. 
    No earthenware pipe shall be laid less than two and one-half feet deep underground. Pipe laid at less than such depth shall be of heavy cast iron with well caulked and leaded joints. 
(Code 1961, § 16-7) 
Sec. 17-27. - Standards for pipes and joints. 
(a)  Inverts. All pipes shall be laid with ends abutting and true to line and grade, so that they will form a sewer with a smooth and uniform invert. 
(b)  Support. The pipes shall be so laid as to be evenly supported throughout the length of the barrel with no weight resting on the bell. 
(c)  Joints. Joints shall be thoroughly and carefully caulked with a closely twisted hemp or jute gasket (untarred) in one continuous piece, of sufficient thickness to hold the pipes in the required relative positions, and in such way as to make the gaskets substantially watertight. The plastic compound to be used in jointing the pipe shall be steam reduced asphalt with a melting point of between 165 degrees Fahrenheit to 185 degrees Fahrenheit and acid filler, 100 percent of which will pass a 280 mesh sieve. The compound shall be heated in a gasoline or other suitable furnace to a temperature slightly above that at which it will pour rapidly and smoothly, at which it shall be kept until it is used. After the jute gasket has been caulked, a pipe jointed or joint runner shall be placed round the pipe in a manner similar to that used in pouring lead joints, except that the opening shall be offset from the center at the top of the pipe in such a manner that the jointing compound will flow down only one side of the pipe. The melted compound shall be poured into the joint until the liquid rises on the side of the pipe opposite to that in which it was poured and the joint is completely filled. Enough compound shall be contained in the ladle or pouring bucket to pour one joint complete without interrupting the pouring. If a joint shall be found to be imperfectly filled, the joint compound shall be melted out or cut out and the joint repoured. 
(d)  Stopping unconnected ends. The ends of all pipes not to be immediately connected with must be securely stopped with vitrified stoneware covers with plastic joints. 
(e)  Covering. The pipes shall be covered with fine soil, dry and free from stone or lumps, carefully and thoroughly tamped around and over them to a depth of at least one foot. 
(f)  Ditch drainage during work. The ditch must at all times be kept dry during the pipe laying. 
(g)  Preventing of sand or dirt. The greatest care must be taken to prevent the entrance of sand or dirt into the house sewer or public sewer. 
(Code 1961, § 16-8) 
Sec. 17-28. - Backfilling. 
(a)  Backfilling must be solidly tamped in horizontal layers not over six inches thick, or puddled by flooding the trench and allowing the filling material to settle through the water. The backfilling must be done immediately after the completion and inspection of that part of the sewer lying in the public highway, and done so as to make the sidewalk, curb, gutter and highway in as good condition as they were previous to the commencement of the work and to the satisfaction of the authorities having jurisdiction thereof. 
(b)  The backfilling of the trench in the highway shall be thoroughly tamped and maintained until a permanent patch shall be placed. After settlement has taken place and when in the opinion of the inspector no future settlement is anticipated, the trench shall be excavated to a depth of eight inches below the surface of the pavement and repaired with at least six inches of bank run gravel and not less than two inches of bituminous material which shall be rolled or tamped to conform to the cross-section of the pavement. The materials, method of placing and final result shall be subject to the approval of the inspector. Failure of the patch shall not relieve the owner or contractor of responsibility in this matter and upon failure the work found defective shall be replaced upon order of the sewer inspector. 
(Code 1961, § 16-9) 
Sec. 17-29. - Removal of rock in sewer trenches. 
    All rock shall be removed at least 15 feet in advance of the laying of the sewer connection and six inches outside the outside lines of the barrel of the pipe. After the removal of the rock, the trench shall be filled with sand or fine gravel and thoroughly rammed. 
(Code 1961, § 16-10) 
Sec. 17-30. - Replacement of unsuitable material in trench. 
    Wherever, in the opinion of the board of selectmen or its authorized agent, the bottom of the trench is of material unsuitable for a foundation it shall be removed and replaced with dry material, plank, concrete, sand cushion or concrete cradle as directed. 
(Code 1961, § 16-11) 
Sec. 17-31. - Safety precautions to protect public. 
    Any opening made, or any dirt pile, material or equipment in or on the public highway must have sufficient barricades and red lights at night and all other necessary precautions to guard the public effectually against all accidents from the beginning to the end of the work. 
(Code 1961, § 16-12) 
Sec. 17-32. - Precautions when blasting. 
    In case blasting is done, the trench shall be carefully covered and all property fully protected from damage. Care must be taken to guard the public sewers and all underground pipes or mains from damage from concussion and flying fragments. The owner or contractor to whom the permit is issued shall pay all costs of any repairs to such sewers, pipes and mains made necessary by the operation. Also any damage to person or property occasioned by the use of explosives by a contractor shall be assumed and paid by the contractor to the person injured. 
(Code 1961, § 16-13) 
Sec. 17-33. - Connections with town sewers. 
(a)  Required for dwellings. Every dwelling or tenanted building hereafter erected in the town shall be connected with the town sewer before occupancy, if such connection is possible at a reasonable expense. 
(b)  Minimum grade. No house sewer connection with the public sewer shall be laid with a grade of less than one inch fall in four feet without a written permit signed by the sewer authority or its authorized agent specifying the minimum grade that will be permitted. 
(c)  Requirements, specifications. Every house sewer hereafter laid, connecting with the public sewer, from a point two feet outside of the outside face of the foundation walls, except as hereinafter provided shall be best quality vitrified salt glazed tile of good shape, sound, with a clear ring when struck with a hammer, and having only very small cracks, capable of being covered in the joints when laid; or of cast iron pipe "extra heavy," at least as large as five inches in diameter, weighing not less than 17 pounds per foot, in lengths not less than four feet, laid with leaded joints. All six-inch tile pipe shall have deep and wide sockets and shall conform to the standard specifications of The American Society for Testing Materials. 
(d)  Traps, obstructions. In connecting any house drainage system with the town sewer, no trap or any kind of obstruction to the free flow of air through the whole course of the soil pipe shall be allowed, but the house drainage system shall be separated from the main line of the pipe by a water trap therein. 
(e)  Approval, supervision. No house drain shall be connected with any town sewer pipe until the sewer inspector shall have given his consent thereto and every such connection shall be made under the immediate supervision of said inspector. 
(f)  Connections serving several buildings. Each building in the area served by a public sewer must be connected separately and independently with the sewer through the house connection branch opposite the building or nearest in the downstream direction. Groupings of buildings on one house sewer will not be permitted, save by special act of the sewer authority and for good sanitary reasons. 
(g)  Pipe diameter between sewer and soil pipe. All pipes from the connection with the town sewer to the soil pipe shall be at least five inches in interior diameter. 
(h)  Connection to rain, surface, sump pump discharge. Rain water leaders and surface water or sump pump discharge pipes shall not be connected to the town sewer. 
(i)  Connection to steam exhaust. No exhaust from any steam engine or blowoff from any steam boiler shall be connected directly with any sewer or drain connecting with the public sewer, but all such steam shall be condensed before passing into the sewer. 
(Code 1961, § 16-14) ;oxh5; Secs. 17-34-17-50.\Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CONSTRUCTION PERMITS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 10; excavations, § 14-20 et seq. 

Sec. 17-51. - Required; fee; application; duty of inspector. 
(a)  Before proceeding to construct any portion of the drainage system of any building in the town the person doing the work shall make written application to the sewer inspector, describing the work contemplated, where located and when the same is to be commenced. 
(b)  This description of the work shall be made to the satisfaction of the sewer inspector and shall be accompanied by a permit fee as established by the sewer authority. 
(c)  The sewer inspector upon approving of the same shall give a written permit for such work and no work shall be commenced before such permit is received. 
(d)  The sewer inspector shall keep a record of all permits granted and fees received by himself and shall make an annual report showing the same, in the same manner and at the same time as is provided for other town officials. 
(Code 1961, § 16-3) 
Sec. 17-52. - Indemnity insurance to protect town required. 
    Any person applying for a permit under the provisions of this division shall file a certificate of insurance indemnifying the town from any and all suits and actions of every name and description brought against the town or any officer of the town for or on account of any injury or damage, received or sustained by any person in consequence of or resulting from any work performed by said applicant, his agents or employees or from any improper materials used in the work or from any negligence in guarding such work, or from any act or omission of the applicant, his agents or employees. 
(Code 1961, § 16-4) 
Sec. 17-53. - Bond to ensure pavement repairs required. 
(a)  Any person applying for a permit required by this division shall deposit with the board of selectmen as a guarantee or bond, the sum of $1,000.00, which sum shall be returned within one year from the date of the permit upon approval of the board of selectmen. 
(b)  If the applicant does not repair the pavement in a satisfactory manner equal to that which existed before applicant commenced construction, as determined by the board of selectmen, the town shall make such repairs as are necessary and deduct the expense of such repairs from the deposit or bond and return the balance to the permittee. 
(c)  If any such sewer excavation made pursuant to a permit required by this division is opened in the months of November, December, January, February or March, the applicant shall resurface that portion of the town roadway excavated with a temporary patch, the temporary patch to be replaced not later than June first immediately following the excavation by a permanent pavement, to be approved by the board of selectmen. 
(Code 1961, § 16-5) 
Sec. 17-54. - Approval of materials, workmanship by inspector. 
    All materials used in sewer construction shall be of good quality and free from defects, and the work shall be executed in a thorough and workmanlike manner, and shall be in all respects satisfactory to the sewer inspector and placed and finished to his acceptance. 
(Code 1961, § 16-6) 
Secs. 17-55-17-65. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SEWER AUTHORITY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference- Water pollution control authority, § 10.14. 

Sec. 17-66. - Established; appointment of members. 
    There is hereby established a board to be called the sewer authority consisting of nine members who shall be electors of the town. The members of the sewer authority shall be appointed by the first selectman for a three-year term in accordance with the provisions of the Town Charter. 
(Code 1961, § 16-1(a); Ord. of 10-17-78) 
Sec. 17-67. - Terms. 
    In the initial appointment of the sewer authority commencing on July 15, 1975, two members shall be appointed for a term of one year, two members for a term of two years and two members for a term of three years. Thereafter such appointments shall be for a period of three years. Upon appointment effective November 1, 1978, three additional members shall be appointed increasing the sewer authority from six to nine members. Upon such appointment, one member shall be appointed for a term of one year; one member for a term of two years; and one for a term of three years. Thereafter such appointments shall be for a period of three years. 
(Code 1961, § 16-1(a)(1); Ord. of 10-17-78) 
Sec. 17-68. - Officers. 
    The sewer authority shall elect from among its members a chairman, a vice-chairman, a secretary and a treasurer, and in the absence of any such officers except the chairman, the authority may elect other members to temporarily serve. Replacement appointments shall be made by the first selectman for the remaining term of the original appointment. 
(Code 1961, § 16-1(a)(2)) 
Sec. 17-69. - Compensation. 
    There shall be no compensation allowed for any member of the sewer authority except as provided under section 4.2 of the Town Charter. 
(Code 1961, § 16-1(a)(3)) 
Sec. 17-70. - Removal. 
    The members of the sewer authority may be removed for: 
(1)  Failure to properly and expeditiously levy sewer assessments for projects duly authorized by the town and constructed by the authority; 
(2)  Failure to obtain proper and valid easements for sewer rights-of-way and have them duly filed on the land records of the town; 
(3)  Failure to adhere to the town's bidding ordinance requirements for goods and services allocated within their budget; 
(4)  Failure to live within their budget as approved by the town's fiscal process; 
(5)  Failure to properly account for the income funds earned by the sewer authority; 
(6)  Failure to obtain planning and zoning approval for any new sewer projects; 
(7)  Failure to apply for or properly follow up applications for federal or state subsidies for sewer projects. 
The removal shall become effective only after a hearing called for that purpose and supported by a majority vote of the board of selectmen. 
(Code 1961, § 16-1(a)(4)) 
Sec. 17-71. - Powers and duties. 
    The sewer authority shall be empowered to provide for the planning, construction, maintenance and operation of a sanitary sewerage system for the town as provided by the general statutes. The sewer authority may establish and revise rules and regulations for the supervision, management, control, operation and use of a sewerage system, including rules and regulations prohibiting or regulating the discharge into a sewerage system of any sewage or any stormwater runoff which in the opinion of the sewer authority will adversely affect any part of any process of the sewerage system. The rules and regulations shall become effective only after a duly called hearing and shall be available to the public in booklet form. 
(Code 1961, § 16-1(b)) 
Sec. 17-72. - Members prohibited from being employees. 
    No member of the sewer authority shall also be an employee of the sewer authority. 
(Code 1961, § 16-1(a)(5)) 
Secs. 17-73-17-85. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - SEWER INSPECTOR[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- 

Sec. 17-86. - Appointment. 
    There shall be a sewer inspector and an assistant in the town who shall be appointed by the first selectman in accordance with the provisions of the Town Charter. 
(Code 1961, § 16-2) 
Charter reference- Administrative appointments, § 9.1. 
Sec. 17-87. - Term. 
    The term of office of the sewer inspector shall be for a one-year term commencing January first of each year. 
(Code 1961, § 16-2) 
Sec. 17-88. - Compensation. 
    The sewer inspector and his assistant shall receive no compensation other than the fees or portion thereof established by the sewer authority. 
(Code 1961, § 16-2) 
Sec. 17-89. - Membership in sewer authority prohibited. 
    The sewer inspector and his assistant shall not be members of the sewer authority. 
(Code 1961, § 16-2) 
Sec. 17-90. - Duties. 
    The sewer inspector and his assistant shall perform the duties assigned by the sewer authority. 
(Code 1961, § 16-2) 
Secs. 17-91-17-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DISCHARGES TO STORM SEWERS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Srormwater management, § 4-171 et seq.; flood damage prevention, Ch. 7; planning, Ch. 13; soil erosion and sediment control, App. A, § 15.0; subdivisions, App. B; regulations for the protection and preservation of inland wetlands and watercourses, App. C. 

Sec. 17-111. - Purpose, intent and authority. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is to provide for the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of Seymour, Connecticut through the regulation of non-stormwater discharges to the storm drainage system to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal and state law. This article establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) in order to comply with requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process. 
(b)  This stormwater management article provides the minimum content for implementing and enforcing Connecticut's stormwater management program consistent with the Connecticut State Statutes 7-148 (c)(8)(A) 1 , 8-2 (a) 2 , and 8-25 3 , 22a-36 to 22a-45 inclusive 4 , and 8-2(b) 5 . [] This article provides guidance to establish minimum criteria for municipal code development. While all local development review and approval processes are unique, this document helps ensure that all stormwater management regulations contain the minimum requirements for effective program implementation. 
(c)  The objectives of this article are: 
(1)  To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) by stormwater discharges by any user. 
(2)  To prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system. 
(3)  To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this article. 
(Ord. of 2-5-08(2), § 1) 
Footnotes: 
--- () --- 
Municipal Powers: The municipality has the power to "Provide for the protection and improvement of the environment including, but not limited to, coastal areas, wetlands and areas adjacent to waterways in a manner not inconsistent with the general statutes. 
Regulations: The zoning commission is authorized to adopt regulations "...to secure safety from ...flood and other dangers; to promote health and the general welfare..." 
Subdivision of land: Authorizes the zoning commission to see "...that proper provision shall be made for... drainage..." and "that proper provision shall be made for protective flood control measures..." 
The Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Act. 
"In any municipality that is contiguous to Long Island Sound the regulations adopted under this section shall be made with reasonable consideration for restoration and protection of the ecosystem and habitat of Long Island Sound and shall be designed to reduce hypoxia, pathogens, toxic contaminants and floatable debris in Long Island Sound. Such regulations shall provide that the zoning commission considers the environmental impact on Long Island sound of any proposal for development." 

Sec. 17-112. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article, the following shall mean: 
    Authorized enforcement agency. Employees or designees of the director of the municipal agency designated to enforce this article. For the purpose of this article, the Seymour Inland Wetlands Commission "IWC", its agent(s) and the town engineer will be the authorized enforcement agency. 
    Best management practices (BMPs). Schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, general good house keeping practices, pollution prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to stormwater, receiving waters, or stormwater conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage. 
    Clean Water Act. The federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
    Construction activity. Activities subject to NPDES construction permits. These include construction projects resulting in land disturbance of one acre or more. Such activities include but are not limited to clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition. 
    Hazardous materials. Any material, including any substance, waste, or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed. 
    Illegal discharge. Any direct or indirect non-stormwater discharge to the storm drain system, except as exempted in section 17-117. 
(1)  Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illegal discharge to enter the storm drain system including but not limited to any conveyances which allow any non-stormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain system and any connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency; or 
(2)  Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use to the storm drain system which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency. 
    Illicit connections. An illicit connection is defined as either of the following. 
    Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission, IWWC shall mean the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission, IWWC, of the Town of Seymour, Connecticut, its agent/s and the town engineer. 
    Industrial activity. Activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as defined in 40 CFR, Section 122.26; 
    National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Stormwater Discharge Permit means a permit issued by EPA (or by a state under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC § 1342(b)) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis. 
    Non-stormwater discharge. Any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
    Person. Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm, corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner or as the owner's agent. 
    Pollutant. Anything that causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects, ordinances, and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind. 
    Premises. Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
    Storm drainage system. Publicly-owned facilities by which stormwater is collected and/or conveyed, including but not limited to any roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and human-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures. 
    Stormwater. Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation. 
    Stormwater pollution prevention plan. A document which describes the best management practices and activities to be implemented by a person or business to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a site and the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to stormwater, stormwater conveyance systems, and/or receiving waters to the maximum extent practicable. 
    Wastewater. Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated stormwater, discharged from a facility. 
(Ord. of 2-5-08(2), § 2) 
Sec. 17-113. - Applicability. 
    This article shall apply to all water entering the storm drain system generated on any developed and undeveloped lands unless explicitly exempted by an authorized enforcement agency. 
(Ord. of 2-5-08(2), § 3) 
Sec. 17-114. - Responsibility for administration. 
    The Inland Wetlands Commission (IWC), its agent(s) and the town engineer shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this article. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the authorized enforcement agency may be delegated in writing by the director of the authorized enforcement agency to persons or entities acting in the beneficial interest of or in the employ of the agency. 
(Ord. of 2-5-08(2), § 4) 
Sec. 17-115. - Severability. 
    The provisions of this article are hereby declared to be severable. If any provision, clause, sentence, or paragraph of this article or the application thereof to any person, establishment, or circumstances shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or application of this article. 
(Ord. of 2-5-08(2), § 5) 
Sec. 17-116. - Ultimate responsibility. 
    The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this article are minimum standards; therefore this ordinance does not intend nor imply that compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination, pollution, nor unauthorized discharge of pollutants. 
(Ord. of 2-5-08(2), § 6) 
Sec. 17-117. - Discharge prohibitions. 
(a)  Prohibition of illegal discharges. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the municipal storm drain system or watercourses any materials, including but not limited to pollutants or waters containing any pollutants that cause or contribute to a violation of applicable water quality standards, other than stormwater. 
The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illegal discharge to the storm drain system is prohibited except as described as follows: 
(1)  The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions established by this ordinance providing they contain no pollutants: water line flushing, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream flows, rising ground water, ground water infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped ground water, foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows, fire fighting activities, and any other water source not containing pollutants. 
(2)  Discharges specified in writing by the authorized enforcement agency as being necessary to protect public health and safety. 
(3)  Dye testing is an allowable discharge, but requires a verbal notification to the authorized enforcement agency prior to the time of the test. 
(4)  The prohibition shall not apply to any non-stormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the Federal Environmental Protection Agency or the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the storm drain system. 
(b)  Prohibition of illegal connection. 
(1)  The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit connections to the storm drain system is prohibited. 
(2)  This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
(3)  A person is considered to be in violation of this article if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the MS4, or allows such a connection to continue. 
(Ord. of 2-5-08(2), § 7) 
Sec. 17-118. - Suspension of MS4 access. 
(a)  Suspension due to illicit discharges in emergency situations. The IWC, its agent(s) and the town engineer may, without prior notice, suspend MS4 discharge access to a person when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or to the MS4 or waters of the United States. If the violator fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency, the authorized enforcement agency may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the MS4 or waters of the United States, or to minimize danger to persons. 
(b)  Suspension due to the detection of illicit dischargesin emergency situations. Any person discharging to the MS4 in violation of this article may have their MS4 access terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an illicit discharge. The authorized enforcement agency will notify a violator of the proposed termination of its MS4 access. The violator may petition the authorized enforcement agency for a reconsideration and hearing. 
A person commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4 access to premises terminated pursuant to this section, without the prior approval of the authorized enforcement agency. 
(Ord. of 2-5-08(2), § 8) 
Sec. 17-119. - Industrial, commercial or construction activity discharges. 
    Any person subject to an industrial, commercial or construction activity NPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the IWC, its agent(s) and the town engineer prior to the allowing of discharges to the MS4. 
(Ord. of 2-5-08(2), § 9) 
Sec. 17-120. - Monitoring of discharges. 
(a)  Applicabilty. This section applies to all facilities that have stormwater discharges associated with industrial, commercial or construction activity. 
(b)  Access to facilties. 
(1)  The IWC, its agent(s) and the town engineer shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities subject to regulation under this article as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this article. If a discharger has security measures in force that require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the discharger shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of the authorized enforcement agency. 
(2)  Facility operators shall allow the IWC, its agent(s) and the town engineer ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, examination and copying of records that must be kept under the conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater, and the performance of any additional duties as defined by state and federal law. 
(3)  The IWC, its agent(s) and the town engineer shall have the right to set up on any permitted facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the authorized enforcement agency to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the facility's stormwater discharge. 
(4)  The IWC, its agent(s) and the town engineer have the right to require the discharger to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the discharger at its own expense. All devices used to measure stormwater flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy. 
(5)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the operator at the written or oral request of the IWC, its agent(s) and the town Engineer and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the operator. 
(6)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the access to a permitted facility a violation of a stormwater discharge permit and of this article. A person who is the operator of a facility with a NPDES permit to discharge stormwater associated with industrial, commercial or construction activity commits an offense if the person denies the authorized enforcement agency reasonable access to the permitted facility for the purpose of conducting any activity authorized or required by this article. 
(7)  If the IWC, its agent(s) and the town engineer has been refused access to any part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and he/she is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this article or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, and welfare of the community, then the authorized enforcement agency may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. of 2-5-08(2), § 10) 
Sec. 17-121. - Requirement to prevent, control, and reduce stormwater pollutants by the use of best management practices. 
    The IWC, its agent(s) and the town engineer will adopt requirements identifying best management practices for any activity, operation, or facility that may cause or contribute to pollution or contamination of stormwater, the storm drain system, or waters of the state. The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment shall provide, at their own expense, reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the municipal storm drain system or watercourses through the use of these structural and non-structural BMPs. Further, any person responsible for a property or premise, which is, or may be, the source of an illicit discharge, may be required to implement, at said person's expense, additional structural and non-structural BMPs to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system. Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid NPDES permit authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with industrial or commercial activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed compliance with the provisions of this section. These BMPs shall be part of a stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) or stormwater management plan (SMP) as necessary for compliance with requirements of the NPDES permit. 
(Ord. of 2-5-08(2), § 11) 
Sec. 17-122. - Watercourse protection. 
    Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical integrity of the watercourse. 
(Ord. of 2-5-08(2), § 12) 
Sec. 17-123. - Notification of spills. 
    Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility or operation has information of any known or suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in illegal discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the storm drain system, or water of the state said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release. In the event of such a release of hazardous materials said person shall immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of non-hazardous materials, said person shall notify the authorized enforcement agency in person or by phone or facsimile no later than the next business day. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the IWC, its agent(s) and the town engineer within three business days of the phone notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years. 
(Ord. of 2-5-08(2), § 13) 
Sec. 17-124. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Notice of violation. Whenever the IWC, its agent(s) and the town engineer finds that a person has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this article, the authorized enforcement agency may order compliance by written notice of violation to the responsible person. Such notice may require without limitation: 
(1)  The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting; 
(2)  The elimination of illicit connections or discharges; 
(3)  That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist; 
(4)  The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; and 
(5)  Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs; and 
(6)  The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs. 
(b)  If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property are required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall further advise that, should the violator fail to remediate or restore within the established deadline, the work will be done by a designated governmental agency or a contractor and the expense thereof shall be charged to the violator. 
(Ord. of 9-16-08(1), § 14) 
Sec. 17-125. - Appeal of notice of violation. 
    Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of the authorized enforcement agency. The notice of appeal must be received within days from the date of the notice of violation. Hearing on the appeal before the appropriate authority or his/her designee shall take place within 15 days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of the municipal authority or their designee shall be final. 
(Ord. of 2-5-08(2), § 15) 
Sec. 17-126. - Enforcement measures after appeal. 
    If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within 30 days of the decision of the municipal authority upholding the decision of the authorized enforcement agency, then representatives of the authorized enforcement agency shall enter upon the subject private property and are authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the government agency or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above. 
(Ord. of 2-5-08(2), § 16) 
Sec. 17-127. - Abatement of the violation. 
(a)  Within 30 days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. The property owner may file a written protest objecting to the amount of the assessment within 30 days. If the amount due is not paid within a timely manner as determined by the decision of the municipal authority or by the expiration of the time in which to file an appeal, the charges shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment. 
(b)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the city by reason of such violation. The liability shall be paid in not more than 12 equal payments. Interest at the rate of 12 percent per annum shall be assessed on the balance beginning on the first day following discovery of the violation. 
(Ord. of 2-5-08(2), § 17) 
Sec. 17-128. - Injunctive relief. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this article. If a person has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this article, the authorized enforcement agency may petition for a preliminary or permanent injunction restraining the person from activities which would create further violations or compelling the person to perform abatement or remediation of the violation. 
(Ord. of 2-5-08(2), § 18) 
Sec. 17-129. - Compensatory action. 
    In lieu of enforcement proceedings, penalties, and remedies authorized by this article, the authorized enforcement agency may impose upon a violator alternative compensatory actions, such as storm drain stenciling, attendance at compliance workshops, creek cleanup, etc. 
(Ord. of 2-5-08(2), § 19) 
Sec. 17-130. - Violations deemed a public nuisance. 
    In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this article is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at the violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken. 
(Ord. of 2-5-08(2), § 20) 
Sec. 17-131. - Criminal prosecution. 
(a)  Any person that has violated or continues to violate this article shall be liable to criminal prosecution to the fullest extent of the law, and shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to a fine of not more than $5,000.00 or imprisonment not exceeding one year or both for each violation with costs imposed in the discretion of the court. Each day that a violation continues shall be a separate offense. In addition, the IWC may institute or cause to be instituted injunctive, mandamus or other appropriate action or proceedings of law to correct violations of this article. Any court of competent jurisdiction shall have the right to issue temporary or permanent restraining orders, injunctions or mandamus, or other appropriate forms of relief. 
(b)  The authorized enforcement agency may recover all attorneys' fees court costs and other expenses associated with enforcement of this ordinance, including sampling and monitoring expenses. 
(Ord. of 2-5-08(2), § 21) 
Sec. 17-132. - Remedies not exclusive. 
    The remedies listed in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law and it is within the discretion of the authorized enforcement agency to seek cumulative remedies. 
(Ord. of 2-5-08(2), § 22) 
APPENDIX A - ZONING[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein are the zoning regulations of the Town as amended and adopted by the Planning and Zoning Commission, effective January 1, 2015. Amendments to the zoning regulations are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original text. Prior to amendment, the zoning regulations derived from provisions adopted August 10, 2000, effective August 17, 2000. See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. Misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform, and the same system for expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. Material inserted in brackets has been added for purposes of clarity. 
Charter reference- Planning and zoning commission, § 10.11; zoning board of appeals, § 10.20. 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 4; housing, Ch. 9; planning, Ch. 13; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 14; utilities, Ch. 17; subdivisions, App. B. 

1.0. - Purpose and authority. 
a)  As authorized by the Charter of the Town of Seymour and Chapter 124, Conn. General Statutes, Revision of 1958, as amended, the Seymour Planning and Zoning Commission hereby establishes a comprehensive zoning plan for the Town of Seymour as set forth in the following text and accompanying zoning map which shall be known as the Zoning Regulations of the Town of Seymour. 
b)  It is the purpose of these regulations to: 
  Promote the health, safety and general welfare of the community. 
  Lessen congestion in the streets. 
  Secure safety from fire, flood, panic and other dangers. 
  Prevent the overcrowding of land and avoid undue concentration of population. 
  Facilitate adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, open space and other public improvements. 
  Provide adequate light and air. 
  Preserve the value of land and buildings. 
  Encourage the most appropriate use of land throughout the Town. 
2.0. - Application of regulations. 
a)  Town Property Exempt. Pursuant to Section 13.1, Code of Ordinances, Town of Seymour, properties owned by the Town of Seymour or any of its agencies or authorities and used for a municipal purpose are exempt from the application of the zoning regulations. 
b)  All Other Property to Conform. No building shall be erected, moved, altered, rebuilt or enlarged nor shall any land or building be used, designed or arranged to be used for any purpose or manner except in conformity with these regulations, and after having obtained a zoning permit as prescribed in Section 20 of these regulations. 
c)  Establishment of Lots. All lots (established after the effective date of these regulations) shall conform to the lot size, area and all other requirements contained herein. 
d)  Lots of Record. The lot size, area, and other requirements except setbacks, contained herein shall not apply to a lot of record provided that all of the following apply: 
1.  Such lot is currently in clearly separate ownership from any abutting property. 
2.  Such lot was in clearly separate ownership from any abutting property prior to the enactment of the zoning regulation that made it nonconforming. 
3.  There is no manner in which such lot may be combined with abutting property in the same ownership to form either a conforming lot or a lot that is more in conformity with these regulations. 
4.  There is no physical evidence of intent to consolidate. 
e)  Approved and Recorded Subdivisions. Lot size, area, setback and other dimensional requirements of these regulations shall not apply to undeveloped lots in duly approved and recorded subdivisions. The initial construction on such lots shall conform to the lot size, area, setback and other dimensional requirements of the zoning regulations in effect at the time the subdivision was approved. Any subsequent construction shall conform to these regulations. 
3.0. - Zoning districts and map. 
a)  The Town of Seymour is hereby divided into the following zoning districts: 
Residential Districts:  Residence R-65  Residence R-40  Residence R-18  Multi-Family Residential MF  Planned Development District PDD Commercial Districts:  Central Commercial CBD-1  General Commercial C-2  Recreational Commercial RC-3 Industrial Districts:  Limited Industrial LI-1  General Industrial GI-2  Aquifer Protection District AQ  
The boundaries of these districts are shown on the map (or set of maps) entitled "Official Zoning Districts, Town of Seymour." This map is incorporated into these regulations as if fully set forth herein. 
b)  The Office Development District, Flood Plain District and the Aquifer Protection District are overlay districts established pursuant to Section 16 (FP), Section 17 (ODD) and Section 21 (AQ) of these regulations. Land within the FP and AQ Districts is subject to the requirements of these districts as stated in Section 16 (FP) and Section 21 (AQ) as well as the requirements of the underlying zoning district. 
c)  The Mixed Use District is a floating zone that may be established within the LI-1, GI-2, C-2, RC-3 and CBD-1 Zoning District. Requirements are contained in Section 23.0. 
d)  Except for the AQ and FP Districts, zoning district boundaries shall be interpreted to follow property lines unless located by dimension from a street or other recognizable feature on the zoning map. If there is a difference between a property line shown on the zoning map and a property line identified by survey, the survey shall govern. 
e)  Where a zoning district boundary divides a parcel, a use allowed in one zoning district may be permitted in the adjoining zoning district with the approval of the Planning and Zoning Commission. Such encroachment shall in no instance occupy an area of more than 20,000 square feet. 
f)  The Aquifer Protection District (AQ) represents land within an "aquifer protection area" as defined in Section 22a-354h, C.G.S., and any extensions of such land duly approved by the Commissioner of Environmental Protection or his or her agent. 
4.0. - Definitions. 
    Words contained in these regulations shall have the usual dictionary definition except for those terms specifically defined below. 
    Affordable Housing. Housing which is occupied by persons and families whose yearly income does not exceed 80 percent of the median income for the area, adjusted for family size, as determined by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, and for whom the cost of housing does not exceed 30 percent of the person or family's income. 
    For rental units the cost of housing includes rent, heat, utilities and any common charges for which the tenant is responsible. For ownership, the cost of housing includes mortgage payments, taxes, insurance, heat, utilities and any common charges in the case of common interest ownership. 
    Accessory Building. A building detached from an located on the same lot as the principal building and used for a purpose customarily incidental, subordinate or in support of the principal building. 
    Accessory Use. A use customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use conducted on the same lot, whether conducted in an accessory building or structure or in the open. 
    Area of Special Flood Hazard. Land designated as Zone A or Zone A1 through A30 on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps, Town of Seymour, as may be prepared or amended from time to time by the National Flood Insurance Program. 
    Basement. A portion of the building partly underground, but having less than half its clear height below the average grade of the adjoining ground. 
    Billboard. A sign that directs attention to an activity conducted in a location apart from the lot on which the sign is located. 
    Building. A structure enclosed within exterior walls, built, erected or framed of component structural parts, designed for the housing, shelter, enclosure and support of persons, animals or property of any kind. 
    Clean Fill. Natural soil, rock, brick, ceramics and concrete that are virtually inert and pose neither a pollution threat to ground or surface waters nor a fire hazard. Clean fill shall not include any bulky, solid or special waste as defined by Section 22a-209, C.G.S., as amended. 
    Congregate or Assisted Living Facility. A residential facility for the elderly or infirm offering a combination of supporting, on-site services such as communal dining, housekeeping assistance and nursing or medical care. 
    Day Care-Child Day Care Center. A facility providing supplementary care to more than 12 unrelated or related children outside their own home. 
    Family Day Care Home. A private family home caring for not more than six children as further defined in Section 19a-77(3), C.G.S. 
    Group Day Care Home. A dwelling that provides day care services to at least seven and not more than 12 related or unrelated children. 
    Dwelling. A building that is designed and used for residential purposes only, and contains one or more dwelling units. 
    Dwelling Unit. One or more rooms designed, occupied or intended for occupancy as separate living quarters with cooking, sleeping and sanitary facilities provided within the dwelling unit for the exclusive use of a single family. 
    Dwelling, Single-Family. A dwelling that contains one dwelling unit only. 
    Dwelling, Two-Family. A dwelling containing two dwelling units, which has not received special permit approval for an in-law or accessory apartment. 
    Dwelling, Three-Family. A dwelling that is not either a town house or a garden apartment and contains three dwelling units. 
    Dwelling, Four-Family. A dwelling that is not either a town house or a garden apartment and contains four dwelling units. 
    Earthen Material. Earth, loam, topsoil, sand, gravel, clay or stone. 
    Family. One or more persons occupying a dwelling unit and living together as a single housekeeping unit. A family shall include no more than two persons unrelated by blood, marriage or adoption. 
    Farming. The production and primary processing of agricultural and forestry products, including livestock and poultry on a tract of at least five acres, but excluding the keeping of fur bearing animals other than cats and rabbits. The seasonal retail sale of products produced on the premises is permitted as an accessory use. 
    Garden Apartment. A dwelling comprised of individual dwelling units each having either direct access to outdoors or interior access to a central hallway system. No more than one unit may be built on top of another unit. 
    Greenhouse. A structure devoted to the production of plants on a tract of three acres or more including the seasonal retail sale of products produced on the premises. 
    Height of Building. The vertical distance measured between the average level at which the finished grade meets the walls and a point mid-way between the highest and the lowest point of the roof. 
    Home Occupation. An accessory use to a detached single-family dwelling carried out by members of the family living in the dwelling and no more than two additional persons. The home occupation is to be clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes, shall not change the exterior appearance of the dwelling and shall be limited to an area equal to 25 percent of the ground floor living area. The home occupation shall generate no more than 20 vehicle trips per day. 
    The above definition shall be interpreted to specifically include the following uses: 
a)  Family day care. 
b)  Telephone answering service. 
c)  Secretarial services. 
d)  Custom dressmaking. 
e)  Barbering, provided that a member of the resident family only conducts the activity who shall be duly licensed by the State of Connecticut. A copy of such license shall be given to the Zoning Enforcement Officer on request. 
    The above definition shall be interpreted to specifically exclude the following uses: 
a)  Sale of fabricated articles. 
b)  Storage of products or stock in trade. 
c)  Hairdressing. 
d)  Retail or wholesale trade. 
e)  The keeping of birds or animals used in the production of any consumable or marketable product for commercial purposes. 
    There shall be no external evidence of any home occupation other than the permitted identification sign. 
    Intermediate Processing Center. An operation conducted entirely within a building that is limited to the receipt and separation of recyclable materials. No processing other than separation and minor compaction shall take place on site, nor is material to be stored for an extended period. No such center located in a commercial district shall include a building having an area of more than 20,000 square feet. There shall be no limitation on building size in an industrial building. 
    Lot. A parcel of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a principal building or buildings, accessory buildings and uses together with such yards and open spaces required by these regulations. 
Lot, Corner. A lot having frontage on more than one public street. 
Lot, Interior. A lot that does not have the standard required lot frontage, but contains an exclusive accessway to a public road and is located behind one or more lots having the standard required frontage. The accessway shall be in the same ownership as the balance of the lot and shall not be an easement or right-of-way. 
    Lot Coverage. The ratio of the total lot area to the area occupied by principal and accessory buildings expressed as a percentage. 
    Lot Frontage. The total distance a lot abuts a street line. 
    Lot of Record. A lot that can be found in the land records of the Town of Seymour. 
    Lot Square. A square that is totally contained within the boundaries of a lot, with some portion of the square located within the required front yard. 
    Lot Width. The distance between the side lot lines measured along a line at a distance from the front lot line equal to the front yard depth. 
    Mobile Home. A structure transportable in one or more sections that is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling unit with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. 
    Storage Container. A pre-built structure, sometimes known as an overseas container, designed for transporting goods by truck, rail or ship, but sometimes used for storage on a lot. 
    Structure. Anything constructed or erected having a location on the ground or attached to structure having a location on the ground. 
    Street Line. The street or highway right-of-way line or in the case of a private road, the edge of the traveled way. 
    Street, Public. For purposes of these regulations, a street shown on an approved and recorded subdivision plan for which required surety has been posted shall be considered as a public street. 
    Town House. A residential building containing individual dwelling units separated by fire walls and each having private direct exterior access. No unit may be built on top of another unit. 
    Yards. An open space extending along the entire length of a street line, side lot line or rear lot line. Yards may be occupied by fencing, landscaping and certain structures as permitted by these regulations. The front yard is the yard between the street line and the lot width measurement line. The rear yard and side yards are as defined below for a corner lot. 
    Yards, Corner Lot. The yard parallel to the longer axis of the principal building shall be considered as the front yard. The yard opposite the front yard is the rear yard. The other yards are side yards except that the required setback from each street line shall be met. 
5.0. - Permitted uses. 
    5.1 Interpretation of Table of Permitted Uses. 
a)  Individual uses are allowed or prohibited by these regulations as specified in the Table of Permitted Uses, Section 5.2. Uses are allowed or prohibited in respective zoning districts in accordance with the following symbols: 
Y-  Allowed following a review of the zoning permit application by the Zoning Enforcement Officer, Town Planner or Town Engineer as required, and a finding of compliance with these regulations. This is considered as administrative approval. 
C-  In general these uses are allowed by administrative approval as noted above. A very few require approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission. "C" uses are subject to certain special conditions. The number following the "C" in the Table refers to these special conditions that are set forth in Section 5.3. 
E-  This is a special use classification applied to certain carefully selected uses that have existed for many years as nonconforming uses and have not caused any problems. Lawfully existing uses designated as "E" are declared to be permitted uses in their respective districts; however, no new uses are to be established in new locations. Any changes to an "E" use require review and approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission. Such changes are to conform to all of the requirements for such use. 
YS-  Allowed by administrative approval if the development does not involve construction of a new building, or involves the construction of a new building having a floor area of 2,000 square feet or less. Developments involving construction of a new building having a floor area of more than 2,000 square feet require approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission as specified below. 
S-  Allowed after site plan approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission, subject to the requirements of Section 9 of these regulations and any other applicable requirements. 
P-  Allowed by special permit approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission subject to any specific standards specified for the use in Section 5.4 and any other applicable requirements in these regulations. The number following the "P" in the Table refers to the special conditions in Section 5.4. 
Z-  Allowed by special permit granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals. N- Use is not permitted. 
b)  Uses Not Listed in Table. If a use not listed in the table of permitted uses is found to be substantially similar in character to a listed use, such use may be permitted in the same zoning district and under the same conditions as the listed use. The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall refer all such determinations to the Planning and Zoning Commission. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall consider at least the following factors in making its determination: 
1)  Location requirements of the requested use. 
2)  Volume and nature of vehicular and pedestrian traffic generated by the requested use. 
3)  Effects of requested use on adjoining properties compared with effects of other uses permitted in the same zoning district. 
4)  Compatibility of requested use with other uses permitted in the same zoning district. 
The table of permitted uses is based in part on the Standard Industrial Classification Manual (SIC). This classification may be used by the Commission to assist in determining similarity of use. 
c)  Prohibited Uses. Any use not specifically listed in the table of permitted uses or determined to be substantially similar in character is prohibited. The following uses are expressly prohibited and are not to be considered as substantially similar to any listed use: Landfill, Mobile Home Park, Massage Parlor, Manufacture, storage or disposal of radioactive substances, Tire recapping, Manufacture or distillation of coal or petroleum products including asphalt plants, Commercial incineration. 
d)  Office Development District/Planned Development District. Uses permitted in the Office Development District are listed in Section 17 and uses permitted in the Planned Development District are listed in Section 18. 
    5.2 Table of Permitted Uses. 
RESIDENTIAL USES R-65 R-40 R-18 MF CBD C-29 RC-3 LI-1 GI-2 Single-Family Dwellings Y Y Y C1 E E Y E E Two-Family Dwellings N E C2 C1 E E E E E Three- & Four-family Dwellings N N P1 P1 E E E E E Town Houses N N N P2 N N N N N Garden Apartments N N N P2 N N N N N Convalescent, Nursing and Rest Homes N N N P2 N N N N N Apartments/Commercial N N N N S S N N N Rooming Houses N N N N E E E N N Hotels and Motels N N N N Y Y/S Y/S N N Mobile Homes/Trailers C29 C29 C29 N N N C29 C29 C29  
COMMERCIAL USES R-65 R-40 R-18 MF CBD C-2 RC-3 LI-1 GI-2 Wholesale Trade N N N N Y YS C30 S S Warehousing & Distribution N N N N E E E N N Fuel & Heating Oil Bulk Storage N N N N N N N N YS Retail Trade  Supermarkets N N N N Y YS N N N  Automotive Sales/ 
Service N N N N P3 P3 N N N  Bars, Taverns, Cafes N N N N Y YS N N N  Restaurants N N N N Y YS YS C3 C3  Fast Food Outlets N N N N Y P4 P4 N N  Package Stores N N N N Y YS YS N N  Convenience Stores N N E N Y YS YS N N  Heating Fuel Dealers N N N N C4 C4 C4 C4 YS  Outdoor Living Products N N N N Y YS C31 N N  Other Retail Business N N N N Y YS E C5 C5  Banks & Financial Offices N N N N Y YS C6 C6 C6  Building Materials, Hardware, Landscaping, Garden & Stone Products N N N N S S N S S Personal Services  Places of Religious Worship P5 P5 P5 N Y P5 N N N  Cemeteries P14 P14 P14 N N E N N N  Funeral Homes N N E N Y Y N N N  Gyms, Fitness Centers N N N C8 Y YS YS C8 C8  Other Personal Services N N N N Y YS YS N N Business Services  Commercial Art, Signs N N N N Y YS N YS YS  Building Maintenance and Landscaping Services N N N N Y YS N YS YS  Farm & Heavy Equipment Sales & Service N N N N N S N S S  Computer Services N N N N Y YS N S S  Other Business Services N N N N Y YS N S S  Contract Construction Services N N N N C9 YS N P S Automotive Services  Automotive Repair N N N N C10 C10 C10 N C10  Automotive and Trailer Rental N N N N C11 YS C11 N S  Auto Body Repair/Painting N N N N N C10 E E C10  Automotive Specialty Installation N N N N N C12 C12 N C12  Auto Junk & Salvage Yards N N N N N E N E E  Automatic Car Wash N N N N N P6 N P6 P6  Misc. Repair Services N N N N C13 C13 N YS YS Other Services  Hospitals N N N N S S N S S  Outpatient Health Clinics N N N N S S S S S  Veterinary Hospitals N N N N Y YS YS YS YS  Canine Grooming, Training and Related Services N N N N Y YS YS YS YS  Private Schools (Business, Vocational Art, etc.) N N N N Y YS N P5 P5  Dance/Martial Arts Schools N N N N Y YS YS N N  Social Service Agencies N N N N Y YS N N N  Child & Adult Day Care C14 C14 C14 C14 Y YS YS YS YS  Welding, Machine Shops N N E N N P15 P15 YS YS  Self-Service Storage N N N N N S N S YS  Business, Professional, Civic & Fraternal Organizations N E E N Y YS YS N YS  
> 
MANUFACTURING USES R-65 R-40 R-18 MF CBD C-2 RC-3 LI-1 GI-2 Food and Beverages N N N N N N N YS YS Paper & Allied Products N N N N N E N YS YS Printing & Publishing N N N N Y YS N YS YS Chemicals & Allied Products N N N N N N N P7 P7 Pharmaceutical Products N N N N N N N S S Primary Metals N N N N N N N N P7 Dry Concrete Batch Plant N N N N N N N P18 N Manufacture, Fabrication or Assembly of Products N N N N N E N S S  
> 
RESOURCE PRODUCTION AND EXTRACTION R-65 R-40 R-18 MF CBD C-2 RC-3 LI-1 GI-2 Forestry C7 C7 C7 N N N N N C7 Farming, General C15 C15 C15 N N N C15 N C15 Animal Husbandry Y Y Y N N N Y N N Horticultural Specialties C16 C16 C16 N Y Y C16 N N Dairies N E E N N N N S S Mining & Processing of Earthen Material N N N N N N E Z Z Earth Removal Z Z Z N N Z Z Z Z  
> 
CULTURAL/ 
ENTERTAINMENT & RECREATIONAL R-65 R-40 R-18 MF CBD C-2 RC-3 LI-1 GI-2 Museums/Historical Societies N N E N Y YS YS N N Historic Sites Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Art Galleries & Studios N N N N Y Y Y N N Auditoriums & Concert Halls N N N N Y YS YS N N Theaters N N N N Y YS YS YS YS Rehearsal Studios N N N N Y YS YS YS YS Recreation Centers N N N C17 Y YS YS YS YS Electronic Game Rooms N N N N Y YS YS YS YS Indoor Sports Facilities N N N C17 Y YS YS YS YS Carnivals and Fairs C18 C18 C18 C18 C18 C18 C18 C18 C18 Marinas, Boat Sales & Repair N N N N N YS N N N Golf Courses P8 P8 N C17 N N P8 N N Riding Stables P9 P9 P9 C17 N N P8 N N Tennis Courts C19 C19 C19 C17 N P11 P11 P11 P11 Archery & Firearms Ranges N N N N N N P10 N P10 Other Outdoor Sports Facilities N N E C17 N P11 P11 P11 P11  
> 
TRANSPORTATION, UTILITIES AND COMMUNICATIONS R-65 R-40 R-18 MF CBD C-2 RC-3 LI-1 GI-2 Ambulance Service N N N N YS Y N YS YS Automobile Parking & Storage C20 C20 C20 C20 C20 C20 C20 C20 C20 Broadcasting Facilities N E N N Y YS N YS YS Public Utilities Distribution Lines; Pipes Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Buildings & Structures C21 C21 C21 C21 C21 C21 C21 C21 C21 Wireless Communication Towers N N N N N P17 N P17 P17 Trucking & Courier Terminals N N E N S S N S S Passenger Terminals N N N N Y YS N S S Intermediate Processing Center N N N N N P12 N P12 P12  
> 
SIGNS R-65 R-40 R-18 MF CBD C-2 RC-3 LI-1 GI-2 For Sale or Rent Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Political Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Directional C22 C22 C22 C22 C22 C22 C22 C22 C22 Home Occupation Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y On-Site Advertising and/or Identification C23 C23 C23 C23 Y Y Y Y Y Billboards N N N N E E N N N  
> 
HOME OCCUPATIONS R-65 R-40 R-18 MF CBD C-2 RC-3 LI-1 GI-2 Customary as Defined in Sec. 4 Y Y Y Y N Y Y Y Y Home Kennels C24 C24 C24 C24 N C24 C24 C24 C24 Mail Order Business C25 C25 C25 C25 Y Y C25 C25 C25 Artists, Craftsmen and Home Products C26 C26 C26 C26 Y Y Y C26 C26  
> 
ACCESSORY USES R-65 R-40 R-18 MF CBD C-2 RC-3 LI-1 GI-2 In-Law or Accessory Apt. C32 C32 C32 C32 N N C32 N N Customary Accessory Uses Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Pets and Other Animals C27 C27 C27 C27 C27 C27 C27 C27 C27 Swimming Pools C28 C28 C28 C28 C28 C28 C28 C28 C28  
> 
    5.3 Required Conditions for Uses Designated With a "C" in the Table of Permitted Uses. 
C1-  Detached single- and two-family dwellings on individual lots, including interior lots are permitted subject to all of the lot size, area, setback and other requirements of the R-18 District. 
Detached single-family dwellings on land in common interest ownership are permitted subject to the following: 
1.  Special Permit approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission is required subject to Sections 10.0 and 10.1.4 of these regulations. 
2.  The number of dwellings containing three bedrooms shall not exceed 50 percent of the total number of all units in the project. 
3.  No dwelling shall contain more than three bedrooms. 
C2-  Two-family dwellings must have a separate entrance for each dwelling unit and a minimum lot area, as defined in these regulations, of at least 20,000 square feet. 
C3-  Establishment shall be designed and intended to serve the daytime, working population and conduct its heaviest volume of business during the morning and noontime hours. 
C4-  Use is limited to office, garage, maintenance and similar activities. Bulk storage of fuel oil is prohibited. 
C5-  Permitted only as an accessory use, selling products produced or assembled on the premises. 
C6-  Limited to branch offices devoted principally to direct customer service. 
C7-  Operation is to be under the supervision of a Connecticut Certified Forester CS. Allowed only as an accessory use, serving residents, guests or employees. 
C9-  Use limited to administrative or office functions. There shall be no storage, maintenance or rental of heavy equipment. 
C10-  Approval of location by the Zoning Board of Appeals is required as specified in Section 19. If the location is so approved, the site plan shall be referred to the Planning and Zoning Commission for approval. 
C11-  Use limited to rental of passenger vehicles, motor homes, all-terrain vehicles, motorcycles and the like. Rental of heavy trucks or heavy construction equipment is prohibited. 
C12-  Installation and repair of specialized automotive and marine glass, vinyl, fiberglass, electrical and electronic accessories is allowed. General automotive repair, sales, auto body repair and painting are prohibited. All work areas and storage of boats or vehicles under repair shall be within a building. 
C13-  Includes repair of items such as appliances, electronic equipment, furniture, shoes, clocks and the like. Any welding is allowed only as a purely incidental operation. Work shall be done entirely within a building. 
C14-  Allowed only as an accessory use to a church or other such permitted use in the R-40 and R-15 Districts, and as an accessory use to a planned development serving the residents of the development. 
C15-  Farming shall not include the commercially organized slaughtering of foul or livestock having no relationship to the farm itself, except for operations existing as of Sept 1, 1991. All buildings or structures for the keeping and feeding of livestock, and the open or covered storage of manure, fertilizer, lime, herbicides, pesticides and the like shall be at least 100 feet from any lot line or residential structure. 
C16-  Includes nurseries, green houses, truck gardens and similar uses on a tract of at least three acres, and the incidental sale of products grown on the premises. Activities such as parking and display of products and all structures shall be located beyond the building setback lines. 
C17-  Permitted as an accessory use only, serving the residents of the development or their guests. 
C18-  Permitted in residential districts only as accessory to a non-profit organization and on the same parcel therewith. Permitted on any parcel in a commercial or industrial district, provided that no structure is erected within 50 feet of any lot line. Duration shall be no longer than seven days in any district. 
C19-  Permitted as an accessory use. 
C20-  Garages and/or surface parking are allowed in all zoning districts as an accessory use. In residential districts, the number of vehicles parked on the premises shall bear a reasonable relationship to the number of occupants. The Zoning Officer may use the motor vehicle assessment list as a basis for determining if an excessive number of vehicles are parked on the premises. The storage of more than one inoperable motor vehicle, or parts of motor vehicles which collectively equal more than one vehicle, is not considered as accessory to a dwelling and is not permitted. Parking lots and garages are allowed as a principal use in any commercial or industrial district subject to site plan approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission. In the R-15 District, parking lots or garages on separate parcels are allowed as special permit uses, granted by the Planning and Zoning Commission if associated with a permitted use such as a church or funeral home. The parking or storage of commercial vehicles such as heavy trucks, construction equipment and the like is not considered as accessory to a dwelling and is not permitted. The parking of a single truck or other vehicle used by the occupant as transportation to a work site would be permitted. 
C21-  Public service facilities as described in Section 16-235, C.G.S. are allowed subject to site plan approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
C22-  If located within a public right-of-way, the applicant shall show that the Department of Public Works has approved the request. No sign that interferes with sight lines or effects public safety will be permitted. 
C23-  Allowed only as shown on a site plan or special permit application approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission or Zoning Board of Appeals. 
C24-  The breeding of dogs for the purpose of show, sports or sale is allowed. No kennel, dog run or other structure shall be allowed beyond the building setback lines. Not more than two dogs shall be kept for breeding purposes if the parcel has an area of less than 80,000 square feet. The boarding or grooming of dogs not owned by residents of the premises is prohibited. 
C25-  A limited operation is allowed in a residential district, which operation shall not include the storage of inventory or sale of products on the premises. In general, the operation shall be limited to placement of individual orders, reception of the order by mail or courier service and delivery of the order to the final customer. The operation shall conform to the general definition of a home occupation. 
C26-  The preparation and sale of products customarily produced in the home or garden such as home baking, preserves, produce, needlework and the like is allowed provided such products are created or grown entirely on the premises. The workshop of an artist or craftsman engaged in painting, ceramics, woodworking, glass working, sculpture and the like is permitted. No such workshop shall be located in an accessory building. 
C27-  Customary household pets are allowed in any dwelling unit. Livestock or fowl raised purely for profit are not considered as accessory to a dwelling and are allowed on a farm only. The keeping of a very limited number of livestock, fowl, rabbits or pigeons for personal use, enjoyment or consumption may be considered as accessory to a dwelling provided that such animals are kept in a sanitary and non-offensive manner, considering the number of animals, size of the lot and proximity of adjacent residences. 
C28-  Allowed following approval of location by the Building Inspector. The Building Inspector may permit swimming pools in a required side or rear yard. 
C29-  Mobile homes are allowed only as temporary living quarters following damage to a dwelling by fire or other casualty an on the same parcel as such damaged dwelling. The Building Inspector shall approve utility connections. The period of occupancy shall not exceed one year. The storage of camping trailers, recreational vehicles and the like is considered as an accessory use to one- or two-family dwellings. 
Such use is expressly limited to storage and does not include occupancy while on the same lot. 
C30-  Permitted in the RC-J District, subject to the following conditions: 
a)  The parcel shall have an area of at least 80,000 square feet and frontage on Roosevelt Drive. 
b)  Vehicular access shall be from Roosevelt Drive only. 
c)  The building setback line shall be at least 75 feet from any property line in a residential district. 
d)  Site plan approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission as per Section 9 of these regulations shall be required. 
C31-  This use is more specifically described as business selling outdoor/recreational products and landscaping/gardening products as well as prefabricated structures such as gazebos, sheds, barns, arbors, windmills, playhouses and the like. In the RC-J District the parcel shall have a minimum lot area of 40,000 square feet and shall have frontage on Roosevelt Drive. Site plan approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission as per Section 9 of these regulations shall be required. 
C32-  The Zoning Enforcement Officer is authorized to allow an in-law or accessory apartment in the R-18, R-40 and R-65 Zoning Districts and in detached single-family dwellings in the MF and RC-J Districts in accordance with the requirements stated below as well as the requirements of other applicable sections of these regulations. 
An in-law or accessory apartment is defined as a group of rooms containing at least a kitchen, bedroom and three fixture bathroom located within and clearly subordinate to a detached single-family dwelling. 
An in-law or accessory apartment shall meet the following standards: 
1.  Shall be located only in a detached, single-family dwelling on an individual lot. No accessory or in-law apartment shall be located in any building that is detached from the principal building. There shall be only one accessory or in-law apartment per building lot. 
2.  One of the dwelling units shall be occupied by either an individual age 65 or older or by a family with one or more members age 65 or older, both dwelling units shall be occupied by members of the same family, all related by blood, marriage or adoption. Notwithstanding the foregoing, one of the units may be occupied by a handicapped person. 
3.  The accessory apartment shall occupy not more than 30 percent of the total gross living area of the host dwelling plus the apartment. 
4.  Exterior alterations shall be so integrated with the original building so that the appearance of a single-family dwelling is maintained. Additions shall not cause the building to exceed two habitable stories. A side or rear entrance to the apartment is preferred, but if the entrance is in the front it shall be clearly incidental and secondary to the main entrance. 
5.  The applicant shall demonstrate that the site has space to accommodate four off-street parking spaces. 
6.  Home occupations shall not be allowed in dwellings containing an in-law apartment. 
The application shall include a letter stating who will occupy the apartment, an A-2 survey of the property showing at least the building, driveway and parking area. A floor plan of the apartment shall be submitted as well as a plan showing the location of the apartment within the host dwelling. Architectural elevations of new buildings or additions shall be submitted. If applicable, the applicant shall provide evidence the Valley Health District is aware of the proposal. The applicant shall provide evidence that he has notified abutting owners that an application for an in-law apartment has been submitted. 
A notice of approval shall be filed on the land records by the Zoning Officer or Town Planner. This notice shall state that approval is for an in-law apartment to be occupied only in accordance with these regulations, and that neither the current owner nor a subsequent owner may rent the apartment for income purposes. 
    5.4 Required Conditions for Special Permit Uses. All special permit uses shall be subject to the requirements of Section 10.0 and other applicable requirements of these regulations. In addition, the following specific requirements shall apply to special permit uses as designated by the number following the "P." 
P1-  Three- and four[-family] dwellings in the R-15 District shall meet the requirements of Section 10.3. Three- and four-family dwellings in the MF District shall meet the requirements of Section 10.1. 
P2-  Subject to the requirements specified in Section 10.1. 
P3-  Approval of location by the Zoning Board of Appeals is required. See Section 19.2.1. 
P4-  All driveways shall meet the following standards: 
a)  They shall be located at least 250 feet from any signalized intersection. 
b)  Not more than one driveway shall be located on a parcel having 150 feet of total road frontage or less. 
c)  A two-way driveway shall have a curb radius of at least 30 feet and a width of at least 24 feet. 
d)  A one way driveway shall have curb radius of at least 30 feet for right turns and at least a five-foot radius on the opposite curb. The width shall be at least 20 feet. 
e)  Driveways shall intersect the street line at an angle of 90 degrees. Driveways shall slope upwards from the gutter line on a straight slope of approximately two percent for at least 25 feet. 
P5-  Principal building shall be set back at least 75 feet from any property line in a residential district. The driveway standards of P4 above shall apply. 
P6-  Subject to the following conditions: 
a)  The operation shall be fully automatic and conducted entirely within a building, fully enclosed. 
b)  Ancillary uses such as vacuum cleaning services and gasoline sales may be permitted following a finding that such uses will not cause congestion. Gasoline sales require approval of location by the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
c)  An on-site staking area shall be provided which provides space for a tandem line up of at least ten vehicles. 
d)  The entire use area shall be paved with a bituminous surface and provided with curbs to control run off. Grade shall be no more than five percent or less than two percent. Surface runoff shall be directed to drains on the lot and shall not be permitted to flow onto adjacent streets or property. 
e)  All wash and rinse waters shall be reclaimed by an automatic system. Detergents used shall be non-toxic. The method of disposing on any wastewater or residue shall be fully described and approved by either the Valley Health District of the Seymour Water Pollution Control Authority. 
P7-  Use is prohibited within the primary recharge area of a stratified drift aquifer used as a public water supply. The use is permitted in other locations subject to the following conditions as well as other applicable provisions of these regulations: 
a)  Manufacture, processing or storage of chemicals or other hazardous materials shall take place entirely within a building. 
b)  No floor drains from areas where chemicals are used, manufactured or stored shall be connected to dry wells or other subsurface leaching structures. 
c)  Outdoor unprotected storage tanks, containers or drums containing chemicals, chemical waste or other hazardous substances are prohibited. Interior storage areas shall have an impervious floor as well as a spill containment area. 
d)  Loading or transfer activities for hazardous chemicals or substances shall be conducted on an impervious surface that is roofed and protected by a dike. 
P8-  The following special requirements shall apply: 
a)  Minimum lot area shall be 50 acres for a 9-hole course and 100 acres for an 18-hole course. 
b)  Club facilities such as restaurant and pro shop shall be at least 200 feet from any lot line in a residential district. 
c)  There shall be no outdoor lighting on the course. Play shall be limited to daylight hours. 
d)  Tees and greens shall be located at least 50 feet from any property line in a residential district. 
P9-  Minimum lot area shall be ten acres. Buildings for the keeping of horses, riding stables, and the open or covered storage of manure shall be at least 100 feet from any lot line in a residential district. 
P10-  Firearms ranges shall be indoors only. 
P11-  As part of the site plan, the applicant shall provide a detailed plan for any outdoor lighting that shows that there will be no annoyance to any residential property in the vicinity. 
P12-  As defined in Section 4.0. 
P13-  Repealed 10-1-05. 
P14-  Land used for burial plots shall be underlain by soils that are characterized by the Soil Survey for New Haven County, Conn. Prepared by the USDA Soil Conservation Service as moderately well drained to excessively drained and having a depth to water table of at least six feet. No burials shall be allowed within 75 feet of any wetland or watercourse. Buildings shall be set back at least 75 feet from any property line in a residential district. The internal roadway system shall have bituminous pavement and provided with storm drainage. Curb to curb width shall be at least 24 feet for two-way traffic and at least 15 feet for one-way traffic. 
P15-  Location is restricted to those portions of the C-2 District that contain heavy commercial land uses such as warehousing, contractors, automotive uses and the like. This use is not allowed in those parts of the C-2 with mixed commercial/residential uses or where the predominant use is retail trade and personal services such as a shopping center. In the RC-3 District, location is restricted to an existing building that is or has been used for a commercial purpose. 
P16-  Permitted as specified in Section 17.0. 
P17-  The distance between a tower and any property line shall be at least equal to the height of the tower. 
P18-  Minimum lot size shall be 30 acres. A new source permit from Conn. DEP is required. 
6.0. - Table of dimensional requirements. 
R-65 R-40 R-18 RC-3 CBD-1 C-2 LI-1 GI-2 Minimum Lot Area, sq. ft. 65,000 40,000 18,000 40,000 10,000 40,000 85,000 85,000 Minimum Lot Frontage, ft. 175 150 120 150 60 150 150 150 Minimum Lot Width, ft. 175 150 120 150 60 150 150 150 Minimum Lot Square, ft. 150 150 120 150 NR NR NR NR Minimum Front Yard, ft. 70 50 25 50 NR 50 75 75 Minimum Side Yard, ft. 35 25 15 25 5 25 25 25 Minimum Rear Yard, ft. 40 30 30 30 5 30 75 75 Maximum Lot Coverage, % 15 15 15 25 NR 25 35 35 Maximum Building Height, ft. 35 35 35 40 65 40 45 50 Principal Buildings/Lot 1 1 1 1/NR NR NR NR NR  
NOTES: 
1.  1/NR denotes one principal residential building per lot, but no restrictions if lot used for commercial purposes only. NR denotes no restrictions. 
2.  Planned Development District-Refer to Section 18 for development standards. 
3.  MF Multi-Family District-Refer to Section 10.1 for development standards. 
4.  Office Development District-Refer to Section 17 for development standards. 
5.  R-18 District-A two-family dwelling shall have a minimum lot area of at least 20,000 square feet. Restrictions contained in Sections 7.2 and 7.3 shall apply. Requirements for three- and four-family dwellings are given in Section 10.3. 
6.  Minimum lot area-Refer to Sections 7.2 and 7.3 for exclusions to area calculations. 
7.  Interior lots-Refer to Section 7.10 for requirements for interior lots. 
8.  Building Height-Maximum building height does not apply to chimneys, church steeples, silos, towers, antennas and similar structures and projections which may be erected to the height required to accomplish their intended purpose without endangering adjacent property of the safety of the public in general. 
7.0. - General provisions. 
    7.1 Application of General Provisions. The provisions of this Section 7 shall apply to all property in all zoning districts, unless expressly noted otherwise. If this section conflicts with a more definitive requirement for a specific use found elsewhere in these regulations, such more definitive requirement shall apply. 
    7.2 Calculation of Minimum Lot Area. The following shall not be included in calculation of minimum lot area for residential uses as required by these regulations: 
a)  The area of any utility or drainage easement, except that such easements located within wetlands and required yards may be included. Only one-half of the area of any conservation easement may be included in calculating minimum lot area. 
b)  The area of any right-of-way. 
c)  Seventy-five percent of the area classified as a wetland by a certified soil scientist. 
    7.3 Wetland/Non-Wetland/Slope Requirements. 
a)  Building lots in each of the following residential zoning districts shall be underlain by contiguous non-wetland soils as specified below. 
R-18 District-An area of at least 11,250 square feet that will accommodate a rectangle 70 feet by 95 feet. 
R-40 District-An area of at least 30,000 square feet that will accommodate a rectangle 100 feet by 185 feet. 
R-65 District-An area of at least 48,750 square feet that will accommodate a rectangle 100 feet by 185 feet. 
MF District-Individual lots containing single- or two-family dwellings shall meet the requirements of the R-18 District stated above. 
b)  Building lots in each of the following zoning districts shall contain a contiguous area having a pre-development slope of 25 percent or less and located within the building setback lines as follows: 
R-18 District-At least 6,000 square feet. 
R-40 District-At least 15,000 square feet. 
R-65 District-At least 25,000 square feet. 
MF District-Individual lots containing single- and two-family dwellings shall meet the R-18 standards stated above. 
    7.4 Accessory Buildings. The following shall apply to the R-18, R-40, R-65, and single- or two-family dwellings in the MF District: 
a)  There shall be no more than three accessory buildings of any type per lot. Accessory buildings of any type are prohibited in the required front yard. Accessory buildings shall meet the building setback requirements of their respective districts except small buildings as stated in Section 7.14.1. 
b)  The total floor area of all buildings accessory to a single-family dwelling shall not exceed 1,150 square feet. 
c)  Portable structures consisting of a frame with a fabric cover shall be at least ten feet from a side or rear lot line. No such structures shall be permitted in the required front yard. 
d)  Storage containers are allowed on a temporary basis only for a period of three months, except that this period may be extended for an additional three months for cause. Only one extension is permitted. 
    7.5 Corner Lots. 
a)  The owner has the option of selecting the location of the front and rear yards and one of the side yards through his choice of building orientation. In a subdivision, the designer may designate side and rear yards. In all cases, the required setback from each street shall be maintained. Refer to the definition on yards in corner lots in Section 4. 
b)  All corner lots shall be subject to a triangular sight line easement within which nothing may be permitted to obstruct vision at any point between a height of 2.5 feet and ten feet above the centerline grade of the intersecting streets. This easement shall be bounded on two sides by a line 50 feet in length measured from the point of intersection of the two street lines, and on the third side by a straight line connecting the two ends of the 50-foot lines. 
    7.6 Drainage. 
a)  Definitions. For purposes of this section, "drainage facilities" are defined as structures intended to convey rain, ground or surface water, including but not limited to roof drains, under drains, relief drains, interceptor drains, storm drainage pipes and drainage swales. Wetlands and watercourses are each as defined in Section 22a-38 C.G.S. 
b)  No land shall be graded in such a manner as to divert, concentrate or direct natural sheet flow on to an adjacent street or property. If the natural flow of ground or surface water is altered by grading or construction, proper drainage facilities shall be provided so that there is no increase in run off on to adjacent properties. 
c)  Outlets from drainage facilities shall meet one of the following conditions: 
1.  Be connected to the Town storm drainage system in a manner approved by the Town Engineer. 
2.  Be discharged into a wetland or watercourse. 
3.  Be located sufficiently distant from a public street or adjacent property so that outflow is dispersed and there is no concentrated discharge of water leaving the property. Outlet protection such as riprap pads or level spreaders may be required. 
d)  Detention basins that collect water from public streets shall not be allowed on lots in private ownership. 
    7.7 Driveways. 
a)  Number of Driveways. The number of driveways per lot shall be based on lot frontage as follows: 
125 feet of frontage or less-One driveway; 
126 feet to 250 feet of frontage-Two driveways; 
251 feet to 500 feet-Three driveways; 
More than 500 feet-Four driveways. 
b)  Corner Lots. Driveways on corner lots shall be located at least 80 feet from the intersection of the street lines. If a lot does not have enough frontage to meet this requirement or if there are physical constraints to driveway location, the driveway shall be located as far from the intersection as practical. 
c)  Setbacks. Driveways shall be set back at least five feet from a side or rear lot line. Driveways on the same lot shall be separated by at least 20 feet at the curb line. Driveways shall be located and aligned so that the apron does not extend beyond the extension of the side lot line. 
d)  Aprons. That portion of the driveway between the curb and the street line and within the Town right-of-way shall be paved in accordance with Town standards. 
e)  Grade. The grade between the curb and the street line shall slope upwards at about five percent for the first ten feet. The grade on the remainder of an unpaved driveway shall not exceed 12 percent. A paved driveway may be up to 17 percent after the first ten feet. Vertical alignment shall be sufficiently flat to prevent the undercarriage of a vehicle from striking the ground. 
f)  Interior Lot Driveways. Driveways shall have either a paved or gravel surface at least 15 feet in width within the area of the 25-foot accessway and at least 12 feet in other locations. Grade shall not exceed ten percent. Driveways shall be at least 2.5 feet from the side lot lines within the 25-foot accessway. 
g)  Sight Distance. In general, all driveways shall have a sight distance of at least 220 feet in both directions. If these requirements cannot be met because of site conditions or road geometry, the driveway shall be located on that part of the lot that provides the best sight distance. Sight distance shall be based on an eye and object height of 3.5 feet. 
h)  Entrance. Driveways shall intersect with the street at an angle of 90 degrees if possible, but in no instance less than 60 degrees measured at its most acute point. The curb radius of a private driveway for a dwelling shall be at least five feet. The curb radius of commercial and industrial driveways shall be designed to accommodate the type of vehicles expected to use the driveway. Driveways to retail centers containing 50,000 square feet or more of floor area shall have a curb radius of at least 25 feet. 
i)  Vertical Clearance. All driveways shall have a vertical clearance between the ground and any overhead obstruction of at least 12 feet for their entire length. 
j)  Turnarounds. Interior lot driveways and all other driveways more than 200 feet in length shall have a turnaround at the end of the driveway. The turnaround shall have one dimension of at least 35 feet. 
k)  Drainage. Driveways shall be designed and located to avoid the concentration and direct discharge of storm water on to an adjacent property or street. Curbing may be required to control the discharge of storm water. 
l)  The driveway to a detached, single-family dwelling shall be located on the same lot therewith for its entire length. 
m)  Turns shall have a minimum radius of 25 feet at the inside curb. 
n)  Driveways on lots other than interior lots shall have a minimum width of 12 feet. 
    7.8 Fences and Walls. 
a)  Fences and walls in residential zoning districts shall be a maximum of four feet in height in the area between the front setback line and the street(s), and a maximum of six feet in height on the remainder of the lot. 
b)  Fences and walls in commercial or industrial zoning districts shall be a maximum of eight feet in height. 
c)  The sight line easement specified in Section 7.5 b) applies to fences and walls. 
d)  No fence or wall, including a retaining wall, shall be located in such a manner as to reduce sight distance along a public street to a distance of less than 220 feet. 
e)  Retaining walls may be erected to the height required to accomplish their intended purpose. The Town Engineer may require that a retaining wall over four feet in height be designed by a professional engineer. 
f)  There are no specific setback requirements for fences or walls; however, they should be located so that repair or maintenance may be done without encroaching upon adjacent property. 
    7.9 Horses. 
a)  The keeping or boarding of horses or other equines is permitted as an accessory use to a detached single-family dwelling. The minimum required lot area shall be 80,000 square feet for the first animal and 20,000 square feet for each animal thereafter. The maximum number of animals permitted shall be five. Minimum required lot area shall be gross area and may include wetlands, steep slopes, easements or rights-of-way. 
b)  Buildings used for housing of animals and the open or covered storage of manure shall be at least 100 feet from any lot line or residential building. Outdoor riding areas, which may be fenced, shall not be required to meet this setback. 
    7.10 Interior Lots. 
a)  Interior lots shall be permitted in the R-65, R-40, and R-18 Zoning Districts. Interior lots for detached single- or two-family dwellings are allowed in the MF District subject to all of the standards for the R-18 District. 
b)  Each lot shall have its own accessway to a public street. The accessway shall be at least 25 feet in width and be in the same ownership as the lot served. The accessway shall not be a right-of-way or easement. 
c)  All standards listed in Section 6 shall apply to interior lots. The area of the accessway shall not be included in calculating minimum lot area in addition to land cited in Section 7.2. The wetland/slope standards of Section 7.3 apply to interior lots. 
d)  Accessways to interior lots on the same side of the street shall be separated by a distance of at least three times the minimum lot frontage for the applicable zoning district. 
e)  The front, side and rear building setback lines on interior lots shall each be as follows: 
R-18: 55 feet. 
R-40: 65 feet. 
R-65: 75 feet. 
MF: 55 feet (single- and two-family dwellings on individual lots). 
f)  The area within the building setback lines shall accommodate at least a 60-foot square. 
    7.11 Outdoor Lighting. All outdoor lighting shall be shielded so that the source of illumination is not directly visible from any street or adjoining property. The circle of illumination cast by the lighting device shall be confined essentially to the lot. 
    7.12 Outside Storage/Display. Outside storage of materials, equipment or inventory for commercial or industrial uses shall not be allowed in the required front yard or in any side or rear yard which abuts a residential zoning district. Such storage shall be in an area specifically designed for this purpose and defined by such means as an opaque fence, embankment or plantings. 
    The display of merchandise offered for retail sale is allowed to occupy up to one-half of the front yard of any parcel in a commercial zoning district. 
    7.13 In general the finished slope of any area excavated, filled or re-graded shall not exceed one foot vertical for each two feet horizontal. Slopes may exceed such slope in rock cuts or other areas after review of the proposed plans by the Town Engineer and a finding that the slope will be stable. There shall be no grading, excavation or filling within five feet of any property line except that grading across property lines may be permitted as part of subdivision approval, and retaining walls may be constructed where needed. No land shall be re-graded to direct the flow of surface water towards a street or adjoining property unless proper provision has been made for the disposition of such water. 
    7.14 Yard Occupancy. 
7.14.1  Except as specifically provided below no required front, side or rear yard may be occupied by a principal of accessory building. No more than two accessory buildings having a total floor area of 200 square feet or less, and a height of not more than 8.5 feet, are allowed in a required side or rear yard, but in no instance shall be less than ten feet from the property line. Architectural projections of the principal building such as decks, overhangs, bay windows, stairs, porches, chimneys and the like may encroach upon any required yard by a distance of up to four feet. Handicapped ramps may be located as required. 
7.14.2  Yards may be occupied by driveways, fences, retaining walls, parking, stairways, landscaping and similar features as may be elsewhere permitted in these regulations. On residential property, yards may also be occupied by certain accessory structures such as picnic tables, play equipment, dog pens and the like that are customarily associated with a dwelling. 
    7.15 Parcels in Adjacent Towns. A zoning permit may be issued for a parcel having land partially in Seymour and partially in an adjacent municipality provided that the total parcel area meets all of the requirements of the zoning district in Seymour in which it is located, vehicular access to the parcel is from Seymour and the principal building is located in Seymour. 
8.0. - "Of right" uses (Y or C). 
    8.1 Uses designated as Y or C in Section 5.1.1 are allowed in their respective zoning districts following a review of the zoning application by the Zoning Enforcement Officer assisted by the Town Planner and Town Engineer as required and a finding of compliance with these regulations. A very few of these uses require site plan approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission. All such uses are subject to all of the applicable requirements of these regulations. The applicant should pay particular reference to the dimensional requirements in Section 6, general provisions in Section 7, and any special conditions listed in Section 5.3. 
    8.2 The application for a zoning permit shall be as established by the Planning and Zoning Commission and shall contain at least a statement of use and a plot plan of sufficient detail to demonstrate full compliance with these regulations. The application for approval of those uses requiring site plan approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be as specified in Section 9 of these regulations. No application will be accepted and placed on the Commission's agenda for consideration unless it is complete in all respects. 
9.0. - Site plan review (YS) (S). 
    9.1 Uses allowed after site plan review are permitted either after administrative review or after review by the Planning and Zoning Commission depending upon the scale of the development as specified in Section 5.1 a). Uses permitted by administrative approval are subject to the same general requirements as stated in Section 8.1 above. Uses requiring approval from the Planning and Zoning Commission are subject to these same general requirements as well as the requirements of Section 9.3. 
    9.2 The zoning application for a use allowed by administrative approval shall contain sufficient information to demonstrate compliance with these regulations and may require generalized floor plans for the purpose of calculating parking requirements, building elevations and topographic data. The plot plan shall be prepared to meet the standards of a Class D map, at least. The zoning application for a use designated as S shall be as specified in Section 9.3. 
    9.3 Site plans (S). 
9.3.1  Intent and Purpose. It is the intent of this section to allow certain uses following review and approval of a detailed site plan by the Planning and Zoning Commission. The purpose of a detailed site plan is to show that the proposed development can be adequately accommodated on the site and integrated with the immediate neighborhood considering the following factors: 
a)  Physical site conditions such as size and area, topography, wetlands and subsoil characteristics. 
b)  Site access including access for emergency services. 
c)  The location, size and design of buildings and structures. 
d)  The intensity and character of the operation. 
9.3.2  Application. An application for site plan approval shall consist of an application form as established by the Commission, architectural elevations and generalized floor plans for all buildings, a plot plan and an A-2 survey of existing conditions. The application form shall include a detailed statement of use. Building elevations shall be of sufficient detail so that the appearance of the building is clearly shown. Floor plans shall be of sufficient detail to allow calculation of parking and loading requirements. No application will be accepted and placed on the Commission's agenda for consideration unless it is complete in all respects. 
9.3.3  Plot Plan. The plot plan shall be prepared at a scale not to exceed one inch to 40 feet and shall show lot lines, existing and proposed contours at two-foot intervals, existing and proposed buildings and structures, wetlands as determined by a soils scientist or a statement from a soil scientist that there are no wetlands on the parcel, circulation and parking, storm drainage, water supply and sanitary sewers, retaining walls, storage areas, outdoor lighting, signs, landscaping and construction details as needed. Erosion and sedimentation control measures shall be shown on the plot plan or on a separate sheet. The site shall be outlined on a vicinity or locus map. The plot plan shall be prepared by a registered land surveyor to the standards of a Class A-2 survey. Storm drainage, retaining walls and similar improvements shall be prepared by a licensed engineer. 
9.3.4  Standards. Site plans shall meet all of the general standards for the zoning district in which they are located as well as the specific standards set forth below. If there is a conflict, the more specific standard shall apply. 
a)  Landscaping. All areas not covered by either a principal or accessory building or pavement shall either be left in its natural undisturbed state or shall have a ground cover of grass or plantings sufficient to prevent wind or water erosion and present a pleasing appearance. 
b)  Yards and Buffers. The side yard in any parcel in an industrial zone that abuts a residential zone shall have a width of at least 75 feet. Any required side or rear yard in a commercial or industrial zone adjacent to a residential zone shall contain a landscaped buffer area at least 15 feet in width. Such buffer shall be planted with a mixture of deciduous or evergreen trees or left in its natural state in order to provide a reasonably opaque barrier. On smaller parcels where it is not practical to provide such buffer, the Commission may approve an opaque fence having a height of at least eight feet. 
c)  Storm Water. Proper provision for storm water is required. On-site detention shall be required only if the increase in storm water runoff cannot be accommodated by the storm drainage system either as it exists or may be improved by the applicant, of if such increase cannot be accommodated by an existing wetland or watercourse without causing downstream flooding or damage. 
d)  Grading. The final grade shall not exceed a slope of one foot vertical distance for each two feet of horizontal distance. If bedrock is encountered, vertical or near vertical cuts are allowed provided they are located at least 50 feet from any property line, from any building or from any portion of the site used for parking or vehicular access. A chain link fence at least six feet high shall protect the top of any such cut that exceeds a height of ten feet. 
e)  Utility Structures. Detached utility structures such as dumpsters, air conditioning units, transformers and the like shall be enclosed by buildings, embankments, fences, walls or plantings. 
f)  Parking. Parking layout and requirements shall be as specified in Section 14. There shall be no parking within 25 feet of the street line in any commercial or industrial district except in the discretion of the Commission where such parking can be safely accessed and is in conformance with other parking in the zone. Site plans for nonresidential use shall have no parking within 50 feet of the side or rear lot line of any parcel in a residential district. The above setbacks do not apply to driveways or accessways. 
9.3.5  Wetlands. If an application includes an activity regulated by the Seymour Inland Wetland Commission, an application shall be submitted to the Wetlands Commission either prior to or on the same day that the site plan application is submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission. No decision on the site plan application shall be made until the Wetlands Commission has submitted a report of its decision. 
9.3.6  Performance Bond. 
9.3.6.1  The Commission may require a performance bond or other surety as a condition of approval of any site plan submitted in accordance with this section as well as any site plan submitted with a special permit application. Surety shall be in a form approved by Town Counsel and in an amount approved by the Town Engineer. 
9.3.6.2  Surety shall be in an amount sufficient to meet the cost of any or all of the following: 
a)  Erosion and sedimentation control measures. 
b)  Excavation, grading, filling and slope stabilization. 
c)  Off-site improvements having a direct relationship to the proposed development which may be either shown on the site plan or required by the Commission. 
d)  On-site improvements, except buildings, required by the zoning regulations to support the proposed principal use. 
e)  On-site improvements which if not completed would have an adverse effect on adjacent property or public safety. 
9.3.6.3  The site plan shall contain a notation stating the time period within which site improvements are to be completed. The Commission may grant one or more extensions of this period; however, the total period shall not exceed the statutory limit. 
9.3.6.4  No zoning permit shall be issued nor shall any construction be started until any required surety has been posted. Surety shall be released by the Commission upon a finding that as built plans show substantial compliance with the approved site plan. 
9.3.6.5  If bonded improvements are not completed within the specified time period or any extensions thereof, the Commission may call the bond or other surety and cause improvements to be completed to the extent necessary to assure substantial compliance with the approved site plan. 
10.0. - Special permits (P) (Z). 
    Special permits may be granted by the Planning and Zoning Commission or the Zoning Board of Appeals for those uses designated as P or Z in Section 5.2. 
    No special permit shall be approved unless the approving authority finds that the use will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, convenience or property values, and that the use will be in conformity with the comprehensive zoning plan for the municipality. 
    The following factors shall be considered when making these findings: 
a)  The suitability of the site for the intended use considering its size, area, shape, topography, subsoil conditions and presence of wetlands and watercourses. 
b)  The ability of the adjacent roadway system to accommodate existing traffic and any increase in traffic generated by the proposed use. 
c)  The availability and adequacy of supporting municipal services such as police and fire protection, water and sewer, storm drainage, sanitation services and the like. 
    All special permit uses are declared to possess such special characteristics that each shall be considered as an individual case. The approving authority may impose additional requirements if the review of the application has shown that additional requirements are needed to protect the public health, safety, convenience or property values. 
    Additional requirements, conditions and safeguards shall include but not be limited to greater setbacks, additional landscaping or screening, additional parking, limitations on building height or bulk, a lesser number of occupants, storm drainage, a modification of the exterior appearance of any structure if needed to ensure neighborhood compatibility or reasonable limitations on hours of operation. 
    All special permit applications shall include a site plan as specified in Section 9 of these regulations and all special permit applications shall require a public hearing as required by Statute. No application will be accepted and placed on the Commission's agenda for consideration until it is complete in all respects. 
    All special permits shall be subject to the requirements of this Section 10.0, any special requirements set forth in Section 5.4 as applicable and any other general requirements as set forth in the body of these regulations. Requirements for Garden Apartments, Town Houses, Elderly Housing, In-Law Apartments, Three- and Four-family Dwellings, Cluster Subdivisions and Earth Removal Operations are contained in their respective sections. If there is a conflict between a requirement in these specific sections and a requirement in the general body of the regulations, the requirement in the specific section shall apply. 
    10.1 Garden Apartments. Town Houses and Specialized Housing for the Elderly. 
10.1.1  Garden Apartments. Town houses and specialized housing for the elderly are allowed by special permit granted by the Planning and Zoning Commission, as specified by Section 5.2, subject to the provisions of this section as well as all other applicable provisions of these regulations. Where there is a conflict, this section shall prevail. 
10.1.2  Application. The application shall include a site plan application and supporting plans and data as specified in Section 9 of these regulations. In addition a statement shall be submitted giving the area of wetlands as determined by a soil scientist, lot coverage of principal and accessory buildings, and lot coverage of impervious surfaces. Plans and profiles of interior roadways shall be submitted if the development includes more than two principal buildings. A traffic analysis may be required. No application shall be accepted and placed on the Commission's agenda for consideration unless it is complete in all respects. 
10.1.3  Development Standards-Garden Apartments. 
a)  Site Requirements. 
1.  Each dwelling unit shall be served by the municipal sanitary sewer system and a public water supply system. 
2.  Developments containing 24 or more dwelling units shall have at least two connections to a public road. One connection shall have a pavement width of at least 24 feet and a lot area width of at least 50 feet. The second connection may be for emergency vehicles only. Developments of less than 24 units shall have at least one connection that meets the 24-foot/50-foot standard described above. 
3.  Parcels shall have a minimum lot area of two acres and such size and shape that a 200-foot square will fit totally within its boundaries. 
b)  Density. The parcel shall have a minimum lot area of 16,000 square feet for each dwelling unit. Lot area restrictions stated in Section 7.2 shall apply. 
c)  Lot Coverage. Total lot coverage of buildings and impervious surface shall not exceed 18 percent of gross parcel area. 
d)  Buildings and Outdoor Private Space. There shall be no limit to the number of principal buildings. Buildings shall have no more than two habitable stories, excluding basements and garages. Each dwelling unit shall have at least 168 square feet of private outdoor space in the form of a porch, deck, patio, balcony or similar feature. 
e)  Yards and Setbacks. Principal buildings shall be set back at least 50 feet from each other or from any internal roadway. The width of front, side and rear yards shall be at least 2.5 times that required for the adjoining property or in the case of the front yard the property on the opposite side of the street if such adjoining property is in the R-18, R-10 or R-65 District. In other locations the front yard shall be 60 feet, the rear yard shall be 75 feet and the side yards shall be 35 feet. Side and rear yards that abut property in the R-18, R-40 or R-65 Districts shall contain a landscaped or natural buffer area at least 20 feet in width. The buffer shall provide a reasonably opaque barrier to a height of at least six feet. The front yard shall be suitably landscaped to present a pleasing appearance from the street. 
f)  Interior Roadways. Interior roadways shall meet the construction standards for town roads as specified in the subdivision regulations. Roadways shall have an unobstructed, paved travel lane at least 12 feet in width for each direction of travel. Horizontal and vertical alignment shall be based on design speed and sound engineering practice. In no event shall the horizontal curve radius at the centerline be less than 35 feet. Maximum grade shall be 12 percent, except that grades of up to 14 percent may be permitted for distances of less than 100 feet. The roadway system shall be designed to provide access to each structure for emergency service vehicles. Interior roadways shall remain private in perpetuity, and all Town road maintenance services including plowing shall stop at the property line. 
g)  Parking. There shall be no parallel parking permitted on internal roadways. Parking lots shall be located at least 20 feet from any property line. The required parking for each building shall be located within 200 feet of the building served and connected thereto by a paved walk way at least 4 feet in width. The walkway shall be illuminated throughout its entire length. The requirements of Section 14 of these regulations shall apply. 
h)  Utilities. Utility lines and wires shall be underground. Streetlights may be required at the project entrance, at intersections of internal roadways and at entrances to parking areas. At least one fire hydrant shall be located within 100 feet of each residential structure, and there shall be at least one fire hydrant for each 20 dwelling units. 
i)  Signs. One freestanding sign, having an area not to exceed 50 square feet identifying the development is permitted. There may be one sign per building, not to exceed an area of 10 square feet except that a sign identifying a community building may be up to 30 square feet. Street name and directional signs are allowed as needed. 
j)  Open Space. At least 30 percent of the area used for the purpose of calculating permitted density shall be reserved as common space. Open space shall be designated on the site plan and distributed throughout the project in a reasonably uniform manner so that all residents may benefit. 
10.1.4  Development Standards, Town Houses. 
a)  Site Requirements. Each dwelling unit shall be connected to the municipal sanitary sewer system and a public water supply. The site shall have at least one connection to a public road, such connect ion having a minim u m pavement width of 24 feet and minimum property width of 50 feet. Developments containing more than 24 dwelling units shall have at least two such connect ions. 
b)  Density. The parcel shall contain at least 12,000 square feet of lot area for each dwelling unit. The area of the internal roadway system shall be deducted for purposed of calculating permitted units. Lot area restrictions stated in Section 7.2 shall apply. 
c)  Lot Coverage. The requirements of Section 10.1.3 c) shall govern. 
d)  Buildings and Private Outdoor Space. There shall be no limit to the number of principal buildings. No building shall contain more than four dwelling units, except that up to six units per building are allowed if the exterior walls of each dwelling unit are offset from those of the adjacent dwelling unit by at least five feet. Each dwelling unit shall have at least 400 square feet of private outdoor space delineated by a fence, wall, plantings or similar method. 
e)  Yards and Setbacks. Principal and accessory buildings shall be at least 30 feet from each other and at least 25 feet from an internal roadway. Front, side and rear yards shall be as specified in Section 10.1.3 e). A buffer as specified in this same Section shall be provided. 
f)  Internal Roadways. Internal roadways shall be as specified in Section 10.1.3 f). 
g)  Parking. Parking shall be as stated in Section 10.1.3 g), except that at least one covered parking space shall be assigned to each dwelling unit. 
h)  Utilities. Utilities shall be as stated in Section 10.1.3 h). 
i)  Signs. Permitted as stated in Section 10.1.3 i). 
j)  Open Space. Requirements of Section 10.1.3 j) shall apply. 
10.1.5  Development Standards-Specialized Housing for the Elderly. 
a)  Site Requirements. All principal building shall be connected to the municipal sanitary sewer system and a public water supply. Parcels shall have a minimum lot area of two acres and be of such size and shape that a 200-foot square will fit totally within its boundaries. Nursing or convalescent homes having a capacity of more than 50 beds, and congregate living facilities having a capacity of more than 24 dwelling units, shall have a principal connection to a public road as well as a hard surfaced accessway for emergency vehicles. The principal connection shall have a pavement width of at least 24 feet. 
b)  Density. The parcel shall contain at least 1,250 square feet of lot area for each bed in a nursing or convalescent home, and at least 8,000 square feet of lot area for each dwelling unit in a congregate living facility. Lot area restrictions for calculating density stated in Section 7.2 shall apply. 
c)  Lot Coverage. The requirements of Section 10.1.3 c) shall apply. 
d)  Buildings. A nursing or convalescent home shall have a capacity of not more than 130 beds. No single buildings containing congregate living units shall contain more than 24 such units. Buildings shall have no more than three usable stories, excluding basements and garages. Buildings shall not exceed a height of 35 feet except that building height may be up to 40 feet if justified by special architectural considerations. 
e)  Yards and Setbacks. The requirements of Section 10.1.3 e) shall apply. 
f)  Internal Roadways. If required, the provisions of Section 10.1.3 f) shall apply. 
g)  Parking. The requirements of Section 10.1.3 g) shall apply, except that the required number of spaces shall be as follows. Convalescent or nursing homes shall have one space for each person employed at any one time plus one space for each four beds. If community meeting rooms, day care or other such services are provided, additional parking shall be required as specified in Section 14.3. Congregate housing facilities shall provide 1.25 spaces for each dwelling unit plus one space for each person employed at any one time. 
h)  Utilities. The requirements of Section 10.1.3 h) shall apply to congregate living projects including more than two principal buildings. 
i)  Signs. One sign identifying the project and having an area of no more than 50 square feet is permitted. This may be either free standing or attached to the building. Building identification, street name and directional signs are permitted as needed. 
j)  Supporting Services. Congregate housing facilities shall contain formal areas suitable for social and leisure time activities. The plan shall also include physical facilities for supportive services such as common dining, housekeeping, laundry and medical care. 
k)  Open Space. Requirements of Section 10.1.3 j) shall apply. 
l)  Pursuant to Section 8-2i, C.G.S., the Planning and Zoning Commission may, upon a finding of compliance with Section 10.0, adjust the development standards for a congregate, independent or assisted living facility under the ownership and control of the Seymour Housing Authority as follows: 
1.  Lot coverage for principal and accessory buildings may be up to 35 percent. Total lot coverage (buildings plus impervious surface) may be up to 50 percent. 
2.  Lot area per dwelling unit may be reduced to 3,000 square feet for parcels larger than 2.5 acres and to 1,850 square feet for parcels 2.5 acres or less. 
3.  The total number of dwelling units or beds, or combination thereof, in a single building may be increased to up to 80. 
4.  Open space may be reduced to 20 percent of the parcel area. 
5.  Parking may be reduced to one space per two units. 
6.  Minimum lot size, shape and setback requirements may be reduced by up to 20 percent. 
7.  For parcels of 2.5 acres or less, the setback requirements shall be that of the adjoining zone, provided the building height does not exceed that of the adjoining zone. For all other parcels the setback requirements of Section 10.1.3 e) may be reduced by 20 percent. 
10.1.6  Phased Developments. 
a)  The Commission may approve a composite development plan allowing a parcel to be developed in two or more phases. Approval of a composite development plan shall represent the Commission's endorsement of the applicant's long term plan for the entire tract, but shall not be construed as approval of any individual phase. Each individual phase shall require special permit approval. 
b)  A composite development plan shall be drawn at a scale suitable for the degree of detail to be shown and shall show the location of principal and accessory buildings, number of dwelling units, layout of circulation and parking, proposed grading, accessory uses, limits of individual phases and anticipated construction timetable. Any community service or recreational areas or facilities shown of the plan shall be considered as an essential part thereof. 
c)  Each phase shall be capable of independent existence without the approval of subsequent phases. Each subsequent special permit application shall faithfully implement the composite development plan. Substantial differences, including failure to include community service or recreational areas, shall be cause to reject the special permit application. 
d)  A composite development plan may be submitted at the same time as a special permit application for the first phase, but shall be considered and acted upon as a separate application. 
e)  The construction timetable submitted by the applicant shall be diligently pursued. Delays of five years or more shall be cause for the Commission to reconsider its approval of any phase on the approved composite plan that has not been started. 
f)  A special permit for any subsequent phase shall not be approved until all community service facilities, recreation facilities and off-site improvements included in any approved phase have been completed. 
g)  Approval of a composite development plan shall not prevent the Planning and Zoning Commission from amending the zoning regulations and map in the usual manner. A special permit application for any phase shown on an approved composite development plan shall conform to such regulations as amended. 
    10.2 Accessory or In-law Apartments. Repealed 10-1-05. Refer to Section 5 for requirements for In-Law Apartments. 
    10.3 Three- and Four-family Dwellings. 
a)  Authorization. The Planning and Zoning Commission is hereby authorized to grant a special permit for three- and four-family dwellings in the R18 Zoning District in accordance with the requirements of this section and all other applicable requirements of these regulations. 
b)  Location. Three- and four-family dwellings shall be located exclusively in areas containing similar mixed housing types and prohibited from areas containing detached single-family dwellings only. Duly approved Subdivisions where the prevailing lot area is 15,000 square feet, among other areas, shall be considered as areas containing single-family dwellings only. 
c)  Density. New construction shall require at least 10,000 square feet of lot area per unit. Conversions of existing structures shall require at least 8,000 square feet of lot area per unit. If building additions are proposed, the requirements for new construction shall apply to the entire project. Land area identified as wetlands, land area having a slope of more than 20 percent and the area of any easements or rights-of-way shall be deducted from total parcel area for purposes of calculating permitted density. 
d)  Parking. There shall be at least two off-street parking spaces per dwelling unit. Each space shall have direct access to a driveway or maneuvering lane. Tandem arrangements are prohibited. No parking is permitted in the required front yard. Parking areas and driveways shall be paved with bituminous concrete. 
e)  Usable Outdoor Space. There shall be at least 500 square feet of usable outdoor space per dwelling unit. A deck, patio or balcony may be used to meet a portion of this requirement. The area of the required front yard shall not be considered as usable outdoor space, nor shall any other area that is clearly unsuited for this purpose because of location or character. 
f)  Yards, Setbacks and Screening. New construction or additions to existing structures shall have a side yard and rear yard at least equal to the highest point of the principal building or shall meet the requirements of the R-18 District, whichever is greater. Screening or buffer strips consisting of opaque fencing or plantings to a height of at least six feet shall be provided along any side or rear lot line common to a lot containing a single-family dwelling. 
g)  Utilities. Each dwelling unit shall be served by a public water supply system and connected to the municipal sanitary sewer system. 
h)  Affordability. Dwellings constructed or altered under the provisions of this section shall contain affordable units. A three-family dwelling shall contain at least one affordable unit. A four-family dwelling shall contain at least two affordable units. Affordability shall be assured by an agreement between the Town and the property owner which agreement shall be filed on the land records and binding on all subsequent owners for a period of 30 years. 
i)  Application. Application shall be made on a form provided by the Commission accompanied by the established fee. A site plan prepared to the standards of an A-2 survey shall be submitted showing at least property lines, principal and accessory buildings, driveways and parking areas, designated open space, landscaping and screening, proposed grading and location of wetlands and watercourses. Density calculations as specified in Section 10.3 c) above and a map showing existing land use in the immediate area shall be submitted. Architectural elevations of new buildings or additions to existing buildings are required. 
j)  No application will be accepted and placed on the Commission's agenda for consideration until it is complete in all respects. 
k)  Renovation of Existing Building. The less restrictive density requirement of 5,500 square feet per unit shall apply. Other requirements of this Section 10.1.3, including road connections, open space, habitable stories, lot coverage, parking and setbacks, may be modified by the Planning and Zoning Commission if existing conditions related to the building or site prevent full compliance. Compliance shall be as complete as existing conditions will allow. 
11.0. - Nonconforming uses. 
    11.1 Definition. A nonconforming use is a lawfully existing use of land or buildings which does not conform to one or more of the use requirements set forth in Section 5 of these regulations. Such use must have legally existed prior to the effective date of the regulation that caused it to be nonconforming. Such use shall have been actual and generally known in the neighborhood and not merely contemplated. 
    A nonconforming sign is a legally existing sign that does not conform to the requirements of Section 13 of these regulations. 
    11.2 A nonconforming use may be repaired, renovated or upgraded. A nonconforming use may be intensified due to a normal increase in business or other related activity. 
    A nonconforming sign may be repaired, reconstructed or have a change in copy. There shall be no changes to height, size or location. 
    11.3 A nonconforming use may not be expanded into any portion of a building constructed after such use became nonconforming or into any portion of a building not originally designed or intended for occupancy by such use. 
    11.4 A nonconforming use may not be extended into any land not occupied by such use at the time it became nonconforming, except that such use may be extended throughout a lot of record if there is substantial evidence that such lot was intended to be occupied by the nonconforming use only. 
    11.5 A nonconforming use may be changed to a conforming use. A nonconforming use may be changed to another nonconforming use following a finding by the Planning and Zoning Commission that the new use has either the same or a lesser degree of nonconformity. In making such determination, the Commission shall consider similarity of use as specified in Section 5.1 b), potential off-site effects, and the classification of uses as set forth in the Table of Permitted Uses. The Commission may impose reasonable conditions or limitations to assure the same or a lesser degree of nonconformity. 
    11.6 A nonconforming use shall be considered as abandoned and may not be reestablished if such use has been voluntarily discontinued by the owner as evidenced by any positive act indicating such discontinuance. 
    11.7 Any nonconforming use that has been damaged by fire or other casualty may be restored to its prior condition with respect to height, size, bulk or area, but may not be extended or expanded. 
12.0. - Earth removal, filling and regrading. 
    12.1 General. Except for those activities excluded in Section 12.2 below, the excavation, filling or regrading of earthen material on any lot in any zoning district shall require a special permit granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals subject to the requirements of this section. 
    12.2 Exclusions. The following activities involving excavation, filling or regrading of earthen materials are exempt from the specific requirements of this section, but may be subject to requirements contained elsewhere in these regulations: 
a)  Activities involving 50 cubic yards of material or less are allowed on any lot for any purpose without zoning approval. 
b)  Activities involving more than 50 cubic yards and up to 400 cubic yards of material require a zoning permit issued by the Zoning Enforcement Officer. Activities involving more than 400 cubic yards must conform to the requirements of this section. 
c)  Activities required for the construction of foundations, driveways, septic systems and lot regrading associated with building construction for which a building permit has been issued involving no more than 1,200 cubic yards of material. 
d)  Activities associated with land preparation for agricultural use involving no more than 2,000 cubic yards of material. 
e)  Activities shown on a grading plan submitted with a site plan, special permit or subdivision application and approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission. In the case of a site plan or special permit, the Commission may require an as built progress plan after one year to determine that sufficient progress has been made. The Commission shall require surety for restoration of the entire site. 
f)  Activities associated with the repair or alteration of an existing roadway or parking lot, or the installation and repair of public utility lines. 
g)  Activities associated with the dredging, filling or alteration of a watercourse or water body provided that the Seymour Inland Wetlands Commission has approved such activities. 
    12.3 Application for Earthen Material Removal, Filling or Regrading. 
12.3.1  Site Plan Requirements. 
a)  The site plan shall be prepared at a preferred scale of one inch to 40 feet. The plan shall meet the standards of a Class A-2 survey and be prepared by a registered land surveyor. A professional engineer shall design storm water drainage, retaining walls and similar improvements. 
b)  The site plan shall show as much of the following information as is applicable to or reasonably required by the proposed activity: property lines, existing and proposed structures, existing and proposed contours at two-foot intervals, grading limits, location and results of soil borings, location of wetlands and watercourses, stormwater drainage facilities, access or haul roads, areas for storage of equipment, fuel or other hazardous materials, and the location of any rock crusher or other processing machinery. 
c)  The site plan shall include notations giving the following information: types of equipment to be used, estimates of the amount of material to be removed, hours of operation and acknowledgement that any blasting will conform to the Town's blasting ordinance. 
d)  An erosion control plan as specified in these regulations shall be submitted either as a separate sheet or on the site plan. 
12.3.2  Standards. 
a)  Not more than five acres shall be disturbed at any one time. In general, the area of active excavation shall be no more than two acres, with the balance of the disturbed area to be used for ancillary operations such as stockpiling, storage of machinery, haul roads and the like. 
b)  The access road shall be paved for a distance of at least 25 feet from a public road. There shall be the usual construction entrance at the end of the pavement. 
c)  There shall be no excavation within 50 feet of any adjoining property line. 
d)  The permit holder shall ensure that vehicles transporting earthen materials to and from the site are securely loaded to prevent spillage. 
e)  Drainage facilities shall be provided to control the discharge of storm water on to adjacent property or streets. On-site detention may be required. 
f)  The storage of hazardous materials and the fueling of vehicles shall take place on an impervious surface protected by a dike to contain spillage. 
g)  The maximum hours of operation shall be from 7:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. on weekdays and from 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon on Saturday. There shall be no activity on Sundays or legal holidays. 
h)  Any form of processing of materials such as rock crushing, screening or sifting is permitted only in an industrial or commercial zoning district. Processing machinery shall be located at least 300 feet from any property line. Acoustical and dust control measures shall be provided. 
12.3.3  Restoration. 
a)  No area of more than two acres shall remain in an undisturbed state for more than one year after excavation and/or filling to final grade has been completed as shown on the application. Restoration shall be started within this one-year period. 
b)  Disturbed areas shall be evenly graded to a slope not exceeding one-foot vertical rise to each two feet of horizontal distance. This slope may be modified where exposed bedrock or other natural conditions make a steeper slope unavoidable, provided that the resulting slope is stable and safe. 
c)  Disturbed areas shall be covered with a suitable planting media and seeded with a perennial grass. The area shall be maintained by the permit holder until the vegetative cover is established and there is no danger of erosion by wind or water. The entire area shall be free from debris and loose boulders. 
d)  Restoration of the entire permit area shall have been either completed or started within one year after establishment of final grade. The performance bond required below shall not be released until the Board of Appeals has ruled that restoration is satisfactory. 
    12.4 Performance Bond. A performance bond shall be provided by the applicant in favor of the Town of Seymour. The bond shall be in an amount recommended by the Town Engineer and in a form acceptable to Town Counsel. The bond shall provide for site stabilization, restoration, erosion control and the completion of any other improvements required for public convenience and safety 
    12.5 Application. Application for a special permit for earth removal shall be made, advertised and processed in the same manner as any other application to the Zoning Board of Appeals, except that the Board will make a good faith effort to notify abutting property owners of the public hearing on the initial application. 
    12.6 Duration of Permit/Renewal. A permit issued pursuant to this section shall be valid for a period of one year from the date of approval, and may be renewed for subsequent periods of one year. A public hearing shall be held on an application for renewal. An application for renewal shall include an updated site plan and a statement of the volume of material removed during the past year. An application for renewal shall be approved, provided that the Board finds that work done during the preceding year was in compliance with the permit. 
13.0. - Signs. 
    13.1 General. It is the intent of this section to regulate the height and size and location of all signs in the Town of Seymour, and the character of such signs to the extent necessary to protect the public safety convenience and continuity. No sign shall be erected, moved or altered without first having obtained a zoning permit, except for those signs exempt from zoning approval as specified in this section. Signs not expressly permitted by this section are prohibited. 
    13.2 Definitions. 
a)  Sign. Any object, device or display which is used to advertise, identify, display, direct or attract attention to an object, person, institution, organization, business, product, service, event or location by any means. A sign does not include any flag, pennant or insignia of any governmental unit, or any traffic or similar regulatory device or legal notice of any governmental unit. 
b)  Area of sign. The entire visible face of a sign, which may consist of more than one side, including the advertising surface and any framing, trim or molding, but not including the supporting structure. 
c)  Detached sign. A sign that is supported by beams or poles resting on the ground and is not attached to any building or structure. 
d)  Attached sign. A sign that is attached directly to or projects from the wall of a building. 
e)  Banner. A sign of a temporary nature made of a material such as cloth, vinyl, cardboard and the like. 
f)  Roof sign. A sign that is attached to any part of the roof of a building. 
g)  Sandwich sign. A portable, two sided sign, commonly shaped like an "A," resting on the ground and having a height of not more than 45 inches and a width of not more than 25 inches. 
    13.3 Prohibited Signs. The following signs are prohibited: 
a)  Billboards and all other signs that do not identify advertise or otherwise directly relate to the property on which they are located, except for existing billboards as specified in Section 5.2. This section is further intended to prohibit such signs within a Town or State right-of-way or other Town of State property. 
b)  Hazardous Signs. Signs that are either within or hang over a public or private street or right-of-way, including a sidewalk; that are located within ten feet of a street line in such a manner as to interfere with vehicular sight distance; that are otherwise located or maintained in a condition that is a hazard to pedestrians or vehicles. 
c)  Roof Signs. Signs that are attached to the roof of a building except as may be allowed by special permit. 
d)  Animated Signs. Signs that are flashing, revolving, oscillating, pulsating or otherwise animated. Standard time and temperature signs are permitted as well as electronic signs provided the changing display of an electronic sign remains for a period of at least five minutes. 
e)  Improperly Lighted Signs. Signs that cast unshielded light directly upon an adjacent street or property. 
f)  Excessive Height. Detached signs shall not exceed a height of 24 feet. 
g)  [ Portable Sandwich Signs. ] Portable sandwich signs are prohibited; except in the CBD-1 District if they are located directly in front of the business served. Sandwich signs shall be removed during non-business hours and shall not interfere with vehicular sight lines or block pedestrian traffic. 
    13.4 Exempt Signs. The following signs are permitted in any zoning district and do not require a permit except as noted: 
a)  Traffic control, street name or directional signs within a public or private right-of-way or on private property. Such signs shall be of a standard size and design. (See C22, Section 53.) 
b)  Regulatory signs such as No Hunting or No Trespassing, and the like. 
c)  Signs bearing the name and address of the property owner. 
d)  Political signs to be removed immediately after the election. 
e)  Contractor's Signs. One sign per contractor identifying the person or firm currently constructing or repairing a building, not to exceed 16 square feet. 
f)  Temporary signs for public service, charity or similar events provided they are displayed for no more than 30 days prior to the event and removed within seven days after the event. Such signs shall pertain only to the event and shall contain no commercial message. 
g)  For Sale or Rent Signs. One sign not to exceed six square feet advertising the sale or rental of land or buildings, provided it is located on the same premises or on private property with the consent of the owner. 
h)  Subdivision Signs. Signs advertising or identifying lots for sale in an approved subdivision, limited to one sign per subdivision not to exceed 32 square feet. Signs identifying each lot by developer's lot number are also permitted. 
i)  Repair and Maintenance. Operations that do not change the height, size, location or basic character of a sign including change of copy do not require zoning approval, but may require a building permit. 
j)  Temporary banners provided they are approved by the Zoning Enforcement Officer and displayed for no more than 30 days. 
    13.5 Residential Districts. The following signs are permitted upon receipt of a zoning permit: 
a)  Home Occupation Signs. Such sign shall be for the sole purpose of identifying a home occupation. It shall bear no advertising and not exceed an area of 21/2 square feet. 
b)  Special Permit/Site Plan. Signs associated with any use allowed by special permit or site plan approval are permitted. The location, number and size requirements for commercial/industrial districts as set forth below shall apply. 
    13.6 Commercial/Industrial Districts. 
a)  Signs identifying and/or advertising for the principal use or uses on the lot are permitted. One detached sign for each building is permitted. The area of such sign shall be no more than 7.5 percent of the area of the front façade of the building, but shall not exceed 100 square feet. One attached sign for each business, service or tenant is allowed. A second such sign is permitted if the building fronts on or is clearly visible from a second street. The area of such sign shall not be greater than 7.5 percent of the area of the wall to which it is attached. Subordinate signs such as directory signs or entry signs are permitted provided that they are shown on a site plan approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission and are not otherwise prohibited in these regulations. 
b)  No detached sign shall be located in a required side or rear yard that is adjacent to a residential zoning district. 
c)  Banners or temporary signs of paper, cardboard, cloth or similar material advertising goods sold or services rendered are allowed in commercial or industrial districts without a zoning permit if they are located inside a building. If such signs are located outside a building, they are allowed for a period not to exceed 14 days if associated with a grand opening or similar event. A zoning permit is required for such exterior signs. 
d)  Portable sandwich signs provided they are located directly in front of the business served and are removed during non-business hours and located so they do not block vehicular sight lines nor interfere with pedestrian traffic. 
    13.7 Nonconforming Signs. Signs lawfully existing at the time of enactment of this section and not conforming to its provisions shall be considered as nonconforming signs. A nonconforming sign shall not be changed as to height, size, location or basic character except in conformance with this section. 
    13.8 Special Permit Signs. Signs that do not meet the requirements of this section may be permitted by special permit granted by the Planning and Zoning Commission upon a finding that: 
a)  The number, size, height and character of the requested sign(s) bear a reasonable relationship to the scale and characteristics of the associated use. 
b)  The location does not present a hazard to public safety. 
c)  The sign(s) do not cause an annoyance or nuisance to surrounding property. 
d)  The resulting signage is not considered excessive or unattractive according to standards reasonably acceptable to the community. 
e)  The resulting signage demonstrates compatibility, continuity and uniformity with existing signage in the vicinity. 
    13.9 Penalties. A person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of this section shall be subject to the fines established by Ordinance #2001(c), An Ordinance Establishing Procedures and Fines for Zoning Violations. 
14.0. - Off-street parking and loading. 
    Off-street parking and loading for all uses shall be provided as specified in this section. 
    14.1 Design Standards. 
a)  Size. Each individual parking space shall be at least nine feet by 18 feet. 
b)  Accessways. Each parking space shall have direct access to a driveway or maneuvering lane. Accessways or driveways having no adjacent parking shall be at least 12 feet in width for each direction of traffic. The width of accessways having adjacent parking shall be at least 24 feet for 90 degree parking, 18 feet for 60 degree parking and 13 feet for 45 degree parking. Access to 60 degree and 45 degree parking shall be one-way. 
c)  Turning Radius. Parking lots shall be designed to accommodate passenger vehicles. The turning radius of all driveways and maneuvering lanes shall be at least 24 feet. 
d)  Grade. Driveways or accessways to parking areas for nonresidential uses, and parking areas for multifamily development, shall have a grade of ten percent or less. All parking areas for nonresidential uses, and for multifamily developments, having a capacity of more than five vehicles shall have a grade of five percent or less. 
e)  Traffic Islands. Parking lots with four or more rows of parking shall contain islands to direct and control circulation. 
    14.2 Other Standards. 
a)  Paving/Drainage. All parking lots having a capacity of more than eight spaces shall have a bituminous surface or an alternative, properly bound all weather surface acceptable to the Planning and Zoning Commission. Storm water shall not be permitted to drain on to adjacent property. 
b)  Lighting. The circle of illumination of any outdoor lighting shall be confined to the parking area. Lights shall be shielded or directed so that the source of light is not directly visible from the street or surrounding property. 
c)  Marking. Parking spaces in all lots except for dwellings of four families or less shall be marked with paint or otherwise individually delineated. 
d)  Buffer. Parking lots in commercial or industrial districts that abut property in a residential district shall contain a suitable buffer of fencing, landscaping or other means to provide a reasonably opaque barrier at least eight feet high along the property line. 
e)  Use. Parking lots shall be used for the short-term parking of vehicles of occupants, employees and patrons of the principal use. Storage of unused motor vehicles, trailers, boats, inventory, equipment and the like is prohibited. 
    14.3 Number of Spaces Required. 
a)  Dwellings. Two spaces per dwelling unit. 
b)  Retail, Personal Services and Office. 5.5 spaces per 1,000 square feet of floor space in actual use for the purpose. Storage areas, hallways, stairs and the like shall not be included for the purpose of calculating parking requirements. 
c)  Manufacturing. One space for each 500 square feet of floor area. 
d)  Warehouse, Distribution, Wholesale and the Like. One space for each 1,500 square feet of floor area. 
e)  Uses Having Fixed Seats. One space for each four seats. This requirement may be based upon expected percent of occupancy rather than total seats if the applicant can supply reliable supporting data. 
f)  Eating/Drinking Places. One space for each 75 feet of floor area used for eating or drinking. Area of kitchen, storage and the like shall be excluded for purposes of calculating parking requirements. Establishment involving mostly take out service shall provide at least five parking spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area used for preparation and service of products. 
g)  Hotels/Motels. One space for each guest unit. 
h)  Automotive Services. One space for each employee plus one space of each service bay. 
i)  Business and Other Services. One space for each employee plus visitor spaces. 
j)  Cultural, Entertainment and Recreational Uses. One space for each four seats or service units. This may be based upon anticipated occupancy if reliable supporting data is provided, subject to the approval of the Zoning Officer. 
k)  Uses Not Specified. As determined by the applicant based on an analysis of parking needs as related to the scale of the operation subject to the approval of the Zoning Officer. The Zoning Officer's decision may be appealed to the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
    14.4 Calculation of Parking Requirements. Parking requirements may be calculated based on gross floor area of the building as required for the principal use, or based on the sum of the floor area devoted to each function making up the principal use. For example, a building may contain special areas for such functions as office, retail sales, customer service, storage, warehouse or fabrication. The applicant may, with the approval of the Zoning Enforcement Officer calculate total parking requirements as the sum of the requirements for each function. 
    14.5 Joint Use. Properties containing multiple uses, under the same ownership or control may share parking for up to on half of the total required spaces upon a finding by the Planning and Zoning Commission that peak parking demand for the individual uses takes place at a different time. 
    14.6 Loading Space. 
a)  One loading space shall be provided for each use requiring the delivery of goods by the truckload and having a floor area of 10,000 square feet or less. One additional loading space shall be provided for each additional 20,000 square feet of floor area, up to a maximum of four loading spaces. 
b)  Loading spaces shall be at least ten feet by 40 feet. The turning radius of access lanes shall be designed to accommodate the types of vehicles to be used, but shall be at least 40 feet. 
c)  Loading spaces shall not be used for any other purpose. 
    14.7 CBD-1 Exemption. The replacement of an existing use in an existing building in the CBD-1 Zoning District with another use having the same or a lesser parking requirement is exempt from providing new parking. Existing or new buildings within 300 feet of a municipal lot may include available space in such lots in meeting parking requirements with the approval of the Planning and Zoning Commission. The Planning and Zoning Commission may reduce the parking requirements for apartments for the elderly either owned or managed by the Seymour Housing Authority in the CBD-1 District to one space per apartment unit. 
15.0. - Soil erosion and sediment control regulations. 
    15.1 Definitions. 
a)  Development. Any activity on improved or unimproved real estate that removes or destroys its natural cover leaving the land subject to accelerated erosion. 
b)  Erosion. The detachment and moving of soil or rock fragments by water, wind, ice or gravity. 
c)  Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plan. A scheme that minimizes soil erosion and sedimentation resulting from development, including, but not limited to, a narrative and map. 
    15.2 Application of Regulations. 
a)  A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan shall be submitted with any development application when the disturbed area of such development is cumulatively more than one-half acre, as determined by the Zoning Enforcement Officer. 
b)  A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan for a single-family dwelling that is not part of a subdivision is not required. A standard construction entrance and a filter fence and/or hay bales down slope from any disturbed area is required for all new construction. 
c)  Stockpiling of earthen materials on any lot for any purpose shall be protected by a filter fence and/or hay bales. 
    15.3 Content of Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plan. 
a)  In general, a plan shall contain proper provisions to adequately control accelerated erosion and sedimentation and reduce the danger from storm water runoff on the site based on the best available technology. Such technology can be found in the Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control, latest edition. Alternative methods may be used if approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission or the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
b)  The plan shall include but not be limited to a narrative and a site plan. The narrative shall include a description of the development; the schedule for grading and construction activities to include start and completion dates, sequence of grading and construction activities, sequence for installation of erosion control measures, and sequence for final site stabilization; and the design criteria, construction details, installation procedures, and operations and maintenance procedures for erosion control and storm water management facilities. 
c)  The site plan shall be prepared by a professional engineer and/or land surveyor at a sufficient scale to show property lines, existing and proposed contours, wetlands, watercourses, existing and proposed structures, and the location and design details for all proposed erosion control and storm water management facilities 
    15.4 Standards. In general a soil erosion control plan shall result in a development that minimizes erosion and sedimentation during construction, is stabilized and protected from erosion when completed and does not cause off-site erosion and sedimentation. The minimum standards for individual erosion control measures shall be as specified in the latest edit ion of Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control. Determination of peak flow rates and volumes of runoff shall be taken from this same publication. The Planning and Zoning Commission or the Zoning Board of Appeals for sound technical reasons may grant exceptions from the standards of the Connecticut Guidelines. 
    15.5 Approval Conditions. The Planning and Zoning Commission or the Zoning Board of Appeals may require surety for the installation and maintenance of erosion control and/or storm water control measures shown on an erosion control plan. The Commission or Board may require periodic inspections of the development by itself or its agent to assure compliance with the plan, or the Commission or Board may require that the applicant perform periodic inspections and report the results. 
16.0. - Flood Plain District. 
    16.1 Delineation. In general, the Flood Plain District includes all land subject to the 100-year flood that is or may be designated as Flood Zone A or any of its subcategories as shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps, Town of Seymour, prepared by the National Flood Insurance Program. The stream profiles shown in the latest Flood Insurance Study for the Town of Seymour together with the actual ground elevation as determined by a registered land surveyor shall control in determining the exact location of the boundaries of the Flood Plain District. 
    16.2 Standards. 
a)  Standards for residential and nonresidential construction taking place within the Flood Plain District shall be as specified in Section 7-41 and Section 7-42, Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance, Town of Seymour. 
b)  No construction, renovation, excavation, grading, filling or other activity shall result in an increase in the 100-year flood elevation at any point along the watercourse of more than one foot. 
c)  Enclosed areas below the base flood elevation shall be used only for parking, building access or limited storage. 
    16.3 Application. 
a)  An application for a zoning permit, site plan or special permit approval shall be submitted as required for the type of use as specified in Section 5. All applications including applications for administrative approval shall include a site plan prepared by a registered land surveyor that shows the limits of the Flood Plain District, basement and first floor elevations of existing or proposed buildings, and the elevation of the grade immediately adjacent to all buildings. 
b)  If floodproof construction is required, the site plan shall contain a notation that certification by a registered architect or engineer that the design meets the floodproofing standards specified in Section 7-42 of the Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance shall be submitted to the Building Inspector. 
c)  If there are to be enclosed areas below the base flood elevation, the site plan shall contain a notation that such areas will be designed to equalize hydrostatic pressure as specified in Section 7-42, Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance. 
d)  All site plans shall contain a certification by a professional engineer that the plan will not result in an increase of more than one foot in the base flood elevation at any point along the watercourse. If any development is to be within a floodway, such certification shall state that the development will not result in any increase in the base flood elevation at any point along the watercourse. 
    16.4 Approval. An application shall be approved by the Zoning Officer, Planning and Zoning Commission or Zoning Board of Appeals as the case may be upon a finding of compliance with this section and the requirements of the underlying zoning district. 
    16.5 Exemptions. The following are exempt from the provisions of this Section 16, but not the requirements of the underlying zoning district: 
a)  Repairs or alterations of existing structures, the cost of which does not exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure. 
b)  Repairs necessary to correct a code violation. 
c)  Alterations to an historic structure as defined in the Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance. 
17.0. - Office Development District. 
    17.0[1] Purpose and Content. 
a)  The purpose of this district is to allow the conversion of existing buildings and the construction of new buildings for use as business and professional offices under carefully controlled conditions. It is the finding of the Planning and Zoning Commission that such offices can co-exist in harmony with residential uses in selected areas and with proper conditions and safeguards. 
b)  The Planning and Zoning Commission is hereby authorized to permit business and professional offices as a special permit use within an area designated as an office development district and constructed in accordance with an approved office development district plan. 
c)  This section delineates the areas within which office development districts may be established by amendment to the zoning map, sets forth conditions and requirements for the approval of an office development district plan, states the procedures for applications for designation and plan approval and establishes methods of enforcement. 
    17.1 Definitions. 
a)  Office Development District. An overlay district within which property may be developed or used either in accordance with the requirements of the underlying zoning district or in accordance with an approved office development district plan. 
b)  Office Development District Plan. A plan prepared at a preferred scale of one inch equals 40 feet showing property lines, existing and proposed buildings and structures, floor plans, architectural elevations, and existing or proposed uses for each floor. The plan shall also show driveways, parking, fencing, landscaping, signs, lighting, utility areas, and proposed grading. A complete description of the proposed use shall be submitted to include the nature of the office, number of employees, hours of operation, delivery requirements and equipment or machines to be used. 
c)  Business and Professional Office. Offices of persons engaged in business or the professions, including but not limited to medical and dental services; finance, insurance and real estate services; engineering, surveying, architectural and related services; computer software services; and other activities similar in nature to the foregoing. A business and professional office shall not include fabrication or assembly of goods for sale or distribution, retail sale or rental of items or the storage of vehicles or equipment intended primarily for off-site use. 
    17.2 Designation of Office Development District. 
a)  Property that may be considered for designation as an office development district shall meet all of the following requirements: 
1)  It shall be located within the R-18 Zoning District. 
2)  It shall not be located in subdivision approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission if the subdivision included the construction of a new road. 
3)  It shall either have frontage on a State numbered highway or have frontage on a Town road that directly feeds a State highway and be located no more than 300 feet distant from the State highway. 
b)  Parcels that are presently used for business or professional offices and have valid nonconforming status are eligible for designation as an office development district in accordance with this section regardless of location. 
    17.3 Office Development District Plan Standards. 
a)  All buildings and structures resulting from either renovation or new construction shall be architecturally compatible with the surrounding neighborhood in terms of style, size, height and bulk. 
[b)  Reserved.] 
c)  For new construction the gross floor area devoted to office use shall not exceed 5,000 square feet. Renovated buildings may have up to 5,500 square feet of gross floor area for office use. 
d)  Off-street parking shall be provided at the rate of one space for each 200 square feet of floor area actually used for office purposes, excluding stairways, storage areas and other such areas. A lesser amount will be acceptable only if it can be clearly shown that the plan will not result in employees, visitors or patrons parking on adjacent streets. 
e)  Parking shall be prohibited in the required front yard. Parking is allowed in the required side and rear yards. All parking shall be screened from adjacent residential properties by fencing or landscaping. 
f)  Off-site parking is permitted if it is on property under the same ownership or control as the principal site. It shall be subject to the same location and screening requirements as on-site parking. It shall be secured against unauthorized occupancy during non-business hours. 
g)  One, unlighted sign identifying the occupants of the premises is allowed. It shall have an area of 32 square feet or less. 
h)  There shall be no outside storage of materials, overnight parking of non-passenger vehicles, nor any other such evidence of a nonresidential use. 
i)  All of the requirements of Section 6 of these regulations shall apply as well as any other applicable requirements of these regulations. If there is a conflict, this section shall prevail. 
    17.4 Application Procedures and Approval. 
a)  An application for designation as an office development district shall be made in the same manner as an application for a change in the zoning map. The Commission shall make a good faith effort to notify abutting property owners of the public hearings. 
b)  An application for approval of an office development district plan shall be submitted at the same time as the application for designation. The application shall consist of the special permit application form as supplied by the Planning and Zoning Commission together with the office development district plan. 
c)  A public hearing on the application for designation and the application for approval of the office development district plan shall be held on the same date. Notice of hearing for designation shall be as required for a zone change, and notice of hearing for plan approval shall be as required for a special permit. 
d)  The Commission shall act upon the application for designation within the time limits specified for a zone change, and the application for plan approval within the time limits for a special permit. Action on both applications shall take place on the same date, except that an area must be designated as an office development district before an office development district plan may be approved. It is expressly stated herein that the Commission shall have the same legislative discretion in acting upon an application for designation that it has in acting upon any other application for an amendment to the zoning map. 
    17.5 Enforcement. 
a)  Before any premises is used for business or professional offices, the owner or tenant shall have received written certification from the Zoning Enforcement Officer that the project as completed is in substantial compliance with the approved office development district plan. 
b)  Any substantial change in an approved office development plan made without the approval of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall render both the plan and the designation null and void. The property may then be used only in accordance with the underlying zoning district. Substantial change shall specifically include an increase of more than five percent in the area of office use, any change in the building other than a cosmetic change and any change in the site plan that would directly affect surrounding property. 
c)  The Zoning Officer may issue an order for correction if the premises are not maintained in accordance with the approved plan. The order shall state the condition to be corrected, the manner of correction and the time within which correction is to be made. The Zoning Officer may modify his order if he has been shown cause why the condition cannot be corrected in the manner or time set forth or if reasonable progress has been made. Appeal of any part of the order may be made to the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
d)  If the premises is sold or is occupied by a new tenant, the new owner or tenant shall obtain written certification from the Zoning Officer that the new occupancy is in substantial compliance with the approved office development district plan before the premises is so occupied. If the Zoning Officer determines that the new occupancy is substantially different, then an amended office development district plan shall be approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission in the same manner as approval of the original plan. The Zoning Officer may determine that a new occupancy having less office space is in substantial compliance. 
e)  If the office use is voluntarily discontinued or abandoned by the owner, the designation as an office development district and approval of the office development district plan shall become null and void. A change to any use other than that permitted by the office development district plan shall be considered as abandonment. 
18.0. - Planned Development District. 
    18.0[1] Intent and Purpose. It is the intent and purpose of this section to encourage innovation and flexibility in the use of the remaining large tracts of land in Seymour by allowing a mixture of residential, recreational and community uses in a single zoning district. It is the finding of the Planning and Zoning Commission that such uses can exist in harmony with each other and surrounding residential areas with adequate conditions and safeguards. With proper planning, the Planned Development District will result in a more efficient utilization of land and the preservation of greater areas of open space than what would result from conventional development. 
    18.1 Definitions. 
a.  Planned Residential/Recreational Community. A development consisting of an appropriate mix of detached and attached single-family dwellings, designed and intended for occupancy by persons 55 years of age or older, together with a major open space area which may be a golf course, designed and developed as a single, coordinated project. All residential dwellings and their occupants shall comply with the requirements of the "55 or over housing exemption" as set forth by the Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988. 
b.  Specialized Housing for the Elderly. Housing designed and intended for occupancy exclusively for the elderly or infirm such as nursing or convalescent homes, and congregate or assisted living facilities which offer supplementary services such as independent living units, on-site medical care and common dining. 
    18.2 Permitted Uses. 
1)  Any use permitted in the R-40 District as specified in Section 5 of these regulations. 
2)  Planned Residential/Recreational Community as defined in this section. 
3)  Specialized Housing for the Elderly as defined in this section. 
4)  Uses customarily incidental and subordinate to the above uses when located on the same lot. Uses accessory to a golf course shall include a clubhouse, which may contain a restaurant and banquet facility, pro shop, instruction programs, health and exercise facilities, swimming pool and tennis courts. Community buildings designed to provide for the physical or social needs of older persons are considered as accessory to a Planned Residential Community. 
    18.3 Development Standards. 
18.3.1  Conventional Single-Family Subdivision. Single-family subdivisions shall be developed in accordance with the subdivision regulations of the Town of Seymour. The following shall apply: 
a)  The number of lots permitted in subdivision shall be determined by dividing the adjusted tract area in square feet by 40,000. The adjusted tract area is the gross or total tract area minus the open space area required by (b) below, the area of public or private rights-of-way, the area of wetlands and the area of land having a slope of 20 percent or more that has not been designated as open space. 
b)  At least 25 percent of the gross parcel area shall be dedicated as permanent open space. 
c)  Individual lot size, area, setback and other requirements shall conform to the standards of the R-40 Zoning District. 
d)  Cluster subdivisions as specified in Section 11 of these zoning regulations are not permitted in the Planned Development District. 
18.3.2.  Planned Residential/Recreational Community. 
a)  Required Open Space. At least 30 percent of the total parcel area shall be reserved as permanent open space, which may be a golf course or other land which meets the definition of open space as set forth in Section 12-107b, C.G.S. 
b)  Density. Required parcel area per dwelling unit shall be as follows: 
21,430 square feet for the first 25 acres or part thereof. 
35,700 square feet for any parcel area between 25 and 50 acres. 
57,100 square feet for parcel area in excess of 50 acres. 
This section is intended in part to limit the development of very large parcels to a scale appropriate for the Town of Seymour. It shall not be used to allow a parcel to be divided into 25-acre portions by either a present or subsequent owner so that maximum density will result. The Commission shall consider this intent when evaluating a request for a map change to PDD. The permitted density of any parcel subsequently changed to PDD shall be based on the area of the parcel as it exists as of the effective date of this regulation. (6-1-03) 
The above sliding scale of density requirements shall apply only to dwelling units containing a single master bedroom and a second subsidiary bedroom. Dwelling units containing two bedrooms of equal or nearly equal size or more than two bedrooms shall be required to have at least 57,100 square feet of parcel area regardless of total parcel area. 
c)  Buildings. Either detached or attached single-family dwellings are permitted. No single structure shall contain more than four dwelling units, and no dwelling unit shall be located above another dwelling unit. At least 60 percent of the total number of dwelling units shall be in detached, single-family units. No more than 25 percent of the total number of dwelling units shall be in buildings containing four dwelling units. 
d)  Buffers. Land dedicated for open space purposes as defined in this section shall be located along the entire perimeter of the parcel area for a depth of at least 100 feet, except that the following shall apply: 
1.  A golf course fairway may be located within this 100-foot buffer area; however, tees, greens and any parking associated with the golf course shall be set back at least 100 feet from the perimeter of the project area wherever such perimeter abuts a residential property. 
2.  The golf course clubhouse shall be set back at least 300 feet from the perimeter of the project area. Any other principal building shall be set back at least 100 feet from the perimeter of the project area. 
Buffer area may be included in calculation of required open space. Landscaping as described in Section 9.3.4 b) of these regulations shall be required in the buffer area if it has been disturbed during construction. 
e)  Setbacks. Principal and accessory buildings shall meet the following setbacks: 
Front: 30 feet from edge of roadway. 
Side: 30 feet between buildings or a distance equal to the height of the tallest building, whichever is greater. 
Rear: 60 feet between buildings. 
f)  Private yards. Each dwelling unit shall have at least 400 contiguous square feet of private yard for its exclusive use. 
g)  Interior Roadways. All interior roadways shall be constructed to the standards specified in Section 4.5.2, Figure 1, of the subdivision regulations, except for width of pavement and right-of-way. Roadways shall have a paved travel lane at least 12 feet in width for each direction of travel. Horizontal and vertical alignment shall be based on design speed and sound engineering practice, but in no event shall the horizontal curve radius at the centerline be less than 35 feet. The maximum road grade shall be 12 percent except that grades of up to 14 percent may be permitted for distances of 100 feet or less. 
h)  Roadway Ownership and Maintenance. All interior roadways shall remain private in perpetuity, and town maintenance services shall stop at the perimeter boundaries of the project. The owner shall, by formal agreement with the Board of Selectmen, agree to keep all roadways open and passable at all times for town emergency services such as police, fire, and ambulance. 
i)  Utilities. The community shall be served by the municipal sanitary sewer system and a public water supply. Electric power, telephone, and similar utility lines shall be underground. 
j)  Access. Each group of 50 or more dwelling units shall have a secondary accessway t o a town road in addition to the principal accessway. The second access may be for emergency use only. 
k)  Signs. The following signs are permitted: 
1.  One freestanding sign, not to exceed 20 square feet, identifying the development at each entrance onto town roads. 
2.  One sign per building, not to exceed five square feet, identifying internal community uses. 
3.  Golf course and clubhouse signs, not to exceed ten square feet, at internal road entrances. 
4.  Street name and directional signs as required. All other signs are prohibited. 
18.3.3  Specialized Housing for the Elderly. Development standards for specialized housing for the elderly are as specified in Section 10.1.5 of these zoning regulations, except that the following open space, density and setback requirements shall apply: 
a)  At least 25 percent of the total parcel area shall be dedicated as permanent open space. The density standards set forth in b) and c) below shall be based on parcel area after deducting 25 percent for required open space. 
b)  At least 5,000 square feet of parcel area shall be provided for each bed in a nursing home, convalescent home or similar building. 
c)  At least 12,500 square feet of lot area shall be provided for each complete dwelling unit in a congregate living, assisted living or similar facility. 
d)  Principal buildings shall be set back at least 100 feet from the perimeter of the project area where such perimeter abuts a residential lot. 
    18.4 Application Procedures and Requirements. 
18.4.1  Planned Residential/Recreational Community. 
1.  Composite Development Plan. A composite development plan illustrating the proposed development of the entire tract shall be submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission for its review. The plan shall illustrate the basic elements of the development such as number and location of dwelling units, circulation and parking, golf course layout or location and character of alternate open space, location and character of community buildings and other accessory uses. The plan shall be of a sufficient scale and degree of detail for the Planning and Zoning Commission to evaluate the above elements. 
2.  Supporting Plans and Studies. The following plans and studies shall be submitted with the Composite Development Plan: 
a)  Conceptual architectural elevations and floor plans of all buildings. 
b)  A description of the home owner's association or other organization that will be responsible for providing long term maintenance of roads, maintenance of any land in common interest ownership and provision on any community facilities or services designed to meet the physical and social needs of those ages 55 or older. 
c)  Narrative describing qualification as 55 or older housing exemption under the Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988 and age verification procedures. 
d)  An environmental impact study including such topics as the effect of the proposed development on the wetland's and watercourse's capacity to support fish and wildlife, to prevent flooding, to protect surface and ground waters, to facilitate drainage and to retain nutrients and control sediment. 
e)  A traffic analysis evaluating the adequacy of existing roadways to serve the proposed development, including intersection capacity. If a drop in level of service or any other traffic problem is projected to result from the development, this report shall include a description of the manner in which this problem is to be corrected. 
f)  A phasing plan and tentative construction time table shall be submitted if the development is to be constructed in more than one phase. Phase boundaries shall be shown on the composite development plan. 
3.  Action on a Composite Development Plan. The Planning and Zoning Commission may approve, modify and approve or disapprove the Composite Development Plan. Any approval represents the Commission's acceptance of the basic elements of the Plan, but does not constitute final zoning approval. 
4.  Site Plan Approval. An application for site plan approval of either the entire project or an individual phase as the case may be shall be submitted as specified in Section 9 of these regulations. Where there is a conflict between the requirements of Section 9 and this section, the requirements of this section shall apply. It is recognized that minor changes may be necessary following detailed project planning; however, no site plan shall be approved unless it conforms to the Composite Development Plan as approved or modified and approved with respect to its basic elements as set forth above. Site Plan approval shall represent final zoning approval. 
18.4.2  Specialized Housing: for the Elderly. An application for site plan approval as specified in Section 9 of these regulations shall be submitted. Where there is a conflict between the requirements of Section 9 and this section, the requirements of this section shall apply. 
18.4.3  Other Permitted Uses. Application procedures for other permitted uses shall be as required by the zoning and subdivision regulations. 
19.0. - Zoning Board of Appeals. 
    19.1 Establishment. There shall be a Zoning Board of Appeals consisting of five regular members and three alternate members established pursuant to Section 8-5, C.G.S. 
    19.2 Powers and Duties. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the following powers and duties: 
a)  To hear and decide upon appeals from any order, requirement or decision made by the Zoning Enforcement Officer, Assistant Zoning Enforcement Officer or Planning and Zoning Commission acting as the Zoning Enforcement Officer. 
b)  To determine and vary the application of the zoning regulations in harmony with their general purpose and with due consideration for conserving the public health, safety, convenience, welfare and property values solely with respect to a parcel of land where, owing to conditions especially effecting such parcel, but not affecting generally the district in which it is situated, a literal enforcement of the zoning regulations would result in exceptional difficulty or unusual hardship so that substantial justice will be done and the public safety and welfare secured. 
c)  To hear and decide on all applications for site plan and/or special permit approval as specified in Section 5 of these regulations. 
d)  To grant approval of location of a license for dealing in or repairing motor vehicles pursuant to Section 14-54 and Section 14-55, C.G.S. 
e)  To grant approval of location for the sale of gasoline and associated products pursuant to Section 14-321 and Section 14-322, C.G.S. 
    19.3 Standards. 
a)  Applications for site plan and/or special permit approval shall meet the standards specified in Sections 9 and 10 of these regulations. 
b)  Applications for approval of location pursuant to Section 19.1 d) and Section 19.1 e) above require a site plan prepared by a registered land surveyor showing at least property lines, existing and proposed structures, driveways, parking and any other information that the Board may reasonably require to properly evaluate the application. 
c)  Any application that proposes the establishment of a new lot of record requires an A-2 survey of each lot to be established, and a separate application for each lot. If approved, the survey of each lot shall be filed on the land records. 
d)  The Board may require an A-2 survey for an application for a yard or setback variance if the exact location of a property line is critical. 
e)  An application for a variance of lot size, area, width, or frontage or an application for a yard or setback variance may be granted by the Board upon a finding that the request is similar to conditions prevailing in the neighborhood and a valid hardship exists. 
f)  Uses specifically prohibited by Section 5.1.3 may not be allowed by variance in any zoning district. Uses allowed in one zoning district may be permitted by variance in another zoning district upon referral of the application to the Planning and Zoning Commission and a finding by the Commission that the use change is not tantamount to a change in the zoning regulations or map, and is not contradictory to the comprehensive zoning plan. 
    19.4 Procedures. 
a)  Applications shall be submitted on a form provided by the Board together with any required plans or documents at least 21 days before the meeting at which the application is to be considered. 
b)  All applications to the Board require a public hearing. Notice and conduct of all hearings are to be as prescribed by Statute. 
c)  An appeal of a decision, order or requirement as specified in Section 19.1 a) shall be made within 30 days of its receipt by filing an application to the Board on the form provided. A copy of the decision, order or requirement appealed from shall be submitted with the application. The Board may reverse or affirm, totally or partly, or may modify any such decision, order or requirement. 
d)  The affirmative vote of at least four members shall be required to approve any application or appeal to come before the Board except that approval of location will require only a majority vote. 
e)  All approved variances shall be filed on the land records by the applicant on a form provided by the Board before they become effective. 
20.0. - Enforcement. 
a)  These regulations shall be enforced by a Zoning Enforcement Officer who shall be appointed by formal vote of the Planning and Zoning Commission. The Planning and Zoning Commission may appoint an individual hired for this purpose, a qualified Town employee, or the Planning and Zoning Commission itself as the Zoning Enforcement Officer. An Assistant Zoning Enforcement Officer may be appointed as needed. The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall serve under the direction of the Planning and Zoning Commission and shall have the powers and duties specified by Sections 8-12 and 8-12a C.G.S., and by these regulations. The Zoning Enforcement Officer may be removed by the Planning and Zoning Commission for just cause. 
b)  No new buildings or structures, additions to existing buildings, excavation or filling of land, or change in the use of land or buildings shall be undertaken until either a zoning permit has been issued or site plan or special permit approval has been given. Site plan and special permit approval shall be given pursuant to Section 9 and Section 10 of these regulations. The Zoning Officer may issue a zoning permit for any use allowed by administrative approval as specified in Section 5.0, except that no zoning permit may be issued for a parcel that does not have frontage on an approved Town or State road or a public street as defined herein. 
c)  No certificate of occupancy required for a new building or additions or renovations to existing buildings shall be issued until it is certified in writing by the Zoning Enforcement Officer that such building, renovations or additions are in compliance with the zoning regulations. In the case of site plan or special permit approval, such certification shall state that the project as completed is in substantial compliance with the approved plan. An A-2 Survey shall be required for new buildings and substantial additions to existing buildings before a certificate of occupancy is authorized. The survey shall show all substantial improvements. 
d)  The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall make an effort to investigate all complaints of violations of these regulations except that preference will be given to written, signed complaints. The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall make a good faith effort to report all enforcement actions to the Planning and Zoning Commission. The Zoning Enforcement Officer may discuss a complaint with the Planning and Zoning Commission and receive direction from the Commission before taking an enforcement action. 
e)  The Planning and Zoning Commission may adopt such forms, fees, and procedures deemed necessary to effectively and fairly enforce and administer these regulations. In the case of a site plan or special permit, the applicant may be required to pay for the cost of special studies such as traffic, geo technical engineering, drainage and the like. 
f)  Any person, firm or corporation found to be in violation of these regulations shall be subject to the remedies and penalties prescribed by the Connecticut General Statutes. 
g)  The plot plan submitted with an application for a zoning permit for a single- or two-family dwelling shall be an A-2 survey. The Zoning Officer may require an A-2 survey for an addition or an accessory building if there is a question of meeting required setback or lot coverage. 
21.0. - Aquifer Protection District AQ. 
    The following shall apply immediately after the effective date of aquifer protection regulations adopted by the Aquifer Protection Agency: 
If any portion of a parcel of land is located within the Aquifer Protection District, no zoning permit shall be issued for such land unless an application has been made to the Aquifer Protection Agency or its Agent, and a permit has been issued for any activity regulated by the Agency, or a finding has been made that the application does not include a regulated activity. 
22.0. - Amendments. 
a)  These regulations and the boundaries of the zoning districts established hereunder may be from time to time amended in accordance with the provisions of this section and the provisions of Chapter 124, C.G.S. Applications for zoning amendments shall be accompanied by a filing fee as established by the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
b)  An application for a change in the text of the regulations shall include a letter of application explaining the reason for the proposed change and a copy of the proposed text amendment. 
c)  An application for a change in the zoning map shall include a letter of application signed by the property owner or his authorized agent together with a map at a sufficient scale to accurately show the boundaries of the proposed zone change. Such boundaries shall either follow property lines or be referenced by dimension from a street or other identifiable point on the zoning map. 
d)  An applicant for a change in the zoning map shall either own or have a written option to purchase all of the land included in the proposed change. The Commission may accept an application that includes land not owned by the applicant if the written approval of each of the other owners is submitted. These ownership requirements shall not apply to a zone map change proposed by the Planning and Zoning Commission. If a zone map change is proposed by the Planning and Zoning Commission and does not constitute a general or town wide revision of the zoning map, the Commission will make a good faith effort to notify all of the owners of land in the proposed zone change. 
23.0. - Mixed Use District MD. 
    23.1 Intent and Purpose. The intent of this section is to provide flexibility to traditional zoning practice. Experience has shown that some development proposals have much merit, but may not be able to conform to the letter of the zoning requirements of any zoning district. The purpose of this section is to permit such development with proper conditions and safeguards provided such proposal conforms to the Plan of Conservation and Development. An applicant shall prepare a detailed project development plan as described herein in support of a request to establish a mixed use district and demonstrate compliance with the intent and purpose of this section. 
    23.2 Location. The mixed use district is a floating zone that may be established within the Gl-2, LI-1, C-2, RC-3 and CBD-1 Zoning Districts. 
    23.3 Permitted Uses. 
1)  Any use allowed in the Gl-2, U-1, C-2 and CBD-1 Zoning Districts except as stated below and as qualified by Section 4.0. 
2)  Uses permitted in the MF District are allowed, except for detached single- or two-family dwellings on individual lots, provided they are combined with a nonresidential use. 
3)  The following uses are not permitted: 
Detached single-family dwellings on individual lots. 
Mobile Homes/Trailers. 
Fuel and Heating Oil Bulk Storage. 
Mining and Processing of Earthen Material. 
Earth Removal not as a part of site preparation. 
Those uses prohibited by Section 5.1 c). 
    23.4 Zoning Requirements. 
1.  Except for permitted uses, zoning requirements shall conform to the body of the zoning regulations, but may be modified as necessary by the project development plan. 
2.  The property shall be served by a public water supply. 
3.  Proposed uses shall reflect the comprehensive zoning plan and the manner in which the several classes of land use are distributed throughout the Town. If the project borders a residential district, the proposed uses and their location on the site shall promote an acceptable transition between potentially incompatible uses. 
4.  Architectural design shall be of superior quality and aesthetically pleasing. The structures and their location on the site shall blend in with the surrounding neighborhood. Building setbacks shall not deprive the surrounding properties of adequate light and air. The total floor area of all buildings shall not exceed 65 percent of total parcel area. 
5.  The project shall not cause undue congestion on adjacent streets or result in obvious traffic safety issues. Particular attention shall be paid to the capacity of nearby intersections. 
6.  The project shall not result in significant harm to the environment with respect to air quality, flooding, wetlands degradation, water quality and the like. 
7.  The Fire Department shall certify that adequate fire protection can be provided with respect to access to structures and building height. 
8.  Signage shall generally conform to the requirements of Section 13 of these regulations except such modifications as may be deemed necessary for the success of the project, shown on the site plan and in good taste as determined by the Planning and Zoning Commission during the review process. 
9.  Parking provided for retail use shall be at least 2.5 spaces for each 1,000 square feet or retail sales area. 
    23.5 Contents of Project Development Plan. 
1)  A detailed statement of all uses, including accessory uses, proposed for the project. 
2)  A plot plan as described in Section 9.3.3 of these regulations. 
3)  Preliminary architectural plans including generalized floor plans, exterior elevations and complete description of exterior finish materials. 
4)  A graphic description of all signage, such signage to be shown on the plot plan. 
5)  A complete engineering report, including but not limited to storm drainage, flood potential, grading requirements including volumes, geotechnical data as appropriate, water supply details, sanitary sewer details, analysis of septic system, landscaping, lighting and construction details. 
6)  A traffic study to include such topics as traffic volumes, pavement width, intersection capacity, safety considerations, pedestrian circulation, sight distances and any proposed street improvements. 
7)  An environmental assessment to include, at least, the effect on wetlands and watercourses, flooding potential, air quality, ground water and on wild life if appropriate. 
8)  An analysis of parking requirements. 
9)  A statement of compliance with the Plan of Conservation and Development. 
10)  The Planning and Zoning Commission may request an independent review of the technical aspects of any of the above. The applicant shall pay the cost of such review. 
    23.[6] Procedure for Establishing a Mixed Use District. 
1.  The establishment of a Mixed Use District requires a change in the zoning map and concurrent approval of the project development plan. 
2.  A preliminary project development plan as described in this section shall be submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission for informal review and discussion. Following this review the applicant may submit an application for a change in the zoning map. 
3.  Application for a change in the zoning map shall be made in accordance with the requirements of Section 22 of these regulations, except that the project development plan shall be submitted at the same time as the zone change application. The letter of application for the zone change shall state that it is the intent that the area of the zone change if approved will be developed only in accordance with the approved or amended project development plan. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall have the same legislative discretion in acting upon a mixed use zone change that it has in acting upon any other zone change. 
4.  A public hearing on the zone change application shall be held in the usual manner, except that the project development plan shall be presented at the hearing to support the zone change application. Public comment on the project development plan shall be accepted at this hearing. The Commission may either close or continue the hearing at its discretion. 
5.  Following the public hearing, the applicant shall make any changes in the project development plan as deemed necessary. If changes are substantial the Planning and Zoning Commission may hold a new hearing or hear evidence at a continued hearing. 
6.  The Commission may either approve the project development plan as presented or with modifications, or it may deny it if the project development plan does not meet all of the requirements of this section. 
7.  The zone change application may be approved only after approval of the project development plan. The motion approving the zone change shall state that approval is given with the understanding that the area of the zone change is to be developed in full compliance with the approved project development plan, and that no certificate of occupancy will be authorized without such full compliance. 
8.  A zoning start permit shall be issued upon final review and approval of the site plan submitted with the project development plan together with such supporting documentation as may be required by the Commission. 
9.  The Commission may require surety for the completion of any off-site public improvements required by the project development plan, long-term maintenance of the septic system, or of any site improvement that would be a threat to public safety if not completed. 
10.  The project development plan may be amended, but such amendments shall comply with the requirements of this section. If the change is minor, it may be approved administratively. If it is a substantial change, it may be approved by the Commission. The Zoning Enforcement Officer may seek a ruling from the Commission on the question of a minor or substantial amendment. 
11.  If the initial development as approved is discontinued, abandoned or phased out in any manner the mixed use designation shall remain in effect, but future development shall conform to either the original project development plan or a revised project development plan as approved by the Commission. 
12.  The Commission shall charge a fee for an application for a mixed use district. This fee shall be based on the fee for a change in the zoning map, zone text change and site plan review. 
24.0. - Validity. 
    If any section, paragraph, sub-section, clause or provision of these regulations shall be adjudged invalid, such adjudication shall apply only to the section, paragraph, sub- section, clause or provision so adjudged, and the remainder of these regulations shall be deemed valid and effective. 
25.0. - Effective date. 
    These regulations shall become effective on August 17, 2000. 
    All other zoning regulations of the Town of Seymour are hereby repealed as of said effective date. 
APPENDIX B - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein are the subdivision regulations of the town, adopted by the planning and zoning commission on Aug. 13, 1992. Amendments to the original regulations are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. Material inserted in brackets has been added for clarity. 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 4; housing, Ch. 9; planning, Ch. 13; utilities, Ch. 17; zoning, App. A. 

1.0. - Title and authority. 
    1.0 These regulations shall be known as the Land Subdivision Regulations of the Town of Seymour and may be referred to as the "Subdivision Regulations" 
    1.1 These regulations have been prepared and adopted by the Seymour Planning and Zoning Commission in accordance with the authority granted by Chapter 126, Connecticut General Statutes. Wherever there is a conflict between these regulations and said Chapter 126, said Chapter 126 shall govern. 
    1.2 Henceforth, no land within the Town of Seymour shall be subdivided or resubdivided until a plan for such action has been approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission pursuant to these regulations. 
2.0. - Application procedures, referrals and content. 
    2.1 Procedures and Referrals. 
2.1.1 Documents required herein for an application shall be submitted to the office of the Town Planner at least ten working days prior to the meeting at which the application is to be considered. The Town Planner shall review the application as to form, content and completeness. No application will be placed on the Commission's agenda unless it is substantially complete in all respects. 
2.1.2 If the Commission agrees that the application is substantially complete, the Commission shall accept the application and refer it to the Town Engineer and Town Planner for review for compliance with these regulations. The time periods specified in Section 8-26(d) CGS shall begin upon acceptance of the application by the Commission. If the application is determined to be incomplete, it shall not be accepted and the above time periods shall not begin. 
2.1.3 A report of the findings of the Town Engineer and Town Planner as to conformity with all of the requirements of these regulations shall be presented to the Commission at the next meeting following referral of the complete application. The Commission may then take action on the application as specified in Section 5 herein, or it may schedule a public hearing. A public hearing shall be held on all applications for resubdivision. If staff review finds substantial noncompliance with these regulations, and denial on this basis is clearly justified, the applicant will be requested to withdraw his application, or the Commission may deny the application without prejudice. 
2.1.4 If an application includes land which abuts or includes land located within an adjacent Town, the Commission shall refer such plan to the appropriate Regional Planning Agency(s) as specified in Section 8-36(b) CGS before any action shall be taken. 
2.1.5 If an application includes land which is either within 500 for on an adjoining municipality, or otherwise effects an adjoining municipality in the manner described in Sec 8-26(f) CGS, the Commission shall notify the Town Clerk of such municipality by certified mail within seven days of the meeting at which the application is accepted. The Commission shall hold no public hearing on such application nor shall any action be taken until the adjoining municipality has received notification of the application. 
2.1.6 If an application includes a regulated activity as defined by the Inland Wetlands Regulations of the Town of Seymour, the applicant shall submit an application to conduct such activities to the Seymour Inland Wetlands Commission no later than the date on which the application is accepted by the Commission. The Commission shall take no action on any such application until the Inland Wetlands Commission has submitted a report on its decision. The minutes of the meeting at which the decision was made by the Inland Wetlands Commission may be considered as a report. 
2.1.7 If any portion of the land included in an application is an area of special flood hazard as defined in the zoning regulations, development of such land shall conform to the standards of the Flood Plain Zoning District. 
    2.2 Content of Application. 
2.2.1 Application form as prescribed by the Commission. The form is to be dated and signed by the owner of the property or his authorized agent. The form shall include the following information as well as any additional information as may be required from time to time by the Commission. 
a)  Name of subdivision as it appears on Record Subdivision Plan. 
b)  Property identification by street address and/or assessor's map and parcel number. 
c)  Name, address and telephone number of applicant, property owner and/or authorized agent. 
d)  Name, address and telephone number of land surveyor who prepared record subdivision plan and of civil engineer if applicable. 
e)  Type of water supply and method of sanitary sewage disposal. 
f)  Names of any new streets to be constructed as they appear on record subdivision plan. 
g)  Date on which application submitted to Inland Wetlands Commission. 
h)  Flood hazard zone in which property is located. 
i)  Request for waiver of subdivision requirements and statement of grounds for waiver as applicable. 
j)  Surety option selected, i.e. posting of letter of credit, completion of improvements prior to final approval or conditional approval. 
2.2.2 Application Fees. Fees include an application fee and a construction inspection fee. The application fee is to be submitted at the time that the application is filed. The construction inspection fee is due and payable after the subdivision has been approved. The schedule of fees shall be established from time to time by formal action of the Commission. Additional fees may be required to cover the cost of special consultants as deemed necessary by the Commission. 
2.2.3 If lots are to be connected to the sanitary sewer system, notification that plans have been submitted to the Water Pollution Control Authority shall be provided. If lots are to be served by septic systems, the results of percolation tests and deep test observation holes for each lot as witnessed by the Naugatuck Valley Health District shall be submitted. 
2.2.4 If building lots are to be served by a public water supply, a letter from an appropriate company official shall be submitted stating that the company will provide service to such lots. If building lots are to be served by an on-site well, evidence from the Valley Health District shall be submitted stating that a well permit will be issued for such lots. 
2.2.5 Record subdivision plan, site development plan, soil erosion and sediment control plan, plan and profile of proposed roads or major improvements to existing roads including storm drainage and sanitary sewers, standard construction details and cross sections as further described in these regulations. 
3.0. - Maps and plans. 
    3.1 Record Subdivision Plan. The record subdivision plan shall bear the live signature and seal of a licensed land surveyor and a certification that it has been prepared to the degree of accuracy required for a Class A-2 survey, as specified by the Conn. Board of Registration for Professional Engineers and Land Surveyors. It shall be at a scale of not more than 100 feet to one inch and on one or more sheets of translucent material approved by the Public Records Administrator, 36 inches long and 24 inches wide. If more than one sheet is required, the record subdivision plan shall be accompanied by an index map of the size and material cited above showing the entire subdivision to scale. The street and lot layout, street names and lot numbers shall be indicated on the index map. 
    The record subdivision plan shall show the following information: 
1.  Title, date, numerical and graphic scale, north point, and name and address of applicant and property owner. 
2.  A location map as an insert showing the location of the subdivision with respect to existing town roads. 
3.  The names of owners of abutting property, and names of existing and proposed streets. 
4.  Proposed property and street lines, including bearings and distances, and the delta angle, radius and length of all curves. 
5.  Primary control points and ties to such points. 
6.  The area of all building lots, land devoted to public use or other parcels in square feet. 
7.  The location and dimensions of all utility, drainage, slope rights or other easements either existing or proposed. 
8.  The location of all wetlands and watercourses as identified by a certified soils scientist, or a statement from a soils scientist that the property contains no wetlands. If a building lot contains a wetland, the wetland boundaries shall be suitably marked in at least two places, location to be determined by Commission. The plan shall show the location and type of marker. The plan shall state that the location of any building or structure or the grading, filling or the alteration of the natural landscape is prohibited in a designated wetland or upland review area except that which may be permitted by the Seymour Inland Wetland Commission or allowed as a matter of right by Chapter 440, CGS. 
9.  If private septic systems are proposed, the plan shall note which lots will require a professionally designed system, and if the system on any lot will not support a four-bedroom house. The number of bedrooms which such system shall support shall be noted. 
10.  The plan shall state if any of the building lots are to be connected to the municipal sanitary sewer system, and that such lots may be subject to an impact fee and/or assessment. The amount shall be stated. Any special requirements applicable to a lot such as the need for a grinder pump shall be stated. 
11.  Location of existing or proposed permanent street monuments. 
12.  Building setback lines, zoning district, zoning district boundary if applicable, total area of subdivision, and identification of property with respect to tax map and parcel number. 
13.  The words "Approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission" with a place for the signature of the Chairman and Secretary and date. The date on which the statutory period for completing improvements expires shall be indicated. 
14.  A statement that the developer agrees to maintain any proposed roads in a passable condition, including snow removal until they are accepted and agrees to provide surety for such maintenance. 
15.  A statement that no certificate of occupancy will be authorized until at least one coat of pavement has been installed on any new roads to be constructed. 
16.  If any portion of the subdivision is within an area of special flood hazard, the area subject to the 100-year flood shall be indicated. 
17.  A statement that a soil erosion and sediment control plan is required for all building lots, and that the owner is responsible for the maintenance of erosion control measures during the construction period. 
18.  The location of any natural features to be preserved as stated in Section 4.4 of these regulations. 
19.  The words "Returned to the applicant for filing on the land records on _______." 
    3.2 Site Development Plan. 
1.  Title block including subdivision name, graphic and numeric scale, date and name of applicant. The scale shall not exceed one inch equals 40 feet. 
2.  Street, lot and building setback lines. 
3.  Existing and proposed contours at two-foot intervals. The proposed grade of all driveways shall be indicated. 
4.  Generalized location of the principal building and driveway on each building lot to the extent necessary to demonstrate that the lot is buildable. This requirement is optional for subdivisions of nonresidential property. 
5.  The location and size of any proposed storm drainage components, sanitary sewers, sewer laterals, water lines, hydrants, underground utilities, plantings, sidewalks, guide rails, or other such improvements to be constructed. 
6.  If the building lots are to be serviced by an on-site septic system and/or private well, the following shall be shown: 
a)  Approximate location and size of primary and reserve leaching areas based upon a four-bedroom home. 
b)  Approximate location of individual trenches or a preliminary system design. 
c)  Approximate location of well. 
    3.3 Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan. A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan that meets the requirements specified in the zoning regulations shall be submitted. The plan shall include measures designed to minimize erosion and sedimentation with respect to construction of roads, utilities or other improvements as well as a plan for each individual building lot. The plan shall be prepared by a licensed professional engineer and land surveyor. 
    3.4 Plan and Profile. A plan and profile at a preferred scale of one inch equals 40 feet horizontal and one inch equals four feet vertical shall be submitted for all roads, and for substantial improvements to existing roads. Proposed sanitary sewers and storm drainage shall be shown. The plan shall be properly signed and certified by a professional engineer and registered land surveyor. The plan and profile shall show the following: 
1.  Title block including subdivision name, street name, scale, date and name of applicant. 
2.  Existing and proposed ground surface at both street lines and the centerline. 
3.  The proposed grade as a percent, and the length of vertical curves. 
4.  Stations at 100-foot intervals. 
5.  Location, size and elevation of storm drainage and sanitary sewer facilities as appropriate. (Invert, inlet, outlet, rim). 
6.  Approximate location of lot lines intersecting the street lines, and lot number. 
7.  Typical roadway cross section, including curbs and sidewalks. 
    3.5 Cross Sections. Cross sections [at] 50-foot intervals along all roadways indicating typical pavement, cuts and fills and drainage facilities at a preferred scale of one inch equals five feet. 
    3.6 Standard Construction Details. Detailed drawings of all proposed improvements shall be submitted including but not limited to storm drainage facilities, sanitary sewer facilities culverts, rip rap channels and guide rails. Such details shall conform to the State of Conn. Department of Transportation Standard Specifications for Roads, Bridges and Incidental Construction, latest publication, including standard detail sheets. If these regulations establish standards that are different from Conn. DOT standards, the standards established herein shall govern. 
4.0. - Design and construction standards. 
    4.1 General. 
4.1.1 Land to be subdivided shall be of such character that it can be used for building purposes without danger to health and safety, it can be provided with utilities and services necessary to support the intended use, and that it can be accessed by an acceptable roadway system. 
4.1.2 Building lots shall meet all of the minimum lot size, area and dimensional requirements of the zoning district in which they are located. 
4.1.3 Zoning requirements shall be considered as minimum requirements. Where conditions such as topography, drainage, presence of wetlands or similar physical factors significantly limit the suitability of a specific parcel for development, the Commission may require that a particular parcel be of sufficient size to support a dwelling together with a private well and disposal system as applicable, which size and area may be greater that that required by zoning. 
4.1.4 Good engineering practice shall prevail. 
    4.2 Lot Layout, Setback Lines, Open Space and Driveways. 
4.2.1 In general, side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight street lines and radial to curved street lines. 
4.2.2. Corner Lots. The setback from each street line shall be as required by zoning. The yard parallel to the shorter axis of the lot shall be considered as the front yard. The side and rear yards shall be designated accordingly. Frontage on at least one street shall be as required by zoning. 
4.2.3 Interior Lots. Interior lots shall be laid out so that the area within the building setback lines is of a size and shape generally comparable to other lots to be established by the subdivision and will accommodate at least a 60-foot square. 
4.2.4 Where a proposed lot fronts on an existing street the front lot line shall be located at a distance from the street center line which will allow the widening of the street to conform with the class of street as established by these regulations. Street widening requirements apply individually to parcels on either side of the street. 
4.2.5 Open Space. The Commission shall require a fee to be paid to the Town equal to ten percent of the fair market value of the land prior to the approval of the subdivision. An appraisal of the property shall be made at the applicant's expense and submitted as part of the application for subdivision approval. The fair market value shall exclude the value of any property containing and existing dwelling to remain. The land value as reported by the appraisal is subject to review and possible modification by the Commission. 
A portion of the fee shall be paid upon the sale of each lot in an amount pro rated on the market value of the land and the number of lots to be built upon as specified in Section 8-25, CGS. A note shall be placed on the record subdivision plan stating the amount of such payment for each lot, and that no zoning permit will be authorized until this payment has been made. The Commission may place a caveat on the land records alerting a potential buyer that the open space fee is due upon the sale of the lot. 
The applicant may, at his discretion pay the entire fee prior to the endorsement of the record subdivision plan by the Commission. In this instance, the note on the record subdivision plan shall state the open space fee has been paid. 
All fees collected under this section shall be deposited in a fund established by ordinance to be used only as specified in Section 8-25b, CGS. 
The Commission may waive all or a portion of the above fee provided that land is to be conveyed to the Town. Such land shall be free of obvious physical conditions such as wetlands or excessive slope. Such land shall be deemed by the Commission as suitable for a present or future municipal purpose. If land so conveyed is at least ten percent of the gross area of the subdivision, there shall be no fee. If less than ten percent, the fee shall be adjusted downward to meet the intent of this section. 
The provisions of this Section 4.2.5 shall not apply to the subdivision on nonresidential property as well as those subdivision exempted by Statute. 
4.2.6 Driveways. Lots shall be laid out so that driveway grades and sight distances will meet the standards established in the zoning regulations. Corner lots shall be laid out so that driveway access is feasible adjacent to the lot line most distant from the intersecting street lines. If the intersection is from a major street the preferred access is from the local street. If a driveway crosses a watercourse, a culvert or other structure designed for at least a 25-year storm shall be provided. 
4.2.7 Solar Techniques. The applicant shall state that he has considered the use of passive solar energy techniques in the design of his subdivision which would not increase the net cost of the housing to the buyer, after deduction of any tax credit, deductions or exemptions. Passive solar energy techniques are site design techniques which maximize solar heat gain, minimize heat loss and provide thermal storage within a building during the heating season, and minimize heat gain and provide for natural ventilation during the cooling season. Site design elements shall include, at least house orientation, street and lot layout, vegetation, slope and topographical features, and protection of solar access within the development. 
4.2.8 Lot Numbers. The developer shall post signs identifying each lot by developer's lot number to remain until the building is completed and a certificate of occupancy is issued. The sign shall be about one foot by one foot, white with black letters. 
4.2.9 Access. If the driveway to a lot is from a street on which such lot has less than the frontage required by zoning, such driveway shall meet the requirements for an interior lot driveway. This shall not apply to a corner lot. 
    4.3 Street Layout and Design. 
4.3.1 The design of the street system of a proposed subdivision shall flow with the topography so that excessive grades, cuts and fills shall be avoided. 
4.3.2 Proposed streets shall be coordinated with and provide a logical extension of the existing street system. Where possible, proposed streets shall be extended to adjacent properties subject to future subdivision and provided with a temporary turn around. 
4.3.3 Reserve strips controlling access to existing or proposed streets or other public land shall be prohibited. 
4.3.4 When feasible, subdivisions containing more than 20 building lots shall have at least two connections to existing streets. It shall be considered feasible if, among other considerations the property to be subdivided has access to existing streets at two or more points or has sufficient frontage on a single street to provide two connections with proper separation. 
4.3.5 Where dead end streets are designed to be permanent, they should in general, not exceed 700 feet and shall terminate in a circular turn around having a minimum R/W radius of 50 feet. 
4.3.6 Street Widths. Streets shall have appropriate pavement and right of way widths in according with the following: 
Light Residential Street-50-foot R/W; 30 feet pavement (See Section 4.5.2) 
Residential Street-60-foot R/W; 30 feet pavement 
Residential Collector Street-70-foot R/W; 30 feet pavement 
4.3.7 Alignment. Tangents shall be at least 100 feet between curves. Intersecting street lines shall be at approximately right angles to each other for a distance of at least 100 feet. In no instance shall street lines intersect each other at an angle of less than 60 degrees. All property line corners at street intersections shall be rounded by the arc of a curve having a radius of at least 25 feet. The curve radius of the inner street line of a light residential street shall be at least 200 feet; for light residential streets, 250 feet, and 600 feet for residential collector streets. 
4.3.8 Grades. All street grades shall be at least one percent and not more than ten percent for light residential streets, eight percent for residential streets and six percent for residential collector streets. Changes in grade shall be connected by a vertical curve of sufficient length to give adequate sight distance for the classification of road. 
4.3.9 Intersections. If sufficient land is available, intersections shall be separated by at least 500 feet. Land at intersections shall be graded to permit a sight distance of at least 200 feet in both directions for light residential streets. For residential and residential collector streets, sight distance shall be increased to reflect design speed. 
    4.4 Natural Resources. The planning and design of the subdivision, including related streets, drainage and other improvements shall provide for preservation of natural features of the tract and encourage solar energy techniques to the maximum extent possible by: 
4.4.1 Avoiding cuts and fills which result in potential soil erosion and excessive tree removal or which disturb water resources; 
4.4.2 Avoiding relocation of or encroachment upon natural water courses and ponds, and avoiding the filling, excavation or encroachment upon swamps, flood plains or other land subject to potential flooding; 
4.4.3 Avoiding removal of mature trees and desirable woods and other vegetation, particularly those that serve as wind barriers in the winter or offer passive cooling of buildings in the summer. 
    4.5 Construction Standards. 
4.5.1 General. Unless specifically stated below, all construction shall conform to the State of Conn. Dept. of Transportation Standard Specifications for Roads, Bridges and Incidental Construction, latest publication, including Standard Detail Sheets. 
4.5.2 Roadway Cross Section. Roadways shall be constructed as illustrated in Figure 1 entitled Typical Roadway Cross Section, except that right-of-way and pavement widths shall be as specified in Section 4.3.6. The pavement width on Light Residential Streets may be reduced to 26 feet, face to face, where the applicant can provide evidence that such reduction will preserve water quality and will not compromise public safety or traffic circulation. The Commission may allow a proven low impact curb design on any street on a finding by the Town Engineer that stormwater drainage will not be adversely affected. 
4.5.3 Storm Drainage. Reinforced concrete pipe shall be used under paved areas on public property except that HDPP pipe may be used in these locations where approved by the Town Engineer. Pipe size shall be adequate to carry the calculated runoff, but in no instance shall be less than 15 inches diameter. Drainage systems shall be installed to provide a minimum velocity of two feet per second. 
4.5.4 Detention. In general, no net increase in off-site stormwater runoff will be permitted. Such runoff may be permitted if the site is within a reasonable distance of either the Housatonic or Naugatuck Rivers, and a watershed analysis demonstrates adequate down stream capacity. If drainage or detention studies require a special consultant, the cost will be paid by the applicant. 
4.5.5 Grading and Filling. Cut and fill sections shall not exceed a slope of one on two, except in rock. The Town Engineer may require a lesser slope to maintain slope stability as determined by specific soil and rock conditions. Any slope rights required to meet these conditions shall be granted to the Town by the applicant. Retaining walls may be constructed to meet these requirements if there is no other alternative. 
Fill shall be compacted to 90 percent density. All areas that have been disturbed in any way due to grading or construction shall be covered with a minimum of four inches of topsoil and suitably seeded with a perennial mix. No material except earthen material shall be used for fill in any portion of the subdivision. No bury pits are allowed. All debris shall be disposed of legally. 
4.5.6 Sidewalks. Sidewalks on one or both sides of the street shall be required in a subdivision that is within a one mile walking distance from a school measured along the actual route that a student would have to walk to school, along a public right-of-way, and may be required in other locations. Sidewalks shall be five feet if provided on one side and four feet if provided on both sides. Sidewalks shall be located within the street right-of-way with one edge not more than four inches from the street line. 
4.5.7 Monuments. Street lines shall be located with monuments set wherever there is a change in their direction. Monuments shall be set after all other street work has been completed, and their location shall be certified in writing by a registered land surveyor. Monuments shall be reinforced concrete, four inches square on the bottom with three rods at least six inches long in the top. They shall be set so that the marked center of the top shall be the point of reference. The front corners of all lots shall be marked with an iron pin. 
4.5.8 Guide Rails. Guide rails shall be installed where there will be an embankment of more than four feet within 20 feet of the pavement. They shall in general be constructed in accordance with DOT standards, however the Commission may accept an alternate design in the interest of aesthetics and where public safety will not be compromised. 
4.5.9 Street Name signs. Street name signs shall be installed at all street intersection in locations approved by the Town Engineer and traffic authority. Such signs shall be of a standard design and material, acceptable to the Town Engineer. 
4.5.10 Street Lights. The Commission may require street lights at intersections, horizontal or vertical curves or other locations considered necessary for public safety. 
4.5.11 Utilities. All utilities shall be underground in subdivisions that include the construction of new streets. 
4.5.12 Detention Basins. The design of all detention basins shall be included in the sheet showing standard construction details. In general, the design shall reflect the basic standards set forth in the Connecticut Stormwater Quality Manual and the Connecticut Guidelines for Erosion and Sediment Control. 
    4.6 Construction Inspections. Grade stakes shall be provided left and right of the centerline at each half station, all drainage locations and elsewhere as the Town Engineer may direct. 
    The Town Engineer shall be notified 48 hours prior to placing any drainage pipe or structures, sub base, base or bituminous concrete pavement whereby proper inspections may be provided. All materials material incorporated into the work shall be as specified in these regulations and as approved by the Town Engineer. The Town Engineer may specify certain material tests to be performed by a certified testing laboratory, the cost of which shall be paid by the applicant. 
5.0. - Approval of application. 
    5.1 The Commission shall approve, modify and approve or disapprove a subdivision or resubdivision application within the time periods specified by Section 8-26d CGS. The Commission may require that certain modifications to the Plan be made, in accordance with the requirements of these regulations, before the Plan will be signed by the Chairman and Secretary of the Commission, and such actions shall be considered as a modification and approval of the Plan. 
    5.2 The record subdivision plan will be endorsed by the Chairman and Secretary of the Commission after any required modifications have been made. The endorsed plan shall be returned [to] the applicant for filing on the land records as specified by Section 8-25 CGS provided that required surety has been received. The Commission may grant extensions of the filing period as permitted by Section 8-25 CGS upon request by the applicant. The record subdivision plan shall be submitted in electronic digital format along with the plan to be endorsed. Such digital format shall be Auto CAD by AutoDesk or equal in accordance with specifications provided by the Planning Commission as may be amended from time to time. This requirement shall be waived if the surveyor preparing the plan does not have the in house capability to prepare the map in digital format. 
    5.3 Amendments. Any change in an approved record subdivision plan shall be considered as an amendment and must be approved by the Commission. Applications for a change which consist only of a minor change in existing lot boundaries and which do not change the number of approved building lots may be made by preparing a correction map showing the revised lot boundaries. The Commission may waive the submittal of the application form and other supporting documentation required for the original application totally or in part, but the correction map shall be signed by the Chairman and Secretary and filed on the land records by the applicant. 
    5.4 Any change in an approved and recorded subdivision not authorized by the Commission in accordance with the above shall be null and void. The Commission may cause notification to be placed on the land records that any lots affected by an unauthorized change are no longer approved building lots in an approved subdivision. 
    5.5 Validation of Prior Subdivision. The Commission may accept and approve an application to validate a subdivision of property that occurred without the Commission's approval. The record subdivision/compilation plan shall be prepared to the standards of an A-2 Survey. It shall contain as much of the information included in Section 3.1 of these regulations as deemed necessary by the Commission. The plan shall state that its purpose is to validate a prior subdivision of property. The Commission may validate a prior subdivision only if it conforms to current zoning. 
6.0. - Security for public improvements. 
    6.1 Options. The Commission shall require assurance that all proposed improvements in the subdivision shall be constructed to its satisfaction. An applicant may select one of three options, which choice shall be specified on the application form and subject to approval by the Commission. Such options are as follows. 
    6.2 Completion of Improvements. In relatively simple subdivisions where improvements to be constructed are limited, the applicant may choose to complete all improvements to the Commission's satisfaction before the record subdivision plan is endorsed by the Commission and filed on the land records. The resolution approving the subdivision shall state the time period within which the improvements shall be completed. After improvements have been completed, and upon recommendation by the Town Engineer, the record subdivision plan will be placed on the Commission's agenda for endorsement. The signed plan will then be filed on the land records by the applicant. No zoning permits will be issued for any lots until the record subdivision plan has been filed. The Commission shall have the option of requiring surety for erosion and sedimentation control during the construction period. 
    6.3 Posting of Surety. Surety shall be posted by the applicant in an amount deemed sufficient by the Town Engineer to assure completion of all public improvements as well as provision for erosion and sedimentation control measures. The form of surety shall be an irrevocable letter of credit with provision for automatic renewal until improvements are completed. The Commission may accept a performance bond if the applicant can show that it will not be feasible to obtain a letter of credit. Any surety shall be approved a to form by Town Counsel. Surety shall be provided before the record subdivision is released to the applicant for filing on the land records. If a detention basin is included, a separate surety in an amount approved by the Town Engineer shall be provided for long term performance and maintenance to be in effect for at least five years after the certificate of occupancy for the last house in the subdivision is issued. 
    6.4 Conditional Approval. The Commission may authorize the filing of a record subdivision plan with a conditional approval endorsed thereon. The resolution or motion of conditional approval shall state the date on which such approval shall expire. The period of conditional approval shall not exceed five years, except that the Commission may grant an extension of such period for just cause. 
    The Commission shall cause final approval of the plan to be endorsed thereon upon either completion of all improvements as specified in Section 6.2 or posting of surety as specified in Section 6.3. No lot shown on such plan shall be sold, nor shall any zoning permit be issued for any such lot, until the plan has received final approval. 
7.0. - Completion and acceptance. 
    7.1 Improvements shall be completed within the time periods specified by Section 8-26(c), CGS. Failure to complete the improvements within this period shall be cause for the Commission to take the actions specified in this same Section 8-26(c). 
    7.2 When the applicant has completed all improvements, he shall provide the Town Engineer with "as built" plans and profiles prepared and properly certified by a licensed land surveyor. Such plans and profiles shall show the location and other pertinent information on all improvements that were constructed. Written certification of the location of street monuments as stated in Section 4.5.7 shall be provided at this time. The applicant may then request the Town Engineer to make an inspection of the improvements to determine compliance. When this inspection is completed, the Town Engineer shall notify the applicant and the Commission, and the applicant may at this time formally request the Commission recommend acceptance of any new roads to the Board of Selectmen. The Commission may recommend that acceptance be conditioned upon provision of a maintenance bond, in an amount determined by the Town Engineer, to be in effect for one year following the date of acceptance. 
8.0. - Flood damage prevention. 
    Subdivisions proposed in any area of Special Flood Hazard as shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps, Town of Seymour as they may be amended shall comply with the following requirements in addition to other requirements of these regulations and the zoning regulations. 
1.  Design and construction shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
2.  Public facilities and utilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems shall be located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
3.  Adequate drainage shall be provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
4.  Base flood elevation data shall be indicated on the record subdivision plan. 
9.0. - Waivers. 
    The design, construction and application requirements of these regulations may be waived by a three-quarters vote of all of the Commission. No waiver shall be granted which would result in a violation of the zoning regulations or a violation of the Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance of the Town of Seymour. Waivers may be granted if conditions unique to a parcel of property make in unreasonable or impractical for such property to be in full compliance with these regulations. No waiver shall be granted which in the Commission's judgment would have a significant adverse effect on adjacent property or on public safety. Waivers shall be requested at the time that the initial application is made. The Commission may approve the waivers at any time during the review process, but the record shall state the reasons why the waivers were granted. 
10.0. - Definitions. 
    10.1 Area of Special Flood Hazard. Land within a floodplain subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. Such land may be designated as zones A1, A4, A6, A8, A11, A12m A13, A17, and A18 on the Town's Flood Insurance Rate Map. 
    10.2 Commission. The Seymour Planning and Zoning Commission. 
    10.3 C.G.S. General Statutes of Connecticut, Revision of 1958 as amended. 
    10.4 Dead End Street. A single street or portions of more than on street which singly or collectively have only one outlet or connection to the rest of the Town road system. 
    10.5 Earthern Material. Earth, loam, topsoil, sand, gravel, clay, silt or stone. 
    10.6 Interior Lot. A lot not having the road frontage required by zoning, but having an unobstructed and exclusive access way to a Town road, and located behind one or more lots having the required frontage. 
    10.7 Light Residential Street. As defined in "Guidelines for Subdivision Streets. Conn. DOT, Section 16-2.01. 
    10.8 Loam or Topsoil. A loose, fertile soil composed of clay, sand and organic matter and suitable for growing lawns and shrubs. 
    10.9 Open Space. Land dedicated to active or passive public recreational use. Wetland areas with a recognized ecological value may also be considered as open space. No structures other than those used for recreational purposes shall be permitted. 
    10.10 Plan of Development. A plan for the development of the Town prepared and adopted by the Commission pursuant to Section 8-23, CGS. 
    10.11 Residential Collector Street. As defined in "Guidelines for Subdivision Streets, Conn. DOT, Section 16-2.02. 
    10.12 Residential Street. As defined in "Guidelines for Subdivision Streets, Conn. DOT, Section 16-2-02. 
    10.13 Resubdivision. A change in a map of an approved or recorded subdivision or resubdivision if such change affects any street layout shown on such map, affects any area reserved thereon for public use or diminishes the size of any lot shown thereon and creates an additional building lot, if any of the lots shown thereon have been conveyed after the approval or recording of such map. 
    10.14 Subdivision. The division of a tract or parcel of land into three or more parts or lots made after July 1956, for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or building development expressly excluding development for municipal, conservation or agricultural purposes, and includes resubdivision. The Commission shall have the authority to determine if an action constitutes a subdivision as defined above. 
    10.15 Watercourse. Any natural or man made river, stream, brook or water way. 
11.0. - Penalties. 
    Any person, firm or corporation making any subdivision of land without the approval of the Commission shall be fined not more than $500.00 for each lot sold or offered for sale or so subdivided. The Commission shall take action to have such illegal lot removed from the land records, and may recover said fine by a civil action. 
12.0. - Effective date. 
    These regulations shall become effective on September 15, 1992. All prior subdivision regulations are hereby repealed. 
APPENDIX C - REGULATIONS FOR THE PROTECTION AND PRESERVATION OF INLAND WETLANDS AND WATERCOURSES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed in this appendix are the regulations for the protection and preservation of inland wetlands and water courses as adopted by the conservation commission acting as inland wetlands commission effective July 1, 2017. 
Charter reference- Inland-wetlands and conservation commission, § 10.9. 
Cross reference- Municipal flood and erosion control board, § 2-61 et seq.; flood damage prevention, Ch. 7; Housatonic Lake Authority, § 13-36. 

Sec. 1. - Title and authority. 
    1.1 Purpose. The inland wetlands and watercourses of the State of Connecticut are an indispensable and irreplaceable but fragile natural resource with which the citizens of the state have been endowed. The wetlands and watercourses are an interrelated web of nature essential to an adequate supply of surface and underground water; to hydrological stability and control of flooding and erosion; to the recharging and purification of groundwater; and to the existence of many forms of animal, aquatic and plant life. Many inland wetlands and watercourses have been destroyed or are in danger of destruction because of unregulated use by reason of the deposition, filling or removal of material, the diversion or obstruction of water flow, the erection of structures and other uses, all of which have despoiled, polluted and eliminated wetlands and watercourses. Such unregulated activity has had, and will continue to have, a significant, adverse impact on the environment and ecology of the state of Connecticut and has and will continue to imperil the quality of the environment thus adversely affecting the ecological, scenic, historic and recreational values and benefits of the state for its citizens now and forever more. The preservation and protection of the wetlands and watercourses from random, unnecessary, undesirable and unregulated uses, disturbance or destruction is in the public interest and is essential to the health, welfare and safety of the citizens of the state. It is, therefore, the purpose of these regulations to protect the citizens of the state by making provisions for the protection, preservation, maintenance and use of the inland wetlands and watercourses by minimizing their disturbance and pollution; maintaining and improving water quality in accordance with the highest standards set by federal, state or local authority; preventing damage from erosion, turbidity or siltation; preventing loss of fish and other beneficial aquatic organisms, wildlife and vegetation and the destruction of the natural habitats thereof; deterring and inhibiting the danger of flood and pollution; protecting the quality of wetlands and watercourses for their conservation, economic, aesthetic, recreational and other public and private uses and values; and protecting the state's potable fresh water supplies from the dangers of drought, overdraft, pollution, misuse and mismanagement by providing an orderly process to balance the need for the economic growth of the state and the use of its land with the need to protect its environment and ecology in order to forever guarantee to the people of the state, the safety of such natural resources for their benefit and enjoyment and for the benefit and enjoyment of generations yet unborn. 
    1.2 Regulations named. These regulations shall be known as the "Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations of the Town of Seymour." 
    1.3 Commission established. The Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission of the Town of Seymour was established in accordance with Section 10.9 of the Seymour Town code amended on 11/08/94 and shall implement the purposes and provisions of these regulations and the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Act in the Town of Seymour. 
    1.4 Adopted regulations may be amended. These regulations have been adopted and may be amended, from time to time, in accordance with the provisions of the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Act and these regulations. 
    1.5 Enforcement. The Agency shall enforce the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Act and shall approve with terms, conditions, limitations or modifications, or deny permits for all regulated activities in the Town of Seymour pursuant to Sections 22a-36 to 22a-45, inclusive, of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended. 
Sec. 2. - Definitions. 
    2.1 Definitions. As used in these regulations: Act means the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Act, Sections 22a-36 through 22a-45, inclusive, of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended. 
    Agency means the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission of the Town of Seymour. 
    Bogs are watercourses distinguished by evergreen trees and shrubs underlain by peat deposits, poor or very poor drainage, and highly acidic conditions. 
    Clear-cutting means the harvest of timber in a fashion which removes all trees down to a two-inch diameter at breast height. 
    Commissioner of environmental protection means the commissioner of the State of Connecticut Department of Energy and Environmental Protection. 
    Continual flow means a flow of water which persists for an extended period of time; this flow may be interrupted during periods of drought or during the low flow period of the annual hydrological cycle, June through September, but it recurs in prolonged succession. 
    Deposit includes, but shall not be limited to fill, grade, dump, place, discharge or emit. 
    Discharge means emission of any water, substance, or material into waters of the state whether or not such substance causes pollution. 
    Essential to the farming operation means that the proposed activity is necessary and indispensable to sustain farming activities on the farm. 
    Farming shall be consistent with the definition as noted in Section 1-1(q) of the Connecticut General Statutes. 
    Feasible means able to be constructed or implemented consistent with sound engineering principles. 
    Intermittent watercourses shall be delineated by a defined permanent channel and bank and the occurrence of two or more of the following characteristics: (a) evidence of scour or deposits of recent alluvium or detritus, (b) the presence of standing or flowing water for a duration longer than a particular storm incident, and (c) the presence of hydrophytic vegetation. 
    License means the whole or any part of any permit, certificate of approval or similar form of permission which may be required of any person by the provisions of Sections 22a-36 to 22a-45, inclusive. 
    Management practice means a practice, procedure, activity, structure or facility designed to prevent or minimize pollution or other environmental damage or to maintain or enhance existing environmental quality. Such management practices include, but are not limited to: erosion and sedimentation controls; restrictions on land use or development; construction setbacks from wetlands or watercourses; proper disposal of waste materials; procedures for equipment maintenance to prevent fuel spillage; construction methods to prevent flooding or disturbance of wetlands and watercourses; procedures for maintaining continuous stream flows; confining construction that must take place in watercourses to times when water flows are low and fish and wildlife will not be adversely affected. 
    Marshes are watercourses that are distinguished by the absence of trees and shrubs and the dominance of soft-stemmed herbaceous plants. The water table in marshes is at or above the ground surface throughout the year and areas of open water six inches or more in depth are common, but seasonal water table fluctuations are encountered. 
    Material means any substance, solid or liquid, organic or inorganic, including but not limited to soil, sediment, aggregate, land, gravel, clay, bog, mud, debris, sand, refuse or waste. 
    Municipality means the Town of Seymour. 
    Nurseries means places where plants are grown for sale, transplanting, or experimentation. 
    Permit see license. 
    Permittee means the person to whom a license has been issued. 
    Person means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, limited liability company, company, organization or legal entity of any kind, including municipal corporations, governmental agencies or subdivisions thereof. 
    Pollution means harmful thermal effect or the contamination or rendering unclean or impure of any waters of the state by reason of any waste or other materials discharged or deposited therein by any public or private sewer or otherwise so as directly or indirectly to come in contact with any waters. This includes, but is not limited to, erosion and sedimentation resulting from any filling, land clearing or excavation activity. 
    Prudent means economically and otherwise reasonable in light of the social benefits to be derived from the proposed regulated activity provided cost may be considered in deciding what is prudent and further provided a mere showing of expense will not necessarily mean an alternative is imprudent. 
    Regulated activity means any operation within or use of a wetland or watercourse involving removal or deposition of material, or any obstruction, construction, alteration or pollution, of such wetlands or watercourses, and any construction of a residential building, residential institution, commercial and industrial building, site establishment of a new lawn, nonresidential building, deck, pools, parking area or subsurface sewage disposal system within 100 feet of wetlands or watercourses, as set forth in Section 22a-42a of the General Statutes, as amended, or in an area of special concern as defined by the Public Health Code, but shall not include the specified activities in Section 4 of these regulations. Soil evidencing favorable underground rate of flow analysis by geohydraulic testing may be considered by the Agency as grounds for reducing any of the separating distances. The Agency shall require certified tests and/or reports for this purpose. The Agency may rule that any other activity located within such upland review area or any other non-wetland or non-water course area is likely to impact of affect wetlands or watercourses and is a regulated activity. 
    Regulated area means any wetland, watercourses or upland review area as defined by these regulations. 
    Remove includes, but shall not be limited to drain, excavate, mine, dig, dredge, suck, bulldoze, dragline or blast. 
    Rendering unclean or impure means any alteration of the physical, chemical or biological properties of any waters of the state, including, but not limited to, change in odor, color, turbidity or taste. 
    Significant impact means any activity, including, but not limited to, the following activities which may have a major effect: 
1.  Any activity involving deposition or removal of material which will or may have a substantial effect on the wetland or watercourse or on wetlands or watercourses outside the area for which the activity is proposed. 
2.  Any activity which substantially changes the natural channel or may inhibit the natural dynamics of a watercourse system. 
3.  Any activity which substantially diminishes the natural capacity of an inland wetland or watercourse to: support aquatic, plant or animal life and habitats; prevent flooding; supply water; assimilate waste; facilitate drainage; provide recreation or open space; or perform other functions. 
4.  Any activity which is likely to cause or has the potential to cause substantial turbidity, siltation or sedimentation in a wetland or watercourse. 
5.  Any activity which causes substantial diminution of flow of a natural watercourse or groundwater levels of the wetland or watercourse. 
6.  Any activity which is likely to cause or has the potential to cause pollution of a wetland or watercourse. 
7.  Any activity which damages or destroys unique wetland or watercourse areas or such areas having demonstrable scientific or educational value. 
    Soil scientist means an individual duly qualified in accordance with standards set by the federal Office of Personnel Management. 
    Swamps are watercourses that are distinguished by the dominance of wetland trees and shrubs. 
    Submerged lands means those lands which are inundated by water on a seasonal or more frequent basis. 
    Town means the Town of Seymour. 
    Upland review area means all land with horizontal distance of 100 feet from a wetland or watercourse and any proposed activities located in more distant upland areas if the Commission finds that the proposed activity is likely to impact a wetland or watercourse. 
    Waste means sewage or any substance, liquid, gaseous, solid or radioactive, which may pollute or tend to pollute any of the wetlands and watercourses of the Town. 
    Watercourses means rivers, streams, brooks, waterways, lakes, ponds, marshes, swamps, bogs, and all other bodies of water, natural or artificial, vernal or intermittent, public or private, which are contained within, flow through or border upon the Town or any portion thereof not regulated pursuant to Sections 22a-28 through 22a-35, inclusive, of the Connecticut General Statutes. 
    Wetlands means land, including submerged land as defined in this Section, not regulated pursuant to Sections 22a-28 through 22a-35, inclusive, of the Connecticut General Statutes, which consists of any of the soil types designated as poorly drained, very poorly drained, alluvial and floodplain by the National Cooperative Soils Survey, as it may be amended from time to time, of the Natural Resources Conservation Service of the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA). Such areas may include filled, graded, or excavated sites which possess an aquic (saturated) soil moisture regime as defined by the USDA Cooperative Soil Survey. 
Sec. 3. - Inventory of inland wetlands and watercourses. 
    3.1 Determination of boundaries. The map of wetlands and watercourses entitled "Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Map, Seymour, Connecticut" delineates the general location and boundaries of inland wetlands and the general location of watercourses. Copies of this map are available for inspection at the office of the Town Clerk or the Agency. In all cases, the precise location of wetlands and watercourses shall be determined by the actual character of the land, the distribution of soil types and location of watercourses as determined by a qualified soil scientist, flagged with flags located by survey. The Agency may use aerial photography, remote sensing imagery, resource mapping, soils maps, site inspection observations or other information in determining the location of the boundaries of wetlands and watercourses. The Agency may amend its map as more accurate information becomes available. 
    3.2 Petition to dispute regulated area designation. Any person may petition the Agency for an amendment to the map. All petitions for a map change shall be submitted in writing and shall include all relevant facts and circumstances which support the change. The petitioner shall bear the burden of proof regarding the proposed map amendment. Such proof shall include a determination by a qualified soil scientist flagged with flags located by survey. The Agency may require such person to provide an accurate delineation of regulated areas in accordance with Section 15 of these regulations. 
    3.3 Maintenance of records. The Agency shall maintain a current inventory of regulated areas within the town. 
    3.4 Map amendments. All map amendments are subject to the public hearing process outlined in Section 15 of these regulations. 
Sec. 4. - Permitted uses as of right and nonregulated uses. 
    4.1 Operations and uses permitted as of right. The following operations and uses shall be permitted in inland wetlands and watercourses, as of right: 
a.  Grazing, farming, nurseries, gardening and harvesting of crops and farm ponds of three acres or less essential to the farming operation, and activities conducted by, or under the authority of, the Department of Energy and Environmental Protection for the purposes of wetland or watercourse restoration or enhancement or mosquito control. The provisions of this subdivision shall not be construed to include road construction or the erection of buildings not directly related to the farming operation, relocation of watercourses with continual flow, filling or reclamation of wetlands or watercourses with continual flow, clear cutting of timber except for the expansion of agricultural crop land, the mining of top soil, peat, sand, gravel or similar material from wetlands or watercourses for the purposes of sale; 
b.  A residential home (i) for which a building permit has been issued or (ii) on a subdivision lot, provided the permit has been issued or the subdivision has been approved by a municipal planning, zoning or planning and zoning commission as of the effective date of promulgation of the municipal regulations pursuant to subsection (b) of Section 22a-42a, or as of July 1, 1974, whichever is earlier, and further provided no residential home shall be permitted as of right pursuant to this subdivision unless the permit was obtained on or before July 1, 1987; 
c.  Boat anchorage or mooring, not including dredging or dock construction; 
d.  Uses incidental to the enjoyment and maintenance of residential property, such property defined as equal to or smaller than the largest minimum residential lot site permitted anywhere in the municipality. Such incidental uses shall include maintenance of existing structures and landscaping, but shall not include removal or deposition of significant amounts of material from or onto a wetland or watercourse, or diversion or alteration of a watercourse; 
e.  Construction and operation, by water companies as defined by Section 16-1 of the Connecticut General Statutes or by municipal water supply systems as provided for in chapter 102 of the Connecticut General Statutes, of dams, reservoirs and other facilities necessary to the impounding, storage and withdrawal of water in connection with public water supplies except as provided in Sections 22a-401 and 22a-403 of the Connecticut General Statutes; and, 
f.  Maintenance relating to any drainage pipe which existed before the effective date of any municipal regulations adopted pursuant to Section 22a-42a of the Connecticut General Statutes or July 1, 1974, whichever is earlier, provided such pipe is on property which is zoned as residential but which does not contain hydrophytic vegetation. For purposes of this subdivision, "maintenance" means the removal of accumulated leaves, soil, and other debris whether by hand or machine, while the pipe remains in place. 
    4.2 Nonregulated uses permitted as of right. The following operations and uses shall be permitted, as nonregulated uses in wetlands and watercourses, provided they do not disturb the natural and indigenous character of the wetland or watercourse by removal or deposition of material, alteration or obstruction of water flow or pollution of the wetland or watercourse: 
a.  Conservation of soil, vegetation, water, fish, shellfish and wildlife; and 
b.  Outdoor recreation including play and sporting areas, golf courses, field trials, nature study, hiking, horseback riding, swimming, skin diving, camping, boating, water skiing, trapping, hunting, fishing and shellfishing where otherwise legally permitted and regulated. 
    4.3 Other operations and uses require a permit. All activities in wetlands, watercourses, and upland review areas involving filling, excavating, dredging, clear cutting, clearing, or grading or any other alteration or use of a wetland or watercourse not specifically permitted by this Section and otherwise defined as a regulated activity by these regulations shall require a permit from the Agency in accordance with Section 6 of these regulations, or for certain regulated activities located outside of wetlands and watercourses from the duly authorized agent in accordance with Section 12 of these regulations. 
    4.4 Must notify agency. To carry out the purposes of this Section, any person proposing a permitted operation and use or a nonregulated operation and use shall, prior to commencement of such operation and use, notify the Agency on a form provided by it, and provide the Agency with sufficient information to enable it to properly determine that the proposed operation and use is a permitted or nonregulated use of a wetland or watercourse. The Agency shall rule that the proposed operation and use or portion of it is a permitted or nonregulated operation and use or that the proposed operation and use is a regulated activity and a permit is required. Such ruling shall be in writing and shall be made not later than the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Agency following the meeting at which the request was received. 
Sec. 5. - Activities regulated exclusively by the commissioner of environmental protection. 
    5.1 State agencies under state jurisdiction. The Commissioner of Environmental Protection shall have exclusive jurisdiction over regulated activities in or affecting wetlands or watercourses, undertaken by any department, agency or instrumentality of the State of Connecticut, except any local or regional board of education, pursuant to Sections 22a-39 or 22a-45a of the Connecticut General Statues. 
    5.2 Tidal wetlands under state jurisdiction. The Commissioner of Environmental Protection shall have exclusive jurisdiction over tidal wetlands designated and regulated pursuant to Sections 22a-28 through 22a-35 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended. 
    5.3 Activities under state jurisdiction. 
a.  The Commissioner of Environmental Protection shall have exclusive jurisdiction over activities authorized under a dam repair or removal order issued by the Commissioner of Environmental Protection under Section 22a-402 of the Connecticut General Statutes or a permit issued by the Commissioner of Environmental Protection under Sections 22a-403 of the Connecticut General Statutes. Any person receiving such dam repair or removal order or permit shall not be required to obtain a permit from a municipal wetlands agency for any action necessary to comply with said dam order or to carry out the activities authorized by said permit. 
b.  The Commissioner of Environmental Protection shall have exclusive jurisdiction over the discharge of fill or dredged materials into the wetlands and watercourses of the state pursuant to Section 401 of the Federal Clean Water Act, as amended, for activities regulated by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers under Section 404 of the Federal Clean Water Act. 
Sec. 6. - Regulated activities to be licensed. 
    6.1 Obtaining a permit for regulated activities. No person shall conduct or maintain a regulated activity without first obtaining a permit for such activity from the Inland Wetland and Watercourses Commission of the Town of Seymour. 
    6.2 Conduct subject to enforcement proceeding. Any person found to be conducting or maintaining a regulated activity without the prior authorization of the Agency, or violating any other provision of these regulations, shall be subject to the enforcement proceedings and penalties prescribed in Section 14 of these regulations and any other remedies as provided by law. 
Sec. 7. - Application requirements. 
    7.1 Obtaining application form. Any person intending to conduct a regulated activity or to renew or amend a permit to conduct such activity, shall apply for a permit on a form provided by the Agency. The application shall contain the information described in this Section and any other information the Agency may reasonably require. Application forms may be obtained in the offices of the Town Clerk or the Agency. 
    7.2 Application concerning subdivisions or resubdivisions. If an application to the Town of Seymour Planning and Zoning Commission involves land containing a wetland, watercourse, or within an upland review area, the applicant shall, in accordance with Section 8-3(g), 8-3c, or 8-26, as applicable, of the Connecticut General Statutes, submit an application for a permit to the Agency in accordance with this Section, no later than the day the application is filed with such planning, zoning, or planning and zoning commission. 
    7.3 Necessity of information. The application shall contain such information as is necessary for a fair and informed determination thereon by the Agency. 
    7.4 Request for determination of significant impact activity. A prospective applicant may request the Agency to determine whether or not a proposed activity involves a significant impact activity. 
    7.5 Information required on application. All applications shall include the following information in writing or on maps or drawings: 
a.  The applicant's name, home and business mailing addresses and telephone numbers; if the applicant is a Limited Liability Corporation or a Corporation the managing member's or responsible corporate officer's name, address, and telephone number; 
b.  The owner's name, mailing address and telephone number and written consent of the land owner if the applicant is not the owner of the land upon which the subject activity is proposed; 
c.  The applicant's interest in the land; 
d.  The geographical location of the land which is the subject of the proposed activity and a description of the land in sufficient detail to allow identification of the inland wetlands and watercourses, the area(s) (in acres or square feet) of wetlands or watercourses to be disturbed, soil type(s), and wetland vegetation; 
e.  The purpose and a description of the proposed activity and proposed erosion and sedimentation controls and other management practices and mitigation measures which may be considered as a condition of issuing a permit for the proposed regulated activity including, but not limited to, measures to (1) prevent or minimize pollution or other environmental damage, (2) maintain or enhance existing environmental quality, or (3) in the following order of priority: restore, enhance and create productive wetland or watercourse resources; 
f.  A site plan showing the proposed activity and existing and proposed conditions in relation to wetlands and watercourses and identifying any further activities associated with, or reasonably related to, the proposed regulated activity which are made inevitable by the proposed regulated activity and which may have an impact on wetlands or watercourses; the Commission may request any additional information it requires to determine whether the activity is significant. The site plan shall meet the requirements of Section 7.6 of these regulations. 
g.  Names and mailing addresses of adjacent land owners; including land owners separated by a public right-of-way; 
h.  Certification by the applicant that the applicant is familiar with all the information provided in the application and is aware of the penalties for obtaining a permit through deception or through inaccurate or misleading information; 
i.  Authorization for the members and agents of the Agency to inspect the subject land, at reasonable times, during the pendency of an application and for the life of the permit; 
j.  A completed DEEP reporting form; the Agency shall revise or correct the information provided by the applicant and submit the form to the Commissioner of Environmental Protection in accordance with Section 22a-39-14 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies; 
k.  Any other information the Agency deems necessary to the understanding of what the applicant is proposing; and 
l.  Submission of the appropriate filing fee based on the fee schedule established in Section 19 of these regulations. 
    7.6 Additional information for significant activity. At the discretion of the Agency or its agent, or when the proposed activity involves a significant impact, additional information, based on the nature and anticipated effects of the activity, including but not limited to the following, is required: 
a.  Site plans for the proposed activity and the land which will be affected thereby which show existing and proposed conditions, wetland and watercourse boundaries, land contours, boundaries of land ownership, proposed alterations and uses of wetlands and watercourses, and other pertinent features of the land and the proposed activity, prepared by a professional engineer, land surveyor, architect or landscape architect licensed by the state, or by such other qualified person; 
b.  Engineering reports and analyses and additional drawings to fully describe the proposed activity including any filling, excavation, drainage or hydraulic modifications to watercourses and the proposed erosion and sedimentation control plan; 
c.  Mapping of soil types consistent with the categories established by the National Cooperative Soil Survey of the U.S. Natural Resources Conservation Service; the wetlands shall be delineated in the field by a soil scientist and the soil scientist's report and field delineation shall be depicted on the site plans; 
d.  A description of the ecological communities and functions of the wetlands or watercourses involved with the application and the effects of the proposed activity on these communities and wetland functions; 
e.  A description of how the applicant will change, diminish, or enhance the ecological communities and functions of the wetlands or watercourses involved in the application and each alternative which would cause less or no environmental impact to wetlands or watercourses, and a description of why each alternative considered was deemed neither feasible nor prudent; 
f.  Analysis of chemical or physical characteristics of any fill material; and 
g.  Management practices and other measures designed to mitigate the impact of the proposed activity, alternatives which would cause less or no environmental impact to wetlands or watercourses and why the alternative as set forth in the application was chosen; all such alternatives shall be diagramed on a site plan or drawing; 
    7.7 Certification of impacts on other municipalities. The applicant shall certify whether: 
a.  Any portion of the property on which the regulated activity is proposed is located within 500 feet of the boundary of an adjoining municipality; 
b.  Traffic attributable to the completed project on the site will use streets within the adjoining municipality to enter or exit the site; 
c.  Sewer or water drainage from the project site will flow through and impact the sewage or drainage system within the adjoining municipality; or, 
d.  Water run-off from the improved site will impact streets or other municipal or private property within the adjoining municipality. 
    7.8 Number of copies necessary to file an application. Three (3) full size copies, not to exceed 24 x 36 in size, plus six (6) reduced copies of 11 x 17 sized documents, and one (1) electronic copy in .PDF format of all application materials shall be submitted to comprise a complete application unless an applicant is otherwise directed, in writing, by the Agency. The Commission may require additional full size copies as it deems necessary. 
    7.9 Amendments, renewal or extension. Any application to renew or amend an existing permit shall be filed with the Agency in accordance with Section 8 of these regulations at least sixty-five (65) days prior to the expiration date of the permit. Any application to renew or amend such an existing permit shall contain the information required under Section 7 of these regulations provided: 
a.  The application may incorporate the documentation and record of the prior application; 
b.  The application shall describe the extent of work completed at the time of filing and the schedule for completing the activities authorized in the permit; 
c.  The application shall state the reason why the authorized activity was not initiated or completed within the time specified in the permit; 
d.  The application shall describe any changes in facts or circumstances involved with or affecting wetlands or watercourses or use of the land for which the permit was issued; 
e.  The Agency may, prior to the expiration of a permit, accept an untimely application to renew such permit if the authorized activity is ongoing and allow the continuation of work beyond the expiration date if, in its judgment, the permit is likely to be renewed and the public interest or environment will be best served by not interrupting the activity; 
    7.10 Permit renewal. Any application to renew a permit shall be granted upon request of the permit holder unless the Agency finds that there has been a substantial change in circumstances which requires a new permit application or an enforcement action has been undertaken with regard to the regulated activity for which the permit was issued provided no permit may be valid for more than ten years. 
Sec. 8. - Application procedures. 
    8.1 Filing copies of application. All petitions, applications, requests or appeals shall be submitted to the Agency at least five (5) days prior to a scheduled meeting in order to be included on the agenda. 
    8.2 Filing with adjacent municipalities. 
A.  The Agency shall, in accordance with Connecticut General Statutes Section 8-7d(f), notify the clerk of any adjoining municipality of the pendency of any application, petition, appeal, request or plan concerning any project on any site in which: 
1.  Any portion of the property affected by a decision of the agency is within five hundred feet of the boundary of an adjoining municipality; 
2.  A significant portion of the traffic to the completed project on the site will use streets within the adjoining municipality to enter or exit the site; 
3.  A significant portion of the sewer or water drainage from the project on the site will flow through and significantly impact the drainage or sewerage system within the adjoining municipality; or 
4.  Water run-off from the improved site will impact streets or other municipal or private property within the adjoining municipality. 
B.  Such notice shall be made by certified mail, return receipt requested, and shall be mailed within seven days of the date of receipt of the application, petition, appeal, request or plan. 
    8.3 Notification of water company. When an application is filed to conduct or cause to be conducted a regulated activity upon an inland wetland or watercourse, any portion of which is within the watershed of a water company as defined in Section 16-1 of the Connecticut General Statutes, the applicant shall provide written notice of the application to the water company provided such water company has filed a map showing the boundaries of the watershed on the land records of the municipality in which the application is made and with the inland wetlands agency of such municipality. Such notice shall be made by certified mail, return receipt requested, and shall be mailed within seven days of the date of the application. The water company, through a representative, may appear and be heard at any hearing on the application. Documentation of such notice shall be provided to the Agency. 
    8.4 Application receipt date. The date of receipt of a petition, application, request or appeal shall be the day of the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Agency, immediately following the day of submission to the Agency or its agent of such petition, application, request or appeal or thirty-five days after such submission, whichever is sooner. 
    8.5 Additional information that may be required. At any time during the review period, the applicant shall provide such additional information as the Agency may reasonably require. Requests for such additional information shall not stay the time limitations as set forth in Section 11.2 of these regulations. 
    8.6 Public inspection. All applications shall be open for public inspection. 
    8.7 Denial of incomplete applications. Incomplete applications may be denied. 
Sec. 9. - Public hearings. 
    9.1 Conditions. The inland wetlands agency shall not hold a public hearing on an application unless the inland wetlands agency determines that the proposed activity may have a significant impact on wetlands or watercourses, a petition signed by at least twenty-five persons who are eighteen years of age or older and who reside in the municipality in which the regulated activity is proposed, requesting a hearing is filed with the inland wetlands agency not later than fourteen days after the date of receipt of such application, or the inland wetlands agency finds that a public hearing regarding such application would be in the public interest. The inland wetlands agency may issue a permit without a public hearing provided no petition provided for in this Section is filed with the inland wetlands agency on or before the fourteenth day after the date of receipt of the application. Such hearing shall be held no later than sixty-five days after the receipt of such application. All applications and maps and documents relating thereto shall be open for public inspection. At such hearing any person or persons may appear and be heard. 
    9.2 Published notices. Notice of the public hearing shall be published at least twice at intervals of not less than two days, the first not more than fifteen days and not fewer than ten days, and the last not less than two days before the date set for the hearing in a newspaper having a general circulation in each town where the affected wetland and watercourse is located. 
    9.3 Notification of other property owners. Notice of the public hearing shall be mailed by the applicant to the owner(s) of record of abutting land as supplied by the applicant no less than 15 days prior to the day of the hearing. The applicant shall provide certification of the mailings to the Agency. 
    9.4 Notification of other municipalities. In the case of any application which is subject to the notification provisions of Section 8.2 of these Regulations, a public hearing shall not be conducted until the Clerk of the adjoining municipality(ies) has received notice of the pendency of the application. Proof of such notification shall be entered into the hearing record. 
Sec. 10. - Considerations for decision. 
    10.1 Evidence. The Agency may consider the following in making its decision on an application: 
a.  The application and its supporting documentation 
b.  Reports from other agencies and commissions including but not limited to the Town of Seymour: 
1.  Conservation Commission; 
2.  Planning, Zoning, or Planning and Zoning Commissions; 
3.  Building Official; 
4.  Sanitarian or Director of Health; and, 
5.  Town Engineer. 
c.  The Agency may also consider comments on any application from the New Haven County Soil and Water Conservation District, Naugatuck Valley Council of Governments or other regional organizations; agencies in adjacent municipalities which may be affected by the proposed activity, or other technical agencies or organizations which may undertake additional studies or investigations. 
d.  Non-receipt of comments from state agencies and commissions listed in Section 10.1b and c above within the prescribed time shall neither delay nor prejudice the decision of the Agency. 
e.  For an application for which a public hearing is held, public comments, evidence and testimony. 
f.  The Agency is not precluded from seeking advice from its own experts on any aspect of an application. 
    10.2 Standards and criteria for decision. 
    Criteria for Decision. In carrying out the purposes and policies of Sections 22a-36 to 22a-45, inclusive, of the Connecticut General Statutes, including matters relating to regulating, licensing and enforcing of the provisions thereof, the Agency shall take into consideration all relevant facts and circumstances, including but not limited to: 
a.  The environmental impact of the proposed regulated activity on wetlands or watercourses; 
b.  The applicant's purpose for, and any feasible and prudent alternatives to, the proposed regulated activity which alternatives would cause less or no environmental impact to wetlands or watercourses. 
c.  The relationship between the short term and long term impacts of the proposed regulated activity on wetlands or watercourses and the maintenance and enhancement of long-term productivity of such wetlands or watercourses. 
d.  Irreversible and irretrievable loss of wetland or watercourse resources which would be caused by the proposed regulated activity, including the extent to which such activity would foreclose a future ability to protect, enhance or restore such resources, and any mitigation measures which may be considered as a condition of issuing a permit for such activity including, but not limited to, measures to (1) prevent or minimize pollution or other environmental damage, (2) maintain or enhance existing environmental quality, or (3) in the following order of priority: restore, enhance and create productive wetland or watercourse resources; 
e.  The character and degree of injury to, or interference with, safety, health or the reasonable use of property which is caused or threatened by the proposed regulated activity; and 
f.  Impacts of the proposed regulated activity on wetlands or watercourses outside the area for which the activity is proposed and future activities associated with or reasonably related to, the proposed regulated activity which are made inevitable by the proposed regulated activity and which may have an impact on wetlands and watercourses. 
    10.3 Existence of feasible and prudent alternative. In the case of an application which received a public hearing pursuant to a finding by the Agency that the proposed activity may have a significant impact on wetlands or watercourses, a permit shall not be issued unless the Agency finds on the basis of the record that a feasible and prudent alternative does not exist. In making this finding the Agency shall consider the facts and circumstances set forth in Section 10.2 of this Section. The finding and the reasons therefore shall be stated on the record in writing. 
    10.4 Application denial. In the case of an application which is denied on the basis of a finding that there may be feasible and prudent alternatives to the proposed regulated activity which have less adverse impact on wetlands or watercourses, the Agency shall propose on the record in writing the types of alternatives which the applicant may investigate provided this Section shall not be construed to shift the burden from the applicant to prove that he is entitled to the permit or to present alternatives to the proposed regulated activity. 
    10.5 Definition. For purposes of this Section, (1) "wetlands and watercourses" includes aquatic, plant or animal life and habitats in wetlands or watercourses, and (2) "habitats" means areas or environments in which an organism or biological population normally lives or occurs. 
    10.6 Denial of regulated activity in an area outside wetlands or watercourses. A municipal inland wetlands agency shall not deny or condition an application for a regulated activity in an area outside wetlands or watercourses on the basis of an impact or effect on aquatic, plant, or animal life unless such activity will likely impact or affect the physical characteristics of such wetlands or watercourses. 
    10.7 Based on information in the record. In reaching its decision on any application after a public hearing, the Agency shall base its decision on the record of that hearing. Documentary evidence or other material not in the hearing record shall not be considered by the Agency in its decision. 
Sec. 11. - Decision process and permit. 
    11.1 Decision types. The Agency, or its duly authorized agent acting pursuant to Section 12 of these regulations, may, in accordance with Section 10 of these regulations, grant the application as filed or grant it upon other terms, conditions, limitations or modifications of the regulated activity designed to carry out the purposes and policies of the Act, or deny the application. Such terms may include any reasonable measures which would mitigate the impacts of the regulated activity and which would (a) prevent or minimize pollution or other environmental damage, (b) maintain or enhance existing environmental quality, or (c) in the following order of priority: restore, enhance and create productive wetland or watercourse resources. 
    11.2 Timelines. No later than sixty-five (65) days after receipt of an application, the Agency may hold a public hearing on such application. At such hearing any person or persons may appear and be heard and may be represented by agent or attorney. The hearing shall be completed within thirty-five (35) days of its commencement. Action shall be taken on applications within thirty-five (35) days after completion of a public hearing. In the absence of a public hearing, action shall be taken on applications within sixty-five (65) days from the date of receipt of the application. The applicant may consent to one or more extensions of the periods specified in this subsection, provided the total extension of all such periods shall not be for longer than sixty-five (65) days, or may withdraw the application. The failure of the Agency to act within any time period specified in this subsection, or any extension thereof, shall not be deemed to constitute approval of the application. An application deemed incomplete by the Agency may be withdrawn by the applicant or denied by the Agency. 
    11.3 Form and decision statement. The Agency shall state upon its record the reasons and basis for its decision, and in the case of a public hearing, such decision shall be based fully on the record of such hearing and shall be in writing and shall incorporate a statement relative to the consideration of feasible and prudent alternatives. 
    11.4 Notice of decision. The Agency shall notify the applicant and any person entitled to such notice of its decision within fifteen (15) days of the date of the decision by certified mail, return receipt requested, and the Agency shall cause notice of its order in the issuance or denial of the permit, to be published in a newspaper having general circulation in the town wherein the inland wetland or watercourse lies. In any case in which such notice is not published within such fifteen-day period, the applicant may provide for the publication of such notice within ten days thereafter. 
    11.5 Decision to be filed with Planning and Zoning Commission. If an activity authorized by an inland wetland permit also involves an activity which requires a zoning or subdivision approval, special zoning permit, or variance or special exception, under Sections 8-3(g), 8-3c, or 8-26 of the Connecticut General Statues, the Agency shall file a copy of the decision and report on the application with the Town Planning and Zoning Commission within fifteen days of the date of the decision thereon. 
    11.6 Duration of permit. Any permit issued by the Agency for the development of land, for which an approval is required, shall be valid in accordance with Sections 22a-42a. 
    11.7 Assigning or transferring permits. No permit issued by the Agency shall be assigned or transferred without the written permission of the Agency. 
    11.8 Bond or insurance. If a bond or insurance is required in accordance with Section 13 of these regulations, the Agency may withhold issuing the permit until such bond or insurance is provided. 
    11.9 General provisions. General provisions in the issuance of all permits: 
a.  The Agency has relied in whole or in part on information provided by the applicant and if such information subsequently proves to be false, deceptive, incomplete or inaccurate, the permit may be modified, suspended or revoked. 
b.  All permits issued by the Agency are subject to and do not derogate any present or future rights or powers of the Agency or the Town of Seymour, and convey no rights in real estate or material nor any exclusive privileges, and are further subject to any and all public and private rights and to any federal, state, and municipal laws or regulations pertinent to the subject land or activity. 
c.  If the activity authorized by the Agency's permit also involves an activity which requires zoning or subdivision approval, special permit, variance or special exception under Sections 8.3(g), 8-3c, or 8-26 of the Connecticut General Statutes, no work pursuant to the wetland permit may begin until such approval is obtained. 
d.  In constructing the authorized activities, the permittee shall implement such management practices consistent with the terms and conditions of the permit as needed to control storm water discharges and to prevent erosion and sedimentation and to otherwise prevent pollution of wetlands and watercourses. 
Sec. 12. - Action by duly authorized agent. 
    12.1 Action by duly authorized agent. The Agency may delegate to its duly authorized agent the authority to approve or extend a license for an activity that is not located in a wetland, watercourse or upland review area when such agent finds that the conduct of such activity would result in no greater that a minimal impact on any wetlands or watercourses provided such agent has completed the comprehensive training program developed by the Commissioner of Environmental Protection pursuant to Section 22a-39 of the Connecticut General Statutes. Requests for such approval shall be made on a form provided by the Agency and shall contain the information listed under Section 7.5 of these regulations and any other information the Agency may reasonably require. Notwithstanding the provisions for receipt and processing applications prescribed in Sections 8, 9 and 11 of these regulations, such agent may approve or extend such an activity at any time. 
    12.2 Requirements of application recipient. Any person receiving such approval from such agent shall, within ten days of the date of such approval, publish, at the applicant's expense, notice of the approval in a newspaper having a general circulation in the town wherein the activity is located or will have an effect. Any person may appeal such decision of such agent to the Agency within fifteen days after the publication date of the notice and the Agency shall consider such appeal at its next regularly scheduled meeting provided such meeting is no earlier than three business days after receipt by such Agency or its agent of such appeal. Any person may appear and be heard at the meeting held by the Agency to consider the subject appeal. The Agency shall, at its discretion, sustain, alter, or reject the decision of its agent or require an application for a permit in accordance with Section 7 of these regulations. 
Sec. 13. - Bond and insurance. 
    13.1 Bond or surety. The Agency may require as a permit condition the filing of a bond with such surety in such amount and in a form approved by the Agency. 
    13.2 Conditioned on compliance with regulations and permit. The bond or surety shall be conditioned on compliance with the provisions of these regulations and the terms, conditions and limitations established in the permit. 
    13.3 Public liability insurance. The Agency may require the applicant to certify that it has public liability insurance against liability which might result from the proposed operation or use of the wetland or watercourses covering any and all damage which might occur within two (2) years of completion of such operations, in an amount commensurate with the regulated activity. 
Sec. 14. - Enforcement. 
    14.1 Appointment of agent. The Agency may appoint an agent or agents to act in its behalf with the authority to issue notices of violation or cease and desist orders and carry out other actions or investigations necessary for the enforcement of these regulations. In carrying out the purposes of this Section, the Agency or its duly authorized agent shall take into consideration the criteria for decision under Section 10.2 of these regulations. 
    14.2 Regular inspections of regulated activities. 
A.  The Agency or its agent may make regular inspections at reasonable hours of all regulated activities for which permits have been issued with the consent of the property owner or the authorized agent of the owner during the life of the permit. 
B.  In the case in which a permit has not been issued or a permit has expired, the Agency or its agent may make regular inspections at reasonable hours with the consent of the property owner or the authorized agent of the property owner. 
    14.3 Violations of Act or regulations. If the Agency or its duly authorized agent finds that any person is conducting or maintaining any activity, facility or condition which is in violation of the Act or these regulations, the Agency or its duly authorized agent may: 
a.  Issue a written order by certified mail, return receipt requested, to such person conducting such activity or maintaining such facility or condition to immediately cease such activity or to correct such facility or condition. Within ten (10) calendar days of the issuance of such order the Agency shall hold a hearing to provide the person an opportunity to be heard and show cause why the order should not remain in effect. The Agency shall consider the facts presented at the hearing and within ten (10) days of the completion of the hearing notify the person by certified mail that the original order remains in effect, that a revised order is in effect, or that the order has been withdrawn. The Agency shall publish notice of its decision in a newspaper having general circulation in the municipality. The original order shall be effective upon issuance and shall remain in effect until the Agency affirms, revises or withdraws the order. The issuance of an order pursuant to this subsection shall not delay or bar an action pursuant to Section 22a-44(b) of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended. 
b.  Issue a notice of violation to such person conducting such activity or maintaining such facility or condition, stating the nature of the violation, the jurisdiction of the Agency, and prescribing the necessary action and steps to correct the violation including, without limitation, halting work in wetlands or watercourses. The Agency may request that the individual appear at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Agency to discuss the unauthorized activity, and/or provide a written reply to the notice or file an application for the necessary permit. Failure to carry out the action(s) directed in a notice of violation may result in issuance of the order provided in Section 14.3.a or other enforcement proceedings as provided by law. 
c.  The Agency may suspend or revoke a permit if it finds that the permittee has not complied with the terms, conditions or limitations set forth in the permit or has exceeded the scope of the work as set forth in the application including application plans. Prior to revoking or suspending any permit, the Agency shall issue notice to the permittee, personally or by certified mail, return receipt requested, setting forth the facts or conduct which warrants the intended action. The Agency shall hold a hearing to provide the permittee an opportunity to show that it is in compliance with its permit and any and all requirements for retention of the permit. The permittee shall be notified of the Agency's decision to suspend, revoke, or maintain a permit by certified mail within fifteen (15) days of the date of its decision. The Agency shall publish notice of the suspension or revocation in a newspaper having general circulation in the municipality. 
Sec. 15. - Amendments. 
    15.1 Subject to change. These regulations and the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Map for the Town of Seymour may be amended, from time to time, by the Agency in accordance with changes in the Connecticut General Statutes or regulations of the Connecticut Department of Energy and Environmental Protection, or as new information regarding soils and inland wetlands and watercourses becomes available. 
    15.2 Regulations and maps subject to change. An application filed with the Agency which is in conformance with the applicable inland wetlands regulations as of the date of the receipt of such application shall not be required thereafter to comply with any change in inland wetland regulations, including changes to setbacks and buffers, taking effect on or after the date of such receipt and any appeal from the decision of such Agency with respect to such application shall not be dismissed by the Superior Court on the grounds that such a change has taken effect on or after the date of such receipt. The provisions of this Section shall not be construed to apply (1) to the establishment, amendment or change of boundaries of inland wetlands or watercourses or (2) to any change in regulations necessary to make such regulations consistent with the provisions of the Act as of the date of such receipt. 
    15.3 Regulation amendments. These regulations and the Town of Seymour Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Map shall be amended in the manner specified in Section 22a-42a of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended. The Agency shall provide the Commissioner of Environmental Protection with a copy of any proposed regulations and notice of the public hearing to consider any proposed regulations or amendments thereto, except map amendments, at least thirty-five days before the public hearing on their adoption. 
    15.4 Petitions requesting map changes or amendments. Petitions requesting changes or amendments to the "Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Map, Town of Seymour, Connecticut, shall contain at least the following information: 
a.  The petitioner's name, mailing address and telephone number; 
b.  The address, or location, of the land affected by the petition; 
c.  The petitioner's interest in the land affected by the petition 
d.  Map(s) showing the geographic location of the land affected by the petition and the existing and the proposed wetland(s) and watercourse(s) boundaries on such land in accurate detail together with the documentation supporting such proposed boundary locations; and 
e.  The reasons for the requested action. 
    15.5 Burden of proof. Any person who submits a petition to amend the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Map, Town of Seymour, Connecticut, shall bear the burden of proof for all requested map amendments. Such proof may include, but is not limited to, professional interpretation of aerial photography and remote sensing imagery, resource mapping, soils mapping, or other information acceptable to the Agency. If such person is the owner, developer or contract purchaser of the land which is the subject of the petition, or if such person is representing the interests of such an owner, developer or purchaser, in addition to the information required in Section 15.4, the petition shall include: 
a.  The name, mailing address and telephone number of the owner(s) of such land and owner(s) agent or other representative; 
b.  The names and mailing addresses of the owners of abutting land; 
d.  Documentation by a soil scientist of the distribution of wetland soils on said land. Such documentation shall at a minimum include the report of the soil scientist documenting the location of wetland soils on the land and a map of the said land indicating the flag locations set by the soil scientist and defining the boundaries of wetland soil types; and 
e.  Map(s) showing any proposed development of the land in relation to existing and proposed wetland and watercourse boundaries. 
f.  Watercourses shall be delineated by a soil scientist, geologist, ecologist or other qualified individual. 
    15.6 Public hearing on petitions to amend boundaries. A public hearing shall be held on petitions to amend the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Map. Notice of the hearing shall be published in a newspaper having a general circulation in the municipality where the land that is the subject of the hearing is located at least twice at intervals of not less than two days, the first not more than fifteen days, nor less than ten days, and the last not less than two days before the date set for the hearing. All materials including maps and documents relating to the petition shall be open for public inspection. 
    15.7 Timeline for public hearing. The agency shall hold a public hearing on a petition to amend the regulations and the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Map within sixty-five days after receipt of such petition. The hearing shall be completed within thirty-five days after commencement. The agency shall act upon the changes requested in such petition within sixty-five days after completion of such hearing. At such hearing, any person or persons may appear and be heard and may be represented by agent or attorney. The petitioner may consent to one or more extensions of any period specified in this subsection, provided the total extension of all such periods shall not be for longer than sixty-five days, or may withdraw such petition. Failure of the agency to act within any time period specified in this Section or any extension thereof, shall not be deemed to constitute approval of the petition. 
    15.8 Explanation of decisions. The Agency shall make its decision and state, in writing, the reasons why the change in the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Map or Regulations were made. 
Sec. 16. - Appeals. 
    16.1 General statutes apply. Appeal on actions of the Agency shall be made in accordance with the provisions of Section 22a-43 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended. 
    16.2 Notice of appeal sent to Agency and state. Notice of such appeal shall be served upon the Agency and the Commissioner of Environmental Protection. 
Sec. 17. - Conflict and severance. 
    17.1 Most stringent standards apply. 
A.  If there is a conflict among the provisions of these regulations, the provision which imposes the most stringent standards for the use of wetlands and watercourses shall govern. The invalidity of any word, clause, sentence, Section, part, subsection, subdivision or provision of these regulations shall not affect the validity of any other part which can be given effect without such invalid part or parts. 
B.  If there is a conflict between the provisions of these regulations and the provisions of the Act, the provisions of the Act shall govern. 
Sec. 18. - Other permits. 
    18.1 Responsibility for any other permits. Nothing in these regulations shall obviate the requirements for the applicant to obtain any other assents, permits or licenses required by law or regulation by the Town of Seymour, the State of Connecticut or the Government of the United States including any approval required by the Connecticut Department of Energy and Environmental Protection and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. Obtaining such assents, permits or licenses is the sole responsibility of the applicant. 
Sec. 19. - Fees. 
    19.1 Method of payment. All fees required by these regulations shall be submitted to the Agency by check or money order payable to the Town of Seymour at the time the application is filed with the Agency. 
    19.2 Waiver. No application shall be granted or approved by the Agency unless the correct application fee is paid in full or unless a waiver has been granted by the Agency pursuant to subsection 19.7 of these regulations. 
    19.3 Non-refundable fee. The application fee is not refundable. 
    19.4 Definitions. As used in this Section: 
    Residential uses means activities carried out on property developed for permanent housing or being developed to be occupied by permanent housing. 
    Commercial uses means activities carried out on property developed for industry, commerce, trade, recreation, or business or being developed to be occupied for such purposes, for profit or nonprofit. 
    Other uses means activities other than residential uses or commercial uses. _____ 
    19.5 Fee schedule. Application fees shall be based on the following schedule: 
PLEASE NOTE: 
1.  A $60.00 DEEP fee required by C.G.S. §22a-27j will be added to the base fee of all applications. 
2.  ALL APPLICATION FEES WILL BE DOUBLED FOR PROJECTS AND/OR REGULATED ACTIVITIES WHICH HAVE BEEN STARTED WITHOUT AN APPROVED PERMIT 
a. Regulated Activities: Residential Uses .....
Plus Fee from Schedule A 
* Each additional lot with regulated activities $100.00 plus $100.00/Lot * Commercial Uses ..... $300.00 Plus Fee from Schedule A All Other Uses Plus Fee from Schedule A ..... $300.00 Approval by Duly Authorized Agent ..... $50.00 Appeal of Duly Authorized Agent Decision ..... $125.00 Significant Activity Fee ..... Activity fee plus $125.00/1,000 s.f. of disturbed land in the regulated area, plus $50.00/1,000 s.f. for monitoring of the activity, which additional fee shall be refundable, in part, to the applicant to the extent that the monitoring costs are less than the additional fee.  Review Fee ..... Any application that requires more than two (2) hours of staff review shall pay a fee of $100.00 for each additional hour of staff review required. Public Hearing Fee: Single Residential ..... $100.00 Subdivision ..... $300.00 Commercial, Industrial, Other ..... $300.00 Complex Application Fee: The Inland Wetlands Agency may charge an additional fee sufficient to cover the cost of reviewing, acting on, administrating, and monitoring complex applications. Such fee may include, but not be limited to, the cost of retaining experts and/or outside consultants to analyze, review, and report on issues requiring such experts. The Agency or the duly authorized agent shall estimate the complex application fee which shall be paid pursuant to Section 19.1 of these regulations within 10 days of the applicant's receipt or notice of such estimate. Any portion of the complex application fee in excess of the actual cost shall be refunded to the applicant no later than 30 days after publication of the agency's decision. For the purposes of this fee schedule, an "outside consultant" means a professional who is not an employee of the Town, including, but not limited to engineering, environmental, hydrological, legal and wetlands professionals. b. Permitted and Nonregulated Uses: Permitted Uses as of Right ..... NO FEE Nonregulated Uses ..... NO FEE c. Regulation Amendment Petitions ..... $100.00 (Does not include Notices or Regulation Advisories from DEEP) d. Map Amendment Petitions ..... $50.00 (Plus Fee from Schedule) e. Modification of Previous Approval: Residential ..... $25.00 Subdivision ..... $50.00 Commercial, Industrial, Other ..... $75.00 f. Renewal of Previous Approval ..... $50.00 g. Monitoring Compliance Fee per site visit ..... $100.00 (not applicable when there is a finding of significant activity)  
SCHEDULE A. For the purpose of calculating the permit application fee, the area in schedule A is the total area of wetlands and watercourses and the upland review area upon which a regulated activity is proposed.   
SQUARE FEET of AREA a. Less than 1,000 ..... NO FEE b. 1,000 to 5,000 ..... $200.00 c. More than 5,000 ..... $400.00  
SCHEDULE B. For the purpose of calculating the map amendment petition fee, linear feet in schedule B is the total length of wetlands and watercourses boundary subject to the proposed boundary change.   
LINEAR FEET a. Less than 500 ..... NO FEE b. 500 to 1,000 ..... $100.00 c. More than 1,000 ..... $200.00  
_____ 
    19.6 Exemptions. Boards, commissions, councils and departments of the Town of Seymour are exempt from all fee requirements. 
    19.7 Petition to waive fees. The applicant may petition the Agency to waive, reduce or allow delayed payment of the fee. Such petitions shall be in writing and shall state fully the facts and circumstances the Agency should consider in its determination under this Section. The Agency may waive all or part of the application fee if the Agency determines that: 
a.  The activity applied for would clearly result in a substantial public benefit to the environment or to the public health and safety and the applicant would reasonably be deterred from initiating the activity solely or primarily as a result of the amount of the application fee, or 
b.  The amount of the application fee is clearly excessive in relation to the cost to the Town for reviewing and processing the application. 
c.  The applicant has shown good cause. 
The Agency shall state upon its record the basis for all actions under this Section. 
Sec. 20. - Effective date of regulations. 
    20.1 Effective date. These regulations are effective upon filing in the Office of the Town Clerk and publication of a notice of such filing in a newspaper having general circulation in the Town of Seymour. 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1961 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1961 Code, as supplemented through March 7, 1978, which are included herein. Sections of the 1961 Code not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete, or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 
1961 Section Section 
this Code 1-1-1-3 1-1-1-3 1-4, 1-5 1-6, 1-7 1-6 1-4 1-7, 1-8 1-8, 1-9 2-3 2-1 2-5 2-2 2-6-2-8 2-226-2-228 2-9 2-191 2-10 13-56 2-13 2-4 2-14 2-201 2-15 2-31-2-38 2-16 2-181 2-17 2-3 2-18 13-36-13-40 2-26 2-261 2-26.1 2-262 2-28-2-34 2-263-2-269 2-35-2-42 2-281-2-288 2-45, 2-46 2-46, 2-47 2-59 2-61 2-60 2-62, 2-63 2-61-2-70 2-64-2-73 2-75, 2-76 2-91, 2-92 2-96 2-101, 2-102 2-97, 2-98 2-111, 2-112 2-99, 2-100 2-131, 2-132 2-101 9-61-9-65 2-102 2-141, 2-142 3-1 3-1 5-1 4-26 5-2 4-27, 4-28 5-3, 5-4 4-29, 4-30 5-4 5-5 5-5, 5-6 4-31, 4-32 5-7, 5-8 4-1, 4-2 5-16 4-3 5-17 4-66-4-71 5-27-5-29 4-51-4-53 6-31-6-35 13-16-13-20 7-1, 7-2 5-1, 5-3 7-2.1 5-4 7-3 5-6 8-1-8-6 15-1-15-6 9-1-9-7 6-21-6-27 9-8 11-22 9-9 6-2 9-10-9-14 6-28-6-32 9-15 6-1 10-3 8-1(a), (b) 10-7 8-1 10-8 8-3 10-11-10-24 8-21-8-34 11-1-11-16 9-1-9-16 11-21-11-34 9-31-9-44 12-1-12-4 10-1-10-4 13-1-13-4 11-1-11-4 13-6-13-9 11-5-11-8 13-12-13-16 11-9-11-13 13-18, 13-19 11-14, 11-15 13-21, 13-22 11-16, 11-17 13-A-1 16-1 16-4-16-7 16-14 13-A-2, 13-A-3 16-2, 16-3 13-A-3 16-32-16-34 13-A-4 16-8-16-13 16-31 16-35-16-41 16-69 13-A-5 16-64-16-68 13-A-7 16-74 13-A-7, 13-A-8 16-76, 16-77 13-A-9 16-70 14-1.1 12-1 14-3 12-31 16-1(a) 17-66 16-1(a)(1)-(4) 17-67-17-70 16-1(a)(5) 17-72 16-1(b) 17-71 16-2 17-86-17-90 16-3-16-6 17-51-17-54 16-7-16-14 17-26-17-33 17-1-17-6 14-1-14-6 17-8, 17-9 14-21, 14-22 17-10, 17-11 14-7, 14-8 17-16 14-36 17-17 14-37 18-1, 18-2 16-61, 16-62 18-2.1 16-63 19-6 13-1  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1961 Code, as supplemented through March 7, 1978, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date where incorporated into the 1961 Code. This table contains some ordinances which precede March 7, 1978, but which were never included in the 1961 Code, as supplemented, for various reasons. Ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Ordinance 
Date Section Section 
this Code 12-21-72(subd. reg.) App. B  9-17-75(zoning reg.) App. A 10-20-76(amd.) App. A, § 3.2  4-20-77(amd.) App. A, § 1.6(j) App. A, § 3.2  9-21-77(amd.) App. A, § 2.1 App. A, § 3.2 App. A, § 4.1 App. A, § 4.2 App. A, § 6.5(3)  3-15-78(amd.) App. A, § 1.7 App. A, § 2.1 App. A, § 4.4 App. A, § 5.3(d) App. A, § 5.4(d) App. A, §§ 13.3, 13.9, 13.10 App. A, § 15  5-10-78(amd.) App. A, § 5.5  7- 1-78(amd.) App. A, § 1.2(a) App. A, § 1.2(c) App. A, § 2.1 App. A, §§ 14.1-14.7 App. B, Art. III, § I App. B, Art. V  7-12-78 4-52, 4-53 1.1-1.3 7-1-7-3 1.4 7-5 2.1 7-4 3.1-3.6 7-6-7-11 4.1 7-23 4.2, 4.3 7-21, 7-22 4.4-4.6 7-24-7-26 5.1-5.3 7-41-7-43 10-17-78 5-7 17-66, 17-67  5-13-81(amd.) App. A, § 3.2 10- 6-81 15-7 10-20-81(1) 1-4 2-151-2-154 10-20-81(2) 2-211-2-216  2- 2-82 16-72  4- 7-82 2-171  2- 1-83 16-73 16-75 1-3 16-71 1-4 16-70  4-11-83(amd.) App. A, § 5.5(b) App. A, § 13.4(m), (n)  6-27-83 1, 2 8-46, 8-47 3.1-3.27 8-48 4.2, 4.3 8-49, 8-50 5.2-5.5 8-52-8-55 6.3 8-56 7.2 8-57 8.1 8-58 9.1-9.5 8-59 10.1, 10.2 8-61 11.1 8-60  9- 8-83(amd.) App. A, § 2.1 App. A, § 3.2  9-12-83(amd.) App. A, §§ 2.1, 3.2, 7.2  1-23-84 15-8  5- 1-84 11-18-11-20 1-5 11-21 10-16-84 2-268 a-f 14-23  4-30-85 10-2 a-f 4-4  1-22-85 1.0-17.0 App. C  5- 5-87 2-160.1 A 2-160.2 B, C 2-160.3 D, E 2-160.4 F, G 2-160.5, 2-160.6 (1)-(3) 2-160.7  8-16-88 1 11-21(c)(5) 2 11-21(d)(1) (1) 10-2(h) (2) 10-2(d) (3) 10-2(m) (4) 10-2(c)  2- 7-89 (5) 10-2(i) 8-62-8-67 11-14-89 A 13-81 B 13-83 C 13-82  3- 6-90 1-4 4-101-4-104 5 4-106 6 4-105  1- 8-91 1-4 7-4 5 7-7 6 7-25(3) 7 7-42(3) 8 7-43  2-19-91 1-6 8-81-8-86  4-16-91 16-70-16-76  6-18-91 7-1-7-11 7-21-7-26 7-41-7-43 10-15-91 1-8 8-21-8-28  3- 3-92 10-2  3- 3-92 1-7 11-21  4-21-92 6-33  8-13-92 1-12 App. B  5-18-93 1-1-1-10 2-236-2-245  6-15-93 10-4  9- 6-94(1) Added 2-160.11  9- 6-94(2) Added 2-270  9- 6-94(3) 8-63  9- 6-94(4) 8-82-8-86  9- 6-94(5) Added 8-100-8-110  9- 6-94(6) Added 8-120-8-135  9- 6-94(7) Added 10-6  9- 6-94(8) Rpld 15-8  9- 6-94(9) 1.01, 10.02 4.5-1, 4.5-2 2.10-2.07 4.5-21 3.0-3.8 4.5-31-4.5-39 4.1, 4.2 4.5-51 5.1-5.19 4.5-61-4.5-79 6.0, 6.1 4.5-91 6.2-6.7 4.5-92-4.5-97 7.0-7.11 4.5-111-4.5-122 8.0-8.6 4.5-131-4.5-137 9.0-9.5 4.5-151-4.5-156 10.0-10.3 4.5-171-4.5-174 10.4, 10.5 4.5-175 10.6-10.8 4.5-176-4.5-178 11.1, 11.2 4.5-191, 4.5-192 12.1-12.3 4.5-201-4.5-203 12.4, 12.5 4.5-204 12.6, 12.7 4.5-205 13.0, 13.1 4.5-211 13.2, 13.3 4.5-212, 4.5-213 14.1, 14.2 4.5-221, 4.5-222 15.1-15.3 4.5-231-4.5-233 16.1 4.5-241 12- 6-94(1) 10.2(b) 12- 6-94(2) 14-21(a), (g) 12- 6-94(3) 14-22 12- 6-94(4) Rpld 14-23 12- 6-94(5) 15-7(b)  5- 2-95       Added 8-171  5- 2-95 11-21, 11-22  7-18-95 10-2  7-18-95       Added 11-41-11-44 11-21-95 I-VIII       Added 8-181-8-188  3- 5-96 1, 2       Added 8-86, 8-87 3-10       Added 8-88 11       Rpld 8-86  3-18-97       Added 4-121-4-124  3-18-97 14-6  3-18-97       Added 14-9  6-29-98 2-266  6-29-98 8-100-8-110  6-29-98       Added 8-151-8-156  6-29-98 10-2  6-29-98       Added 14-10  6-29-98       Added 14-23  1- 5-99 14-36, 14-37  8-10-00       Rpld App. A       Added App. A 10-16-01(1) 4-4(b)(2) 10-16-01(2) I-VII       Added 6-35-6-41 10-16-01(3) 12-1 10-16-01(4) 13-16 10-16-01(5)       Added 15-2.5 10-16-01(6) App. A, § 1.4 11-19-02(1) 2-268 11-19-02(2) 4.5-51, 4.5-231 11-19-02(3) 1, 2       Added 15-9 11-19-02(4) 1-5       Added 15-10  3- 2-04(1) A-H       Added 2-295-2-302  3- 2-04(2) 11-14  3- 2-04(3) 1-4 11-18  4- 5-05       Added App. C, § 18.0  4-20-04(1) 1-3       Added 2-160.121-2-160.123  4-20-04(2)       Added 6-3-6-6  4-20-04(3) 15-2.5  5-23-05       Rpld App. C       Added App. C 10- 4-05(1)       Added 2-5 10- 4-05(2) 1-7       Added 4-146-4-152  4-17-07 1-7 4-146-4-152  2- 5-08(1) 1.0, 1.1 4-171, 4-172 2.0 4-173 3.1-3.5 4-191-4-195 4.1-4.3 4-211-4-213 5.1-5.3 4-221-4-223 6.1-6.4 4-231-4-234 7.0 4-241 8.1, 8.2 4-251, 4-252 9.1-9.3 4-261-4-263 10.0 4-174 11.0 4-175 12.0 4-174  2- 5-08(2) 1-22 17-111-17-132  2- 5-08(3) 2-261, 2-263, 2-265, 2-266, 2-268  9-16-08 1-7 6-61-6-67 10-21-08 14-21-14-23  
Ordinance 
Approval 
Date Effective 
Date Section Section 
this Code  1-20-09  2-10-09       Added 4-151(d)  1-20-09(1)  1-27-09 6-21  1-20-09(2)  1-27-09 8-59, 8-61  9- 1-09  9-15-09 2-295-2-302  9-15-09  9-16-09 1-9 Ch. 4, Art. VII, 4-146-4-155 11-12-09(1) App. A, § 14.7 10-19-10 10-19-10 7-1-7-12, 7-21-7-27, 7-41-7-45 12- 8-11  1- 1-12 App. A, § 13.0  8- 8-13 App. A, §§ 3.0, 
21.0-23.0       Added App. A, 
§§ 24.0, 25.0 10- 1-13 1-9 Ch. 4, Art. VII, 
4-146-4-154  3- 4-14(1)  3-25-14 A-D       Added Ch. 2, Art. II, 
Div. 14, 
§§ 2-160.131- 
2-160.134  3- 4-14(2)  3-25-14 A, B       Added Ch. 2, Art. II, 
Div. 15, 
§§ 2-160.141, 
2-160.142  3-13-14(1)  4- 1-14 App. A, § 5.2  3-13-14(2)  4- 1-14 App. A, §§ 5.3(C2), 6.0(5), 10.1.3(b)-(d), 
10.1.4(b)  5-18-14(1)  6- 1-14       Rpld App. A, § 13.3(g) App. A, § 13.6(c)       Added App. A, § 13.6(d)  6- 4-14 13-16-13-20 12-11-14(1)  1- 1-15       Added App. A, 
§ 10.1.3(k)  1- 1-15(1)  1- 1-15       Rpld App. A, 
§§ 1.0-25.0  7-21-15(1) 6-21, 6-22  7-21-15(2) 1, 2       Added 15-11  7-21-15(3) 14-6  7-21-15(4)       Added 15-12 10-20-15(1) 1-6       Added 15-13       Added App. A, 
§§ 1.0-25.0  4-19-16(1)       Added Ch. 2.3, 
2.3-1-2.3-22       Rpld 10-6  4-19-16(2)  6- 1-16 1-9 4-146-4-154  7-19-16(1) 2-191  7-19-16(2) 2-160.141, 
2-160.142  7-19-16(3)       Rpld Ch. 14, Art. II, 
14-21-14-23       Added Ch. 14, Art. II, 14-21-14-35.14  7- 1-17       Rpld App. C       Added App. C  6- 6-18(1)  6- 6-18       Added 15-14  
STATUTORY REFERENCE TABLE 
 This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the state law or related matters. 
G.S. Section Section  
this Code 1-1 1-2 4-124c Ch. 13, Art. II 4-124i-4-124p 13-16 7-6 Pt. I, Subpt. C, § 4 7-9 Pt. I, Subpt. A, §§ 
7.7, 7.8 7-9a Pt. I, Subpt. A, § 7.7 7-16 Ch. 2, Art. III, Div. 2 7-31 2-1 7-78 2-5 7-101A 13-40 7-127 Ch. 2, Art. II, Div. 6 7-127a Ch. 2, Art. II, Div. 2 7-137c 15-7(a), (b) 7-137d 15-7(a) 7-148 et seq. 4-146 7-148 Ch. 1, 8-1, 2-296 4-171 17-111 7-148-7-186 Ch. 1 7-148(c)(4)(B) Ch. 12 7-148(c)(4)(F) Ch. 14 7-148(c)(4)(G) Ch. 17 7-148(c)(6)(A)(i) Ch. 12 7-148(c)(6)(A)(ii) Ch. 17 7-148(c)(6)(A)(v) 7-148(c)(6)(B)(i) Ch. 17 7-148(c)(6)(B)(iii) Ch. 17 7-148(c)(6)(B)(iv) Ch. 14 7-148(c)(6)(C)(i) Ch. 14 7-148(c)(6)(C)(ii) 7-148(c)(6)(C)(iii) Ch. 14 7-148(c)(6)(C)(iv) Ch. 14 7-148(c)(6)(C)(v) Ch. 14 7-148(c)(7)(A)(i) Ch. 9 7-148(c)(7)(B)(i) Ch. 16 7-148(c)(7)(B)(ii) Ch. 16 7-148(c)(7)(C) Ch. 17 7-148(c)(7)(F)(i) Ch. 14 7-148(c)(10)(A) 1-9 7-148(c)(10)(B) Ch. 2, Art. V 7-148(d) 1-9 7-151A 13-36, 13-40 7-163a 14-6 7-187-7-201 Ch. 1 7-193       Pt. I, Subpt. A, § 17.3 7-194 Ch. 1 7-202, 7-203 Ch. 16, Art. III 7-203 16-61 7-204-7-207 Ch. 16, Art. III 7-234 Ch. 17 7-245 Ch. 17 7-259-7-266 Ch. 17 7-273c Pt. I, Subpt. C, § 2 7-301 Ch. 6, Art. II 7-314-7-323 Ch. 6, Art. II 7-324 Ch. 17 7-374 Pt. I, Subpt. C, § 4 7-392 Pt. I, Subpt. C, § 3 7-425-7-450 2-226 7-426 2-227 7-451-7-455 2-228 8-2 4-171, 13-1 17-111 8-2i App. A, § 10.1.5 8-3c App. C, § 7.2 App. C, § 11.5 App. C, § 11.9 8-3(g) App. C, § 7.2 App. C, § 11.5 App. C, § 11.9 8-5 App. A, § 19.0 8-12 App. A, § 20.0 8-12a App. A, § 20.0 8-18-8-30a Ch. 13 8-23 App. B, § 10.0 8-25 App. B, § 4.2.5 App. B, § 5.2 8-25b App. B, § 4.2.5 8-26 App. B, § 7.2 App. C, § 11.5 App. C, § 11.9 8-26(c) App. B, § 7.1 8-26(d) App. B, § 2.1.2 App. B, § 5.1 8-26(f) App. B, § 2.1.5 8-36(b) App. B, § 2.1.4 8-124-8-139 Ch. 13 8-141-8-144 Ch. 13 8-151-8-162 Ch. 13 8-163-8-169 Ch. 13 Tit. 9 Ch. 5 9.1 Pt. I, Subpt. A, § 3.3 9-169 5-2-5-4 9-183(a) Ch. 2, Art. III, 
Div. 4 2-191 9-185 Ch. 2, Art. III, 
Div. 3 9-196 Pt. I, Subpt. B, § 12 11-20 Ch. 12, Art. II 11-21       Ch. 12, Art. II, Div. 2 Tit. 12 Ch. 15 12-62g 15-12 12-81 15-5, 15-6, 6-35 12-81(20) 15-12 12-81(76) 15-13 12-81c(3) 15-10 12-81g(a) 15-12 12-81k 15-13 12-107b(c) App. A, § 18.3.2 12-110       Pt. I, Subpt. A, § 12.3 12-144(c) 15-9(a) 13-25 2-1 13a-1 Ch. 14 13a-149 14-6 14-1(26) 8-48 14-54 App. A, § 19.1 14-55 App. A, § 19.1 14-150a 16-76 14-162 Ch. 16 14-251, 14-252 Ch. 16, Art. III 14-253a 16-72 14-254 16-72 14-321 App. A, § 19.1 14-322 App. A, § 19.1 16-235 App. A, § 5.3 19a-77(3) App. A, § 4.0 19-74 9-2 19-105-19-111 8-3 19-342-19-375 Ch. 9 19-395 4-1, 8-108 19-395(b), (c) 4-28, 4-29 19-395(e) Ch. 4 19-396 Ch. 4, Art. II 19-397 4-30 19-402 Ch. 4, Art. IV 19-403e Ch. 2, Art. III, Div. 5 19a-77(3) App. A, § 4.0 19a-92 Ch. 10 19a-200-19a-230 Ch. 8 21-36 Ch. 10 21-36, 21-37 10-2 21a-91-21a-120 Ch. 8 Tit. 22, Ch. 435 8-188 22a-27j 19.5 22a et seq. 2-160.121-2-160.123 et seq. 22a-28-22a-35 App. C, § 2.1 App. C, § 5.2 22a-36-22a-45 4-171, 17-111 App. C, § 1.5 App. C, § 2.1 App. C, § 10.2 22a-38 App. A, § 7.6 22a-39 App. C, § 5.1 App. C, § 12.1 22a-39-14 App. C, § 7.5 22a-42a App. C, § 4.1 App. C, § 11.6 App. C, § 15.3 22a-43 App. C, § 16.1 22a-44(b) App. C, § 14.3 22a-45a App. C, § 5.1 22a-174-1 6-62 22a-209 App. A, § 4.0 22a-220a(f), (i) 8-86, 8-88 22a-250(a) 8-86, 8-88 22a-354f 2-160.123 22a-354h App. A, § 3.0 22a-354p 1-160.122 22a-354v 2-160.121 22a-401 App. C, § 4.1 22a-402 App. C, § 5.3 22a-403 App. C, § 4.1 App. C, § 5.3 23-58-23-60 8-122 23-65 8-122 25-1 Ch. 17 25-84 2-62 27-103 10-2 Tit. 28 Ch. 2, Art. II, Div. 7 28-7 2-111 29-34 11-6 29-89 10-4 29-230 8-152 29-265 8-108 29-291 Ch. 6 29-317 8-156 30-1 11-18 30-14-30-62a Ch. 3 30-74 Ch. 3 30-86 Ch. 3 30-91 Ch. 3 31-97, 31-98 Pt. I, Subpt. C, § 7 52-560 8-134 52-572 11-17 Ch. 98 4-171 Ch. 99       Pt. I, Subpt. A, § 16.6 Ch. 106       Pt. I, Subpt. A, § 12.3 Ch. 124       Pt. I, Subpt. A, § 10.20 4-171 App. A, § 1.0 App. A, § 22.0 Ch. 126 4-171 App. B, §§ 1.1, 1.2 Ch. 127 13-56 Ch. 128       Pt. I, Subpt. A, § 10.8 Ch. 277 Pt. I, Subpt. C, § 8 Ch. 286 Pt. I, Subpt. C, § 8 Ch. 391       Pt. I, Subpt. A, § 10.5 Ch. 440 4-171 App. B, § 3.1 444 4-171 446h 4-171  
