CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF SHELTON, CONNECTICUT 
____________ 
CONTAINING 
THE CHARTER AND 
GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE 
CITY OF SHELTON 
____________ 
Published by Order of the Board of Aldermen 
____________ 

OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF SHELTON, CONNECTICUT; 
____________ 
Mark A. Lauretti 
Mayor 
____________ 
First Ward 
John "Jack" Finn 
Anthony F. Simonetti 
Second Ward 
Stanley Kudej 
Eric J. McPherson 
Third Ward 
John F. Anglace, Jr. 
Lynn Farrell 
Fourth Ward 
John P. Papa 
Kenneth Olin 
Aldermen 
____________ 
Winnick, Vine, Welch & Teodosio 
Corporation Counsel 
____________ 
Ray Sous 
Assistant Corporation Counsel 
____________ 
Margaret Domorod 
City/Town Clerk 
PREFACE 
    This Code is a codification of the ordinances of Shelton of a general and permanent nature. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the Compiled Ordinances of 1975 and 1977 and subsequent ordinances of the City of Shelton. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the Comparative Tables appearing in the back of this volume, the reader can locate any Compiled Ordinance section and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Footnotes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state laws have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this volume. 
Numbering System 
    The numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and municipal codes. Each section number consists of two component parts separated by a dash, the figure before the dash referring to the chapter number and the figure after the dash referring to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the first section of Chapter 1 is numbered 1-1 and the third section of Chapter 8 is 8-3. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter and at the same time new sections or even whole chapters can be inserted in their proper place simply by using the decimal system for amendments. By way of illustration: If new material consisting of three sections that would logically come between sections 8-2 and 8-3 is desired to be added, such new sections would be numbered 8-2.1, 8-2.2 and 8-2.3 respectively. New chapters may be included in the same manner. If the new material is to be included between Chapters 11 and 12, it will be designated as Chapter 11.5. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject, the next successive number being assigned to the article or division. 
Indices 
    The indices have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of the headings being couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by municipal officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within each index which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which he is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this Code to which the attention of the user is especially directed is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing for the Code. With this system, the Code will be kept up-to-date periodically. Upon the final passage of amendatory ordinances, they will be properly edited and the appropriate page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the Code, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Successfully maintaining of this Code up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the volume. As revised sheets are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publishers that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    The publication of this Code was under the direct supervision of Jan Shekitka, Supervising Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publishers are most grateful to Ms. Beverly Brown, City/Town Clerk and Mr. John Bashar, Corporation Counsel, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this Code. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publishers have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION 
Tallahassee, Florida 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omitted." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ordinance 
 Number Date 
Adopted Included/ 
Omitted Supplement 
Number 847  4- 8-10 Included 11 848  4- 8-10 Omitted 11 849  7- 8-10 Included 11 850  7- 8-10 Included 11 851  7- 8-10 Included 11 852  7- 8-10 Included 11 853  7- 8-10 Included 11 854  9- 9-10 Included 11 855  9- 9-10 Included 11 856 10-14-10 Included 11 857  2-10-11 Included 11 858  5-12-11 Included 11 859  6-28-11 Included 12 860 12- 8-11 Omitted 12 861  2- 9-12 Included 12 862  2- 9-12 Included 12 863  3- 8-12 Included 12 864  4-12-12 Included 12 865  4-12-12 Included 12 866  8- 9-12 Included 12 Chtr. Rev. 11- 6-12 Included 12 867  4-11-13 Included 13 868  4-11-13 Included 13 869  4-11-13 Included 13 870  4-11-13 Included 13 871  4-11-13 Included 13 872  4-11-13 Included 13 873  4-11-13 Included 13 874  4-11-13 Included 13 875  4-11-13 Included 13 876  2-13-14 Included 14 877  3-13-14 Included 14 878  3-13-14 Included 14 879  4-10-14 Included 15 880  5- 8-14 Included 15 881  8-14-14 Included 15 882 10- 9-14 Included 15 883 10- 9-14 Included 15 884  2-11-15 Included 15 885  2-11-15 Included 15 886  2-11-15 Included 15 887  2-11-15 Included 15 888  4- 9-15 Omitted 16 889  4- 9-15 Included 16 890  6-11-15 Omitted 16 891 11-12-15 Included 16 892 11-12-15 Included 16 894 11-12-15 Included 16 895 12-10-15 Included 16 898  6- 9-16 Included 16 899  6-28-16 Included 16 900  7-14-16 Included 16 901 12- 8-16 Included 17 902  2-16-17 Included 17 903  4-13-17 Included 17 904  4-13-17 Included 17 905  6- 8-17 Omitted 17 906  6- 8-17 Included 17 907 10-12-17 Included 17 908  2- 8-18 Included 17  
PART I - CHARTER AND RELATED MATTERS 
SUBPART A. CHARTER [1] 
Subpt. A. Charter §§ 1.1-9.12 
Footnotes: 

CHAPTER 1. - INCORPORATION POWERS, AND DUTIES, AND PROPERTY AND RIGHTS AND OBLIGATIONS 

Section 1.1. - Incorporation. 
    All inhabitants residing within the territorial limits of the City as shown on the map filed with the City/Town Clerk, shall continue to be a body politic and corporate under the name of the City of Shelton and as such shall have perpetual duration. 
Section 1.2. - Powers and Duties. 
    The City shall have all powers and duties specifically conferred or imposed by this Charter or the laws of the State or United States, and all other powers and duties fairly incident to those specifically conferred or imposed, and all powers and duties not reserved to the State or the United States. 
Section 1.3. - Property and Rights and Obligations. 
    The City shall continue to have all property which it has as of the effective date of this Charter and all rights and obligations shall continue in the City. 
CHAPTER 2. - ELECTIONS 

Section 2.1. - General City Election. 
    The general City election for the elective offices of the City and each ward of the City shall be held in accordance with the laws of the State on the Tuesday after the first Monday of November of the odd-numbered years unless otherwise provided for by the Connecticut General Statutes. 
Section 2.2. - Polling Places and Hours. 
    The Registrars of Voters shall designate the polling place or places for the City of each ward of the City for each general City election and for any other voting by the electors. All elections and other voting shall be conducted as provided in this Charter and the laws of the City and State and United States. If not otherwise provided, the polls shall remain open from 6:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. If not otherwise provided, the Registrars of Voters shall publish a notice of the election or other voting in a newspaper having a substantial circulation in the City at least seven (7) days prior to the election or other voting. 
Section 2.3. - Regulation. 
    The Board of Aldermen may enact such ordinances not inconsistent with this Charter and the laws of the City and State and United States as may be necessary to regulate any general City election or other voting. 
Section 2.4. - Elected Municipal Officials and Voting. 
2.4.1. Officials: 
    At a general City election, where applicable, the electors shall elect the following officials to the following offices for the terms indicated or until successors shall be elected: 
(a)  A Mayor to serve for a term of two (2) years; 
(b)  A Board of Aldermen consisting of eight (8) members elected as follows: Two (2) members to the Board from each ward to serve for a term of two (2) years; 
(c)  A Board of Apportionment and Taxation consisting of six (6) members to serve for a term of two (2) years; 
(d)  A Board of Education consisting of nine (9) members to serve for a term of two (2) years; 
(e)  A Library Board consisting of six (6) members to serve for staggered terms of six (6) years with the terms of two (2) members expiring at each general City election; 
(f)  A Planning and Zoning Commission consisting of six (6) members elected to serve for staggered terms of four (4) years with the terms of three (3) members expiring at each general city election. In November 2013, three (3) members shall be elected for a term of two (2) years and three (3) members elected for a term of four (4) years, thereafter they shall all be elected for four (4) year terms at each biennial election. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall also consist of two (2) alternates elected for a term of two (2) years. 
(g)  A City Treasurer to serve for a term of two (2) years. 
2.4.2. Voting: 
    Each elector is authorized to vote for the full number of members to be elected to any board, commission, or other body; provided, however, that such authorization shall not prohibit the operation of any law requiring minority representation. 
Section 2.5. - Taking Office. 
    Each elected official shall take office on the second Tuesday following the day of his/her election. 
Section 2.6. - Conduct of Other Voting. 
    Any other voting, in addition to the general City elections, which is authorized by this Charter or the laws of the City or State or United States may be called by the Mayor or, if not, the Board of Aldermen and shall be conducted, as far as possible, in the same manner as a general City election. 
Section 2.7. - Tie. 
    When a general City election or other voting results in a tie, an adjourned election shall be conducted in accordance with the laws of the City or State or United States. If not otherwise provided, the adjourned election shall be held on the fourteenth day after the certification of the election or other voting which resulted in a tie and shall be confined to the tied candidates or issues. 
Section 2.8. - Provisions for Charter Revision. 
    The Board of Aldermen shall, on or before April 1, 2022, and at least every ten (10) years thereafter, appoint a Charter Revision Commission in accordance with the laws of the State to consider general charter revision. 
Section 2.9. - Wards. 
    The City shall be divided into four (4) wards, the boundaries of which shall be established pursuant to Connecticut General Statute Section 9-169(f) as may be amended from time to time and such reapportionment plan shall be filed with the City/Town Clerk's office. 
CHAPTER 3. - THE MAYOR 

Section 3.1. - Office, Election and Qualifications. 
    The chief executive officer of the City shall be a Mayor. The Mayor shall be elected as provided in Section 2.4.(a) of this Charter. The Mayor shall be an elector and a resident of the City. 
Section 3.2. - Powers and Duties. 
    The Mayor shall have all powers and duties of a chief executive officer specifically conferred or imposed by this Charter or the laws of the City or State or United States and all other powers and duties fairly incident to those specifically conferred or imposed. The Mayor shall supervise the general operation and Departments of the City. The Mayor shall preside at all meetings of the Board of Aldermen and the Board of Apportionment and Taxation, at which meetings of the Board he/she shall have a tie-breaking vote only. The Mayor shall prepare and have printed, as soon as possible after the close of each fiscal year, an annual City report. The Mayor shall prepare and submit to the Board of Apportionment and Taxation an annual budget as provided in Chapter 7 of this Charter. The Mayor shall have such other lawful powers and duties as may be conferred or imposed by ordinance or resolution of the Board of Aldermen; provided, however, that the Board of Aldermen shall not diminish, in any way, the powers and duties of the Mayor except those powers and duties conferred or imposed on the Mayor by the Board of Aldermen under this Section. 
Section 3.3. - Appointments. 
3.3.1. Boards, Commissions, and Other Bodies: 
    Within thirty (30) days after taking office, the Mayor shall make appointments required of the Mayor under Chapter 5 of this Charter. 
3.3.2. Offices: 
    Within thirty (30) days after taking office, the Mayor shall make the appointments required of the Mayor under Chapter 6 of this Charter, each for a term of two (2) years unless otherwise specified or until removed and until a successor is appointed. 
3.3.3. Other Appointments: 
    The Mayor shall also have the power, subject to the provisions of Chapter 8 of this Charter to appoint and remove persons in positions in the classified service, except where this Charter specifically grants to another authority the power to appoint and remove, in which case the Mayor shall have no power to appoint and remove. The Mayor may delegate his/her authority to appoint and remove under this subsection to one (1) or more department heads. 
Section 3.4. - Succession to Office. 
    If the office of Mayor is vacant for the reason of temporary disability or absence from the City, the President of the Board of Aldermen shall serve as acting Mayor during such disability or absence. If the office of Mayor is vacant for any other reason, the President of the Board of Aldermen shall fill the vacancy until a successor is elected at the next Mayoral election. 
CHAPTER 4. - THE BOARD OF ALDERMEN 

Section 4.1. - Office, Election, and Qualifications. 
    The legislative body of the City shall be a Board of Aldermen ("Board"). The Board shall be elected as provided in Section 2.4.1.(b) of this Charter. Each Alderman shall be an elector and a resident of the ward from which he/she is elected at the time that he/she takes office and during his/her entire term of office. Each Alderman shall serve without compensation but may receive reimbursement for reasonable and necessary expenses. 
Section 4.2. - Presiding Officers. 
    On the second Tuesday following the day of each general City election, the members of the Board shall meet and elect one of its members as President of the Board and one of its members as Vice President of the Board. The President shall preside at the meetings in the absence of the Mayor and shall serve as acting Mayor or Mayor as provided in Section 3.4. of this Charter. The President shall retain his/her own right to vote as a member of the Board and, in the absence of the Mayor, may vote additionally to break a tie. The Vice President shall act in the place of the President in the event of his/her temporary disability or absence. 
Section 4.3. - Meetings, Quorum and Actions, and Procedure. 
4.3.1. Meetings: 
    The Board shall hold regular monthly meetings, open to the public, on a day specified by ordinance. The Mayor or any two (2) members of the Board may convene a special meeting of the Board at any time by giving each member and the Mayor at least twenty-four (24) hours notice. 
4.3.2. Quorum and Actions: 
    Five (5) members of the Board, exclusive of the Mayor, shall constitute a quorum for any meeting, and the Board shall take no action, except on a vote to adjourn or to fix the time and place of the next meeting, unless the action is adopted by at least five (5) affirmative votes. 
4.3.3. Procedure: 
    The Board shall, to the extent possible, confine each ordinance and resolution to one subject which shall be clearly stated. The Board shall keep minutes of all its proceedings, including all roll call votes, which minutes shall be the official record of its proceedings and shall be open to public inspection. The Clerk of the Board shall maintain the minutes and an exact copy shall be kept in the office of the City/Town Clerk. The Board shall, by ordinance or resolution, determine other rules of its procedure not specified by the Charter. 
Section 4.4. - Powers and Duties. 
    The Board shall have all powers and duties of a legislative body specifically conferred or imposed by this Charter or the laws of the City or State or United States and all other powers and duties fairly incident to those specifically conferred or imposed. Consistent with this Charter and the laws of the City and State and United States, the powers of the Board shall include, but not limited to, the following powers: to enact, amend, or repeal ordinances; to create, consolidate, or abolish offices or boards, commissions, or other bodies and to define their powers and duties; to provide for the preservation of the order, peace, safety, health, and welfare of the City and its inhabitants; to determine and set, upon the recommendation of the Mayor, the compensation of all elected and appointed officials of the City and all City employees; to regulate the borrowing of money by the City; to issue such bonds or notes as may be required for the proper conduct of the business of the City; and to exercise the powers as granted by Connecticut General Statute Section 7-194, as amended from time to time. 
Section 4.5. - Appointments. 
4.5.1. Boards, Commissions and Other Bodies: 
    Within thirty (30) days after taking office, the Board shall make the appointments required of it under Chapter 5 of this Charter. 
4.5.2. Clerk: 
    Within thirty (30) days after taking office, the Board shall appoint for a term of two (2) years, or until removed and until his/her successor is appointed, a Clerk of the Board. 
Section 4.6. - Investigation. 
    The Board and each committee of the Board granted such authority, shall have the power to investigate any matter concerning the City and the public interest and well-being and to call witnesses to appear before the Board to testify on any matter under investigation by the Board. 
Section 4.7. - Ordinances. 
4.7.1. Proposal: 
    The Mayor or any member of the Board may propose an ordinance in writing to the Clerk of the Board and, not later than the next regular meeting following its submission; the Clerk shall refer the ordinance without the requirement of a vote to the Board. 
4.7.2. Referral to Committee: 
    Should the Board determine that the proposed Ordinance should be reviewed by a Committee(s) of the Board before going to Public Hearing, it may, by majority vote, agree to refer the proposed Ordinance to a Committee(s) of its choice providing that the reasons for the referral are clearly stated. The Committee(s) shall be required to report back to the full Board no later than sixty (60) days after the date of referral to the Committee(s) with or without comment. In no case shall a Committee(s) of the Board withdraw the proposed Ordinance from further consideration by the Board. 
4.7.3. Hearing: 
    Within thirty (30) days after the referral to the Board by the Clerk or, in the case of a referral to a Committee(s) within thirty (30) days of the Committee(s) report, the Board shall hold without requirement of a vote, at least one (1) public hearing on the proposed Ordinance and notice of such hearing shall be published in a newspaper having substantial circulation in the City at least five (5) days prior to said hearing and be posted on the City website. 
4.7.4. Board Action: 
    Not later than the next regular meeting following the Public Hearing, the Board shall consider the proposed Ordinance together with any amendments that may be offered thereto, and the Board shall either reject or pass such Ordinance with or without such amendments except that the Board may table said ordinance until its next regular meeting in order to permit further study or investigation. At such next regular meeting the Board shall consider the proposed Ordinance together with such amendments as shall be proposed and shall reject or pass such Ordinance with or without amendments. 
4.7.5. Proposal by Petition: 
    The electors may also propose an Ordinance by petition as set forth in Section 4.11. of this Charter. 
Section 4.8. - Approval or Disapproval of Votes, Resolutions, and Ordinances. 
4.8.1. Certification to Mayor: 
    The Clerk of the Board shall, within ten (10) days of Board action, certify to the Mayor for his/her approval or disapproval each vote, resolution, or ordinance (except an emergency vote, resolution, or ordinance or any vote, resolution, or ordinance relating to the procedures of the Board, any of which shall become effective without review or approval by the Mayor and except any vote, resolution, or ordinance adopting a final budget or making an emergency appropriation, any of which shall become effective in accordance with Chapter 7 of this Charter). 
4.8.2. Approval : 
    If the Mayor approves the vote, resolution, or ordinance, he/she shall sign it, upon which, subject to the provisions of this Charter, it shall become effective. 
4.8.3. Disapproval: 
    If the Mayor disapproves the vote, resolution, or ordinance, he/she shall, within fourteen (14) days after it was certified to him/her, return it to the Clerk of the Board with a statement of the reasons for his/her disapproval, which statement shall be read by the Clerk to the Board at its next regular meeting. If the Board shall pass the vote, resolution, or ordinance within seven (7) days after it has been read to the Board, by an affirmative vote of at least six (6) of the eight (8) members, then subject to the provisions of this Charter, it shall become effective without the approval of the Mayor. 
4.8.4. Failure to Return: 
    If the Mayor does not return the vote, resolution, or ordinance within the time required, subject to the provisions of this Charter, it shall become effective without the approval of the Mayor. 
Section 4.9. - Publication of Ordinances; Effective Date. 
    The Clerk of the Board shall file each Ordinance, within five (5) days after final passage, with the City/Town Clerk pursuant to Sections 4.8.2., 4.8.3., 4.8.4. and as required by Connecticut General Statutes. Within ten (10) days after receipt of such Ordinance, the City/Town Clerk shall publish the same in summary form in a newspaper having substantial circulation within the City, which notice shall also state that a full copy of the ordinance has been posted on the City website and is on file with the City/Town Clerk. 
    In the event that an emergency Ordinance is passed pursuant to Section 4.10. of the Charter, the Board shall not have the right to direct that a summary be published, but the entire ordinance shall be published. 
    In either event, the publication shall be within ten (10) days of receipt of the Ordinance by the City/Town Clerk and shall be published in a newspaper having a substantial circulation within the City and a full copy of the Ordinance shall be posted on the City website. 
Section 4.10. - Emergency Action. 
    An action stated to be an emergency vote, resolution or ordinance as determined by the Mayor and the Board and stating facts constituting an emergency shall not require notice of a public hearing or a public hearing and shall become effective immediately and published as required in Section 4.9. of this Charter. 
    Each such emergency vote, resolution, or ordinance, including any amendments, shall automatically stand repealed thirty (30) days following passage of the emergency vote, resolution, or ordinance. 
Section 4.11. - Powers of Initiative. 
    The electors of the City shall have the power by petition to propose to the Board passage of a vote, resolution or ordinance (except any emergency vote, resolution, or ordinance adopted under Section 4.10 of this Charter or any vote, resolution, ordinance or action taken pursuant to Chapter 7 of this Charter). Any elector may file with the City/Town Clerk any such petition, and, except as provided in this Section, such petition shall conform to the requirements of Connecticut General State Statute Section 7-9, as amended from time to time. The petition shall contain the full text of the vote, resolution, or ordinance proposed to be passed or repealed and shall be signed by a total of fifteen percent (15%) or more of the electors as determined by the last completed registry list for the last general City election. The petition shall be accompanied by affidavits signed and sworn to by each circulator as provided in Connecticut General State Statute Section 7-9. The City/Town Clerk shall, within ten (10) days after receipt of the last page of the petition, determine whether or not the petition and affidavits are sufficient as to the requirements of the petition provision as stated above, and if they are, the City/Town Clerk shall certify the petition to the Board of Aldermen. If the Board fails to take action on passage or repeal of any vote, resolution, or ordinance so proposed without any substantial change within thirty (30) days after certification by the City/ Town Clerk, the Board shall, cause a referendum to be held on the proposed passage or repeal of the vote, resolution, or ordinance at the next general election unless insufficient time remains to put said question on the ballot at the next general election, in that case, the Board of Aldermen may call a Special Election within ninety (90) days of the certification. Passage or repeal of any such vote, resolution, or ordinance shall become effective fourteen (14) days after certification by the moderator of the referendum that a majority of those voting on the question have voted in the affirmative; provided, however, that at least twenty percent (20%) of the eligible electors have voted in the referendum. If less than twenty percent (20%) of the electors as determined by the last completed registry list for said election have voted, the proposal shall be defeated. Passage or repeal of any such vote, resolution or ordinance shall become effective upon certification of the results of the voting regardless of any defect in the petition. The Board shall not act to defeat the effect of passage or repeal of any vote, resolution, or ordinance which shall have been adopted in accordance with the provisions of this Section, except by vote of the electors, which vote shall be conducted in the same manner as the original referendum. Passage or repeal of any vote, resolution, or ordinance, proposed by initiative petition and defeated by referendum shall not be resubmitted by initiative petition until at least two (2) years after the referendum. 
CHAPTER 5. - BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND OTHER BODIES. 

Section 5.1. - Elected. 
5.1.1. Board of Apportionment and Taxation: 
    The City shall have a Board of Apportionment and Taxation, elected as provided by Section 2.4.1.(c) of this Charter, no more than three (3) members of whom shall be from the same political party. The members shall hold no other elected or appointed office within the City. The Mayor shall be an ex-officio member of the Board, shall preside at its meetings, and shall vote only in the case of a tie. At the first regular meeting of the Board following the date on which the newly elected members take office, the Board shall choose, by plurality vote, one (1) of its members to be Chairman of the Board. The Chairman shall preside in the absence of the Mayor. Four (4) members of the Board, exclusive of the Mayor, shall constitute a quorum to transact business. The Board shall have the powers and duties conferred or imposed by this Charter. 
5.1.2. Board of Education: 
    5.1.2.1. Board: The City shall have a Board of Education, elected as provided by Section 2.4.1.(d) of this Charter, no more than five (5) members of which shall be from the same political party. The members shall hold no other elected or appointed office within the City. Members may, however, be appointed to temporary committees relative to the duties of the Board. The Board shall operate a school system in the City and shall appoint and may remove such personnel as may be necessary or convenient to the operation of the system. The Board shall have the power to receive, manage, and expend any gifts for school purposes. The Board shall have such duties as prescribed by Connecticut General Statutes. 
    5.1.2.2. Chairman: At the first regular meeting of the Board following the date on which the newly elected members take office, the Board shall choose, by plurality vote, one (1) of its members to be Chairman of the Board. The Chairman shall preside over all meetings of the Board. Within thirty (30) days after the Chairman is chosen, the Chairman shall appoint a Clerk of the Board (whose compensation the Board shall establish), who shall attend the meetings of the Board, take the minutes, and prepare and maintain the records of its proceedings. The Chairman shall appoint all committees. The Chairman shall have such other powers and duties consistent with his/her office as may be conferred or imposed by the Board. 
5.1.3. Library Board: 
    The City shall have a Library Board elected as provided by Section 2.4.1.(e) of this Charter no more than four (4) members of whom shall be from the same political party. The members shall hold no other elected office within the City. The Board shall operate a library system in the City and shall appoint and may remove, subject to the approval of the Mayor, such librarian, librarians, and other personnel as may be necessary or convenient to the operation of the system. The Board shall make and adopt bylaws, rules and regulations for the governance of the library and reading room and shall have exclusive control of the expenditure of all monies collected to the credit of the library fund, have the supervision, care and custody of the grounds, rooms or building set apart by the Board of Aldermen for library purposes; provided that all such monies collected and received shall be placed in the custody of the Finance Director to the credit of its library fund and shall be kept separate from other monies of the City and shall be drawn upon by the proper officers of the City upon duly authenticated vouchers of the Directors. The Board shall have the power to receive, manage and expend any gifts for library purposes, and shall have custody of such gifts, including, but not limited to, any endowment funds. 
5.1.4. Planning and Zoning Commission: 
(a)  The City shall have a Planning and Zoning Commission elected as provided by Section 2.4.1.(f) of this Charter, no more than four (4) members of whom shall be from the same political party. The members shall hold no other elected or appointed office within the City. The Commission shall have such duties as are provided by the Connecticut General Statutes relating to planning and zoning, and, subject to the approval of the Mayor, shall appoint and may remove zoning and planning officers and such professional and other personnel as may be necessary or convenient to the operation of the commission. 
(b)  There shall be two (2) alternate members elected to the Planning and Zoning Commission as provided by Section 2.4.1.(f), no more than one (1) of whom shall be from the same political party. The alternate members shall hold no other elected or appointed office within the City. The Chairman of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall, when a regular member is unable to attend a meeting or is otherwise unable to participate, select an alternate in place of such member firstly from the same political party as the member who is unable to attend the meeting or otherwise unable to participate and if an alternate from the same political party is not available, then the Chairman shall select the second alternate. If two (2) members are unable to attend or participate, both alternates shall be seated. 
Section 5.2. - Appointed by the Mayor. 
    The Mayor shall make appropriate notifications to the clerk of the Board of Aldermen and the City/Town Clerk as to those appointments under Section 5.2. 
5.2.1. Parks and Recreation Commission: 
    The City shall have a Parks and Recreation Commission consisting of twelve (12) members, no more than seven (7) of whom shall be from the same political party, appointed by the Mayor to serve for a staggered term of four (4) years. The Commission shall operate and maintain a system of public recreation facilities and activities in the city and, subject to the approval of the Mayor, shall appoint and may remove a Director of Parks and Recreation, and the Superintendent of Parks and Recreation and such other personnel as may be necessary or convenient to the operation of the system. The director of Parks and Recreation shall report to the Administrative Assistant on a day-to-day basis to carry out the directions of the Parks and Recreation Commission. The Commission shall have the power to receive, manage and expend any gifts for Parks and Recreation purposes which funds shall be subject to audit in compliance with Connecticut General Statutes and City Ordinances. 
5.2.2. Board of Zoning Appeals: 
    The City shall have a Board of Zoning Appeals, consisting of five (5) regular members and three (3) alternate members, no more than three (3) of which regular members and no more than two (2) of which alternate members shall be from the same political party, appointed. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall have all of the powers and duties granted to and imposed upon them under the appropriate provisions of the Connecticut General Statutes. 
5.2.3. Conservation Commission: 
    The City shall have a Conservation Commission, consisting of seven (7) members, no more than four (4) of whom shall be from the same political party, appointed by the Mayor to serve for staggered terms of three (3) years. The Conservation Commission shall have all of the powers and duties granted to and imposed on Conservation Commission under the appropriate provisions of the Connecticut General Statutes and Ordinances and Resolutions adopted by the Board of Aldermen. The Commission may appoint and remove a Natural Resource Manager subject to the approval of the Mayor. 
5.2.4. Economic Development Commission: 
    The City shall have an Economic Development Commission, consisting of five (5) members, no more than three (3) of whom shall be from the same political party, appointed by the Mayor to serve for staggered terms of five (5) years. The Commission shall promote development of the economic resources of the City and shall have such duties and powers as are set forth in the Connecticut General Statutes and Ordinances and Resolutions adopted by the Board of Aldermen. 
5.2.5. Inland Wetlands Commission: 
    The City shall have an Inland Wetlands Commission, consisting of seven (7) members, no more than four (4) of whom shall be from the same political party, and two alternates of whom not more than one (1) shall be from the same political party, appointed by the Mayor to serve for staggered terms of five (5) years. 
    The Commission shall administer the Inland Wetlands regulations and shall have such duties and powers as are set forth in the Connecticut General Statutes of the State of Connecticut relating to Inland Wetlands Commissions. 
    The Commission, subject to the approval of the Mayor, shall appoint and may remove a Wetlands Enforcement Officer and such professional and other personnel as may be necessary or convenient to the operation of the Commission. 
Section 5.3. - Appointed by the Board of Aldermen. 
    The Board of Aldermen shall make appropriate notifications to the Mayor and the City/Town Clerk as to those appointments under Section 5.3. 
5.3.1. Board of Assessment Appeals: 
    The City shall have a Board of Assessment Appeals, consisting of three (3) members, no more than two (2) of which shall be from the same political party, appointed by the Board of Aldermen to serve for staggered terms of three (3) years as prescribed by Connecticut General Statutes. 
5.3.2. Public Building Committees: 
    The City shall have a Public Building Committee for each public building project which may reasonably exceed Five Hundred Thousand Dollars ($500,000.00) in total cost. Each committee shall consist of from five (5) to nine (9) members as appointed by the Board of Aldermen to serve for an indefinite term until completion of the public building project for which the committee was appointed. The Board of Aldermen shall appoint each committee no later than fourteen (14) days after the Board has first authorized the expenditure of any funds for the public building project. At the first meeting of each committee, the committee shall elect, by plurality vote, a chairman from its members to serve until completion of the public building project for which the committee was appointed. Each committee shall supervise the public building project for which it was appointed, develop a project program with input from the appropriate department head or representative of the Board/Commission for which the project is being completed and shall have such other powers as conferred upon them by the Board of Aldermen. Each committee shall supervise the public building project for which it was appointed, and shall appoint and may remove such professional service providers and such other personnel as may be necessary or convenient to the supervision of the project. Each committee shall have the power to issue change orders which do not result in an increase in the total cost of the project above the authorized total bond issue or cost. No committee shall have the power to award contracts or waive bids on any project, but a committee may recommend the acceptance or rejection of any bid on any project or the waiver of the bids. 
5.3.3. Public Employee Appeals Board: 
    The City shall have a Public Employees Appeals Board consisting of five (5) members appointed by the Board of Aldermen of which no more than (3) three from the same political party to serve for staggered terms of five (5) years. The Board shall hear, within twenty (20) days of filing, the appeal of any employee of the City, unless covered by a collective bargaining agreement grievance procedure, who has completed any probationary period of employment, and who may have a grievance involving his/her employment or the merit system. The Board shall submit its decision in writing to the Mayor, and the decision of the Board shall be final unless within ten (10) days of receipt of the decision the Mayor shall submit a different decision in writing to the Board, in which event the decision of the Mayor shall be final unless within ten (10) days the Board shall reaffirm its original decision in writing after the affirmative vote of at least four (4) members. 
    Any decision which becomes final hereunder may be appealed to the Superior Court for the Judicial District of Ansonia/Milford or such other Judicial District as may have jurisdiction within twenty (20) days from the date the decision becomes final. 
5.3.4. Water Pollution Control Authority: 
    The City shall have a Water Pollution Control Authority consisting of eight (8) members appointed by the Board of Aldermen of which no more than five (5) shall be from the same political party to serve for staggered terms of four (4) years. The Water Pollution Control Authority shall have such powers as are set forth in Connecticut General Statutes, as the same may be amended from time to time. It shall also control the revolving sewer fund. The provisions of this Charter relating to the award of contracts, letting to bid, etc. shall be applicable to the Water Pollution Control Authority. 
5.3.5. Board of Ethics: 
    The City shall have a Board of Ethics which shall have all the powers conferred upon and imposed by Ordinance of the City. The Board of Ethics will consist of five (5) members of whom no more than two (2) shall be from the same party and will be appointed by the Board of Aldermen for a term of three (3) years. The terms of the members shall be staggered in a manner that not more than two (2) members' term will expire in any year. Members of the Board of Ethics shall not be an employee of the City, hold any elected office, hold any other appointed position as defined in Section 5.2. and 5.3. of this Charter, or provide goods or services to the City. 
    There shall be an Ethics Code adopted by the Board of Aldermen which may be amended from time to time and which shall be in compliance with requirements of the Connecticut General Statutes. The Board of Ethics shall, on a continuous basis, review the Ethics Code of the City, including provisions for enforcement, and recommend any suggested changes to the ordinance to the Board of Aldermen for consideration. 
Section 5.4. - General Provisions. 
    Unless otherwise provided by this Charter or the laws of the City or State, the following general provisions shall govern all boards, commissions and other bodies referred to in this Chapter 5: 
(a)  Members shall serve without compensation, but may receive reimbursement for reasonable and necessary expenses in accordance with procedures as established by the Finance Director. 
(b)  Members shall be electors of the City. 
(c)  Members shall hold no more than one (1) elected municipal office and/or two (2) other appointed offices with the City. 
(d)  A simple majority shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. 
(e)  No ex-officio member shall have a vote. 
(f)  At its first regular meeting following the date on which the newly elected or appointed members take office, each board, commission and other body shall elect, by plurality vote, a chairman from its members who shall serve until the next regular election or appointment of members to the board, commission or other body. A chairman, by virtue of his/her position, shall not be deprived of his/her vote nor given an added vote. 
(g)  Each board, commission and other body shall establish its own rules of procedure provided they are not inconsistent with any other section of the Charter. 
(h)  Each board, commission and other body shall have all powers and duties conferred or imposed upon such a board, commission or other body under the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended from time to time, and shall also have all powers and duties specifically conferred or imposed by this Charter or the laws of the City or State or United States, and all other powers and duties fairly incident to those specifically conferred or imposed. 
(i)  No board, commission or other body shall have the power to obligate the City in an amount greater than is available in its budget. 
(j)  Each appointment or removal shall be in accordance with Chapter 8 of this Charter if applicable to the position in question. 
CHAPTER 6. - OFFICES, DEPARTMENTS, AND OTHER AGENCIES 

Section 6.1. - Administrative Assistant. 
6.1.1. Appointment and Removal; Qualifications: 
    The Mayor shall appoint and may remove an Administrative Assistant. The Administrative Assistant shall be chosen on the basis of his/her administrative qualifications, character, education, training and experience. The Administrative Assistant shall hold at least a baccalaureate degree with a minimum of one (1) year of experience in public administration (federal, state, or municipal) or private business or industry in a responsible management, supervisory capacity; or he/she shall hold at least an associate degree with a minimum of two (2) years of such experience; or in lieu of a college degree, shall have a minimum of four (4) years of such experience. 
6.1.2. Powers and Duties: 
    The Mayor may, from time to time, delegate to the Administrative Assistant, such administrative powers or duties vested in the Mayor as the Mayor deems appropriate, and any powers or duties so delegated may be increased or diminished only by the Mayor. The Mayor may, from time to time, terminate the delegation of any powers or duties to the Administrative Assistant, but all acts of the Administrative Assistant pursuant to the delegation of such powers or duties which are performed prior to termination shall be and remain the acts of the Mayor. 
    The powers and duties delegated shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following: 
(a)  Serving as personnel officer and administering the merit system, the Administrative Assistant, subject to the approval of the Mayor, may delegate these duties to a Personnel Director/Director of Human Resources; 
(b)  Serving as intergovernmental grantsman by researching, preparing, and submitting required applications for programs pertinent to the well being of the City; 
(c)  Assisting the Mayor in the supervision of all offices, departments, and other agencies of the City; 
(d)  Serving as public information officer and handling citizen comments; 
(e)  Exercising such other powers and performing such other duties as the Mayor may prescribe. 
    The Administrative Assistant or a designee of the Administrative Assistant, both of whom are subject to the approval of the Mayor shall be responsible for the day-to-day administrative supervision in personnel matters of all full-time and part-time employees of all Boards and Commissions. Such supervision shall not be deemed to infringe upon the authority of such Boards and Commissions granted by this Charter. 
    The Administrative Assistant shall devote his/her full time to the duties of his/her office. 
6.1.3. Other Positions: 
    The Administrative Assistant shall act only as such and shall hold no other elected or appointed office within the City and shall have no other employment with the City. 
Section 6.2. - Corporation Counsel. 
6.2.1. Appointment and Removal; Qualifications: 
    The Mayor shall appoint and may remove a Corporation Counsel. The Corporation Counsel shall be a lawyer or firm of lawyers admitted to practice law in the State. 
6.2.2. Powers and Duties: 
    The Corporation Counsel shall be the attorney for the City and its boards, commissions, and other bodies including the Board of Education, and its offices, departments, and other agencies, and its officials. The Corporation Counsel shall, upon written request, furnish the City and its boards, commissions, and other bodies including the Board of Education, and its offices, departments, and other agencies, and its officials with a written legal opinion on any legal matter affecting the City. The Corporation Counsel shall have all powers and duties of an attorney to his/her client. The Corporation Counsel, subject to the approval of the Mayor, shall appoint and may remove such personnel as may be necessary or convenient to the operation of his/her office. The Corporation Counsel shall have such other legal powers and duties as may be prescribed by the Mayor or the Board of Aldermen and shall supervise other appointments made under Section 6.2.3. as required. 
6.2.3. Other Counsel; Assistant Counsel: 
    The Board of Aldermen may appoint and remove such Assistant Corporation Counsel and such other counsel, as the Board deems necessary or convenient. Any said appointed position shall be part of the office of Corporation Counsel. 
6.2.4. Other Positions: 
    The Corporation Counsel and Assistant Corporation Counsel shall act only as such and shall hold no other elected or appointed office within the City and shall have no other employment with the City. 
Section 6.3. - City/Town Clerk. 
    The Mayor shall appoint and may remove a City/Town Clerk. The City/Town Clerk shall manage the office of the City/Town Clerk. The City/Town Clerk shall have such duties as prescribed by Connecticut General Statutes and such other related powers and duties as are prescribed by the Mayor or the Board of Aldermen. The City/Town Clerk, subject to the approval of the Mayor, shall appoint and may remove such personnel as may be necessary or convenient to the operation of his/her office. The City/Town Clerk shall pay to the City all fees collected. 
Section 6.4. - Department of Finance. 
6.4.1. Composition: 
    The City shall have a Department of Finance, headed by a Director of Finance and consisting of the following: the Tax Collector, the Assessor, the Purchasing Agent, and such other personnel as may be necessary or convenient to the operation of the department. 
6.4.2. Director of Finance: 
    The Mayor shall appoint and may remove a Director of Finance. The Director shall manage the Department. The Director, subject to the approval of the Mayor, shall appoint and may remove the Tax Collector, the Assessor, the Purchasing Agent, and such other personnel as may be necessary or convenient to the operation of the Department. The Director, subject to the approval of the Mayor, may exercise the powers and duties of any office under his/her supervision, but shall hold no other elected or appointed office within the City and shall have no other employment with the City. 
6.4.3. Powers and Duties: 
    With the exception of those powers and duties conferred or imposed upon the City Treasurer, the Department shall administer all financial matters of the City. The Department shall keep accounts showing the financial transactions for the City and its boards, commissions, and other bodies including the Board of Education, and its departments, offices and other agencies, and its officials. The Director shall prepare such financial reports for such periods as may be required by the Mayor, but at least quarterly, showing expenditures and revenues for the City and its boards, commissions and other bodies including the Board of Education, and its departments, offices, and other agencies, and its officials. The Department shall have such other financial powers and duties as may be prescribed by the Mayor or the Board of Aldermen. 
6.4.4. Central Purchasing: 
    6.4.4.1. Division of Central Purchasing: The City shall have within the Department of Finance a Division of Central Purchasing headed by a Purchasing Agent and consisting of such other personnel as may be necessary or convenient to the operation of the Department subject to the approval of the Mayor. 
    The Purchasing Agent may be the Director of Finance or any other person within the Department except the City Treasurer. 
6.4.5. Information Technology: 
    The Finance Director shall be responsible for maintaining the City website, all electronic data processing systems and related technologies and shall provide such services to the City, its Boards, Commissions and other bodies, its departments, officers, agencies, and officials as may be directed by the Mayor. The management of the existing electronic data processing system of the Board of Education and related technologies shall remain under the management of the Board of Education until such Board otherwise determines. Subject to the approval of the Mayor, the Director of Finance may appoint an individual to perform the Information Technology duties that may be required by the City. 
Section 6.5. - Treasurer. 
    The City shall have a Treasurer elected as provided by Section 2.4.1.(g) of this Charter. The Treasurer shall manage the office of the Treasurer. The Treasurer shall be the agent of the City deposit fund and other City trust funds. The Treasurer shall coordinate all his/her activities with the Director of Finance. The Treasurer shall have such other related powers and duties as are prescribed by the Mayor or the Board of Aldermen. 
Section 6.6. - Building Department. 
    The City shall have a Building Department, headed by a Building Official and consisting of such other personnel as may be necessary or convenient to the operation of the Department. The Department shall be responsible for requiring compliance with the provisions of the State Building Code and applicable regulations and laws related to the construction, alteration, repair, removal, demolition of buildings and structures as described in applicable Connecticut General Statutes. The Building Department shall have such other duties and responsibilities as may be prescribed by the Mayor or the Board of Aldermen. 
6.6.1. Building Official: 
    The Mayor shall appoint and may remove a Building Official who shall have such duties and powers as are provided by Connecticut General Statutes. The Building Official shall be the Department Head and shall be responsible for the management and supervision of the Department. The Building Official, subject to the approval of the Mayor, may appoint and remove such personnel as may be necessary or convenient to the operation of the Department. 
Section 6.7. - Department of Public Works. 
6.7.1. Composition: 
    The City shall have a Department of Public Works, headed by a Director of Public Works and consisting of the following: The City Engineer, the Superintendent of Highways and Bridges, the Tree Warden, and such other personnel as may be necessary or convenient to the operation of the Department. 
6.7.2. Director of Public Works: 
    The Mayor shall appoint and may remove a Director of Public Works. The Director shall be the Department Head and shall be responsible for the management and supervision of the Department. The Director, subject to the approval of the Mayor, shall appoint and may remove the City Engineer, the Superintendent of Highways and Bridges, the Tree Warden, and such other personnel as may be necessary or convenient to the operation of the Department. 
6.7.3. Powers and Duties: 
    The Department of Public Works shall supervise and administer all maintenance, construction and engineering of the public works of the City except for those areas designated by the Board of Aldermen as the responsibility of the Parks and Recreation Commission and except for those areas subject to the control of the Board of Education. The Department shall administer all maintenance of the areas subject to the control of the Board of Education if the Board of Education so requests provided that such work shall be charged to the appropriation of the Board of Education and approved by the Board of Aldermen. 
Section 6.8. - Health Department. 
    The City shall have a Health Department; provided, however, that the City may participate in a district health department as prescribed in Connecticut General Statutes Sections 19-105 to 19-111, as amended from time to time. 
6.8.1. Director of Health: 
    The Mayor shall appoint and may remove a Director of Health who shall be administrative head of the Health Department; provided, however, that the City is not participating in a district health department. If the City is participating in a district health department, the district health board shall appoint a district director of health, who shall serve in lieu of a Director of Health appointed by the Mayor. 
6.8.2. Powers and Duties: 
    The Director of Health shall administer the public health programs of the City and, subject to the approval of the Mayor, shall appoint and may remove such personnel as may be necessary or convenient to the operation of the office. The Director shall have such other related powers and duties as may be prescribed by the Mayor or the Board of Aldermen. 
Section 6.9. - Public Safety. 
6.9.1. Public Safety Council: 
    The City shall have a Public Safety Council which shall coordinate the Public Safety functions of the City. The Council shall consist of the Mayor, who shall serve as Chairman, the Chief of Police, the Fire Chief, the Fire Marshal, the Director of Emergency Management and the Director of Public Works. The Mayor may appoint, on a temporary basis, such additional Public Safety Representatives as ex-officio members that may be necessary to carry out the functions of the Council. 
6.9.2. Department of Police: 
    6.9.2.1. Composition: The City shall have a Department of Police, headed by a Chief of Police and consisting of all law enforcement personnel and such other personnel as may be necessary or convenient to the operation of the Department. 
    6.9.2.2. Powers and Duties: The Department shall provide law enforcement within the city. The Department shall have such other related powers and duties as may be prescribed by the Mayor or the Board of Aldermen. 
    6.9.2.3. Chief of Police: The Mayor shall appoint, subject to ratification by a majority vote of the Board of Aldermen, a Chief of Police for a term not to exceed five (5) years. The qualifications and other terms of employment contract, including compensation, shall be established by the Board of Aldermen by Ordinance. 
    The Chief of Police shall be the chief executive officer of the Police Department. The Chief of Police, subject to the approval of the Mayor, shall appoint and may remove all officers and employees of the Police Department including a Dog Warden, and other such personnel as may be necessary or convenient to the operation of the Department. 
    The Chief of Police may be removed from office during the term of the contract only for just cause shown. The Chief of Police shall not be a merit system employee as defined under this Charter nor be represented by a bargaining unit. 
6.9.3. Fire Department: 
    6.9.3.1. Department Composition and Functions: The City shall have a Fire Department consisting of such existing fire companies and such other fire companies as may be deemed necessary or convenient by the Board of Fire Commissioners and approved by the Board of Aldermen. The Department shall provide for the protection from fire, provide for rescue service and aid in the enforcement of all laws and ordinances relating to fire suppression, fire prevention and fire safety. The Department shall have such other related duties as may be prescribed by the Mayor or the Board of Aldermen. 
    6.9.3.2. Board of Fire Commissioners: The Board of Fire Commissioners shall serve as the administrative body of the Fire Department. It shall consist of one (1) Commissioner appointed by the Mayor, who shall be the Chairman of the Board of Fire Commissioners, and one (1) Commissioner from each volunteer fire company providing service to the Department. Company Commissioners shall be elected by the members of each individual company in such manner as may be provided in the bylaws thereof. Each Commissioner shall serve for a term of two (2) years. 
    The Commissioners shall be equal in rank and authority, have one (1) vote each, and shall serve without compensation, but may receive reimbursement for reasonable and necessary expenses. The Chairman shall preside at all meetings of the Board of Fire Commissioners, and shall have a vote in any matter before the Board of Fire Commissioners. The Chairman shall have such other powers and duties consistent with his/her office as may be conferred or imposed by the Board of Fire Commissioners. The Chairman shall appoint all chairpersons of the committees of the Board of Fire Commissioners. The Commissioners shall, at the January meeting following the General Election, elect one of its members as Vice Chairman of the Commission. The Vice Chairman shall act in the place of the Chairman in the event of his/her temporary disability or absence. 
    The Board of Fire Commissioners shall be responsible for administrative policies, rules and regulations, long range and capital improvements planning, the department budget, and all appointments as provided for by this Charter. The Board of Fire Commissioners shall also serve as the Appeals Board of the Fire Department. The Board of Fire Commissioners shall also certify applicable compliance levels relating to all positions requiring fire service requirements and may remove, subject to the approval of the Mayor, all appointments for cause. 
    6.9.3.3. Appointments: The Board of Fire Commissioners shall appoint and may remove, subject to the approval of the Mayor: 
A Fire Chief to serve a term of three (3) years; 
A Deputy Chief to serve a term of two (2) years; 
Other Assistant Chief(s) as the Board of Fire Commissioners may deem necessary or convenient to the operation of the Department to serve a term of two (2) years; 
Other employees of the Department as the Board of Fire Commissioners may also deem necessary or convenient to the operation of the Department. 
    6.9.3.3.1. Additional Appointments: In addition, each volunteer fire company providing service to the Department may, in such a manner as may be provided by the company, appoint one (1) Assistant Chief, meeting the requirements of the Board of Fire Commissioners. Each Assistant Chief shall serve a term of two (2) years, shall serve department wide and shall report to the Fire Chief. 
    6.9.3.4. Officers' Council: The Fire Department shall have an Officers' Council, which shall consist of the Fire Chief, Deputy Fire Chief, Assistant Chiefs, Fire Marshal, a Deputy Fire Marshal, and the Captains and Lieutenants from each Company. The Officers' Council shall serve to recommend operational policies and procedures to the Fire Chief and may recommend administrative policy to the Board of Fire Commissioners. 
    6.9.3.5. Fire Chief: The Fire Chief shall serve as the Department Head of the Office of Fire Suppression - Fire Services ("Services") and shall exercise the day-to-day supervision and control over the Services and staff as to all operational matters. The Deputy Chief shall be second in command to the Fire Chief. The Fire Chief shall report to the Mayor consistent with the provisions of this Charter. The Fire Chief shall have all powers and duties as provided for in accordance with applicable Connecticut General Statutes. 
    The Fire Chief or his/her designee shall serve as the representative/liaison of the Department on all operational matters. The Chief shall make monthly reports to the Board of Fire Commissioners and the Mayor on the status of the Services within the City. 
6.9.4. Office of Fire Marshal: 
    6.9.4.1. Function and Activities: The Office of Fire Marshal shall aid in the prevention and investigation of fires and the enforcement of the State Fire Code as provided by the Connecticut General Statutes and Regulations. The Office shall have such other related duties as may be prescribed by the State Fire Marshal, the Mayor or the Board of Aldermen. 
    6.9.4.2. Appointments: The Board of Fire Commissioners shall appoint and may remove, subject to the approval of the Mayor and in accordance with the procedures set forth in the Connecticut General Statutes and this Charter, the Fire Marshal, Deputy Fire Marshals, Fire Inspectors and other employees as the Board of Fire Commissioners may deem necessary or convenient to the operation of the Office of Fire Marshal. 
    6.9.4.3. Fire Marshal: The Fire Marshal shall serve as the Department Head of the Office of Fire Marshal and shall exercise the day to day supervision and control of the operations and staff of the Office. The Marshal shall be responsible for carrying out the duties and responsibilities of that office in accordance with the provisions of Connecticut General Statutes and this Charter. The Marshal shall report to the Mayor consistent with the provisions of this Charter and Connecticut General Statutes. The Marshal shall work closely with the Fire Chief in implementing fire prevention planning, site and plan review, and fire safety within the City. The Marshal shall make monthly reports to the Board of Fire Commissioners and the Mayor on the status of the Office of Fire Marshal. The Fire Marshall shall have all powers and duties as provided for in accordance with applicable Connecticut General Statutes. 
6.9.5. Office of Emergency Management: 
    6.9.5.1. Function and Activities: The City shall have an Office of Emergency Management (OEM), which shall carry out the local municipal duties and responsibilities of civil preparedness in accordance with the State Civil Preparedness Plan and Program. The Office shall have those functions and authority as provided for under Connecticut General Statutes. 
    An emergency plan of operations for the City shall be prepared and submitted to the State Office of Emergency Management by the local director upon approval of the Mayor. The plan shall be developed with local input and be implemented in accordance with applicable Connecticut General Statutes and Regulations. 
    6.9.5.2. Director: The Mayor shall appoint and may remove, subject to applicable Connecticut General Statutes, a Director of Emergency Management. The Director shall have such duties, responsibilities and authority as prescribed by Connecticut General Statutes and Regulations. The Director shall also be responsible for the organization, administration and operation of the local Office of Emergency Management. The Director shall report to the Mayor and be subject to the direction and control of the State Commissioner as provided by Connecticut General Statutes and Regulations. The Mayor may appoint such other persons, as he/she deems necessary or convenient to the operations of this office. 
6.9.6. Emergency Medical Service: 
    6.9.6.1. Board of Emergency Medical Services Commissioners: The Emergency Medical Services Commission shall be composed of five (5) members appointed by the Board of Aldermen, subject to the confirmation of the Mayor, of which no more than three (3) shall be from the same political party. The Board [shall be] able to override an unfavorable confirmation by a three-quarters vote of the Board of Aldermen. 
    The Commissioners shall be equal in rank and authority and shall serve without compensation but may receive reimbursement for reasonable and necessary expenses. A Chairman and Vice Chairman shall be elected by the Commission and preside at all meetings of the Board of Emergency Medical Services Commissioners and shall have a vote in any matter before the Board. The Vice Chairman shall assume the powers and duties of the Chairman in the absence of the Chairman. 
    6.9.6.2. Powers and Duties: The Emergency Medical Services Commission shall oversee, monitor, coordinate and regulate emergency medical services for the City of Shelton, including City assets, and will negotiate contracts with the providers subject to approval by the Board of Aldermen. 
    The Emergency Medical Services Commission shall establish policies and procedures for the City of Shelton and its EMS providers to follow and ensure compliance with State and Federal rules and regulations governing emergency medical services under Connecticut State Statutes. 
    The Board of Aldermen may by ordinance define further the powers and duties of the Commission. 
Section 6.10. - Justices of the Peace. 
    There shall be such Justices of the Peace as may be provided by the Connecticut General Statutes, nominated and appointed as provided therein. 
Section 6.11. - City Constables. 
    The Mayor shall appoint and may remove two (2) City Constables no more than one (1) of whom shall be from the same political party, for a term of two (2) years each who shall have such powers as defined in Connecticut General State Statute Section 7-89. 
Section 6.12. - Official Bonds. 
    The Mayor, City/Town Clerk, Director of Finance, Treasurer, Tax Collector, Director of Public Works, Building Inspector, and such other officers and employees as may be required to do so by the Board of Aldermen shall, before entering on their respective official duties, execute to the City, in the form prescribed by the Board of Aldermen and approved by the Corporation Counsel, and file with the City/Town Clerk, a surety company bond in a penal sum to be fixed by the Board of Aldermen, conditioned upon honest and faithful performance of such official duties. The Board of Aldermen may prescribe a name schedule bond, a schedule position bond, or a blanket bond, or prescribe which boards, commissions, or other bodies, or departments, offices, or other agencies, or officials shall be covered by a specific type of bond. The City shall pay the premiums for such bonds. 
Section 6.13. - General Provisions. 
    Unless otherwise specifically provided by this Charter or the laws of the City or State, the following general provisions shall govern Chapter 6 of this Charter: 
(a)  Each department, office or other agency and each head and employee shall have all powers and duties conferred or imposed on such department, office, or other agency and each head and employee under the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended from time to time, and all powers and duties specifically conferred or imposed by this Charter or the laws of the City or State of United States and all other powers and duties fairly incident to those specifically conferred or imposed. 
(b)  No department or head of a department or officer shall have the power to obligate the City in an amount greater than is available in the applicable budget. 
(c)  Each appointment shall be made as provided herein except for appointments required to be made pursuant to the Merit System established by Chapter 8. Merit System personnel shall be removed only as provided therein. Other employees shall be removed as provided by this Charter or other applicable law. 
CHAPTER 7. - BUDGETS, TAX RATES, APPROPRIATIONS 

Section 7.1. - Departmental Estimates. 
(a)  Each board, commission and other body (including the Board of Education) and department, office, and other agency and official of the City ("Department") which seeks an appropriation shall, not later than February 15, submit to the Director of Finance a report containing the following: 
(1)  A program showing the activities to be accomplished by the Department during the ensuing fiscal year and describing any major changes from the current fiscal year together with the reasons for such changes; 
(2)  Estimates of revenue, other than tax revenue, presenting in parallel columns, or any other appropriate budget format established by the Director of Finance, the estimates of the total receipts to be collected during the current fiscal year, estimates of the total receipts to be collected in the ensuing fiscal year, and an estimate of available surplus for the current year; 
(3)  Itemized estimates of expenditures, presenting in parallel columns, or any other appropriate budget format established by the Director of Finance, estimates of the total expenditures for the current fiscal year, and the amount requested for the ensuing fiscal year; and 
(4)  Such other information as may be reasonably requested by the Mayor or by the Board of Aldermen or by the Board of Apportionment and Taxation or by the Director of Finance. 
(b)  The Director of Finance will collate the material and will provide a copy thereof to the Mayor. 
(c)  Any and all documents required to be provided by the Board of Apportionment and Taxation under the provisions of Section [Chapter] 7. shall also be distributed to the members of the Board of Aldermen. 
Section 7.2. - Proposed Budget. 
    The Mayor, with the assistance of the Director of Finance shall prepare a budget for the City, and the Mayor shall submit such budget to the Board of Apportionment and Taxation and Board of Aldermen in joint session, not later than March 22 of each year. Such budget shall contain the following: 
(a)  A budget message outlining the fiscal policy of the City and describing the important features of the budget, and indicating any major changes from the current fiscal year, together with the reasons for such changes, and containing a summary; 
(b)  Estimates of revenue, presenting in parallel columns, or any other appropriate budget format established by the Director of Finance, the itemized receipts collected during the current fiscal year prior to the date of the proposed budget, estimates of the total receipts to be collected during the current fiscal year, estimates of the total receipts, other than from the property tax to be collected in the ensuing fiscal year, and an estimate of available surplus for the current year; 
(c)  Itemized estimates of expenditures, presenting in parallel columns, or any other appropriate budget format established by the Director of Finance, the actual expenditures in each Department for the last completed fiscal year and for the current fiscal year prior to the date of the proposed budget, estimates of the total expenditures for the current fiscal year, and recommendations of the amounts to be appropriated for the ensuing fiscal year for all items together with a tax rate in mills; 
(d)  Such other information as may be reasonably required by the Board of Apportionment and Taxation; 
(e)  Reasons for the recommendations; and 
(f)  Recommended capital projects to be undertaken during the ensuing six (6) fiscal years and methods of financing them. Copies of the proposed budget shall be available to the public. 
    If the Mayor shall fail to submit a budget under the provisions of this Section, the Finance Director shall, not later than April 1, submit a budget conforming to the requirements of this Section. 
Section 7.3. - Duties of Board of Apportionment and Taxation on the Proposed Budget. 
    The Board of Apportionment and Taxation shall review the proposed budget, holding at least one (1) departmental hearing in joint session with the Board of Aldermen, at which the departments may appear and such other departmental hearings as the Board of Apportionment and Taxation shall deem appropriate. All joint hearings shall be conducted under the rules of the Board of Apportionment and Taxation. The Board of Apportionment and Taxation shall either approve the budget submitted to it by majority vote of the full membership of the Board or shall prepare and recommend, by a majority vote of the full membership of the Board of Apportionment and Taxation a different proposed budget and tax rate for the City, and shall submit either budget and tax rate to the Board of Aldermen not later than May 1. Such budget shall contain the following: 
(a)  Estimates of revenue, presenting in parallel columns, or any other appropriate budget format established by the Director of Finance, the itemized receipts collected during the current fiscal year prior to the date of the proposed budget, estimates of the total receipts to be collected during the current fiscal year, estimates of the receipts, other than from the property tax, to be collected in the ensuing fiscal year, and an estimate of available surplus for the current year; 
(b)  Itemized estimates of expenditures presenting in parallel columns, or any other appropriate budget format established by the Director of finance, the actual expenditures in each Department for the last completed fiscal year, and the recommendations of the Board of Apportionment and Taxation of the amounts to be appropriated for the ensuing fiscal year for all items; and 
(c)  Such other information as may be reasonably required by the Board of Aldermen. 
Section 7.4. - Procedure Upon Failure of the Board of Apportionment and Taxation to Submit a Budget. 
    If the Board of Apportionment and Taxation shall fail to submit a budget and tax rate to the Board of Aldermen as required in Section 7.3., the Mayor shall, not later than May 4, submit the budget prepared pursuant to Section 7.2. to the Board of Aldermen who shall act upon the same as provided in Section 7.6. 
Section 7.5. - Publication. 
    Following receipt of the proposed budget, the Board of Aldermen shall have copies of the proposed budget available in the office of the Director of Finance, and at least five (5) days prior to each public hearing, pursuant to Section 7.6. of this Chapter, the Board of Aldermen shall publish in a newspaper having a substantial circulation in the City, a notice of the public hearing or hearings and a summary of the proposed budget showing anticipated revenues by major sources and proposed expenditures by departments and also the amount to be raised by taxation. Said budget shall also be posted on the City's website. 
Section 7.6. - Duties of the Board of Aldermen on the Budget; Board of Aldermen Budget. 
    The Board of Aldermen shall review the submitted budget holding at least one (1) public hearing and such other public hearings as the Board of Aldermen shall deem appropriate, the last of which hearings shall not be later than May 15 and at which hearings any elector or taxpayer may have a reasonable opportunity to be heard regarding appropriations for the ensuing year. Not later than May 31, the Board of Aldermen shall adopt a budget and tax rate in mills for the City and file it with the Director of Finance. Adoption of the final budget and tax rate in mills of the Board of Aldermen for the City shall be made based upon the proposed budget on which the Board of Aldermen is acting as follows: 
    Adopted, decreased or increased in whole or by line item by a majority of the full membership of the Board of Aldermen. 
Section 7.7. - Procedure Upon Failure of the Board of Apportionment and Taxation and the Board of Aldermen to Adopt a Budget. 
    If neither the Board of Apportionment and Taxation, nor the Board of Aldermen, adopt a budget, the budget and tax rate proposed under the provisions of Section 7.2. shall be the budget and tax rate of the City. 
Section 7.8. - Mayor's Veto Power. 
(a)  If the Board of Aldermen shall fail to adopt a budget pursuant to section 7.6., then the budget and tax rate in mills adopted by the Board of Apportionment and Taxation pursuant to Section 7.3. shall be submitted to the Mayor by the Finance Director not later than the second business day following May 31. The Mayor shall have the power to veto said budget only in whole and not by line item and, if he/she exercises his/her veto power, the budget adopted pursuant to Section 7.2. and the tax rate associated therewith shall be the budget and tax rate for the City, unless within seven (7) days of the Mayor's veto, the Board of Aldermen shall, by at least a three quarter affirmative vote of the full membership of the Board of Aldermen, override the Mayor's veto. If the Mayor does not exercise his/her veto powers, the budget and tax rate associated therewith adopted by the Board of Apportionment and Taxation pursuant to Section 7.3. shall become the budget and tax rate for the City. 
(b)  If the Board of Aldermen shall adopt a budget pursuant to Section 7.6., the Clerk of the Board of Aldermen shall submit the same to the Mayor not later than the second business day following May 31. The Mayor shall have the power to veto said budget only in whole and not by line item. The power to veto said budget shall be exercised, if at all, within three (3) business days following the presentation of the budget to him. If the veto power is exercised by the Mayor, and the veto is not overridden within seven (7) days after the exercise of the veto by a vote of at least a three quarters vote of the full membership of the Board of Aldermen, the Finance Director shall, on the next business day following any vote taken by the Board of Aldermen to override said veto, or on the next business day following the expiration of the aforesaid seven-day period, submit to the Mayor the budget adopted pursuant to Section 7.3. by the Board of Apportionment and Taxation. The Mayor shall have the power to veto said budget within two (2) business days after it is submitted to him only in whole and not by line item. If the veto is not overridden by a majority vote of the full membership of the Board of Aldermen within seven (7) days after the exercise of the veto, the budget created pursuant to Section 7.2. and the tax rate associated therewith shall become the budget and tax rate of said City. 
    If the Mayor does not exercise his/her power of veto over a budget submitted to him pursuant hereto, that budget and the tax rate associated therewith shall become the budget and the tax rate of the City. If the Mayor's veto of any budget and the tax rate submitted to him pursuant hereto is overridden as provided herein, that budget and tax rate associated therewith shall become the budget and tax rate of the City. 
Section 7.9. - Subsequent Appropriations. 
(a)  Additional appropriations for any department from any budgeted contingency fund may be made from time to time by the Board of Aldermen upon its own initiative, upon recommendation of the Mayor or upon recommendation of the Board of Apportionment and Taxation. 
(b)  Additional appropriations over and above the total budget may be made from time to time only by the Board of Aldermen upon their own initiative, upon recommendation of the Mayor, or upon recommendation of the Board of Apportionment and Taxation, and upon certification from the Director of Finance that there are available unappropriated general fund resources in excess of the proposed additional appropriations. 
(c)  If unappropriated general fund resources are not available, and an occasion arises where additional monies are needed to fund necessary general governmental operations, the Board of Aldermen, on its own initiative, or upon recommendation of the Mayor, or upon recommendation of the Board of Apportionment and Taxation, and by a vote of at least three quarters of the full membership of the Board of Aldermen, may make an appropriation or appropriations for such purposes, provided that the total amount of such appropriation or appropriations in any one (1) fiscal year under this Section shall not exceed two percent (2%) of the Budget of the fiscal year in which the appropriations are made. 
(d)  If unappropriated general fund resources are not available, the Board of Aldermen, on its own initiative, or upon the recommendation of the Mayor, or upon recommendation of the Board of Apportionment and Taxation, and by a vote of at least three quarters of the full membership of the Board of Aldermen, may make an appropriation or appropriations as may be required in the event of any emergency affecting the general health, safety and welfare of the public or to pay any final judgment which may be rendered against the City of Shelton. 
(e)  Before any appropriation is made pursuant to either Section (c) or (d) above, the Board of Aldermen shall conduct a public hearing at which any elector or taxpayer of the City shall have an opportunity to be heard. Notice of such hearing shall be given in a newspaper having a substantial circulation in the City not more than ten (10) nor less than five (5) days prior to such hearing, provided that if in the unanimous opinion of the Board of Aldermen any emergency under Section (d) above is so grave as to require immediate action, the public hearing may be dispensed with by such unanimous vote. 
(f)  Any appropriation made under the provisions of Sections (c) and (d) above shall be financed by such borrowing as may be necessary to fund the same, provided that the amount of such borrowing shall be included in and made part of the next tax levy. If not otherwise prohibited by law, the Board of Aldermen may authorize borrowing from existing city accounts or funds, but such borrowing shall be limited to fifty percent (50%) of the audited accounts receivable balance as of the commencement of the fiscal year in which the borrowing is made or fifty percent (50%) of the available funds, whichever figure is smaller. 
Section 7.10. - Financial Procedures. 
(a)  No person or department shall obligate the City to spend money for any purpose in excess of the amount appropriated for that purpose until the expenditure has been approved by the Board of Aldermen. 
(b)  If the Board of Aldermen shall approve the over-expenditure of a departmental budget, it shall provide an additional appropriation therefore pursuant to either Section 7.9.(a), Section 7.9.(b) or Section 7.9.(c) unless the Finance Director certifies that there will be an excess in other departmental budgets at the end of the fiscal year. 
(c)  During the last thirty (30) days of each fiscal year, the Board of Aldermen, upon the recommendation of the Finance Director, may transfer unexpended and unencumbered balances from one departmental appropriation to another, provided that no transfer shall be made in a departmental budget if the department head certifies in writing to the Board of Aldermen that any remaining monies are required for the necessary operation of his/her department and provided further that no transfer shall be made from the appropriation of the Board of Education. 
(d)  The Board of Apportionment and Taxation shall consider and approve or disapprove all line item transfers within a Department budget during the fiscal year. No transfer shall be made from any appropriation for debt service or other statutory charges. 
(e)  Any portion of an annual appropriation remaining unexpended and unencumbered at the close of the fiscal year shall lapse. Appropriations for permanent improvements shall not lapse until the purpose for which the appropriation was made shall have been accomplished or abandoned; provided any such project shall be deemed to have been abandoned if three (3) years shall elapse without any expenditure from or encumbrance of the appropriation for the project. The Board of Apportionment and Taxation and Director of Finance shall review such appropriation to verify its termination. 
(f)  Any payment made in violation of the provisions of this Charter shall be illegal and every official authorizing or making such payment, and every person knowingly receiving such payment or any part thereof shall be jointly and severally liable to the City for the full amount so paid or received. 
(g)  The Finance Director shall prepare during the months of October and February of every fiscal year a forecast as to the state of the General Fund Budget in comparison to the approved budget and shall note as part of the forecast any anticipated change in fiscal conditions of the City. Said forecast shall be submitted to the Mayor, Board of Apportionment and Taxation and the Board of Aldermen within fifteen (15) days of the end of the reporting period. 
Section 7.11. - Procedures of the Chapter. 
    The procedures established by Sections 7.1. to 7.10. inclusive of this Chapter shall prevail over any conflicting procedures established by Chapter 4. 
Section 7.12. - Budget Making Authority. 
    For the purposes of this Charter and the laws of this State, the Board of Aldermen shall be deemed to be the budget making authority and the legislative body of the City and shall have all the powers and duties of such authority. 
Section 7.13. - Assessment and Collection of Taxes: Tax District. 
    The assessment of property for taxation and the collection of taxes shall be carried on as provided in the laws of this State; and there shall be one (1) tax district for tax purposes, which shall consist of the entire city. 
Section 7.14. - Purchases and Bidding. 
(a)  The Purchasing Agent shall make all purchases on behalf of the City. The Purchasing Agent shall purchase all goods and services required by the City and its boards, commissions, and other bodies (except the Board of Education, with which the Purchasing Agent shall work on coordinating major purchases under single contract), and its departments, offices and other agencies and its officials. The Purchasing Agent shall act upon receipt of a requisition signed by a responsible representative designated by any board, commission, other body or department, office or other agency or official. The Purchasing Agent shall, to the extent requested by the Chairman of the Board of Education, serve as the purchasing agent for the Board of Education. The Purchasing Agent shall hold no other elected or appointed office within the City and shall have no other employment with the City. 
(b)  Bidding: 
1.  The Purchasing Agent shall let to bid all purchases (including those made by the Board of Education) which reasonably may involve the expenditure of Seven Thousand Five Hundred Dollars ($7,500.00) or more by the invitation of sealed bids, giving at least ten (10) days notice of the closing date for bids by publication at least once in a newspaper having a substantial circulation in the City. The bids shall be opened publicly during regular working hours, by the Purchasing Agent and a representative of the entity requesting the purchase, at a time which shall be published in the invitation of sealed bid. A list of all bids received shall be prepared and recorded in the City/Town Clerk's Office and a copy of all bids shall be available for public inspection in the Office of the Purchasing Agent. The Purchasing Agent shall determine the lowest responsible bidder; however he/she may reject any, all or any part of any bids. The Board of Aldermen may establish such other regulations for purchases and bidding as it deems appropriate. 
2.  When any purchase involves expenditure in excess of Two Thousand Dollars ($2,000.00) and does not exceed Seven Thousand Four Hundred Ninety Nine Dollars and Ninety Nine Cents. (7,499.99), the Purchasing Agent, or in the case of the Board of Education, an agent designated by the Board of Education, shall obtain a minimum of three (3) written proposals for the purchase of the item and shall make such purchase from the lowest responsible vendor, unless the Purchasing Agent, or in the case of the Board of Education, an agent designated by the Board of Education determines that the purchase is due to an emergency or is available only from a single source vendor and in that event, the Purchasing Agent or in the case of the Board of Education, an agent designated by the Board of Education shall create and maintain a written record of the reasons for such choice. 
3.  When any purchase involves expenditures of One Thousand Nine Hundred and Ninety Nine Dollars and Ninety Nine Cents or less ($1,999.99) the Purchasing Agent or in the case of the Board of Education, an agent designated by the Board of Education, may make such purchases direct as prescribed by the procedures enacted by the Purchasing Agent. 
4.  "Purchase" as used herein shall be defined to include the purchase in any fiscal year of any goods, services or combination of goods and services from a single vendor, including but not limited to public improvements and professional services. Aggregate purchases shall not be divided into small increments so as to avoid the provisions called for herein. 
(c)  Professional services: The Board of Aldermen shall establish by resolution such procedures for evaluation and recommendation for the selection of professional services. 
1.  Except as provided in Section 7.14.(c)2, the Board of Aldermen shall determine by resolution at least annually and may amend from time to time as required those services which are considered as professional and as to which selection by bidding to determine the lowest responsible provider is not required. 
2.  The Board of Education shall be permitted to establish a list of professional services in areas of instruction, student assessment, counseling or related specialized services. The Board of Education shall determine by resolution at least annually and may amend from time to time as required those services which are considered as professional and as to which selection by bidding to determine the lowest responsible provider is not required. 
(d)  Waiver of Bids: Whenever the Purchasing Agent shall determine that bidding for any particular goods or services would be impractical, impossible or unwise; the Purchasing Agent shall recommend to the Board of Aldermen that bids be waived. Each such recommendation shall be in writing and shall state its reason. If the Board approves such recommendation by an affirmative vote of at least six (6) of the eight (8) members, bids shall be waived and the goods or services shall be purchased in such manner as the Board of Aldermen directs. 
(e)  The Director of Finance shall ensure that the amount of each authorized purchase and each contract for a future purchase is recorded as an encumbrance against the appropriation from which it is paid or to be paid. 
(f)  Each charge and prospective charge against the City shall state the department and the appropriation against which it is to be charged. The Director of Finance or designee shall audit and approve as correct and valid each charge against the City and shall authorize payment of all approved charges in writing. At the end of each month the Board of Apportionment and Taxation shall review the charges against the City for the preceding month and may make recommendations to the Mayor concerning charges against the City. 
(g)  The Director of Finance shall prescribe the time at which and the manner in which persons receiving money from the account of the City shall be paid. 
(h)  The Director of Finance in consultation with the City Treasurer shall prescribe the time at which and the manner in which persons receiving from the account of the City shall be paid and deposit the money in an authorized depository. 
Section 7.15. - Petty Cash. 
    The Director of Finance may, with the approval of the Mayor, establish and maintain petty cash funds, from which funds purchases of goods or services may be made in such modest amounts as the Board of Aldermen may establish by ordinance. The Director of Finance shall keep records of the amount, purpose and payee of each item purchased with such funds. 
Section 7.16. - Borrowing. 
    The City shall have the power to issue bonds and notes in accordance with the laws of the State for any proper purpose. The Board of Aldermen shall authorize the issuance of such bonds and notes, provided that when any particular issue of bonds or notes exceeds an amount (which amount shall include a reasonable estimate of interest and other charges associated with such issue) equal to two percent (2%) of the authorized municipal budget for fiscal year, in which the authorization is made, the electors of the City shall approve such bond issue. 
    Any such bonds issued by the Board of Aldermen without the approval of the electorate and any notes issued pursuant to such authorization shall be repaid on a straight line method within five (5) fiscal years, commencing with the fiscal year immediately following the fiscal year in which the authorization occurred. 
    The total aggregate amount of bonds that may be issued for any purpose in a single fiscal year without the approval of the electorate shall not exceed two percent (2%) of the authorized municipal budget for the fiscal year in which the bonds are being authorized. 
    Any bonds authorized without the approval of the electorate shall be authorized only by an affirmative vote of three quarters of the members of the entire Board of Aldermen. 
Section 7.17. - Compensation. 
7.17.1. Elected and Appointed Officials: 
    The Board of Aldermen shall establish by ordinance the compensation, including all benefits, of each elected and appointed official. The Board shall not increase the compensation or benefits of any elected official during his/her term of office. 
7.17.2. Employees: 
    The Board of Aldermen shall establish by ordinance the compensation, including all benefits, of each employee of the City whose compensation and benefits are not otherwise established through collective bargaining. 
Section 7.18. - Annual Audit. 
    The Board of Aldermen shall annually engage an independent certified public accountant or firm of certified public accountants to audit the books and accounts of the City in accordance with the provisions of Chapters 55b and 111 of the Connecticut General Statutes. 
CHAPTER 8. - MERIT SYSTEM 

Section 8.1. - Merit System Established. 
    The City shall have a merit system for all employees in the classified service of the City as described in Section 8.2. All such employees shall be appointed on the basis of merit and in conformity with recognized principles of public personnel administration, and no such employee shall be removed except for good cause and in conformity with recognized principles of public personnel administration. 
    The rules of the merit system shall provide that any violation of the Charter shall be grounds for disciplinary action. 
Section 8.2. - The Classified Service. 
    The classified service shall include all appointees to all positions now or hereafter created, except the following: all elected officials and persons appointed to fill vacancies in elective offices; members of boards, commissions and other bodies, professional employees and consultants; stipend positions involving temporary, seasonal, or part-time employment; the Administrative Assistant; the Chief of Police; the Corporation Counsel; the Assistant Corporation Counsel, unless such Assistant Corporation Counsel is designated by Ordinance as a full-time employee; the Director of Public Works; the Director of Emergency Management, the Director of Health; and volunteer personnel serving without pay. 
Section 8.3. - Implementation. 
    The Board of Aldermen, upon its own initiative or upon the recommendation of the Mayor or the Personnel Director, may from time to time amend by a three fourths vote of the entire membership of the Board, the Merit System of the City; provided, however, that no present position in or out of the classified service by virtue of this Charter shall be altered and no present position in the classified service shall be removed or included from the classified service unless there is a bona fide change in the duties of the position which requires removal or inclusion. 
Section 8.4. - Professional or Technical Administration. 
    The Board of Aldermen, upon its own initiative or upon recommendation of the Mayor or the Personnel Director, may contract with any qualified person or agency for the performance of such professional or technical services as may be desired in the operation of the Merit System. 
CHAPTER 9. - TRANSITION AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 

Section 9.1. - Transition. 
    Each officer and employee shall cooperate fully in effecting any necessary transition from operation under the prior Charter to operation under this Charter. 
Section 9.2. - Existing Ordinances and Pension Rights. 
9.2.1. Ordinances: 
    All existing ordinances of the City shall remain in effect except as inconsistent with this Charter. 
9.2.2. Pension Rights: 
    The provisions of any special act relating to City pension rights shall remain in effect. 
Section 9.3. - Present Members. 
    No person presently serving on a board, commission, or other body (including the Board of Education), department, office or other agency or as any official of the City shall be deprived of his/her position merely by the adoption of this Charter, and each such person shall serve out the remainder of his/her term, and staggered terms and alternating elections shall be implemented consistent with this Section. 
Section 9.4. - Definitions; Construction. 
9.4.1. Definitions: 
(a)  City shall mean the City of Shelton. 
(b)  State shall mean the State of Connecticut. 
(c)  Person shall mean any natural person and any legal entity. 
9.4.2. Construction: 
(a)  Where required the singular number shall include the plural number. 
(b)  Headings are for convenience only. 
Section 9.5. - School District. 
    The City of Shelton shall be a school district as defined in the Connecticut General Statutes and have such powers and duties as set forth in the Connecticut General Statutes. 
Section 9.6. - Vacancies. 
    The City/Town Clerk or his/her designee shall maintain a current list of positions whose terms will be expiring within thirty (30) days or such other positions that may otherwise become vacant. Such list shall be posted on the City website and a copy made available at the Office of the Mayor and the City/Town Clerk for public viewing. 
9.6.1. Elected Office: 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided by this Charter, any vacancy in any elected office shall be filled at the next general City election or at a special election called by the Board of Aldermen for such purpose, but until such vacancy is so filled, it shall be filled as provided by law or this Charter. 
(b)  If there is no applicable law or Charter provision, the vacancy shall be filled within forty-five (45) days by the remaining members of the same political party on the board, commission, or other body (including the Board of Education) from the same political party in which the vacancy occurred; if there are no remaining members of such party, the vacancy shall be filled within thirty [forty-five] (45) days by the remaining members of the board, commission, or other body (including the Board of Education), from such person or persons as the town committee of the party in question shall recommend in writing within twenty (20) days of the vacancy; if there is no town committee of the party in question, or if no recommendation in writing is made within twenty (20) days of the vacancy, the vacancy shall be filled within thirty [forty-five] (45) days by the remaining members of the board, commission, or other body (including the Board of Education) from any elector from the political party or unaffiliated voter in which the vacancy occurred. 
9.6.2. Appointed Office: 
(a)  No member of any appointed board or commission shall serve beyond his/her designated term, unless the appointing authority fails to appoint a replacement. In such case he/she shall serve until a replacement has been appointed. 
(b)  Any vacancy shall be filled within sixty (60) days of the vacancy by the appointing authority in such manner as the original appointment was made including one created by completion of a member's appointed term. In the event that the appointing authority fails to do so, appointments of a replacement shall be made within thirty (30) days as follows: in the case of vacant mayoral appointments, appointments shall be made by the Board of Aldermen; in the case of aldermanic appointments, appointments shall be made by the Mayor, provided that such appointment shall not violate any provisions of this Charter. The appointing authority shall retain the right to make such appointment until such time as the Mayor or the Board of Aldermen acts to fill such vacancy. 
9.6.3. Mayor May Fill: 
    In the event of a vacancy in any appointed position only the Mayor shall have the authority to appoint himself/herself to fill the vacancy, without additional compensation, until a successor is appointed. 
Section 9.7. - Conflicts of Interest. 
    Any City official or employee who has a conflict of interest, financial interest or beneficial interest, direct or indirect in any contract, transaction or decision within the purview of his/her responsibilities shall disclose the interest as prescribed by the City Code of Ethics and on the record of the body of which he/she is a member or in the case of an employee, in writing to the Mayor. A written record shall be kept of such disclosure. Violation by any official or employee of this Section may be grounds for his/her removal. Violation of this Section with knowledge, expressed or implied by any person participating in the matter shall render the transaction voidable by the Board of Aldermen or by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
Section 9.8. - Political Activity of Classified Municipal Employees. 
    The provisions of Connecticut General Statute Section 7-421 as the same may be amended from time to time shall be applicable to all classified employees of the City of Shelton. 
Section 9.9. - Removal for Cause. 
(a)  Members of the classified service may only be removed as provided in Section 8.1. or as provided in any applicable collective bargaining agreement. 
(b)  Appointed officials who are not members of the classified service may be removed as provided in this Charter. 
(c)  Appointed members of boards, commissions and other bodies, except as otherwise provided by State Statute, by this Charter, may be removed by the appointing authority for good cause shown. Before any such member may be removed, the appointing authority shall mail to the said member a written notice stating the intent to remove and the specific reason therefore. Said notice shall be mailed certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last address on file with the City at least fourteen (14) days prior to any contemplated action. The member shall have the right to a hearing before the appointing authority, if a hearing is requested in writing within fourteen (14) days after the receipt of the notice of appeal. Any such hearing shall be public and shall be transcribed by electronic means or by a shorthand reporter. Any decision by the appointing authority with the reasons therefore shall be rendered in writing within ten (10) days after said hearing. A copy of said notice shall be filed with the City/Town Clerk and a copy shall be mailed to the member, certified mail, return receipt requested. The member shall have the right to appeal to the Superior Court for the Judicial District of Ansonia/Milford or such other judicial district, as may have jurisdiction provided that such appeal shall be taken within twenty (20) days of the filing of the decision with the City Clerk. 
(d)  Just cause shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, misfeasance in office, intentional violation of any provision of this Charter and substantial absence from scheduled meetings of the board or commission of which the individual is a member. 
Section 9.10. - Amendment of Charter. 
    This Charter may be amended in any manner prescribed by law. 
Section 9.11. - Saving Clause. 
    If any chapter, section, or part of any section of this Charter shall be held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect the remainder of this Charter nor the context in which the section or part so held invalid may appear, except to the extent that an entire section or part of a section may be inseparably connected in meaning and effect with the section or part to which such holding shall directly apply. 
    A change of title or reference to a particular board or commission in these amendments shall not be deemed to substantially affect said board or commission unless the context so requires. 
Section 9.12. - Effective Date. 
    If approved at the November 2012, election, these amendments shall become effective on December 1, 2012. 
APPENDIX A. - ZONING MAP[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Appendix A of the Charter, the zoning map is not printed herein but is on file in the office of the City/Town Clerk. 

APPENDIX B. - WARDS 
First Ward: 
    The first ward shall have the following boundaries: beginning at the point on the Housatonic River where the Shelton and Monroe town lines meet, thence proceeding southwesterly along the Monroe town line, to Walnut Tree Hill Road thence southerly along the centerline of Walnut Tree Hill Road to the intersection of Ripton Road, thence southeasterly along the centerline of Ripton Road to the intersection of Shelton Avenue, thence northeasterly along the centerline of Shelton Avenue to the intersection of Meadow Street, thence northwesterly along the centerline of Meadow Street to the intersection of Wheeler Street, thence northeasterly along the centerline of Wheeler Street to the intersection of Howe Avenue, thence northeasterly along a line perpendicular to Howe Avenue to the center of the Housatonic River, thence northwesterly along the centerline of the Housatonic River to the Monroe town line and the said point of beginning. 
Second Ward: 
    The Second Ward shall have the following boundaries: beginning at a point located in the center of the Housatonic River on a perpendicular line extended from Howe Avenue at the intersection of Wheeler Street, thence proceeding southwesterly along said line to Howe Avenue, thence southwesterly along the centerline of Wheeler Street to the intersection of Meadow Street thence southeasterly along the centerline of Meadow Street to the intersection of Shelton Avenue, thence southwesterly along the centerline of Shelton Avenue to Nells Rock Road, thence southeasterly along the centerline of Nells Rock Road a distance of 450 feet to the intersection of the proposed Constitution Boulevard, thence easterly along the centerline of the proposed Constitution Boulevard to the intersection of Bridgeport Avenue, thence easterly along the centerline of Constitution Boulevard over Route 8 to the intersection of Long Hill Avenue, thence southeasterly along the centerline of Constitution Boulevard South to a point 300 feet southeasterly of the Plaskon Drive intersection, thence easterly along a line 300 feet south of and parallel to the centerline of Plaskon Drive to the center of Coram Road, thence, southeasterly along the centerline of Coram Road to the intersection of Laurel Heights Road, thence easterly along the centerline of Laurel Heights Road to River Road, thence northerly along the centerline of River Road to the intersection to Gordon Avenue, thence easterly along the centerline of Gordon Avenue and continuing along the extended centerline of Gordon Avenue to the center of the Housatonic River, thence northwesterly along the centerline of the Housatonic River to the said point of beginning. 
Third Ward: 
    The Third Ward shall have the following boundaries: beginning at a point located in the center of the Housatonic River on the centerline of Gordon Avenue extended, thence proceeding westerly along the centerline extension of Gordon Avenue and the centerline of Gordon Avenue to the intersection of River Road, thence southerly along the centerline of River Road to the intersection of Laurel Heights Road, thence westerly along the centerline of Laurel Heights Road to the intersection of Coram Road, thence northwesterly along the centerline of Coram Road to a point located 300 feet south of the Plaskon Drive intersection, thence westerly along a line parallel to and 300 feet south of the centerline of Plaskon Drive to the centerline of Constitution Boulevard South, thence northwesterly along the centerline of Constitution Boulevard South to the intersection of Long Hill Avenue, thence Westerly along the centerline of Constitution Boulevard over Route 8 to the intersection of Bridgeport Avenue, thence Westerly along the centerline of the proposed Constitution Boulevard to the intersection of Nells Rock Road, thence northwesterly along the centerline of Nells Rock Road a distance of 450 feet to the intersection of Shelton Avenue, thence southwesterly along the centerline of Shelton Avenue to the intersection of Huntington Street, thence southerly along the centerline of Huntington Street to the Stratford town line thence easterly along the Stratford town line to the center of the Housatonic River, thence northerly along the Housatonic River to the extended centerline of Gordon Avenue and the said point of the beginning. 
Fourth Ward: 
    The Fourth Ward shall have the following boundaries: beginning at the point of the intersection of Huntington Street and the Stratford town line, thence proceeding northerly along the centerline of Huntington Street to the intersection of Ripton Road, thence northwesterly along the centerline of Ripton Road to the intersection of Walnut Tree Hill Road, thence northerly along the centerline of Walnut Tree Hill Road to the Monroe town line, thence southwesterly along the Monroe town line to the intersection of the Trumbull town line, thence southeasterly along the Trumbull town line to the intersection of the Stratford town line, thence easterly along the Stratford town line to the intersection of Huntington Street and the said point of beginning. 
SUBPART B. SPECIAL ACTS RELATING 
TO THE CITY 
(RESERVED) 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
Election 
Date Section Section 
this Code 11-82 Chs. 1-9 11- 8-94 Chs. 1-9 11- 6-12 Chs. 1-9  
PART II - CODE OF ORDINANCES 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal powers generally, G.S. § 7-148; powers of municipalities, G.S. § 7-194; municipal charters and special acts, G.S. §§ 7-187-7-201; municipal ordinances and regulations generally, G.S. §§ 7-148-7-186; scope of municipal ordinances, G.S. § 7-148. 

Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
    The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances, City of Shelton, Connecticut," and may be so cited. 
Sec. 1-2. - Rules of construction and definitions. 
    In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances, the following rules shall be observed, unless the context clearly indicate otherwise: 
    Board of aldermen. Whenever the words "board of aldermen" are used they shall mean the board of aldermen of the City of Shelton, Connecticut. 
    Business. "Business" includes businesses professions, trades and occupations, and all and every kind of calling. 
    Charter. Reference to "this Charter" or "the Charter" shall mean the Charter of the City of Shelton, Connecticut, as printed in Part I of this volume. 
    City. "City" shall mean the City of Shelton or the area within the territorial city limits of the city and such territory outside of this city over which the city has jurisdiction or control by virtue of any constitutional or charter provisions, or any law. 
    Code. Reference to "this Code" or "the Code" shall mean the Code of Ordinances, City of Shelton, Connecticut, as designated in section 1-1. 
    County. The words "the county" or "this county" shall mean the County of Fairfield, in the State of Connecticut. 
    Engage in. "Engage in" includes commence, engage in, carry on, conduct, maintain, manage and operate. 
    Gender. The use of any gender shall include the other genders. 
    Goods. "Goods" includes wares or merchandise. 
    Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three (3) or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers. 
    Keeper and proprietor. The words "keeper" and "proprietor" shall mean and include persons, firms, associations, corporations, clubs, copartnerships and joint venturers, whether acting by themselves or through a servant, agent or employee. 
    License fee. "License fee" shall include any charge imposed for a license, whether the object be regulation or revenue, or both regulation and revenue, but when applied to any business, profession, occupation, trade or calling regulated by the state as a matter of statewide concern the object shall be revenue only. 
    Mayor. "Mayor" shall mean the mayor of the City of Shelton, Connecticut. 
    Number. The use of the singular shall include the plural and the use of the plural shall include the singular. 
    Oath. "Oath" includes an affirmation. 
    Office. "Office" shall mean the use of the title of any officer, employee or office of the city, unless otherwise specifically designated. 
    Officers, employees. The title of any officer or employee used herein shall be construed as if the words "of the city" followed it, and shall include his duly authorized representative. 
    Operate. "Operate" includes carry on, keep, conduct, maintain or manage. 
    Owner. "Owner," when applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, or owner of a community or partnership interest, life tenant, tenant in common, or joint tenant, of the whole or a part of such building or land. 
    Person. "Person" shall mean natural person, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership, association, club company, corporation, business trust, organization, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee of any of them, and shall include all political subdivisions and governmental agencies (except the United States of America and the state), and every department of such political subdivisions, together with every officer and employee thereof while working in the course of his employment. 
    Personal property shall include every species of property except real property as herein defined. 
    Property. The word "property" shall include real and personal property. 
    Public place. The term "public place" shall include any and all streets, highways and boulevards, alleys or other publicly owned or controlled ways and any and all publicly owned or controlled parks, squares, spaces, grounds and buildings. 
    Real property shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
    Sale. "Sale" includes any sale, exchange, barter or offer for sale. 
    Shall, may, must. "Shall" and "must" are mandatory; "may" is permissive. 
    Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean the paved portion of a street between the street right-of-way and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians. 
    State. The words "the state" or "this state" shall mean the State of Connecticut. 
    State law, general law or general statutes shall refer to the General Statutes of Connecticut, Revision, of 1958, as amended. 
    Street. "Street" shall mean the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular or pedestrian travel, including, but not limited to, alleys, lanes, courts, greens, public squares and places, and sidewalks. 
    Tenant, occupant. The word "tenant" or "occupant" applied to a building or land, shall include any person holding a written or oral lease of, or who occupies, the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others. 
    Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
    Vote, approval or consent. Except as may be otherwise provided in connection therewith, the phrase "vote, approval or consent" of the board of aldermen or other body shall mean the affirmative vote of a majority of those members present at a meeting having a quorum in attendance. Whenever such phrase refers to the members of the board of aldermen or other body rather than to the board of aldermen as such, the vote required shall be in relation to the total membership rather than to those present at the meeting. 
    Writing. "Writing" includes any form of recorded message capable of comprehension by ordinary visual means. 
    In the construction of this Code of Ordinances, except as otherwise provided in this Code of Ordinances, words and phrases shall be construed according to the common usage of the language and according to the general statutes; technical words and phrases, and such as have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law, shall be construed and understood accordingly. 
State Law reference- Rules of construction of terms used in G.S. 1-1. 
Sec. 1-3. - Effect of Code on prior actions and obligations. 
    Neither the adoption of this Code nor the repeal hereby of any ordinance of this city shall in any manner affect the prosecution for violation of ordinances, which violations were committed prior to the effective date hereof, nor be construed as a waiver of any license or penalty at such effective date due and unpaid under such ordinance, nor be construed as affecting any of the provisions of such ordinance relating to the collection of any such license or penalty or the penal provisions applicable to any violation thereof, nor to affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit in lieu thereof, required to be posted, filed or deposited pursuant to any ordinance, and all rights and obligations thereof appertaining shall continue in full force and effect. 
Sec. 1-4. - Interpretation of section numbers. 
    In reading a section number from left to right, the digit or digits to the left of the dash shall designate the chapter number of this Code. The digits to the right of the dash shall indicate the section number in such chapter. Figures to the right of a decimal point shall indicate new sections or chapters inserted between existing sections or chapters, as the case may be. The decimal system shall be used in maintaining the numerical order of such sections and chapters. 
Sec. 1-5. - Headings of sections. 
(a)  The headings of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended to indicate the contents of the sections and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the sections, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the headings, are amended or reenacted. 
(b)  The headings of chapters, articles, divisions and sections contained in this Code shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any chapter, article, division or section hereof. 
Sec. 1-6. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed under the ordinance repealed. 
Sec. 1-7. - Validity and severability. 
    If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this Code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Code. The board of aldermen hereby declares that it would have passed this Code, and each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases had been declared invalid or unconstitutional, and if for any reason this Code or any part thereof should be declared invalid or unconstitutional, then the original ordinance or ordinances which such Code or part thereof supersedes shall be in full force and effect. 
Sec. 1-8. - Altering Code. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend by additions or deletions, any part of this Code of Ordinances or any ordinance of the city or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever with intent that any provision of this Code or other ordinance of the city shall be misrepresented or with intent to commit a fraud thereby. 
Sec. 1-9. - Notices; service and proof. 
    Whenever a notice is required to be given under this Code, unless different provisions herein are otherwise specifically made, such notice may be given either by personal delivery thereof to the person to be notified or by deposit in the United States Mail in a sealed envelope, postage prepaid, addressed to such person to be notified at his last known business or residence address as the same appears in the public records or other records pertaining to the matter to which such notice is directed. Service by mail shall be deemed to have been completed at the time of deposit in the post office, or any United States mailbox. Proof of giving any notice may be made by the certificate of any officer or employee of this city or by affidavit of any person over the age of eighteen (18) years, which shows service in conformity with this Code or other provisions of law applicable to the subject matter concerned. 
Sec. 1-10. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the board of aldermen. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the board of aldermen during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into the unified Code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ to ____________ " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but, in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
(d)  The city clerk shall cause copies of each and every such reprint to be distributed to each distributee and to every purchaser of the Code who has ordered and paid for maintenance service. 
Sec. 1-11. - General penalty. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code or any other ordinance of the city, or rule or regulation promulgated by any officer thereof under authority vested in him by law or ordinance, any act is prohibited or is declared to be unlawful or an offense, or the doing of any act is required, or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided, the violation of such ordinance, rule or regulation shall be punished by a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00). Each day any such violation shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  The imposition of any punishment hereunder shall not prevent the enforced abatement of any lawful condition by the city. 
(c)  In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is created by different clauses or sections of this Code, the corporation counsel may elect under which to proceed; but not more than one (1) recovery shall be had against the same person for the same offense. 
(d)  Any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this Code, officially designated as such and each day that such condition continues shall be regarded as a new and separate offense. 
State Law reference- Penalty limitation, G.S. 7-148. 
Sec. 1-11.1. - Hearing procedure for municipal ordinance citations. 
    The City of Shelton hereby establishes the following procedure relative to the issuance of fines established by city ordinance: 
(1)  The mayor shall appoint one (1) or more citation and parking violation hearing officers for a term not to exceed two (2) years. The hearing officer(s) shall not be a police officer, supernumary or any employee of the city or anyone who has authority either under state statute or municipal ordinance to issue citations. 
(2)  Within twelve (12) months from the date payment of the fine is originally due for uncontested payment of fines, penalties, costs or fees for any citation issued by the Shelton Police Department or any designated official or department with authority to issue such citations for violations of city ordinances or parking violations the city shall send notice to the property owner or violator or both in the case of the violation of a city ordinance or to the motor vehicle operator, if known, or the registered owner of the motor vehicle at his address according to the registration records of the department of motor vehicles for parking violations. Such notice shall inform the owner and other person citing the following: 
a.  Citation of violations being charged against him/her and the amount of fines, penalties, costs or fees due. 
b.  That he/she may contest the liability before a citation hearing officer by delivering in person or by mail postage prepaid written notice within ten (10) days of the date of such notice. 
c.  That if he/she does not demand such a hearing, an assessment and judgment shall be entered against them; and 
d.  That such judgment may issue without further notice. 
(3)  If the person(s) who is sent notice wishes to admit liability for any alleged violation he/she may, without requesting a hearing, pay the full amount of the fines, penalties, costs or fees admitted to in person or by mail to the office as designated by the city administration for collection of such fines. Such payment shall be inadmissible in any proceeding, civil or criminal, to establish the conduct of such person or other persons making payment. Any person who does not deliver or mail written demand for a hearing within ten (10) days of the date of the first notice provided for in subsection (c) of this section shall be deemed to have admitted liability, and the designated municipal officer shall thereupon enter and assess the fines, penalties, costs or fees provided for by the applicable ordinances and shall follow the procedures set forth in subsection (5) of this section. 
(4)  [Hearings.] 
a.  Any person who requests a hearing shall be given written notice of the date, time and place for the hearing. Such hearing shall be held not less than fifteen (15) days nor more than thirty (30) days from the date of the mailing of notice provided the hearing officer shall grant upon good cause shown any reasonable request by any interested party for postponement or continuance. An original or certified copy of the initial notice of violation issued by the issuing official or policeman shall be filed and retained by the city and shall be deemed to be a business record within the scope of section 52-180 [of the Connecticut General Statutes] and evidence of the facts contained therein. The presence of the issuing official or policeman shall be required at the hearing if such person so requests. A person wishing to contest his liability shall appear at the hearing and may present evidence in his behalf. A designated municipal official, other than the hearing officer, may present evidence on behalf of the municipality. If such person fails to appear, the hearing officer may enter an assessment by default against him upon a finding of proper notice and liability under the applicable statutes or ordinances. The hearing officer may accept from such person copies of police reports, investigatory and citation reports, and other official documents by mail and may determine thereby that the appearance of such person is unnecessary. The hearing officer shall conduct the hearing in the order and form and with such methods of proof as he deems fair and appropriate. The rules regarding the admissibility of evidence shall not be strictly applied, but all testimony shall be given under oath or affirmation. The hearing officer shall announce his decision at the end of the hearing. If he determines that the person is not liable, he shall dismiss the matter and enter his determination in writing accordingly. If he determines that the person is liable for the violation, he shall forthwith enter and assess the fines, penalties, costs or fees against such person as provided by the applicable ordinances of the municipality. 
b.  All hearings will be tape recorded by the hearing officer and such tapes shall remain on file at the office of the city/town clerk for a period of not less than one year as a matter of public record. 
(5)  If such assessment is not paid on the date of its entry, the hearing officer shall send by first class mail a notice of the assessment to the person found liable and shall file, not less than thirty (30) days nor more than twelve (12) months after such mailing, a certified copy of the notice of assessment with the clerk of the superior court for the geographical area in which the municipality is located together with an entry fee of eight dollars ($8.00). The certified copy of the notice of assessment shall constitute a record assessment. Within such twelve-month period, assessments against the same person may be accrued and filed as one (1) record of assessment. The clerk shall enter judgment, in the amount of such record of assessment and court costs of eight dollars ($8.00), against such person in favor of the municipality. Notwithstanding any other provision, of the general statutes, the hearing officer's assessment, when so entered as a judgment, shall have the effect of a civil money judgment and a levy of execution on such judgment may issue without further notice to such person. 
(6)  A person against whom an assessment has been entered pursuant to this section is entitled to judicial review by way of appeal. An appeal shall be instituted within thirty (30) days of the mailing of notice of such assessment by filing a petition to reopen assessment, together with an entry fee in an amount equal to the entry fee for a small claims case pursuant to section 52-259 [of the Connecticut General Statutes], in the superior court for the geographical area in which the municipality is located, which shall entitle such person to a hearing in accordance with the rules of the judges of the superior court. 
(7)  The original citation issued shall provide that payments may be made within ten (10) days of issuance for the fine, penalty, cost or fee directly to the office as designated by the city administration for collection of such fines if the violator does not wish to contest the violations. Failure to pay within thirty (30) days if a hearing will result in the fine being doubled. If the violator wishes to contest the charges, they may request a hearing within ten (10) days of the issuance of the citation and file such request with the office as designated by the city administration. Such request filed within the ten-day period will prevent the fine from being doubled, notwithstanding the nonpayment. A hearing will then be scheduled by the city hearing officers and the parties will proceed pursuant to subsections (d), (e) and (f) of this section. 
    The hearing officer(s) shall receive compensation in the amount of six hundred dollars ($600.00) per hearing officer to administer the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 583, §§ 1-7, 9-13-90; Ord. No. 692, 2-8-96; Ord. No. 712, 5-8-97) 
Sec. 1-12. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)  Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness; 
(2)  Any appropriation ordinance or ordinance providing for the levy of taxes or for an annual budget; 
(3)  Any ordinance annexing territory to the city or excluding territory as a part of the city; 
(4)  Any ordinance granting any franchise, permit or other right; 
(5)  Any zoning ordinance; 
(6)  Any subdivision ordinance; 
(7)  Any ordinance creating a special services district; 
(8)  Any ordinance approving, authorizing or otherwise relating to any contract, agreement, lease, deed or other instrument; 
(9)  Any ordinance adopting a preliminary plan or development plan; 
(10)  Any temporary or special ordinance; 
(11)  Any ordinance setting salaries for merit system positions or nonmerit positions; 
and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length herein. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration of flood prevention, § 5-21 et seq.; planning, Ch. 12; taxation, Ch. 15. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Uniform fiscal year. 
    The city by vote of its legislative body, agrees to comply with the provisions of chapter 110 of the general statutes, relative to a change of its fiscal year from January 1, 1953 to July 1, 1953 and all provisions of chapter 110 of the general statutes shall become a part of this section as if fully printed herein. 
(Comp. Ords. 1975, § 18-1) 
Sec. 2-2. - Budget information required. 
(a)  In addition to the budget information required to be presented pursuant to the Charter, the following information shall also be provided to the board of aldermen: 
(1)  Commencing for the budget for fiscal year 1987-88, and for each fiscal year thereafter, the following information: 
a.  A statement of the goals and activities of each department of the city to be accomplished during the fiscal year; 
b.  The budget for each department broken down by program or function; 
c.  Performance measures for each such program to measure the success of the activity; 
d.  A capital budget for each department, as required by the Charter. 
(2)  Commencing for the budget for the fiscal year 1988-89, and for each fiscal year thereafter, the following information: 
a.  For each performance measure in the preceding fiscal year's budget, a statement of the actual performance of the department budget for such program; 
b.  The amount of the budget expended for each program or function; 
c.  A statement from each department stating the success or failure of such department in meeting its goals and objectives and the reasons for any failures, with what measures are to be taken to remedy any problems. 
(b)  On or before November 1, 1986, the office of the mayor, with assistance of the finance committee of the board of aldermen, shall prepare or cause to be prepared regulations to implement this section, which regulations shall be reviewed by the finance committee of the board of aldermen, for recommendation and adoption by the full board of aldermen. 
(Ord. No. 499, 4-10-86) 
Sec. 2-3. - Requests for documentation by city officials. 
    All documentation requested by any city official from any department of the city, relating to the official's Charter-given powers or ordinances thereof, will receive copies with no charge to his or her person, and copies will be made available within ninety-six (96) hours of such request. If documentation is not available within ninety-six (96) hours, this will constitute a denial, violating the law. 
(Ord. No. 288, 2-14-77) 
Sec. 2-4. - Disposal of surplus/scrap equipment. 
(a)  The procedure for disposal of all city surplus/scrap equipment having an anticipated salvage value of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) or greater is as follows: 
(1)  A committee made up of the finance director, purchasing agent, and the department head requesting the disposal of such equipment shall be formed prior to disposal. 
(2)  The department head shall prepare a list of equipment requested for disposal. 
(3)  A committee meeting will be held at which time a decision will be made as to the best way to dispose of the surplus/scrap equipment. 
(4)  The decision of the committee will be forwarded to the office of the mayor, the president of the board of aldermen, and the chairman of the finance committee of the board of apportionment and taxation. 
(5)  The board of apportionment and taxation shall make a recommendation to the board of aldermen who will, by majority vote, accept or reject said recommendation. The decision of the board shall be forwarded to the finance committee. 
(6)  Funds, if any, resulting from the disposal of such surplus/scrap equipment will be deposited into the General Fund of the City of Shelton as unanticipated revenue. 
(b)  The procedure for disposal of all city surplus/scrap equipment having an anticipated salvage value of less than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) is as follows: 
(1)  Upon receipt of a request from a department head to dispose of surplus/scrap equipment, the purchasing agent shall circulate a letter to the mayor and all city department heads describing the equipment and soliciting letters of interest in the subject equipment; and 
(2)  After fifteen (15) working days, either: 
a.  Transfer such equipment interdepartmentally, as per the direction of the Mayor; or 
b.  Sell the equipment to the highest bidder with all monies received deposited in accordance with subsection (6) above. 
c.  Equipment not disposed of as outlined in a. or b. shall be disposed of as junk. 
(Ord. No. 393, §§ 1-7, 4-10-80; Ord. No. 463, 8-9-84; Ord. No. 747, 3-8-01) 
Sec. 2-4.1. - Recycled product procurement policy. 
(a)  Within twelve (12) months subsequent to the effective date of this section, all city departments, agencies, offices, boards, and commissions must conduct a review of existing product and service specifications to determine whether existing specifications either require the use of products manufactured from virgin materials or exclude the use of recycled products, reusable products or products designed to be recycled. 
(b)  In the event that such specifications do exclude the use of recycled products or require the use of virgin materials, then such exclusions or requirements must be eliminated unless the pertinent department or entity can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the administrative assistant that these recycled products would not achieve a necessary performance standard. 
(c)  Within the same twelve-month period, all city departments and agencies must recommend changes to the administrative assistant to ensure that performance standards for particular products can be met and that specifications are not overly stringent, and to recommend changes to ensure that specifications will incorporate a requirement for the use of recycled materials, reusable products, and products designed to be recycled to the maximum extent practicable, subject to an alternative showing that either the performance of the product will be jeopardized or that the product will negatively impact health, safety or operational efficiency. 
(d)  Outside contractors bidding to provide products or services to the city, including printing services, must demonstrate that they will comply with the specifications described in paragraph (c) to the greatest extent feasible. 
(e)  Recycled paper, of the appropriate grade (e.g., xerographic grade for xerographic equipment), shall be purchased and used in all currently owned copiers, printers, and offset equipment that will accept it. 
(f)  The purchasing agent shall purchase only copiers, printers, and offset equipment capable of utilizing recycled paper of the appropriate grade (e.g., xerographic grade for xerographic equipment). 
(g)  When recycled products are used, reasonable efforts shall be undertaken to label the products to indicate that they contain recycled materials. City departments and agencies shall use for their masthead stationery and envelopes recycled paper that includes postconsumer recycled content and indicate on the paper and envelopes that they contain recycled material to the extent practicable. 
(h)  A (ten (10) percent or greater) price preference may be given to recycled products, reusable products offered as alternatives to disposable products, and products designed to be recycled where they are offered as alternatives to nonrecyclable products. The preference percentage shall be based on the lowest bid or price quoted by the supplier or suppliers offering nonrecycled products. 
(i)  The city will cooperate to the greatest extent feasible with neighboring municipalities in an effort to develop a comprehensive, consistent and effective procurement effort intended to stimulate the market for recycled products, reusable products and products designed to be recycled. 
(j)  All related city departments and agencies shall work cooperatively to further the purposes of the section. The city's economic development process shall incorporate the goal of stimulating the market for recycled material. 
(Ord. No. 622, §§ 1-10, 5-9-91) 
Sec. 2-5. - Records, minutes of official city matters. 
    All records and minutes pertaining to official city matters shall be deemed the property of the city and shall be kept on file in the office of the city-town clerk, unless otherwise designated by the board of aldermen. 
(Ord. No. 153, 4-9-73) 
Sec. 2-6. - Mileage allowance for use of privately owned vehicles by officials on official business. 
(a)  Elected and appointed city officials, departments and commissions are hereby authorized to receive mileage allowance at the "standard mileage rate " as said term is defined by the Internal Revenue Service, as same may be amended from time to time, for the use of personally owned automobiles in the performance of their official duties subject to their supervisor's approval. 
(b)  As a prerequisite to receiving such allowance, they shall be required to maintain a record of official mileage, which record shall indicate all trip dates, destinations, description of business purposes and miles driven in each instance. 
(c)  Such mileage record must be attached to the expense voucher requesting reimbursement. 
(d)  Expense vouchers must be signed personally by the individual requesting mileage allowance reimbursement. 
(e)  In the case of individual employees of city departments and elected or appointed members of city commissions not specifically referred to by job title in this section, the expense voucher must be countersigned by the appropriate department or commission head. The city's gasoline supply may not be used by owners of private vehicles, unless in the case of the mayor of the City of Shelton when he may use the municipal gasoline supply for his personal vehicle in lieu of the privilege of driving a municipal vehicle assigned for his full time use. 
(Ord. No. 314, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 415, 9-10-81; Ord. No. 572, 1-11-90; Ord. No. 686, 5-11-95; Ord. No. 717, 3-12-98; Ord. No. 765, 5-9-02; Ord. No. 829, 6-12-07) 
Sec. 2-7. - Monies to be accepted by city/town clerk; disbursement to city treasurer. 
    Unless otherwise specifically provided, all monies that shall in any way accrue to the city shall be immediately paid to the city clerk, who is hereby authorized to sign receipts therefor, and the city clerk shall pay the same to the city treasurer every thirty (30) days. 
(Comp. Ords. 1975, § 1.1(4)) 
Sec. 2-8. - Risk retention fund. 
(a)  The city hereby establishes a risk retention fund to cover the expense of repairing any physical damage to city-owned or leased vehicles which resulted from occurrences which are determined to be the city's liability. 
(b)  This vehicle physical damage (collision comprehension coverage) retention fund is to receive at least thirty-five thousand dollars ($35,000.00) annually plus rate of inflation increase/decrease from general fund and shall be deposited in a special operating fund the first day of each fiscal year. These monies are the approximate amounts that would be paid to an insurance company for annual premium of collision coverage. 
(c)  The agent or department managing this fund must maintain detailed records as to the loss experience as follows: 
(1)  By dollar loss; 
(2)  By accident frequency; 
(3)  By line coverage; 
(4)  By accident cause. 
(d)  Since this means of "self-insurance" only projects the city's expected losses based on past five (5) years' experience, there is no provision for catastrophic losses at the time when this plan is initiated, provisions of this section must anticipate the following: 
(1)  Additional funding must be provided should actual losses exceed fund balance; 
(2)  Losses will equal fund balance; 
(3)  Losses will be less; therefore the surplus balance plus any interest accrued are to remain in this fund to provide a reservoir for future losses and to private adequate coverage for expanded vehicle fleet and inflationary cost of repairs. 
(e)  This section is to provide for self-insurance on physical damage only. The liability coverage, personal injury protection (or no fault equivalent coverage) and uninsured motorist insurance are to be procured from outside insurance carriers. Each expenditure paid from this fund for physical damage repairs must be approved by the risk manager and risk management committee who will establish procedures to determine losses involved and the method of having repairs made and by whom. 
(Ord. No. 501, 6-12-86) 
Sec. 2-9. - Uninsured loss fund. 
(a)  There is hereby established a capital fund, to provide a fund for the payment of any claims against the city or damage to city property, which loss or claims are in excess of current appropriations in the budget for uninsured losses and which loss or claims are: (1) not covered, in whole or in part by insurance; or (2) not covered or paid for by the city. This fund shall be funded at the end of each fiscal year by the balance remaining at the end of such fiscal year in any appropriation in the budget for that year for the payment of claims or uninsured losses, plus any additional appropriations made, from time to time, by the board of aldermen for such purpose. 
(b)  At the end of each fiscal year the balance remaining in the capital fund shall not lapse, but shall carry over from year to year until the fund is dissolved by ordinance. 
(c)  Expenditures shall be made from such fund upon recommendation of the finance director or his designee and the approval of the board of aldermen. 
(Ord. No. 500, 6-12-86) 
Sec. 2-10. - Financial accounting by outside agencies. 
(a)  All requests for funds or appropriations from the city or any city departments during the formulation of its annual budget, by any organization, authority, corporation or any other agency, public or private, nonprofit or otherwise, not under the direct authority of the city administration or any of its departments, must be accompanied by a detailed annual report or financial accounting describing the actual expenditures of such organization. 
(b)  All requests subject to the above paragraph must also submit, along with its annual report, a comprehensive prospectus outlining the purpose for such requests, an explanation of the purpose of the agency or organization for expending such funds and a detailed proposed budget for the fiscal year for which funds are requested. 
(c)  Such reports and prospectuses must include total budget and prospectus information, than that related to city-provided funds. 
(d)  The above required information must be presented to the director of finance or the appropriate department head by the date determined by the director of finance. The finance director, in turn, shall incorporate all such information with request for inclusion in the annual budget workbook. 
(e)  No funds may be appropriated to any above defined organization that has not complied with the articles of this section. 
(f)  In the event of disagreement as to the extent of compliance with the terms and purpose of this section, requests shall be accepted or rejected by a majority vote of the board of aldermen. 
(Ord. No. 659, 10-14-93) 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 659, adopted October 15, 1993, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, inclusion as § 2-10 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 2-10.1. - Annual audit. 
    The City of Shelton shall publish the report from the independent certified public accountant that is required annually by the City Charter. Said report shall be published no later than six (6) months following the close of the last preceding fiscal year. 
(Ord. No. 804, 2-8-07) 
Sec. 2-11. - Appropriations-Tractors, mowers, maintenance and exercise equipment for parks and recreation department. 
    The city shall annually appropriate an amount, to be determined by the board of aldermen, to be expended by the parks and recreation department for the purchase of tractors, mowers, maintenance equipment and exercise equipment. The funds appropriated pursuant to this section shall be considered a fund for permanent improvements within the meaning of section 7.10(e) of the Charter and shall come within the provisions of said section. 
    The appropriated funds are to be placed in a Trust In Agency Account to be set up by the finance director. Funding to commence with fiscal year 1994-1995 and that expenditures be approved by the board of aldermen. 
(Ord. No. 665, 2-10-94) 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 665, adopted February 10, 1994, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, inclusion as § 2-11 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 2-12. - Same-Vehicles and heavy equipment for public works department. 
    Ordinance No. 453, Appropriation for vehicles and heavy equipment, approved February 9, 1984, amended by Ordinance No. 456 on April 12, 1984 and Ordinance No. 636 on April 9, 1992 and Ordinance No. 674 on June 9, 1994 is hereby repealed. 
(Ord. No. 678, 10-13-94) 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 678, adopted October 13, 1994, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, inclusion as § 2-12 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 2-13. - Same-Road maintenance repair construction. 
    Ordinance No. 434 entitled yearly appropriation, purpose of road maintenance repair, approved September 9, 1982; amended May 12, 1983 by Ordinance No. 444 and April 9, 1992 by Ordinance No. 637 and Ordinance No. 675 on June 9, 1994 is hereby repealed. 
(Ord. No. 677, 10-13-94) 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 677, adopted October 13, 1994, did not specifically amend this Code, hence, inclusion as § 2-13 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 2-14. - Justices of the peace. 
    There shall be thirty (30) justices of the peace in the city. Two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of the total number of justices shall be selected equally according to the provisions of the Connecticut General Statutes from the political parties qualifying as major parties under the required provisions of the Connecticut General Statutes. The remaining one-third ( 1/3 ) of the total number of justices shall be selected according to the provisions of the Connecticut General Statutes from those persons who are not members of political parties which qualify as major parties under the required provisions of the Connecticut General Statutes. 
(Ord. No. 697, 5-9-96) 
Sec. 2-15. - Agricultural land preservation fund. 
(a)  Establishment of fund. There is hereby established the Shelton Agricultural Land Preservation Fund. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words shall have the following meaning for purposes of this section: 
    Agricultural land means any land in the city suitable by reference to soil types, existing and past use of such land for agricultural purposes and other relevant factors for the cultivation of plants for production of human food and fiber or production of other useful and valuable plant products and for production of animals, livestock and poultry useful to man and the environment, and land capable of providing economically profitable farm units, and may include adjacent pastures, wood land, natural drainage areas and other adjacent open areas. 
    City means the City of Shelton. 
    Conservation commission means the conservation commission of the city. 
    Development rights means the rights of the fee simple owner of agricultural land to develop, construct on, sell, lease or otherwise improve the agricultural land for uses that result in rendering such land no longer agricultural land, but shall not be construed to include: 
(1)  The uses defined in subsection (g) of Section 1-1 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended by Section 1 of the Public Act 83-587; 
(2)  The rights of the fee owner of agricultural land to develop, construct on, sell the property in its entirety, lease or otherwise improve the agricultural land to preserve, maintain, operate or continue such land as agricultural land, including but not limited to, construction thereon of residences for persons directly incidental to farm operation and buildings for animals, roadside stands and farm markets for sale to the consumer of food products and ornamental plants, facilities for the storing of equipment and products or processing thereof of such other improvements, activities and uses thereon as may be directly or incidentally related to the operation of the agricultural enterprise, as long as the acreage and productivity of arable land for crops is not materially deceased and due consideration is given to the impact of any decrease in acreage or productivity of such arable land upon the total farm operation, except that new construction or modification of an existing farm building necessary to the operation of a farm on prime farmland, as defined by the United States Department of Agriculture, of which the city has purchased development rights shall be limited to not more than five (5) percent of the total of such prime farm land; 
(3)  The rights of the fee owner to provide for the extraction of gravel or like natural elements for purposes directly or incidentally related to the operation of the agricultural enterprise; or 
(4)  The existing water and mineral rights, exclusive of gravel, of the fee owner. 
    Fund means the Open Space Trust In Agency Account. 
(c)  Source of the fund. There shall be deposited in and become part of the fund all monies received by the city from whatever sources and by whatever means (a) as gifts for agricultural land preservation purposes; (b) as grants or loans for agricultural land preservation purposes; and (c) as appropriations by the city. 
(d)  Use of the fund. Upon review by the conservation commission and approval by the board of aldermen, such amounts in the fund as may be approved by the board of aldermen may be used for the acquisition in the name of the city of development rights of agricultural land, provided that the development rights have been voluntarily offered for sale to the city by the owner; and the land has been designated for preservation purposes as shown on the farm land priority map of the city open space plan. In addition, the fund may be used for any expenditure incurred in the preservation of agricultural land, subject to the approval of the board of aldermen. 
(e)  Joint acquisition procedures. The conservation commission shall follow procedures for joint acquisition of the development rights to agricultural land by the city and the state in accordance with the regulations adopted by the commissioner of agriculture. 
(f)  Custody and investment of the funds. The fund shall be in the custody of the city treasurer or other officer in charge of funds for the city. All or part of the fund may from time to time be invested in any securities in which public funds may be lawfully invested. All income derived from such investments shall be paid into the fund and become a part thereof. All monies so invested shall at times be subject to withdrawal from such investment for use as provided in subsection (d). 
(g)  Annual reports. Annually, the city treasurer or other officer having custody of the fund shall submit to the city meeting a complete and detailed report of the condition of the fund, which report shall be made a part of the annual city report. 
(h)  Negotiator. The mayor, or his designee or designees, shall have the authority to negotiate to purchase development rights from an owner of agricultural land. 
(Ord. No. 701, §§ 1-8, 6-13-96) 
Sec. 2-16. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 769, adopted Feb. 13, 2003, repealed § 2-16, which pertained to violations relating to city property open to the public, and derived from Ord. No. 711, adopted March 13, 1997. Similar provisions can be found at §§ 11-51 and 11-52. 
Sec. 2-17. - Returned check fee. 
    Anyone who issues a check to the City of Shelton that is returned for any reason, including insufficient funds, closed account, payment stopped, etc., will be assessed a twenty dollar ($20.00) service fee. 
(Ord. No. 736, 6-10-99) 
Sec. 2-18. - Procedure to sell city property. 
(a)  Definition. From time to time the city may be asked or may decide to sell real property owned by the city and hereby determines that a procedure shall be provided regarding the sale of said real property. Said procedure pertains only to property which the board of aldermen considers "significant". 
    "Significant" shall be defined as the sale of real property which has a fair market value in excess of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). 
(b)  Initial determination by the board. 
(1)  If a request is received by the board of aldermen requesting the city to sell city owned real property and the board of aldermen determines that the board has an interest in selling said property or if the board of aldermen decides to sell city owned real property, the procedure set forth in subsection (c) shall be followed. 
(2)  The administrative assistant or his/her designee shall administer this procedure. 
(c)  Procedure. 
(1)  The board of aldermen shall request from the conservation commission and parks and recreation commission their written opinion regarding said sale. 
(2)  The administrative assistant or his/her designee will request an 8-24 referral from the planning and zoning commission. 
a.  If the 8-24 is favorable to sell, the process will continue. 
b.  If the 8-24 is unfavorable, the board of aldermen must override the unfavorable by a two-thirds ( 2/3 ) vote in order to proceed. 
(3)  A property appraisal shall be secured by the administrative assistant or his/her designee. Any appraisal received shall not be disclosed publicly until after the sale has been completed. 
(4)  The board of aldermen shall hold a public hearing in accordance with P.A. 07-218, when applicable. Following the public hearing, a special meeting will be held to consider and decide if the board of aldermen wishes to proceed with the sale process. 
(5)  The next step is to advertise that the city is accepting bids with a cutoff date to receive sealed bids subject to any deed restrictions and/or conditions the board deems appropriate. Each bid must be accompanied with a check equal to ten (10) percent of the amount bid. 
(6)  The purchasing agent would publicly open the bids and determines the highest, responsible bidder. The board of aldermen reserves the right to reject any and all bids. 
(7)  The board of aldermen considers the bids and votes to accept or reject. 
Note: Specifically excluded from this process is the sale of real property located within the redevelopment plan or a municipal development plan as designated by the board of aldermen and any other parcel of real estate not within said plan but determined by the board of aldermen to be within the city's best interest to exclude such parcel from said process. The board of aldermen shall determine the process of the sale of real property located within a redevelopment plan or a municipal redevelopment plan on a case by case basis taking into consideration any grant and statutory requirements and with regard to other parcels so excluded. The board of aldermen shall determine the process of the sale of real property on a case by case basis taking into consideration the most practical and reasonable process for disposition. 
(Ord. No. 782, 7-8-04; Ord. No. 832, 10-11-07; Ord. No. 839, 2-11-09; Ord. No. 853, 7-8-10; Ord. No. 885, 2-11-15) 
Secs. 2-19-2-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BOARD OF ALDERMEN[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- Board of aldermen, Ch. 4. 

Sec. 2-26. - Regular meetings. 
    The regular meetings of the board of aldermen shall be held on the second Thursday of each month, in the council chamber in the city hall, or at such place as may be agreed upon by the board of aldermen, at a time to be agreed upon by the board of aldermen. In the event that such a meeting night falls on a legal holiday, then that regular meeting shall be held on a date, time, and place to be agreed upon by the board of aldermen. 
(Ord. No. 388, § 1(a), 1-10-80; Ord. No. 762, § 1, 4-11-02) 
Charter reference- Meetings, § 4.3. 
Sec. 2-27. - Special meetings. 
    Special meetings of the board of aldermen may be called by the mayor at any time by giving to each alderman written or verbal notice of the usual place of abode of the aldermen, but any meeting of the board of aldermen at which the mayor and all the aldermen are present shall be a legal meeting. 
(Comp. Ords. 1975, § 1.1(1)) 
Sec. 2-28. - Order of business at meetings. 
(a)  The order of business at all regular meeting of the board of aldermen, unless dispensed with by unanimous consent, shall be as follows: 
(1)  Pledge of allegiance; 
(2)  Reading of the minutes of the special and last regular meetings; 
(3)  Reports of committees; 
(4)  Unfinished business; 
(5)  New business. 
(b)  All meetings of all boards and commissions shall be conducted under and governed by parliamentary procedure as defined by Robert's Rules of Order. 
(Comp. Ords. 1975, § 1.1 (3)) 
Sec. 2-29. - Appointment of committees, boards and commissions. 
(a)  The president of the board of aldermen, within thirty (30) days after assuming the duties of his position, shall appoint from the board of aldermen the following committees, boards or commissions, or whatever other committees, boards or commissions he or she shall deem necessary: 
(1)  Finance committee (claims, abatements); 
(2)  Public health and safety (lights, sewers, police, fire); 
(3)  Street committee. 
(b)  Each of the above-mentioned committees, boards or commissions, or whatever other committees, boards or commissions shall be deemed necessary, shall consist of no more than four (4) aldermen, one (1) of whom shall be designated by the president of the board of aldermen as chairman, and they shall hold office until removed therefrom by the president of the board of aldermen or a majority of the board of aldermen. 
(Ord. No. 309, 4-10-78; Ord. No. 388, §§ 1, 2, 1-10-80; Ord. No. 762, § 2, 4-11-02) 
Charter reference- Boards, commissions and other bodies appointed by the board of aldermen, § 5.3. 
Secs. 2-30-2-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference- Boards, commissions and other bodies, Ch. 5. 
Cross reference- Emergency medical service commission, § 7-26 et seq.; housing code board of appeals, § 8-186 et seq.; parks and recreation commission, § 11-21 et seq.; inland wetlands commission, § 12-51 et seq.; economic development commission, § 12-91 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-41. - Voiding of tape recordings of public meetings of boards and commissions. 
    All tape recordings of public meetings held by the various boards and commissions of the city can be voided only one (1) year after the official typed minutes are approved by the members and the document is recorded with the city/town clerk. 
(Ord. No. 315, 5-8-78) 
Sec. 2-42. - Board of aldermen to act as municipal flood and erosion control board. 
    Pursuant to the authority granted by section 25-84 of the general statutes, the board of aldermen is empowered to act as the municipal flood and erosion control board for the city, with all of the powers as provided in sections 25-85 through 25-98, inclusive, of the general statutes. 
(Ord. No. 628, 10-10-91) 
Sec. 2-43. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 727, adopted Nov. 12, 1998, enacted provisions establishing an open space committee. The editor has treated those provisions as superseding the provisions of § 2-43 which derived from Ord. No. 631, adopted Nov. 14, 1991. The more extensive provisions of Ord. No. 727 have been codified as §§ 2-115-2-115.9. 
Sec. 2-44. - Clerk's pay. 
(a)  For any clerk hired after July 1, 2000, who performs the duties of taking and transcribing the minutes of the meetings of the various boards and commissions shall be paid at the rate of eighteen dollars ($18.00) per hour. If said clerk is the regular clerk of the board or commission and is employed by the City of Shelton in another capacity, the hours employed in both positions shall be added together to provide that said clerk be paid one and one-half (11/2) the weighted average hourly rate earned during the week for each hour worked in excess of forty (40) hours in any week. "Regular clerk" is defined as a clerk who attends and takes minutes at meetings of a board or commission on a regular basis. A clerk who attends and takes minutes of meetings on only an occasional or sporadic basis shall not be considered the regular clerk and shall not be entitled to overtime compensation as described above. "Weighted average" shall be determined in accordance with 29 C.F.R. Section 778.115. 
(b)  The hourly rate of eighteen dollars ($18.00) described in subsection (a) shall not apply to any clerk hired on or before July 1, 2000. All other provisions of said subsection (a) shall apply to all clerks regardless of the date of hire. The rate of pay for any clerk hired prior to July 1, 2000, shall continue to be paid at the rate in effect as of said date provided that if said clerk was being paid less than eighteen dollars ($18.00) per hour, said clerk's pay shall be increased to eighteen dollars ($18.00) per hour. 
(c)  Any clerk who attends a properly scheduled meeting which is canceled for any reason shall be paid a sum equal to two (2) hour wage. 
(d)  This section is effective May 1, 2005. 
(Ord. No. 741, 6-8-00; Ord. No. 748, 5-10-01; Ord. No. 788, 4-14-05; Ord. No. 870, 4-11-13) 
Secs. 2-45-2-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - WAR MEMORIAL SCHOLARSHIP COMMITTEE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 784, adopted Sept. 9, 2004, repealed §§ 2-51-2-57, which had pertained to the permanent war memorial commission, and derived from the 1975 Compilation of Ordinances and Ord. No. 318, adopted May 8, 1978. Similar provisions were enacted to read as codified in § 2-51. 

Sec. 2-51. - War memorial scholarship committee. 
(a)  The board of aldermen of the City of Shelton hereby ordains that there shall be a war memorial scholarship committee comprised of five (5) members. This committee shall review the agency funds available and annually award a scholarship(s) as determined by criteria deemed appropriate by the committee. 
(b)  The committee shall be comprised of three (3) residents of Shelton who shall have seen active military service. They shall serve staggered terms of three (3) years and may be reappointed. In addition, the city treasurer and the superintendent of schools shall serve for the duration of their election/appointment. The committee shall report their activities annually to the board of aldermen. 
(Ord. No. 785, 9-9-04) 
Secs. 2-52-2-65. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ENERGY COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-66. - Established; composition; terms of members. 
    There is hereby established an energy commission and the energy commission shall be appointed by the mayor. The energy commission shall consist of not less than five (5) nor more than nine (9) members and not more than a simple majority shall be from the same political party. The members of the energy commission shall be appointed as follows: one-third ( 1/3 ) of the members shall be appointed for two (2) years; one-third ( 1/3 ) of the members shall be appointed for three (3) years; one-third ( 1/3 ) of the members shall be appointed for four (4) years. 
(Ord. No. 392, 2-14-80) 
Sec. 2-67. - Selection of officers; permanent meeting night. 
    At the first meeting of the energy commission the members shall select a chairman, vice-chairman and a secretary. They shall also set a permanent meeting night. 
(Ord. No. 392, 2-14-80) 
Sec. 2-68. - Purpose; duties. 
    The purpose of the energy commission shall be to investigate energy needs and usage in all municipal buildings, this includes but is not limited to schools, firehouses, the library, etc. Within seven (7) months of appointment the energy commission shall submit to the mayor an energy program with specific recommendations for all buildings surveyed. This program shall include, but is not limited to, the following information: 
(1)  A detailed energy audit of the building; 
(2)  Recommendations as to immediate ways to reduce energy consumption in the building; 
(3)  Recommendations as to capital improvements that should be made to the building or its operation that will result in long term energy conservation and reduce the overall cost of energy for the building; 
(4)  A return of investment schedule that shows approximate time tables for the above described programs. 
(Ord. No. 392, 2-14-80) 
Sec. 2-69. - Reports. 
    The energy commission shall from time to time, but not less than quarterly, submit reports to the mayor as to the progress being made in an effort to reduce the overall cost and usage of energy by the city. The energy commission shall also recommend alternative sources or uses of energy in all municipal buildings. 
(Ord. No. 392, 2-14-80) 
Secs. 2-70-2-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - RESERVED[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 883, adopted October 9, 2014, repealed div. 4, §§ 2-81-2-84, in its entirety. Former div. 4 pertained to drug and alcohol commission, and was derived from Ord. No. 197, 11-13-74. 

Secs. 2-81-2-95. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - FINANCE COMMITTEE[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Charter reference- Finance committee, § 5.1.1.2. 

Sec. 2-96. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 873, adopted April 11, 2013, repealed § 2-96 in its entirety. Former § 2-96 pertained to appointment and was derived from Ord. No. 275, adopted April 12, 1976. 
Sec. 2-97. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 872, adopted April 11, 2013, repealed § 2-97 in its entirety. Former § 2-97 pertained to composition; removal of members and was derived from Ord. No. 275, April 12, 1976. 
Secs. 2-98-2-105. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - SENIOR CITIZENS COMMITTEE 

Sec. 2-106. - Created; purpose. 
    Pursuant to section 7-148 of the general statutes there is hereby created a senior citizens committee to study the needs of and coordinate programs for the aged. 
(Comp. Ords. 1975, § 2.6) 
Sec. 2-107. - Composition; terms of members; political affiliation. 
    The senior citizens committee shall consist of nine (9) members who shall be appointed by the mayor and hold office for two (2) years from the dates of their appointment. No more than a simple majority of the senior citizen committee shall be from any single political party. 
(Comp. Ords. 1975, § 2.6; Ord. No. 509, § 1, 10-9-86) 
Sec. 2-108. - Vacancies. 
    Vacancies on the senior citizens committee shall be filled by appointment by the mayor. 
(Comp. Ords. 1975, § 2.6; Ord. No. 509, § 1, 10-9-86) 
Sec. 2-109. - Ex officio members. 
    The health officer, welfare commissioner and state representative or representatives shall be ex officio members of the senior citizens committee. 
(Ord. No. 104, 9-8-69; Ord. No. 509, § 1, 10-9-86) 
Sec. 2-110. - Senior citizens center director. 
(a)  The senior citizens committee may retain a full-time salaried director, senior citizens center, of programs for the aging whose general duties shall be to coordinate programs for the aging and to assist the senior citizens committee in its study of the needs of the aging, as more fully set forth in section 2-193 (Ordinance No. 218, dated June 10, 1974). 
(b)  The director of the senior citizens center, shall be hired by the mayor subject to the approval of the board of aldermen upon the recommendation of the senior citizens committee. 
(c)  The director shall be subject to the procedures set forth in the merit system ordinance dated March 10, 1983 as amended. 
(Ord. No. 108, §§ a-c, 3-9-70; Ord. No. 353, 10-16-78; Ord. No. 509, § 1, 10-9-86) 
Sec. 2-111. - Municipal agent for the elderly; appointment, duties, term. 
(a)  Pursuant to section 7-127-b of the general statutes the mayor shall also appoint a municipal agent for the elderly. 
(b)  The municipal agent shall either be: 
(1)  A member of the senior citizens commission; or 
(2)  An elected official of the city; or 
(3)  A responsible resident of the city who has demonstrated an interest in the elderly or has been involved in programs in the field of the aging. 
(4)  A member of another agency that serves elderly persons. 
(c)  The duties of the municipal agent shall include but not be limited to: 
(1)  Dissemination of information to the elderly and assistance to them relative to community resources available to them; 
(2)  Publication of resources and benefits available to the elderly; 
(3)  Assist elderly in applying for federal benefits and other benefits available to such individuals; 
(4)  Submit a written report at least annually to the mayor, the board of aldermen and the senior citizen commission and a copy to the state department on the aging relative to the services such agent has provided, the needs and problems of the elderly and any recommendations to the city for proposed action with regard to elderly persons. 
(d)  The agent shall serve for a term of two (2) years and may be reappointed. The mayor shall have the power to remove any such appointee. 
(e)  The mayor may also appoint one (1) or more assistant agents as he deems necessary. 
(f)  The city/town clerk shall notify the state department of aging immediately of the appointment of a new municipal agent. 
(Ord. No. 509, § 2, 10-9-86) 
DIVISION 7. - YOUTH SERVICE BUREAU 

Sec. 2-112. - Created. 
    Pursuant to section 10-19m et seq. of the Connecticut General Statutes, the city hereby creates a youth service bureau to evaluate, plan, coordinate and implement prevention, intervention and treatment services for delinquent, pregnant, parenting and troubled youth. Said youth may be referred to the bureau by schools, police, juvenile courts, local youth serving agencies, parents or by self referral. The youth service bureau will offer skill building opportunities, educational programs and recreational activities to all youth in the city in order to encourage them to develop positively and to function as responsible members of the community. 
(Ord. No. 549, 5-12-88; Ord. No. 772, 7-3-03; Ord. No. 881, 8-14-14) 
Sec. 2-113. - Members; terms. 
    The advisory board for the city youth service bureau shall consist of twenty two (22) members who shall be appointed by the mayor and hold office for two (2) years from the dates of their appointment. No more than a simple majority of the board shall be from any single political party. Vacancies shall be filled by appointment by the mayor. The mayor, police chief and superintendent of schools or their designee shall be "ex-officio" members of the advisory board. Appointments shall be made in compliance with the requirements of section 10-19m-2 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as same may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 772, 7-3-03; Ord. No. 881, 8-14-14) 
Sec. 2-113.1. - Director. 
    The youth service bureau shall have a director whom shall perform duties as determined by the mayor or his/her designee. 
(Ord. No. 549, § 1(A), 5-12-88; Ord. No. 772, § 1(A), 7-3-03; Ord. No. 881, 8-14-14) 
Sec. 2-113.2. - Purpose; services provided. 
(a)  The purpose of the youth service bureau shall include but not be limited to providing the following services: 
(1)  Advocacy for youth and families. 
(2)  Crisis intervention and referrals. 
(3)  Parent education. 
(4)  Recreational and educational programs. 
(5)  Substance abuse prevention education. 
(6)  Outreach programs to insure participation and planning by the community for the development of a variety of programs and services for youth and families. 
(7)  Peer education and peer mentoring programs. 
(8)  Juvenile review board to offer diversion from juvenile court for first time offenders age eighteen (18) and younger who admit guilt. 
(b)  The services to be provided by the youth service bureau are intended to address the needs of all city youth and their families. 
(Ord. No. 549, § 1(B), (C), 5-12-88; Ord. No. 772, § 1(B), (C), 7-3-03; Ord. No. 881, 8-14-14) 
Sec. 2-113.3. - Compliance with regulations. 
(a)  Pursuant to section 10-19m of the Connecticut General Statutes, the youth service bureau shall comply with the regulations adopted by the state department of education. 
(b)  The bureau shall adopt other rules and regulations as deemed necessary to accomplish the purposes set forth in this division and to comply with the statutory requirements and the regulations adopted by the commissioner of education regarding youth service bureaus, as same may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 549, § 2, 5-12-88; Ord. No. 772, § 2, 7-3-03; Ord. No. 881, 8-14-14) 
Sec. 2-113.4. - Contract with community alert program. 
    Community alert program is now part of the youth service bureau with their own line item in the YSB budget. We no longer contract with them. 
(Ord. No. 633, 3-12-92; Ord. No. 881, 8-14-14) 
DIVISION 8. - COMMISSION ON DISABILITIES 

Sec. 2-114. - Established. 
    There shall be a commission on disabilities established in compliance with and pursuant to the Americans with Disabilities Act as of July 26th, 1990. 
(Ord. No. 646, 6-11-92) 
Sec. 2-114.1. - Composition. 
    The commission shall be composed of one (1) elected, one (1) educator, one (1) person from the health/medical profession, one (1) person from the business community and three (3) from the disabled community. These persons shall select a chairman of the commission from the appointed body. 
(Ord. No. 646, 6-11-92) 
Sec. 2-114.2. - Appointments; terms of members. 
    Appointments shall be made by the board of aldermen. Four (4) members shall serve for two-year terms and three (3) members shall be elected for an initial one-year term. Subsequent appointments shall be for two-year terms. Members may be reappointed. 
(Ord. No. 646, 6-11-92) 
Sec. 2-114.3. - Duties and responsibilities. 
    The commission shall hear complaints regarding access or alleged discrimination that have not been satisfactorily resolved by the designated Municipal Americans with Disabilities Act Coordinator. 
    The commission shall be charged with establishing procedures for hearing complaints of noncompliance and receiving requests or suggestions from persons with disabilities regarding access to and participation in public facilities, services, activities and functions offered to the general public. Any action taken by this commission shall be in compliance with applicable state and federal statutes. 
(Ord. No. 646, 6-11-92) 
DIVISION 9. - OPEN SPACE COMMITTEE[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 802, adopted Sept. 14, 2006, is being treated as superceding provisions pertaining to the same subject matter and previously codified as §§ 2-115-2-115.9. Former §§ 2-115-2-115.9 had derived from Ord. No. 727, adopted Nov. 12, 1998; and Ord. No. 735, adopted March 3, 1999. 
Cross reference- Open space regulations, § 11-51. 

Sec. 2-115. - Established. 
    The City of Shelton shall establish an open space program and an open space trust account to provide for the funding of such in accordance with the terms, limitations and conditions as follows. 
(Ord. No. 802, 9-14-06) 
Sec. 2-115.1. - Open space. 
    "Open space" shall be defined as designated areas deemed necessary or desirable for the preservation of the city's natural resources. Such areas shall emphasize active and passive recreation sites, natural resource protection areas such as rare or endangered habitat, areas related to public health and safety including floodplain, wetlands, unbuildable areas or areas with limitations for development and areas that shape community design such as greenbelts and buffer strips. Particular attention should be paid, but not limited, to farmlands, forestlands, riverfront lands, coastal area management zones, reservoirs and aquifers. 
(Ord. No. 802, § 1, 9-14-06) 
Sec. 2-115.2. - Establishment of trust account. 
    Within sixty (60) days of the installation of the first committee and upon receipt of the first annual appropriation of funds, the finance director shall establish an interest bearing account and insert a line item account in the budget to be used for the deposit of the first and all subsequent appropriations mandated by this division and any other funding the committee may receive from additional sources. Use of the trust account shall be by recommendation of the conservation commission. Monies accrued in the trust account shall be used for open space needs such as the identification, determination of suitability, purchase of land, title searches, appraisals, title insurance, etc in conjunction with the open space program. Funds may also be used for administrative expenses related to the operation of the committee and the development of plans regarding the desirability and use of lands designated open space. The conservation commission shall annually prepare a fiscal report to be submitted to the board of aldermen no later than March 1. 
(Ord. No. 802, § 2, 9-14-06) 
Sec. 2-115.3. - Appropriation of funds. 
    Commencing with fiscal year 2012-2013 and each fiscal year thereafter, the board of aldermen shall allocate a sum of money which is the lesser of the monies expended from the open space trust account in the previous fiscal year or fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) from the annual budget to the open space trust account which sum should be appropriated within forty-five (45) days of the commencement of the fiscal year. 
(Ord. No. 802, § 3, 9-14-06; Ord. No. 871, 4-11-13) 
Sec. 2-115.4. - Plan of intent. 
    The conservation commission will assume the open space committee functions regarding preparations and updating of a general plan to ensure continued success of the city open space program. These functions should include, but not be limited to, identifying areas of need, intended or possible uses, estimated costs of acquisitions and the general costs of the types of lands desired, as well as an estimation of how much land the city would need to obtain, which, when combined with existing properties and areas designated as open space, would satisfy the need for a comprehensive open space and conservation program. This plan should also incorporate a breakdown of the needs and possibilities in order to insure a fair distribution of the city's open space resources. The committee is encouraged to avail themselves of the cooperation of any city board, commission or agency and to make full use of any and all studies, plans or information legally available from any source which may be pertinent to the formulation of this plan. No expenditure of funds from the trust account shall occur before this plan is accepted and approved by the board of aldermen. 
(Ord. No. 802, § 4, 9-14-06) 
Sec. 2-115.5. - Grants and matching funds. 
    The committee shall actively seek and apply for any available grants, matching funds, gifts, bequests and any other possible sources of land and revenue in order to fulfill the goals of this ordinance. The committee shall seek and identify possible sources of revenue which would be beneficial to the conservation and maintenance of the open space property. 
(Ord. No. 802, § 5, 9-14-06) 
Sec. 2-115.6. - Expenditure of funds. 
    The board of aldermen shall have sole authority over the means of expenditures, including, but not limited to, any bonding or financing needed for the acquisition of property. No expenditure shall be made from the trust account established by this division except by vote of the board of aldermen in accordance with section 4.3.2 of the City Charter. All property and open spaces acquired by the City of Shelton pursuant to this division shall be used whether for open space purposes or other municipal purposes as directed by the board of aldermen, with recommendation from the conservation commission. 
(Ord. No. 802, § 6, 9-14-06) 
Sec. 2-115.7. - Duration of division provisions. 
    This division shall expire when the city has designated as "permanent open space" fifteen (15) percent, or such other goal as determined by the board of aldermen (BOA), of its total land area as "open space." If land originally purchased and designated as "open space" is then utilized for purposes not defined as "open space," these properties will no longer be considered to fulfill the targeted fifteen (15) percent and will be replaced with land of equal quality in the same geographical area, whenever possible. Despite reaching its targeted "open space" acquisition goal, the BOA may continue this and any other pertinent "open space" ordinances, all committees involved in the "open space" program and the open space trust account as it deems appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 802, § 7, 9-14-06) 
Sec. 2-115.8. - Source of division provisions. 
    The above division is a compilation of Ordinance No. 249 adopted on August 11, 1975; Ordinance No. 631 adopted on November 14, 1991; Ordinance No. 638 adopted on April 9, 1992; Ordinance No. 700 adopted on June 13, 1996; Ordinance No. 727 adopted on November 12, 1998; and Ordinance No. 735 adopted on March 3, 1999. All monies currently held in trust for these ordinances shall become part of the open space trust account. 
(Ord. No. 802, § 8, 9-14-06) 
DIVISION 10. - VALLEY REGIONAL PLANNING AGENCY 

Sec. 2-116. - Representation. 
(a)  The City of Shelton hereby adopts the provisions of Sections 8-31a through 8-37a of the Connecticut General Statutes. 
(b)  Representatives to said commission shall be electors of the City of Shelton and shall be appointed as follows: 
(1)  One (1) representative shall be appointed by the planning and zoning commission pursuant to Section 8-31a. 
(2)  One (1) representative shall be appointed by the mayor. 
(3)  One (1) representative shall be appointed by the board of aldermen. 
(c)  Each representative shall serve for a term of two (2) years from the date of appointment and until his or her successor is appointed. 
(d)  Vacancies created by the resignation or inability to serve shall be filled by the appointing authority for the remainder of the unexpired term. Any representative who is absent from three (3) consecutive regular meetings of the regional planning agency and any intervening duly called special meetings thereof shall be considered to have resigned from said body except that the requirements of this section may be waived by the board of aldermen for good cause. 
(e)  This section shall become effective on January 5, 1999. 
(Ord. No. 730, §§ 1-5, 12-10-98) 
DIVISION 11. - TOWER COMMITTEE 

Sec. 2-116.1. - Created. 
    The city shall have a tower committee consisting of five (5) members, no more than three (3) of whom shall be from the same political party, appointed by the mayor to serve for staggered terms of three (3) years. The terms of two (2) members shall expire in the first and second years of a three-year cycle and the terms of one (1) member shall expire in the third year of a three-year cycle. 
(Ord. No. 759, 12-13-01) 
Sec. 2-116.2. - Duties. 
    Upon being consulted upon an application pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes, section 16-50L(e), the mayor shall refer the application to the tower committee which shall review the application and within fifteen (15) days of such referral shall issue an advisory opinion to the mayor and the board of aldermen. 
    The mayor and the board of aldermen shall take such action as is permitted and/or required by said section, and thereafter, but not later than sixty (60) days from the date of the initial consultation with the mayor to render a recommendation to the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 759, 12-13-01) 
DIVISION 12. - HOUSATONIC RIVER ESTUARY COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-116.3. - Created; organization; funding. 
    The City of Shelton shall have a Housatonic River Estuary Commission consisting of seven (7) members; one (1) member from Shelton, Derby, Ansonia, Orange, Stratford, and Milford and a member-at-large. A member shall be appointed by the chief elected official and shall serve for two (2) years. The chief elected official of each town or city shall fill their vacancy as it may occur. The other six (6) members shall choose the member-at-large. The commission may employ expert and such other assistants as it judges necessary and may accept funds from any source. Notwithstanding any other provision of the Connecticut General Statutes, funds appropriated to the commission, or received by the commission from any other source, shall be held in the custody of the commission and expended by the commission for the purposes set forth in section 25-170(b) of the Connecticut General Statues, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 825, 5-10-07) 
Sec. 2-116.4. - Duties. 
    The commission may study any issues relating to the Housatonic River and may make such recommendations as may be necessary to maintain, protect and restore the resources of the estuary of the Housatonic River. The commission shall consider the adverse impact any action proposed in or for the Housatonic River estuary may have upon the marine resources of said river. The commission may prepare and submit reports to the local legislative bodies of the towns represented on said commission. 
(Ord. No. 825, 5-10-07) 
Secs. 2-116.5-2.115.10. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 13. - PENSION BOARD 

Sec. 2-116.11. - Pension board. 
(a)  The pension board shall consist of five (5) voting members, who shall be the following: the mayor, the finance director and three (3) members shall be appointed by the mayor which members have experience in financial services and pensions. Such members appointed by the mayor shall serve for terms of two (2) years. 
(b)  All action taken by the pension board shall be by majority vote. 
(c)  The pension board members shall serve without compensation and shall have charge of the general direction and management of the pension and retirement funds managed by the city. The city shall furnish such advisors, brokers, clerical, legal, or actuarial as the pension board members shall consider necessary to carry out the purpose of this article, subject to such appropriations as shall be made in the manner provided for other city appropriations. 
(Ord. No. 878, 3-13-14) 
ARTICLE IV. - OFFICERS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-117-2-120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MAYOR[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Charter reference- Mayor, Ch. 3. 

Sec. 2-121. - Salary; benefits. 
(a)  The office of the mayor shall be considered a full time position equivalent to "exempt" status as described in the Fair Labor Standards Act. 
(b)  An annual salary of one hundred nineteen thousand one hundred seventy six dollars ($119,176.00) shall be established for the position of mayor as of November 17, 2015 to November 22, 2016; one hundred twenty nine thousand two hundred ninety three dollars ($129,293.00) for the period November 23, 2016 to November 21, 2017 and one hundred thirty five thousand six hundred fifty nine dollars ($135,659.00) commencing November 22, 2017. Thereafter, such salary shall be adjusted each year during the third week of November based upon a cost of living adjustment as determined by the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics Consumer Price Index for Urban Wage Earners and Clerical Workers (CPI-W). 
(c)  The mayor's salary shall be updated in November 2021 and every six (6) years thereafter by conducting a survey using the rationale employed by the city wage and salary consultant, using the latest Connecticut Conference of Municipalities (CCM) Salary Survey data among cities of like population groupings. Further, that the consultant compares ability to pay, grand list equalization and internal salary comparison data to arrive at a recommended salary. 
(d)  The objectivity in the process shall be achieved by acceptance of the fact that this process is not a science. It is logic applied by a professional wage and salary consultant who will recommend to be the board of aldermen. The board will then codify this recommendation in ordinance form, hold a public hearing on such ordinance change and then adopt the final mayoral salary. 
(e)  The mayor shall be provided with life, medical, dental, and disability insurance. Life insurance coverage will be two (2) times salary rounded to the next highest full one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), if necessary. Accidental death and dismemberment coverage equal to the amount of life insurance shall be provided. Medical, dental and disability insurance shall be provided equal to the plan being offered to merit system employees. Mayoral contributions to these plans will be equal to the contribution rate established for merit system employees. Holidays, vacation and bereavement shall be provided equal to that provided to merit system employees. The mayor shall, as a pension benefit, be entitled to a city-paid eight (8) percent of the annual base salary contribution to a 401K, or similar type plan, designated by the mayor. 
(f)  If the mayor has not received a city vehicle, the mayor shall designate his personal vehicle and be permitted to use the city gasoline supplies. 
(Ord. No. 479, 5-9-85; Ord. No. 564, 1-12-89; Ord. No. 739, §§ (1)-(5), 10-14-99; Ord. No. 758, §§ 1-5, 9-13-01; Ord. No. 790, § 2, 4-14-05; Ord. No. 828, 6-12-07; Ord. No. 884, 2-11-15) 
Cross reference- Any ordinance setting salaries for merit or nonmerit positions saved from repeal, § 1-12(11). 
Secs. 2-122-2-130. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - TREASURER 

Sec. 2-131. - Salary. 
    The city treasurer's salary shall be ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) per year effective following the city election of November 5, 1985. 
(Ord. No. 418, 9-10-81; Ord. No. 439, 3-10-83; Ord. No. 487, 10-10-85; Ord. No. 738, 10-14-99) 
Cross reference- Any ordinance setting salaries for merit or nonmerit positions saved from repeal, § 1-12(11). 
Secs. 2-132, 2-133. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - CORPORATION COUNSEL[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 669, adopted April 14, 1994, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, inclusion as § 2-134 was at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 2-134. - Salary. 
a)  Commencing July 1, 2016 the annual compensation for general matters for the Corporation Counsel shall be $48,746.00 to be paid in monthly increments during the fiscal year. The salary for the Assistant Corporation Counsel shall be $34,093.00 payable in monthly increments during the fiscal year. 
b)  The Corporation Counsel shall receive, in addition to such sum, the sum of $764.00 per month in lieu of secretarial assistance and the Assistant Corporation Counsel shall receive a payment of $622.00 per month in lieu of secretarial assistance. 
c)  For those matters which are not included within the above referenced items of compensation, specifically litigation, contested matters and labor work and such other matters as historically have not been included within the annual compensation of the Corporation Counsel, the hourly rate shall be approved by the Board of Aldermen from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 669, 4-14-94; Ord. No. 724, §§ 1-3, 5-14-98; Ord. No. 760, 4-11-02; Ord. No. 789, §§ 1, 2, 4-14-05; Ord. No. 836, 3-13-08; Ord. No. 863, 3-8-12; Ord. No. 898, 6-9-16) 
Sec. 2-135. - Appointment of special counsel. 
    If, in the opinion of the corporation counsel, corporation counsel or the assistant corporation counsel is unable to represent any commission, board, agency or an individual acting in his/ her official capacity for any reason and said commission, board, agency or individual acting in his/her official capacity entitled to legal representation pursuant to law, the mayor, with the approval of the board of aldermen, shall hire special counsel to represent said commission, board, agency or individual acting in his/her official city capacity. The mayor shall endeavor to retain such counsel at an hourly rate equivalent to that which is being paid to the corporation counsel for litigation matters, but if the mayor is unable to retain counsel at such rate, she/he shall retain such counsel at a reasonable rate under all of the circumstances, with the approval of the board of aldermen, provided that there are sufficient funds in the legal services budget to cover such fees. No commission, board, agency or individual acting in his/her official capacity may retain or hire legal counsel without the prior consent of the mayor and the board of aldermen. 
(Ord. No. 767, 7-11-02) 
Secs. 2-136-2-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PERSONNEL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-141. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 695, adopted April 11, 1996, repealed Ord. No. 482, adopted Sept. 12, 1985 from which § 2-141 derived. Section 2-141 pertained to insurance benefits. 
Sec. 2-142. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 695, adopted April 11, 1996, repealed Ord. No. 423, adopted Dec. 10, 1981 from which § 2-142 derived. Section 2-142 pertained to a dental plan. 
Sec. 2-143. - Retirement plan. 
(a)  There is hereby established a municipal employee retirement plan for the city. 
(b)  Each municipal employee and each nonprofessional employee of the board of education on the date of enactment of the ordinance from which this section derives who is not now covered by an existing pension plan of any nature and not receiving any pension by reason of any special act of the legislature, shall upon reaching the age of sixty-five (65) years be entitled to a pension from the city of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per year commencing at the termination of his employment provided that upon reaching the age of sixty-five (65) years, he shall have completed twenty (20) consecutive years as a full-time regular employee of the city or of the board of education. 
(c)  Any such employee having served twenty (20) consecutive years and, who, upon reaching age sixty (60), is unable, for physical reasons as determined by a doctor chosen by the city, to fulfill the duties of his position, shall be entitled to a pension of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per year provided, however, that this section shall not apply if the person is receiving any other payment or benefits directly or indirectly from the city or from workmen's compensation. 
(d)  If any person who is receiving a pension dies leaving a widow of the age of sixty-five (65) or over, then the pension shall be paid to such widow as long as she shall live and shall remain unmarried. 
(e)  The board of apportionment and taxation shall each year appropriate sufficient funds to pay the pension of the persons entitled thereto under the provisions of this section. 
(f)  The city has the right to alter and amend this section from time to time without the consent of the beneficiaries, provided that benefits of persons receiving pensions at the time of alteration or amendment, shall not be reduced below those specified therein. 
(g)  Nothing contained herein shall prevent the city from requiring an employee contribution as a condition of future increase benefits if it so chooses. 
(h)  Notwithstanding the provisions of this section the clerk of the assessors shall be entitled to the following pension benefits upon reaching the age of sixty-five (65) years and after having completed fifteen (15) consecutive years in such position: The annual sum of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) payable in equal monthly installments commencing thirty (30) days after retirement. 
(i)  Blue Cross and CMS or other medical benefits paid by the city during the employee's working years shall be continued at the expense of the city. 
(j)  Any group life insurance paid by the city during the employee's working years shall be continued at the expense of the city. 
(k)  Upon the death of such employee any surviving widow shall be entitled to receive the benefits provided in subsection (d) of this section. 
(l)  The foregoing provisions of this section to the contrary notwithstanding, any person who has held the office of chief of police of not less than four and one-half (41/2) years, pursuant to a written contract with the city as a merit system employee, and who has a minimum of twenty-five (25) years of service with the Shelton Police Department shall, in addition to any pension or other benefits which he may otherwise receive, be entitled to the following pension benefits: 
(1)  The sum of four hundred dollars ($400.00) per month from the date of retirement for a period of fifteen (15) years, or until death, whichever is sooner. 
(2)  A continuation of medical coverage for the chief of police and spouse as may be approved by the board of aldermen. 
(Comp. Ords. 1975, § 19.6; Ord. No. 722, 2-26-98) 
Sec. 2-144. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 668, adopted September 9, 1993, repealed Ord. No. 586, adopted November 8, 1990 from which § 2-144 derived. Section 2-144 pertained to the merit job classification system and was amended by Ord. No. 645, adopted June 11, 1992 and Ord. No. 656, adopted June 10, 1993. 
Sec. 2-145. - Hiring of police officers. 
(a)  Hiring of probationary candidates. 
(1)  When the city determines to hire probationary candidates for the city police department, the administrative assistant shall utilize the services of a testing and measurement or selection agency, which agency and which test is in compliance with the standards of the State of Connecticut Police Officers Standards and Training Council (POSTC), and with all applicable federal and state laws, and consistent with a job description and the merit system and personnel rules of the city, in order to identify and select qualified candidates. 
(2)  The administrative assistant shall cause the position to be advertised in accordance with the provisions of the merit system. 
(3)  All applicants who have the minimum qualifications set forth in the job description shall be allowed to participate in the testing process for the position of police officer. 
(4)  Applicants must successfully pass each phase of the testing process to be allowed to continue. The testing process shall be as follows: 
a.  The "cooper standards" or other physical agility testing recognized by POSTC shall be administered by a qualified source. The candidate must pass this phase to be allowed to continue in the testing process. 
b.  A written test shall be administered by an agency in compliance with entry level testing standards as established by the State of Connecticut Police Officers Standards and Training Council (POSTC). The passing grade shall be announced no later than the commencement of the written test. The passing grade must be achieved in order to proceed with the next phase of the testing. The number of applicants that proceed to the oral examination shall be determined by the administrative assistant and the chief of police based upon the number of positions available. The minimum number of applicants that will proceed to the oral examination will be twenty-five (25) (provided there are more than twenty-five (25) qualifying applicants). 
c.  An oral examination shall be conducted by a panel that shall comply with state regulations relating to oral interviews of prospective police candidates and the requirements of the merit system. 
(5)  To the scores obtained though the written and oral testing, the following additional points shall be added: 
a.  For a minimum of two (2) years of military service with honorable discharge: Six (6) points. 
b.  For those persons who have an associate's degree: Four (4) points. 
c.  For those persons who have a bachelor's degree: Eight (8) points. 
Said college degree shall be from an accredited college or university and shall be in a subject area relevant to the knowledge, skills, and abilities required of police officers. 
d.  For those persons who have six (6) months or more experience in active law enforcement activity within the previous five (5) years: Two (2) points. 
e.  For those persons who have fluency in speaking and writing a second language identified as a language used within the population served by the city police department: Four (4) points. 
f.  For those persons who demonstrate local knowledge of the community: One (1) point. Local knowledge shall mean a familiarity with the city, its streets, its population centers, its institutions, and its emergency service response team organization. 
(6)  Upon completion of the examination process, the administrative assistant shall create a certified list pursuant to the provisions of the merit system and submit this list to the appointing authority. 
(7)  Any appointment made shall be conditional upon the applicant having completed a subsequent background investigation including a polygraph examination, psychological examination, fingerprint check, pre-employment medical and controlled substance examination in accordance with state and city requirements that may be amended from time to time and to the satisfaction of the city. 
(8)  Definitions. 
    Probationary candidate means a police officer who, having satisfied pre-employment requirements, has commenced employment with a law enforcement unit but has not satisfactorily completed the training requirements provided for in section 7-294d of the Connecticut General Statutes. 
(b)  Lateral certification or comparative certification applicants. 
(1)  Lateral certification applicants and comparative certification. Applicants shall be tested separately from other applicants set forth in section 2-145. The testing process shall include both a written and oral examination that complies with entry level testing requirements of the State of Connecticut Police Officers Standards and Training Council (POSTC) as amended from time to time and with all applicable federal and state laws and which shall be consistent with the merit system and personnel rules of the city. A physical fitness agility exam may be required by the city. 
(2)  Any appointment made shall be conditional upon the applicant having completed a subsequent polygraph examination, psychological examination, fingerprint check, background investigation, pre-employment medical, physical agility (if required) and controlled substance examination in accordance with state and city requirements that may be amended from time to time and to the satisfaction of the city. 
(3)  Upon completion of the examination process, the administrative assistant shall create a certified list pursuant to the provisions of the merit system and submit this list to the appointing authority. 
(4)  Definitions. 
    Comparative certification means the certification of a candidate for a police officer position, who has served as a police officer in another state or in a law enforcement within the state that is not subject to the statutes and regulations of the police officer standards and training council. 
    Lateral certification means the certification of a currently certified state police officer to a new position as a police officer with a different law enforcement unit within the state. 
(Ord. No. 721, §§ 3-8, 4-9-98; Ord. No. 756, 8-9-01; Ord. No. 876, 2-13-14) 
Secs. 2-146-2-160. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RESERVED[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 749, adopted March 8, 2001, repealed all ordinances approved to establish job descriptions. These ordinances had been codified as Div. 2, Position Descriptions, §§ 2-161-2-289. The history of the repealed ordinances can be found in the Code Comparative Table at the back of this Code. Ord. No. 749 further provided that all job descriptions shall be written or changed pursuant to section 4.1 of the Merit System and Personnel Rules, as approved by the board of aldermen effective October 6, 1993. 

Secs. 2-161-2-300. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PERSONNEL RULES AND MERIT SYSTEM[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 908, adopted February 8, 2018, set out provisions for use herein as art. VI. At the editor's discretion, those provisions have been treated as repealing art. VI, §§ 2-301-2-320, in its entirety and enacting a new art. VI to read as set out herein. Form art. VI, pertained to similar subject matter, and was derived from Ord. No. 580, adopted June 14, 1990; Ord. No. 668, §§ 1.00-1.17, 2.0-2.2, 3.0-3.8, 4.0, 4.1, 5.0-5.7, 6.0-6.5, 7.0-7.7, 8.0-8.5, 9.0-9.5, 10.0-10.4, 11.0-11.12, 12.0-12.6, 13.0-13.2, 14.0, adopted September 9, 1993; Ord. No. 681, adopted February 9, 1995; Ord. No. 704, adopted July 11, 1996; Ord. No. 771, Arts. I-XIV, adopted March 13, 2003; Ord. No. 773, § 7.4.2, adopted September 11, 2003 and Ord. No. 774, § 11.13, adopted April 8, 2004. 
Charter reference- Merit system, Ch. 8. 
State Law reference- Authority of city to establish a merit system for the selection and promotion of public officials and employees, G.S. § 7-148(c)(5)(B). 

Sec. 2-301. - [Personnel rules and merit system.] 
    PURPOSE OF RULES: It shall be the purpose of these rules to give effect to the intent and requirements of Chapter 8 of the Charter of the City of Shelton. It shall further be the purpose of said rules to provide the means for selecting and/or promoting employees in the classified service solely on the basis of proven ability to perform the duties required as set forth by the specific job description. 
    It is hereby the declared personnel policy of the City of Shelton that employment by the City of Shelton shall be based solely on merit and qualifications, and shall not be influenced by personal and political considerations. Appointment, promotions and other actions requiring the application of the merit system shall be based on uniform tests and evaluations. 
    APPLICATION OF RULES: These rules shall be applicable to all full-time employees of the City of Shelton who are members of the classified service as provided by Section 8.1 and Section 8.2 of the Charter and any other full-time employees. 
    Where there is a conflict between these rules and any properly adopted collective bargaining agreement on matters appropriate to collective bargaining as set forth in Sections-7-467 to 7-477 of the Connecticut General Statutes, the terms of such agreement will prevail pursuant to Section 7-474 (f). 
    RULES OF CONSTRUCTION: Where required the masculine gender shall include the feminine and the singular number the plural number. 
ARTICLE I - DEFINITIONS 
    The terms of the personnel rules and merit system shall be defined as follows: 
    1.00 Administrative Assistant: The Administrative Assistant is the person appointed pursuant to Section 6.1 et seq. of the Charter. When the Administrative Assistant is referred to in the merit system, it shall mean the Administrative Assistant or designee, unless otherwise indicated. 
    1.01 Appointing Authority: The Mayor shall be the appointing authority for all positions unless such authority is delegated by the Mayor, in writing, to a department head or the Administrative Assistant or designee, except as otherwise provided by Charter. 
    1.02 Certification: The act by which the Administrative Assistant supplies a certified list of eligible candidates to the appointing authority for appointment to a vacant position. Eligible candidates are those persons who have successfully met all requirements, including all phases of examination procedure, for appointment to the position. 
    1.03 City: The City of Shelton. 
    1.04 Classified Services: All employees of the City of Shelton not excepted by the Charter. 
    1.05 Days: Days shall mean those days on which City Hall is open for business. 
    1.06 Demotion: The transfer of an employee to a position of lower pay and/or responsibility. 
    1:07 Dismissal: The complete separation of an employee from employment with the City. 
    1.08 Employee: A person in the employ of the City who is paid a salary or hourly wage and who is not a contract employee with the City. 
    1.08.1 Exempt Employee: An employee of the City who is exempt from the Federal and State of Connecticut Wage and Hour Laws. 
    1.08.2 Non-Exempt Employee: An employee of the City who is subject to the Federal and State of Connecticut Wage and Hour Laws. 
    1.08.3 Full Time Employee: One whose job description requires that work be performed at least thirty-five (35) hours per week. 
    1.08.4 Part-Time Employee: One whose job description requires that work be performed less than thirty-five (35) hours per week. 
    1.08.5 Probationary Employee: An employee who has been appointed to a position within the classified service and who is serving a probationary period. 
    1.08.6 Provisional Employee: An employee who has a provisional appointment to a position within the classified service. 
    1.08.7 Regular Employee: An employee who has been appointed to a position within the classified service who has successfully completed the established probationary period. 
    1.08.8 Temporary Employee: An individual who substitutes for a regular employee for the duration of an authorized leave of absence. 
    1.09 Full time Position: A full time position is ordinarily a twelve (12) month position, but in the case of an employee of the board of education may be ten (10) months or more. 
    1.10 Open Competitive Examination: A test or series of tests for a specific position open to all qualified persons, as set forth in this ordinance. 
    1.11 Probationary Period: The initial employment period which, unless otherwise specified in the job description is six (6) months; or a later employment period, specified in writing to the employee, during which a regular employee must demonstrate job performance in accordance with department standards. 
    1.12 Promotion: The advancement of an employee, through the testing procedure established in the merit system, from one position to another position provided that the new position is in a higher salary classification. 
    1.13 Promotional Examination: An examination that is limited to individuals who are presently employed by the City of Shelton who have applied for and meet the requirements of the position to be tested. 
    1.14 Provisional Appointment: An appointment without an examination by the appointing authority to a vacant position within the classified service for a period not to exceed six (6) months when the appointing authority has determined that the position needs to be filled to perform duties required for the operation of the government. The provisional appointment may be extended by the appointing authority provided the recruitment process has been initiated. 
    1.15 Suspension: A temporary separation with or without pay of an employee for disciplinary reasons for a period of time as specified in writing to the employee. 
    1.16 Transfer: A change of an employee from one position to another within the classified service involving the performance of similar duties and requiring substantially the same qualifications. 
    1.17 Work Week: The standard work week for all employees within the classified service shall consist of thirty-five (35) hours per week, except otherwise provided. 
ARTICLE II - ADMINISTRATION 
    2.0 The Administrative Assistant shall administer the merit system of the City of Shelton. 
    2.1 The Administrative Assistant shall attend all meetings of the Public Employees Appeal Board, hereinafter referred to as the PEAB. 
    2.2 The Administrative Assistant shall, from time to time, prepare and recommend revisions and/or amendments to these rules. 
ARTICLE III - ISSUE/COMPLAINT RESOLUTION 
    3.0 Application: The following procedure applies only to regular full time non-bargaining unit employees in the classified service who have completed the probationary period. Prior to filing a grievance with the PEAB pursuant to section 5.3.3 of the Charter, said employees must process the grievance through the steps of this grievance procedure. 
    3.1 Step 1. If an employee of the classified service shall feel aggrieved involving his employment or the application of the merit system, he shall report the matter to his immediate superior within five (5) days of the date on which the event giving rise to the grievance occurred. 
    3.2 Step 2. If such immediate superior cannot or will not adjust the matter to the satisfaction of the employee within five (5) days, the grievance may be submitted in writing, within ten (10) days of the date on which the event giving rise to the grievance occurred, and signed by the employee, and a copy shall be sent to the Administrative Assistant. 
    3.3 Step 3. If the department head does not reply in writing to the employee within five (5) days of receipt of the written grievance, or if the employee is not satisfied with the decision of the department head, the employee may then appeal, in writing, to the Administrative Assistant, within ten (10) days of the date on which the written grievance was submitted to the department head. 
    3.4 Step 4. If the Administrative Assistant does not reply in writing to the employee within five (5) days of receipt of the written appeal, or if the employee is not satisfied with the decision of the Administrative Assistant, the employee may then appeal, in writing, to the PEAB, with a copy to the Mayor, within ten (10) days of the date on which the written appeal was submitted to the Administrative Assistant. The PEAB shall hear such appeal within ten (10) days of the filing of the appeal. The PEAB shall submit its decision in writing to the Mayor. 
    3.4.1 The decision of the PEAB shall be final unless the mayor submits, within ten (10) days upon receipt of the PEAB's decision, a written decision that differs from that of the PEAB, in which event the decision of the Mayor shall be final unless within ten (10) days the PEAB reaffirms its original decision, in writing, after the affirmative vote of at least four (4) members. 
    3.5 Time Limits. Any time limits within this grievance procedure may be extended by mutual agreement, in writing, signed by the employee and the City's representative at the then applicable step of the grievance procedure. 
    3.6 Abandonment of Grievance. If a grievance is not timely submitted to a higher step of the grievance procedure, it shall be deemed settled on the basis of the City's response in the last step considered. 
    3.7 Waiver of Steps. In the event the aggrieved employee is directly supervised by the Administrative Assistant or the Mayor, any written grievance shall be initiated at Step 3 of the procedure within ten (10) days of the date on which the event giving rise to the grievance occurred. 
    3.8 Initiation of Grievance Contesting Disciplinary Action. Dismissal: An employee who is dismissed may initiate a grievance at Step 4 of the procedure by filing the grievance in writing with the Mayor and the PEAB within ten (10) days of the effective date of the dismissal. An employee who feels aggrieved concerning other disciplinary action may initiate a grievance at Step 3 of procedure by filing the grievance with the Administrative Assistant within ten (10) days of the date on which the employee was notified of the disciplinary action. 
ARTICLE IV - CLASSIFICATION 
    4.0 Existing Positions. The existing job classification plan and related ordinances shall remain in effect until repealed or amended by the Board of Aldermen pursuant to the Charter. 
    4.1 New and/or Revised Positions. When a new position is created and/or when an existing position is substantially changed with respect to the qualifications required and/or the duties and responsibilities to be performed, a job description shall be developed or revised and a job grade shall be assigned under the direction of the Administrative Assistant. The job description shall be based upon a completed Job Analysis Questionnaire. The job grade shall be assigned using the procedures and job evaluation points of the Job Evaluation Manual. The Administrative Assistant shall recommend the job description and grade to the Mayor for his approval. The job grade shall be submitted to the Board of Aldermen for approval. 
ARTICLE V - COMPENSATION 
    5.0 Pay Plan: Except as modified herein, the existing pay plan shall remain in effect until repealed or amended by the Board of Aldermen pursuant to the Charter. In accordance with this Article, the Administrative Assistant shall recommend to the Mayor such revisions as are deemed necessary for submission to the Board of Aldermen. 
    5.1 Merit Increases: Salary increases for individual employees within an established class shall be primarily based on meritorious service and shall not be granted automatically based upon length of service. The department head may make recommendations to the Administrative Assistant and the Mayor regarding appropriate salary increases for employees based on performance the preceding year. 
    5.2 Salary Schedule: For non-union positions, the annual salary schedule shall be developed under the direction of the Administrative Assistant. The adjustment shall be based upon a survey of similar municipalities to determine salary adjustments planned and a review of cost of living changes and other relevant data as well as the City's ability to pay. The adjustment shall be applied uniformly to the entire schedule. The Administrative Assistant shall recommend the annual salary schedule to the Mayor for his approval and for submission to the Board of Aldermen for adoption, as part of the budget process. 
    5.3 New Hires: Newly hired employees shall be paid a salary within the salary range for their job grade which is appropriate for their qualifications, background and experience. Salaries for new hires shall be recommended by the Administrative Assistant or designee after discussion with the department head and approved by the Mayor of designee. 
    5.4 Promotions: Promoted employees shall be paid a salary within the salary range for their new job grade which is appropriate for their qualifications, background, and experience, provided that they receive a promotional increase of no less than five percent (5%). Salaries for promoted employees shall be recommended by the Administrative Assistant or designee after discussion with the department head and approved by the Mayor or designee. 
    5.5 Demotions: Demoted employees shall be paid a salary within the salary range for their new job grade. Salaries for demoted employees shall be recommended by the Administrative Assistant or designee after discussion with the department head and approved by the Mayor or designee. 
    5.6 Annual Salary Increases for Individual Employees: Each fiscal year, the Board of Aldermen, upon the recommendation of the Mayor, shall establish a budget for annual salary increases for non-union employees. The Mayor shall award salary increases within the approved budget and within the applicable salary ranges. Said increases shall be given uniformly across-the-board unless all full-time non-union employees have received written performance evaluations during the preceding twelve-month period, in which case, salary increases may be awarded by the Mayor on the basis of merit and with the recommendation of the department head. Any employee whose performance has been evaluated as less than satisfactory shall not receive an annual salary increase. No merit increase shall exceed the average salary increase budgeted for all full-time non-union employees by more than three percent (3%). 
    5.6.1 Salary Adjustments: A salary adjustment is an increase or decrease in an employee's salary made necessary by changes in the duties and responsibilities of an employee's position or by marketplace changes which render an employee's s compensation non-competitive. A salary adjustment is separate and apart from the annual salary increase. When a salary adjustment is warranted, the Mayor shall recommend such adjustment to the Board of Aldermen as part of the budget process. No salary adjustment may be made without the approval of the Board of Aldermen. 
    5.7 Overtime: Any overtime worked by non-exempt employees of the City of Shelton must be approved by the department head and the Administrative Assistant or his designee at least three (3) hours prior to such time being worked. The department head shall indicate to the Administrative Assistant the reason for such overtime and the approximate amount of overtime required. The Administrative Assistant shall be notified if it is impossible to comply with the above. 
    5.7.1 Overtime worked by non-exempt employees shall be compensated as follows: Hours worked up to forty (40) hours per week shall be compensated at straight time. Hours worked over forty (40) hours per week shall be compensated at one and one-half (11/2) times the employee's regular base hourly rate of pay. 
    5.7.2 In lieu of overtime pay, compensatory time off may be granted upon agreement with the employee. Whenever possible, compensatory time should be taken within the same pay period in which it is earned. In any event, no more than twenty-four (24) hours of compensatory time may be accumulated. 
    5.7.3 Administrative Assistant shall monitor the amount of overtime worked in each department to ensure that the time is necessary for the operation of the City. 
    5.7.4 Exempt employees are not entitled to overtime compensation in any form. 
ARTICLE VI - RECRUITMENT 
    6.0 The Administrative Assistant shall make known all vacancies by posting notices on bulletin boards within City Hall and the City Building wherein the position is open, a copy on the City Website filed under the Human Resources Department and by filing said notices with the Town/City Clerk at least ten (10) days prior to the closing date for applications. Upon filing of the notices with the Town/City Clerk, the Administrative Assistant may determine whether notices of open, competitive examination should be placed in any other form of media including but not limited to newspapers. In determining whether any other publication of said notice, the Administrative Assistant shall consider the medium most likely to reach the public. This could include, professional bulletins, newspapers having a wide circulation in the general area and such other media as deemed likely to reach out to qualified candidates. 
    6.1 Any notice for vacancies shall include the following: 
Job Title 
Salary Range 
Nature of Work 
Minimum Qualifications 
Closing Date for Applications 
Any additional information regarding the position deemed necessary by the Administrative Assistant. 
    6.2 All applications shall be made on forms provided by the Administrative Assistant. Applications shall not be returned and shall be kept on file as required by the State Records Retention Schedule. 
    6.3 Pre-employment examinations, such as a physical examination, including drug testing, and a background investigation, may be required as deemed necessary for specific positions. In such event, the applicants shall be informed in writing at the time of application of the City's intention to require a physical examination and to conduct a urinalysis drug test and/or background investigation. The Administrative Assistant shall coordinate such examinations. After an offer of employment is made subject to the satisfactory completion of a physical examination, the physical examination shall be conducted by a medical doctor selected and paid for by the City and in accordance with established procedures for pre-employment physical examinations. Any references or other material related to a background investigation shall be verified and documented and made part of the applicant's record. Verification shall be made prior to any offer of employment and shall be treated confidentially. 
    6.4 Applications shall be screened against the requirements for the position as detailed in the job description. Whenever an application is rejected prior to testing, the Administrative Assistant shall notify the applicant, in writing, of such rejection and the reason for such rejection. 
    6.5 The City of Shelton is an equal opportunity employer. No person applying for a position within the City of Shelton shall be discriminated against in any way because of the individual's race, color, religious creed, age, sex, marital status, national origin, ancestry, sexual orientation, disability, veteran's status, or political affiliation. 
ARTICLE VII - EXAMINATIONS 
    7.0 All appointments to positions within the classified service of the City of Shelton shall be made as provided herein. The Administrative Assistant shall first determine whether an examination shall be a promotional examination or an open examination. 
    7.1 Definitions; Open Examinations are limited to all applicants who meet the minimum qualifications as stated in the job description and include the general public, present employees, both full time and part time employees. Promotional examinations are limited to current employees within the classified service and/or part time employees who meet the minimum qualifications as stated in the job description who have applied for the position. 
    7.1.1 Promotional Examinations: Upon the recommendation of the Department Head that there are qualified employees presently employed by the City, including both full time and part time employees, who are qualified to perform the job that is opened, the Administrative Assistant may, in his sole discretion, limit the applications to City employees and proceed with only a promotional examination. If a promotional examination is determined to be in the best interest of the City, the Administrative Assistant shall post such notice in accordance with the provisions of Article VI of this ordinance. After applications are received, an oral interview will be given to each qualified internal employee who files an application for the position. The interview panel will consist of three individuals, consisting of the Mayor's designee, a Department Head other than from the Department where the position is being posted and the Administrative Assistant and/or his designee. After the interviews each employee will be ranked based upon their interview, using scores determined by the panel. The Administrative Assistant shall prepare a certified list of candidates in accordance with Section 8.0 and 8.1 below. 
    7.1.2 The appointing authority will then make a promotion of one of the applicants from said list to the position. In the event that the panel does not recommend to promote an existing employee, the Administrative Assistant shall then conduct an open examination and testing, which shall be established in accordance with the job description pursuant to the process set forth below. 
    7.2 Open Examination: The examination process shall be of a practical nature and shall relate to subjects which fairly measure the relative capabilities of the person examined to execute the duties and responsibilities of the position sought. The Administrative Assistant may adopt or authorize the use of any procedures as deemed appropriate to assure a selection of employees on the basis of merit and qualifications. 
    7.2.1 The Administrative Assistant shall be allowed to contract with any competent agency or individual for the purpose of preparing and administering such examinations. In the absence of such contract, the Administrative Assistant shall perform said duties or may delegate their performance. 
    7.2.2 Examinations for positions within the classified service shall be competitive and may include written, practical and oral interview test components. In the event that the position requires a state licensed applicant or certification, the written examination will be waived. All applicants meeting the prescribed requirements shall be allowed to participate in the initial test component and shall be notified, in writing, of the time, place and date of the initial test. 
    7.3 The examination shall proceed as follows: 
    7.3.1 When the examination consists of written, practical and oral interview test components, all qualified applicants shall be invited to participate in the initial written test. Up to fifteen (15) candidates who have received the highest passing scores on the written test shall be invited to participate in the practical test. Up to fifteen (15) candidates who have received the highest combined scores on both the written and practical tests shall be invited to participate in the oral interview test. 
    7.3.2 When the examination consists of written and oral interview test components, all qualified applicants shall be invited to participate in the initial written test. Up to fifteen (15) candidates who have received the highest passing scores on the written test shall be invited to participate in the oral interview test. 
    7.3.3 When candidates receive the same test score, they shall receive the same ranking and the following ranks shall be skipped by the number of candidates who are tied. For example, if two candidates tie at the sixth rank, the next rank will be the eighth rank. In the event of ties in the higher ranks, more than the maximum number of candidates shall be allowed to proceed to the next phase of the examination. For example, when the maximum is fifteen (15), if three (3) candidates are tied at the fifteenth rank a total of seventeen candidates shall be allowed to participate in the next phase of the examination. 
    7.3.4 A list of candidates who did not make the certified list of the top ten (10) candidates shall be maintained for one year beyond the effective date of the certified list that is prepared pursuant to Section 8.0. If, within the year, the certified list of eligible candidates falls below 5 and the Administrative Assistant determines that the number of anticipated vacancies warrants that the certified list should be expanded, up to ten (10) of those candidates who received the next ten (10) highest passing scores may be scheduled to complete the remaining test phases or the Administrative Assistant may, at his or her discretion, re-advertise and re-examine for the position. 
    7.4 Each applicant who participates in any phase of the examination process shall be notified of the test outcome in writing by the Administrative Assistant. 
    7.5 Each applicant may request to inspect his examination papers and/or grading papers under conditions prescribed by the Administrative Assistant. Examination papers and/or grading papers shall not be open to the general public. 
ARTICLE VIII - APPOINTMENTS 
    8.0 The Administrative Assistant shall prepare a certified list of eligible candidates. Eligible candidates are those who have received the highest combined scores on all test components of the examination procedure. Each eligible candidate shall be given a combined score that is the total of the candidate's scores on all test components. The certified list shall include each eligible candidate's name and examination rank. The candidate with the highest combined score shall rank first. In the event two or more candidates have the same combined examination score, the ranking shall be shared and the following ranks shall be skipped by the number of candidates who are tied. 
    8.1 The certified list shall remain in effect for a period of one year and may be extended by the Administrative Assistant for an additional period of up to one year. 
    8.2 When a vacancy is to be filled, the Administrative Assistant shall submit the certified list to the appointing authority. The appointing authority shall select a candidate from the certified list. 
    The appointing authority may review application files of the certified candidates and may conduct such interviews with the certified candidates as deemed necessary or advisable, provided, however, that available candidates shall be offered the opportunity to interview in the order of their rank and shall be subject to the same application file review and interview. The selected candidate shall be notified in writing, by certified mail, of such appointment and shall accept or decline the appointment within seven days of receipt of the appointment notice. 
    8.2.1 If the candidate fails to accept or decline the appointment within the allotted time period, the appointing authority shall select another candidate from the certified list. 
    8.2.2 If a candidate on the certified list refuses any offered employment, the candidate's name shall be placed at the bottom of the certified list. 
    8.3 Provisional appointments of qualified persons may be made without examination. 
    8.4 If it is necessary to hire a temporary employee to replace a regular employee who is on an authorized leave of absence, a temporary employee may be appointed without examination for the duration of the leave. 
ARTICLE IX - PROBATION 
    9.0 All new employees shall be required to serve a probationary period as detailed in the individual job descriptions. 
    9.1 In the event that no probationary period is detailed in the job description, the probationary period shall be deemed to be six (6) months. 
    9.2 An employee may be terminated at any time during the probationary period upon the written recommendation for the Administrative Assistant and the department head. There shall be no appeal from the decision. 
    9.2.1 If the probationary period is related to a position which also is a promotion and the employee fails the review at the end of the probationary period, he shall be returned to his original position only if such position is vacant. 
    9.3 Probationary employees will receive a written evaluation within three (3) months of the beginning of the probationary period. The evaluation shall indicate whether or not the employee's job performance is satisfactory. 
    9.4 Two (2) weeks prior to the completion of the probationary period, the department head will confer with the Administrative Assistant as to the status of the employee and review of the employee's work record. 
    9.5 Upon successful completion of the probationary period, the Administrative Assistant shall so notify the employee. 
ARTICLE X - EMPLOYEE WORK PERFORMANCE 
    10.0 All employees are expected to be at their regular place of work and to devote their full time and energies to the performance of their job duties in accordance with these rules and other City ordinances, rules and regulations. 
    10.1.1 Any absence of an employee from duty for all or part of a day without authorization shall be deemed an absence without leave and as such shall be subject to disciplinary action and the withholding of pay. 
    10.2 All employees shall be evaluated annually, in writing, by their respective department heads. The annual evaluations shall be submitted to the Administrative Assistant no later than May 1 of each year. A copy of said evaluation shall be signed by both the employee and the department head and forwarded to the Administrative Assistant for review. After such review, the evaluation shall be placed in the employee's file. 
    10.2.1 Any employee may meet with the Administrative Assistant to discuss the evaluation. After consultation with the department head, the Administrative Assistant may make modifications to the evaluation as deemed necessary. The employee may add a written response to the evaluation. 
    10.3 Employees may not engage in outside employment that presents a conflict of interest or interferes with their duties as an employee of the City of Shelton. Employees must notify the Administrative Assistant of any outside employment. Employees whose business activities conflict with their job responsibilities will be required to forego those activities or be subject to disciplinary action up to and including termination. 
    10.4 Training programs shall be encouraged to further the confidence and skill of all employees. Department heads shall be responsible for the training of individual employees in their department and may seek assistance from the Administrative Assistant or his designee. 
ARTICLE XI - EMPLOYEE BENEFITS FOR NON-UNION EMPLOYEES 
    11.0 Employee benefits shall be conferred as provided for in this Article, unless modified by a contract between an individual employee and the City of Shelton. Only the appointing authority may enter into such contract, subject to the approval of the Board of Aldermen. 
    11.1 Holidays: The following holidays shall be observed by all full-time employees and shall be granted with pay: 
New Year's Day Labor Day Lincoln's Birthday Columbus Day President's Day Veteran's Day Martin Luther King Day Thanksgiving Day Good Friday The Friday following Memorial Day Thanksgiving Day Independence Day Christmas Day  
    11.1.1 In the event that a holiday falls on a Saturday, the preceding Friday shall be scheduled as the day off. If the holiday falls on a Sunday, then the following Monday shall be scheduled as the day off. If the Holiday falls on a scheduled day off, other than Saturday or Sunday, then it shall be considered a "floating holiday". 
    11.1.2 All "floating holidays" shall be used prior to the end of the fiscal year in which they were earned, shall be taken at the time mutually convenient for both the employee and his department head and may not be carried over. If a time cannot be agreed upon, the Administrative Assistant shall make the final determination. 
    11.1.3 No pay shall be granted in lieu of holidays except as provided by Section 13.2 below. 
    11.1.4 Employees who are absent from work on the work days before and after the holiday shall not be eligible for the paid holiday unless absence is authorized with full pay. Employees on extended absences with pay shall not be eligible for paid holidays after three (3) months of absence. 
    11.2 Fringe Benefits: Only full-time employees shall be eligible to receive fringe benefits. Fringe benefits may include medical insurance benefits, life insurance, long term disability insurance, participation in a retirement plan, and payroll deductions for savings plans and may be changed from time to time by the City. 
    11.3 Vacation: All full-time employees shall be eligible for paid vacation as follows: 
One (1) year to six (6) years - two (2) weeks. 
Six (6) years to twelve (12) years - three (3) weeks. 
More than twelve (12) years - four (4) weeks. 
    Employees with 20 years of service will receive one (1) additional day of vacation per year up to a maximum of 5 additional days' vacation. Thus, after the 25 th year anniversary of service and beyond the employee would receive five weeks. 
    Notwithstanding the foregoing, newly hired supervisors or directors may be granted additional vacation time within a range that is commensurate with their qualifications, background and experience, including the amount of vacation the new employee may have had at their present or most immediate past employment. Such additional vacation time for newly hired supervisors and/or directors shall be recommended by the head of the department subject to approval by the Administrative Assistant and final approval of the Mayor. 
    11.3.1 Vacation Credit: The vacation year is July 1 st through June 30 th . Employees will be credited with vacation on July 1 st . The amount of vacation to be credited shall be based on the number of continuous years of service the employee will have completed as of his anniversary date within the vacation year. Although the employee may be credited the step increase of vacation time on July 1 of the vacation year in which his/her anniversary date falls, the employee may not take the increased vacation during that year until after his anniversary date is reached during the vacation year. No employee may take vacation until he has completed nine (9) months of employment. 
    11.3.2 Vacation During Extended Leave: An employee who is absent with pay for an extended period of time does not accrue vacation during the absence but shall retain the vacation credited to him as of his last day of work. Upon reinstatement after period of absence, the employee shall use said vacation time prior to the end of the then current vacation year. At the start of the said vacation year, he shall be credited with vacation pursuant to the vacation schedule. In no event shall he be credited with more vacation time than the schedule allows. 
    11.3.3 Holidays: If a holiday falls in any given vacation week, this day may be taken at a later date or the current vacation period may be extend by one (1) day if arranged in advance. 
    11.3.4 Vacation Scheduling: Vacation time must be approved in advance, in writing, by the department head and the Administrative Assistant. If a conflict in requests for vacation time arises between two or more employees within the same department, the senior employee shall be granted the vacation request. The taking of more than five (5) vacation days consecutively must be approved, in writing, by the department head and Administrative Assistant at least thirty (30) days prior to said time. This requirement may be waived by the Administrative Assistant after consultation with the department head regarding the reason for the shortened notice. 
    11.3.5 No Vacation Carryover: Vacation time must be used in the current vacation year. There shall be no payment in lieu of vacation except upon termination from employment. Vacation may not be carried over from one vacation year to the next. 
    11.3.6 Payment of Unused Vacation at Termination: Unused vacation credited to an employee as of the previous July 1 st shall be paid to the employee upon his termination at the employee's current rate of pay at the time of termination. No other payment in lieu of vacation is allowed. 
    11.4 Sick Leave Reimbursement Plan: The following sick leave plan shall apply to employees hired before October 6, 1993 unless such employees have opted to be covered by the Income Protection Plan set forth in Section 11.5. 
    11.4.1 Sick leave shall be granted at the rate of one (1) day each month after the first sixty (60) days of employment with a maximum accumulation equivalent to one-hundred and twenty (120) days. 
    11.4.2 Upon retirement, accrued sick leave shall be paid at one hundred percent (100%). Upon discharge for cause there shall be zero percent (0%) reimbursement of accrued sick leave. Upon any other termination of employment, there shall be fifty percent (50%) reimbursement of accrued sick leave. Sick leave does not accrue beyond one hundred twenty (120) days. Reimbursement shall be paid at the rate of pay received by the employee immediately before the date of termination. 
    11.4.3 Any qualified employee set forth in Section 11.4.1 may, prior to December 31 st of each year, request to buy back up to one-half of his accumulated sick time at the wage rate in effect at the time of the request. Such buy back shall take place on July 15 following the request and shall be at the rate of two (2) sick days for each day of payment. Such request shall be made in writing to the Administrative Assistant and shall state the amount of days to be bought back. 
    11.4.4 Any employee who participates in the Sick Leave Reimbursement Plan under this Section will also be subject to the provisions of Sections 11.5.1, 11.5.3, 11.5.4, 11.5.5, 11.5.6 and 11.5.7. 
    11.5 Income Protection Plan: The income protection plan is designed to provide cash income to an employee who is temporarily or permanently totally disabled by a non-job-related injury or illness or pregnancy, and is therefore prevented from performing the duties of his or her occupation. Full-time employees who have completed six (6) months of continuous employment by the City are eligible for disability benefits under the income protection plan provided they have presented medical documentation substantiating the total disability. The income protection plan applies to all employees hired on or after October 6, 1993 and to employees hired before October 6, 1993 who have elected to be included in the income protection plan. Said election must be made between the period October 6, 1993 and December 6, 1993. Any such employee who elects to be included in the income protection plan shall waive any and all benefits under the sick leave plan described in the foregoing subsections 11.4.1, 11.4.2 and 11.4.3. 
    11.5.1 Occasional Sick Leave: As a condition of employment all employees are expected to report to work on their regularly scheduled shifts. It is recognized, however, that on occasion employees will be rendered physically unable to perform assigned work due to non-job-related accidents or debilitating illness. The paid sick days provided in this Section are not to be considered as personal days off other than for purposes of any sickness or any injury other than job-related sickness or injury covered by Workers' Compensation. 
    11.5.2 An occasional leave for sickness or non-job-related injury shall mean any absence for such reasons of seven (7) or less consecutive calendar days. Occasional days of absence shall be paid up to a total of ten (10) days of paid absence in any fiscal year for five (5) day per week employees and eight (8) days of paid absence for four (4) day per week employees. Employees with less than six (6) months of continuous service may be paid for such absences only when the department head specifically requests such payments from the Administrative Assistant and the Administrative Assistant approves such payments. 
    11.5.3 In order for an employee to receive payment for sick leave, the employee shall notify the department head within the first half-hour of the work day and the department head shall notify the Administrative Assistant as soon as possible. 
    11.5.4 Sick leave shall be allowed only for the following reasons: 
a)  Personal illness resulting in the inability to perform job duties. 
b)  Pregnancy - A pregnant employee may use accumulated sick leave, when, as the result of pregnancy, she is unable to perform her job. If accumulated sick leave is exhausted, the employee may request to use earned vacation and holiday time. If all available time with pay is exhausted, the employee shall apply for and receive as a matter of right an unpaid leave that shall not exceed the duration of the pregnancy related disability. At the end of a leave, the employee shall be offered reinstatement to her original job or an equivalent position. 
    If a pregnant employee presents written notification that she reasonably believes that continued employment in her current position may cause injury to herself or the fetus, the City will make reasonable efforts to transfer the employee to any suitable temporary position which may be available. 
    11.5.5 During the period of authorized sick leave the employee's medical insurance shall be paid by the City. Additional sick time shall not be accrued. 
    11.5.6 The Administrative Assistant may request a doctor's certificate of fitness prior to an employee returning to work or, as proof of illness, prior to payment for sick leave. 
    11.5.7 All sick leave shall be recorded in the employee's permanent record and reviewed periodically by the Administrative Assistant. 
    11.5.8 Commencing with Fiscal Year 2017-2018 and each Fiscal Year thereafter, any employee who is absent less than their allotted sick days in any Fiscal Year, the employee shall be paid 50% of their regular hourly rate for any unused sick days. Such payments shall be made during the following month after the end of the Fiscal Year on a scheduled pay day. 
    11.5.9 Short Term Disability: Short term disability shall apply to any extended absence for sickness or non-job-related injury of more than seven (7) consecutive calendar days. Weekly benefits will be paid in the amount of one hundred percent (100%) of normal weekly straight time earnings for a maximum duration of two (2) weeks if approved by the Department Head and/or the Administrative Assistant. If the Department Head and/or the Administrative Assistant does not approve all or part of the two (2) weeks, the employee, at his option, may use all or part of his unused occasional days for the unpaid portion of the two (2) weeks. If the Short-Term Disability is approved, after the first two weeks of absence and for a maximum duration of twenty-six (26) weeks after the first day of absence, weekly benefits will be paid in the amount of sixty-six and two-thirds percent (66-2/3%) of normal weekly straight time earnings, provided the employee is under the care of a licensed physician. The Employee may supplement their payments during the twenty-four (24) weeks that they receive sixty-six and two-thirds percent (66-2/3%) of normal weekly straight time earnings with unused accumulated sick time, vacation time and personal time, in that order, until such benefits are expired. The Employee must request in writing that he/she elects to supplement their short-term disability payments with said accrued credited benefits. 
    11.5.10 Long Term Disability: Employees who, after twenty-six (26) weeks, are totally and permanently disabled and are unable to perform their own job or any other occupation or trade to which they are suited by reason of education or training may be eligible to receive a long-term disability benefit, provided that they qualify under the terms of a Disability Policy maintained by the City with an insurance carrier. The employee may apply for such benefit and if qualified by the insurance carrier, the employee will receive an amount equal to fifty percent (50%) of their normal monthly straight time earnings at the time of their disablement less any payments for which they are eligible from Social Security and any other insurance or pension plan to which the City has contributed. Employees shall be eligible for long term disability benefits for the length of their disablement up to the normal retirement date of the Federal Social Security Act. The Employee may supplement their payments of long term disability with unused accumulated sick time, vacation time and personal time, in that order, until such benefits are expired. The Employee must request in writing that he/she elects to supplement their long-term disability payments with said accrued credited benefits. 
    11.6 Job-Related Sick Leave. Any employee who is absent from work as a result of illness or accident covered by the State of Connecticut Workers' Compensation Law and who are receiving payments for temporary total disability under said Act shall be paid the difference between their normal base pay less applicable deductions and the amount of the Workers' compensation benefit for the period of temporary total disability not to exceed six (6) months. 
    11.7 Military Leave: Military leave, as mandated by state statute, shall be granted to full-time employees when required. 
    11.8 Jury Duty: Time off for jury duty shall be granted to all employees. The employee shall receive compensation equal to the difference between payment for jury duty and his normal base pay upon submission of evidence of service satisfactory to the Administrative Assistant and the finance department. 
    11.9 Personal Leave: Up to three (3) paid personal days may be granted by the Administrative Assistant for the following reasons: 
a)  Serious illness of the employee's spouse, child, or other member of the employee's immediate family for whose care the employee is responsible. 
b)  Handling legal matters requiring an absence of the employee. 
c)  Attendance at a funeral not covered by the Bereavement Policy in 11.9. 
d)  Any other reasons of a similar magnitude as approved by the Administrative Assistant or designee. 
Personal Business Leave for other than reasons a) through c) may not be taken on the day before or after an employee's scheduled vacation or holiday. 
    11.10 Bereavement Leave: Paid bereavement leave shall be granted by the Administrative Assistant or designee in accordance with the following schedule: 
a)  Immediate family - up to five (5) working days leave with pay. "Immediate Family" shall be defined as spouse, children, parents, siblings, grandchild and any other relative domiciled with the employee. 
b)  Up to three (3) days leave with pay for the death of the employee's grandparent, parent-in-law and sibling-in-law. 
c)  Other relatives - one (1) working day with pay for the death of the employee's aunt or uncle. 
    11.11 Conference Leave: Authorized leaves of absence for one (1) or more days may be granted by the Administrative Assistant upon recommendation of the department head, to employees for attendance at conferences, meetings, education or training courses, etc. 
    11.12 Leave of Absence Without Pay: The Mayor, or his designee, may at his sole discretion, grant a leave of absence without pay to an employee for a period not to exceed one (1) year. The employee must request such leave, in writing, indicating the reason for the request, the dates of the leave and other pertinent information. Thirty (30) days before the leave of absence expires the employee must advise the City, in writing, of the date of expected return to work or tender a formal resignation. If the leave of absence is for ninety (90) calendar days or less and the employee returns within the ninety (90) calendar days or less, the employee shall be reinstated to the position held at the time the leave was granted. The City shall have no obligation to reinstate any employee to his own position or an equivalent position, if the leave of absence exceeds ninety (90) calendar days. Any employee granted a leave of absence without pay shall not qualify for fringe benefits during the period of leave. However, the employee may continue insurance benefits at his own expense in accordance with the requirements of federal and state law. Leaves of ninety (90) days or less shall not affect continuation of medical insurance. 
    11.13 Pension: Employees shall be entitled to such pension benefits or City of Shelton Money Purchase Pension Plan, as may be amended by the City from time to time, as are provided for in other ordinances of the City or in any collective bargaining agreement or pension plan which may be applicable. 
    11.14 Longevity. A one-time per year longevity payment shall be made as follows: 
5 years or more service $100.00 10 years or more service $200.00 15 years or more service $300.00 20 years or more service $400.00 25 years or more service $500.00  
    This longevity payment shall be made in the month of December based upon years of service attained within the previous fiscal year. 
    11.15 Tuition Assistance - the City shall provide the following assistance to full-time employees who have completed one year of continuous service for reimbursement of the expense of tuition incurred for job-related educational courses as follows: 
    A maximum of five hundred dollars $500.00 each calendar year per employee. 
    This tuition assistance is subject to the following limitations: 
a.  Courses must be sponsored by a recognized educational institution. 
b.  Courses must be completed with a grade of B or better. 
c.  The employee must obtain approval from his immediate supervisor and from the administrative assistant or designee before enrolling in the course. Certification by the immediate supervisor that the course is job-related is required. 
d.  Upon completion of the course, the employee must forward a transcript of grades and tuition invoices to the personnel office. Fifty percent (50%) of the tuition cost shall be paid by the city. 
    11.16 Life and Accidental Death and Dismemberment Insurance in the amount of One (1) times Annual Base Salary; this benefit is reduced by 50% when the employee reaches age 70. 
    11.17 Medical Plan - The City will continue in effect a group health insurance program for all full-time employees and their eligible dependents. The City reserves the right to discontinue, modify, or amend such plan from time to time. Said plan shall be as is generally provided for in other ordinances of the City or not less than in any collective bargaining agreement (except the Police CBA) which may be applicable. 
    11.17.1 Voluntary Waiver of Medical Insurance. 
a.  On a completely voluntary basis, any employee who is enrolled in medical insurance through another source may elect to waive the medical insurance coverage provided by the City. 
b.  The procedures to elect a waiver of medical insurance coverage are as follows: 
1.  The employee must complete an appropriate waiver form and provide evidence of existing medical insurance coverage. The form and the evidence of medical insurance coverage must be completed during the May open enrollment period and submitted to the Benefits Office at City Hall. 
2.  A secondary enrollment period will be offered in December of each year. 
3.  The waiver of insurance shall be in effect for one year from the following July 1 through June 30. Once the waiver form has been filed with the City, the waiver shall continue to be in effect from year-to-year thereafter until the employee elects to reenroll in the medical insurance plan. 
c.  An employee waiving medical insurance coverage shall be eligible for a payment as indicated below, subject to any limitations under the law: 
Single plan - $3,500 
2 people - $4,000 
Family - $4,500 
Said payment shall be payable during August following the fiscal year for which the waiver was effective. If the employee signs for the waiver in December, a prorated payment will be made in August for the first year. In addition, if an employee is terminated, and the employee is otherwise eligible for the waiver payment, the waiver payment shall likewise be prorated based upon the date of termination, with the payment also being made in the August following termination. 
d.  Newly hired employees electing to waive medical insurance coverage may do so upon commencing employment with the insurance waiver taking effect on the normal effective date for medical insurance coverage. The first August payment shall be made to the employee on a pro-rata basis. 
e.  In the event an employee who has elected to waive medical insurance coverage wishes to reinstate such coverage, the following shall apply: 
1.  Except as provided in 2 below, application for medical insurance must be made during the May open enrollment period; coverage will be reinstated effective the following July 1 st . 
2.  An employee who loses alternate medical insurance due to a qualifying event may request to re-Section enroll in the City's medical insurance plan. A request for reinstatement must be made in writing to the Benefits Office at City Hall. Reinstatement of coverage shall be approved upon the employee's providing satisfactory proof of loss of alternate medical insurance coverage due to a qualifying event. The medical insurance will be reinstated as soon as the insurance provider is able to effectuate the coverage. 
3.  Any employee who has waived his insurance coverage shall be entitled to a prorated payment in August providing that the coverage has been waived for at least six months. 
ARTICLE XII - DISCIPLINARY PROCEDURES 
    12.0 Disciplinary action against any regular employee shall be taken only for cause including but not limited to any violation of the Charter, and the following procedures shall apply. Records of disciplinary action shall be maintained in the employee's personnel file and a copy given to the employee. Appeals from disciplinary action shall be in accordance with the provisions of Article III-Grievance Procedure. 
    12.1 There shall be five (5) classes of disciplinary action. The class assessed will depend upon the severity of the offense. Class I disciplinary action may be taken at the discretion of the individual department head. Any action taken in Class II, II or IV must have the approval of the Administrative Assistant whose signature must appear in the letter of notification to the employee. The Administrative Assistant will be responsible for administering Class I, II, III, and IV disciplinary action against a department head. Any action taken in Class V must have the approval of the Mayor or designee whose signature must appear in the letter of notification to the employee. 
    12.2 Class I Disciplinary Action-Written Reprimand. The department head may issue a written reprimand to an employee with a copy to the Administrative Assistant. 
    12.3 Class II Disciplinary Action-Suspension: Suspension without pay may be imposed when, after investigation of an employee offense, the Administrative Assistant concludes that such disciplinary action is appropriate. Suspension without pay shall not exceed thirty (30) days. A letter of notification will be sent to the employee stating the nature of the offense and the length of the suspension. When serious misconduct is alleged requiring the immediate removal of the employee from the workplace, the Administrative Assistant may immediately suspend the employee prior to conducting an investigation and making a determination regarding disciplinary action. 
    12.4 Class III Disciplinary Action -Probationary Status: A regular employee whose performance evaluation indicates less than satisfactory performance of job duties may be placed on a probationary period of a defined length during which the employee must demonstrate improved job performance in accordance with written standards established by the employee's supervisor and the Administrative Assistant. 
    12.5 Class IV Disciplinary Action-Demotion: The disciplinary transfer of an employee to a lower salary grade may be imposed by the Administrative Assistant. A letter of notification will be sent to the employee stating the reasons for the demotion. 
    12.6 Class V Disciplinary Action - Dismissal: Dismissal is the disciplinary termination of an employee's employment with the City. Any action taken in this class must be approved by the Mayor or the authority designated by the Mayor. As used in the subsections of Section 12.6, the term "Mayor" shall include any authority designated by the Mayor. 
    12.6.1 An employee who is subject to dismissal shall be advised in writing by the department head and/or the Administrative Assistant that the dismissal is being considered and that the has a right to an informal pre-termination hearing with the Mayor by requesting such hearing within three (3) business days of being so advised. At the hearing, the employee will have the opportunity to hear the charges against him, to receive an explanation of the facts leading to the charges and to explain his view of the events leading to the charges. Such hearing shall not prevent the Mayor from proceeding with the dismissal as deemed necessary. 
    12.6.2 If, at the completion of the pre-termination hearing, the Mayor decides that the appropriate disciplinary action falls with Class I, II or III, the employee shall be so notified by the Mayor in writing. 
    12.6.3 Following the pre-termination hearing, if an employee is dismissed, a letter of notification signed by the Mayor shall be sent by certified mail to the employee, which will clearly state the nature of the offense, the effective date of the dismissal and the reasons for such action. The letter of notification will advise the employee of his right to appeal under the grievance procedure to the PEAB, and will state that the appeal must be taken within ten (10) days of the effective date of the action by filing a grievance with the Mayor and the PEAB. 
ARTICLE XIII - SEPARATIONS 
    13.0 Continued employment of every employee shall be contingent upon satisfactory performance of duties, attendance, conduct and ability. 
    13.1 Employees may be separated from employment with the City for the following reasons: 
    13.1.1 Dismissal: As set forth in Article XII. 
    13.1.2 Termination for Inability to Perform Due to Permanent Disability: An employee shall be deemed "permanently disabled" if it is determined that the employee suffers from either a physical or a mental disability that will substantially impair the performance of his job duties for a period of not less than one (1) year beyond the date of the determination. In the event the disability determination is made by the employee's physician, the City may appoint a physician to review the determination. In the event the disability determination is made by a physician appointed by the City, the employee's physician may review the determination. When there is a conflict between the opinion of the employee's physician and the opinion of the physician selected by the City, a third physician, mutually appointed by the first two physicians, shall render his opinion which shall prevail. Physician's fees shall be paid by the City unless otherwise covered by the employee's health insurance. In the event that the physicians determine that the employee is permanently disabled, as hereinbefore defined, and the employee does not voluntarily resign his employment, then dismissal procedures shall be initiated. 
    13.1.3 Layoff: An employee may be terminated at any time because of a lack of work or the lack of funds to support the employee's position or a reduction in force or the elimination of the employee's position. Any laid-off employee shall have the right to be recalled if the position becomes available within one (1) year. Notice of recall shall be given in writing by certified mail, return receipt requested, and must be accepted or declined in writing within ten (10) days of receipt. If the employee elects not to return to work, his recall rights shall be automatically terminated. If a position does not become available within one (1) year, the employee shall lose all rights to employment with the City and may apply for any new position in accordance with Articles VI-VIII of the Merit System. 
    13.1.4 Resignation: Employee resignations shall be submitted in writing, no less than two (2) weeks in advance of the effective date of the resignation. The written resignation shall specify the effective date of the resignation. 
    13.1.5 Retirement: Retirement shall be defined as termination upon or after completion of twenty-five (25) years of continuous uninterrupted service with the City or termination upon or after attaining age sixty-five (65). 
    13.1.6 Death or Other Termination. 
    13.2 Payment of Fringe Benefits at Termination: The following benefits shall be paid upon an employee's termination, except for termination for cause, at the employee's current rate of pay at the time of termination. 
    13.2.1 Unused accrued vacation days, provided that unused vacation days may not be carried over from one fiscal year to the next... 
    13.2.2 Unused accrued floating holidays, provided that unused floating holidays may not be carried over from one fiscal year to the next. 
    13.2.3 Unused accrued compensatory time up to a maximum of twenty-four (24) hours, provided that unused compensatory time may not be carried over from one fiscal year to the next. 
    13.2.4 Except for employees eligible for the Sick Leave Reimbursement Plan and provided that sick days may not be carried over from one fiscal year to the next, the employee will be paid 50% of their regular hourly rate for any unused sick days at time of termination. 
ARTICLE XIV - RECORDS 
    14.0 The Administrative Assistant shall maintain adequate records of the proceedings of the PEAB, all personnel actions, the examination record of every candidate and the employment record of every employee. Records shall be retained in accordance with the record retention schedule adopted by the State of Connecticut. 
ARTICLE XV - SAVINGS CLAUSE 
    15.0 Should any part of these rules be declared illegal, all other provisions shall remain in effect. 
(Ord. No. 908, 2-8-18) 
Secs. 2-302-2-350. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - CODE OF ETHICS[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Charter reference- Board of ethics, § 5.4; conflicts of interest, § 9.7. 
State Law reference- Authority of city to adopt a code of ethical conduct, G.S. § 7-148(c)(10)(B). 

Sec. 2-351. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
    Confidential shall mean personal matters and financial matters which, if disclosed, would be of detrimental interest to the city and a violation of trust placed in that person. 
    Employees shall include all employees of the city and of all governmental bodies created under the provisions of the Charter. 
    Interest shall include private financial benefit and interest other than financial, arising from blood or marriage relationships or close business or political association. 
    Officials shall include elected and appointed officials and officers, whether paid or unpaid, and members of all governmental bodies created under the provisions of the Charter, and all other city ordinances and applicable statutes. 
    Participating shall include the rendering of advice, or recommendation, investigation, approval, disapproval or otherwise influencing a decision or action. 
(Ord. No. 304, § 1-1, 9-12-77) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 2-352. - Declaration of policy. 
    There is hereby established a code of ethics for all city officers, employees, and officials, whether elected or anointed, paid or unpaid. The purpose of this article is to establish suitable ethical standards for all such officers, employees and officials by prohibiting acts or actions incompatible with the discharge of their public duties and the best interests of the city and by directing disclosure of private financial interest or personal interest in matters affecting the city by such officers, employees and officials. Any violations of this article may constitute a cause for suspension, removal from office or employment or other disciplinary action as more particularly set forth in section 2-356. 
(Ord. No. 304, § 1-2, 9-12-77) 
Sec. 2-353. - Conflict of interest prohibited. 
(a)  No officer, employee or official shall engage in or participate in any business or transaction, or shall have an interest, direct or indirect, which is incompatible with the proper discharge of his official duties in the public interest or would tend to impair his independent judgment or action in the performance of his official duties. 
(b)  No officer, employee or official shall solicit or accept any substantial gift, whether in the form of a service, loan, thing, or promise, from any person, which to his knowledge is interested in business dealings with the city. 
(c)  No officer, employee or official shall appear, for personal gain, in behalf of private interests before any board, agency, or committee of the city, nor shall he, for personal gain, represent private interests in any action or proceeding against the interest of the city in any litigation to which the city is a party. 
(d)  Nothing in this section shall prohibit the officer, employee or official from appearing before any board or commission on his own behalf. No officer, employee or official shall, without proper authorization, disclose confidential information concerning city affairs, nor shall he use such information to advance the financial interests of private interests of himself or others. 
(Ord. No. 304, § 1-3, 9-12-77) 
Sec. 2-354. - Nondiscrimination. 
(a)  No officer, employee or official shall discriminate against or favor any individual, or cause, based solely upon race, color, creed, sex or age. 
(b)  No officer, employee or official shall request or permit the use of city-owned vehicles, equipment, facilities, materials, or property for personal convenience or profit, except when such are available to the public generally or are provided as municipal policy for the use of such officer, employee or official in the interest of the city. 
(c)  No officer, employee or official shall grant any special consideration, treatment, or favor, or advantage to any person beyond that which is generally available to residents or taxpayers of the city. 
(Ord. No. 304, § 1-4, 9-12-77) 
Sec. 2-355. - Written disclosure of interest. 
    Any officer, employee or official having any financial or private interest as designated in section 2-353(a) shall file written disclosures of the interest with the city/town clerk, the board of ethics, the board of aldermen and the mayor as soon as he becomes aware of such interest. Such written disclosure shall set forth in detail the nature and extent of such interest. 
(Ord. No. 304, § 1-5, 9-12-77; Ord. No. 781, § 1-5, 5-13-04) 
Sec. 2-356. - Board of ethics. 
(a)  There is hereby created a board of ethics which shall be charged with the administration of this article. 
(b)  The board of ethics shall be composed of three (3) resident electors, and at no time shall more than one (1) member be of the same political party. The mayor shall appoint all members to this board. Of the three (3) members initially appointed, one (1) shall be appointed for a term of three (3) years, one (1) for a term of two (2) years and one (1) for a term of one (1) year. Thereafter, upon the expiration of the initial term of any member of the board, or in the event a vacancy exists on the board, the mayor shall appoint a member to fill the vacancy. Each member shall serve until his successor has been appointed. 
(c)  The board of ethics shall promulgate and adopt reasonable rules and regulations for the administration of its proceedings. The rules and regulations so promulgated and all amendments thereto shall be made available at the office of the city/town clerk to any elector of the city. 
(d)  The board of ethics shall receive complaints of any violation of this article and shall, upon such complaint, investigate the same or obtain investigative services from the police department, and may hold private hearings thereon if, in the opinion of the majority of the board of ethics, the complaint warrants a hearing. Any complaint received by the board of ethics must be in writing and signed by the individual making said complaint. This board of ethics will issue a written reply to all such complaints. Upon receiving such complaint, the board of ethics shall privately notify the person against whom complaint has been filed, advising the concerned party of the specific nature of the complaint made and being investigated by the board of ethics. Upon receipt of the notice from the board of ethics, the party so notified that a complaint has been filed against him shall have a right to demand a public or private hearing by the board of ethics. In the event that the board of ethics decides that a hearing is required or the person whose conduct is being called into question demands a hearing, the hearing shall afford the person whose conduct is called into question the right to cross-examine anyone testifying against him or meet or answer any complaint of his conduct, and to present evidence in his own behalf. No hearing, however, may be conducted with less than two (2) members of the board of ethics in attendance. 
(e)  If the board of ethics shall receive complaints against any officer, employee or official of the city, the investigation and disposition of which has been delegated to other boards or commissions created by the Charter, then in that event the board of ethics shall forward the complaint received to the appropriate board or commission. The board or commission to which such complaints are forwarded shall thereafter notify the board of ethics of the disposition made of such complaint, and the board of ethics shall review the disposition. 
(f)  The board of ethics shall report to the board of aldermen its findings as to whether or not a violation of this article has occurred, together with recommendations as to the disposition to be made. The board of aldermen shall thereupon take such action as it deems appropriate or take action in accordance with the provisions of the Charter. 
(g)  The board of ethics may upon the written request of any officer, employee or official, or resident of the city, or upon its own initiative render written advisory opinions concerning any matters relating to the code of ethics. 
(h)  All opinions and recommendations of the board of ethics, whether advisory or the result of a complaint, shall be kept on file with the board of ethics. 
(Ord. No. 304, § 1-6, 9-12-77) 
Charter reference- Board of ethics, § 5.4. 
Cross reference- Boards, commissions and committees, § 2-41 et seq. 
State Law reference- Authority of city to establish board of ethics, G.S. § 7-148h. 
Sec. 2-357. - Amendments. 
    This article may be amended only by ordinance in conformity with the provisions of the Charter. 
(Ord. No. 304, § 1-8, 9-12-77) 
Sec. 2-358. - Conflicts. 
    Should any provision of this article conflict with any provisions of federal law or the state general statutes then the provisions of the federal law or the state general statutes shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 304, § 1-7, 9-12-77) 
Secs. 2-359-2-370. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - RETIREMENT INCENTIVE PROGRAM[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Editor's note- Sections 1-5 of Ord. No. 647, adopted July 9, 1992, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, inclusion as Ch. 2, Art. VIII, §§ 2-371-2-375 was at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 2-371. - Retirement incentives described. 
    The retirement incentives described herein shall be made available to all employees who meet the following eligibility requirements: 
(1)  The employee is a full-time, nonunion employee of the city (excluding the Shelton Board of Education); 
(2)  The employee is a participant in the City of Shelton Money Purchase Plan; 
(3)  The employee has reached the age of sixty (60) or older before July 1, 2001; 
(4)  As of July 1, 2001, the city has employed the employee full-time for no less than ten (10) consecutive years. 
(Ord. No. 647, § 1, 7-9-92; Ord. No. 671, § 1, 5-12-94; Ord. No. 685, § 1, 4-13-95; Ord. No. 737, § 1, 7-8-99; Ord. No. 752, § 1, 5-10-01) 
Sec. 2-372. - Form required. 
    Each eligible employee will receive a letter from the city offering the Retirement Incentive Program. To participate in the Retirement Incentive Program, the employee must accept the city's offer by completing a prescribed form no later than May 15, 2001. Said form shall indicate acceptance of the Retirement Incentive Program and an intention to retire on or before July 30, 2001. 
(Ord. No. 647, § 2, 7-9-92; Ord. No. 671, § 2, 7-15-94; Ord. No. 685, § 2, 4-13-95; Ord. No. 737, § 2, 7-8-99; Ord. No. 752, § 2, 5-10-01) 
Sec. 2-373. - Medical benefits. 
    As a retirement incentive, the city shall provide each eligible employee and spouse the medical benefit described herein for a period not to exceed five (5) years from the employee's actual retirement date. For any employee and/or employee's spouse who is not eligible for Medicare on the employee's retirement date, the city shall allow the employee and the employee's spouse to continue to participate in the medical insurance program (excluding dental insurance) described in the merit system and personnel rules. For said insurance, the city shall pay a percentage share of the premium, which is the same as the percentage the city pays for active employees and their spouses. For any employee and/or the employee's spouse who is eligible for Medicare on the employee's retirement date, or who becomes eligible for Medicare during the first five (5) years following the employee's retirement date, in lieu of the forgoing medical insurance, the city shall provide a basic Medicare supplement plan. For said Medicare supplement, the city shall pay the percentage share of the premium, which is the same as the percentage share the city pays for active employees and their spouses. In order to be eligible for the foregoing medical insurance benefits, the employee's spouse must be married to the employee as of the employee's retirement date. 
(Ord. No. 647, § 3, 7-9-92; Ord. No. 671, § 3, 5-12-94; Ord. No. 685, § 3, 4-13-95; Ord. No. 737, § 3, 7-8-99; Ord. No. 752, § 3, 5-10-01) 
Sec. 2-374. - Expiration of program. 
    The retirement incentive program described herein is offered by the city this one time only and shall not serve as a precedent in the future. This offer expires on July 30, 2001. 
(Ord. No. 674, § 5, 7-9-92; Ord. No. 671, § 5, 5-12-94; Ord. No. 685, § 4, 4-13-95; Ord. No. 737, § 4, 7-8-99; Ord. No. 752, § 4, 5-10-01) 
Chapter 3 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Public building committees, § 5.3.2; department of inspection and compliance, § 6.6. 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 4; flood damage prevention, Ch. 5; garbage, trash and refuse, Ch. 6; housing, Ch. 8; planning, Ch. 12; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 14; building material left in streets, § 14-2; storing building material on streets restricted, § 14-3; utilities, Ch. 17; zoning, App. A; subdivisions, App. B. 
State Law reference- State building code applicable to all municipalities, G.S. § 29-253. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 3-1. - Fire limits. 
    The following area is hereby designated as the fire limits of the city; commencing on the Housatonic River at a point where a continuation of the centerline of Myrtle Street intersects the westerly shore line of the river, thence westerly along the centerline of Myrtle Street to its intersection with the centerline of Coram Avenue, thence in a general northerly direction along the centerline of Coram Avenue to its intersection with the centerline of Wooster Street, thence westerly along the centerline of Wooster Street to its intersection with the centerline of Brook Street, thence northerly along the centerline of Brook Street to its intersection with the centerline of Howe Avenue, thence northwesterly along the centerline of Howe Avenue to its intersection with the southerly line of Wheeler Street and thence easterly to the Housatonic River along an imaginary line extending the southerly boundary of Wheeler Street to its intersection with the westerly shore of the Housatonic River, thence southerly along the westerly shore of the Housatonic River to the point of beginning. 
(Comp. Ords. 1975, § 22.1(1)) 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 4. 
Sec. 3-2. - Certificate of occupancy; denial; appeal; penalty. 
(a)  The building inspector shall not issue a certificate of occupancy on any house when, in his judgment, the road or highway leading thereto is insufficient to permit the passage with reasonable safety of fire, police and other emergency vehicles. 
(b)  Any person who sells or who occupies a house for which a certificate of occupancy has been refused by the building inspector shall be fined more than one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(c)  Any person aggrieved by an order of the building inspector as provided by subsection (a) of this section shall have a right of appeal within seven (7) days from the issuance of the order to the board of aldermen. The board of aldermen shall hold a hearing and decide the matter within fourteen (14) days from the date of the appeal. Any person aggrieved by the order or the determination of the board of aldermen shall have the right of appeal to the court of common pleas for Fairfield County, as provided by section 52-7 of the general statutes. 
(Ord. No. 85, 9-9-68) 
Sec. 3-3. - Insurance required for erection, installation, etc., of signs. 
    The amount of insurance required before a sign may be erected, installed, removed, hung or maintained over public property as set forth in section 1406.1 of the building code shall be not less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for each accident and twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) for property damage. With regard to an application where the building official believes that because of the nature or size of the particular sign being installed, that the aforementioned limits are inadequate, the building official may require additional insurance not to exceed one million dollars ($1,000,000.00). 
(Ord. No. 422, 12-10-81) 
Sec. 3-4. - Trailer houses; trailer coaches. 
    Any trailer house or trailer coach used for human habitation which remains on any lot or land within the limits of the city for more than thirty (30) days within any twelve-month period shall be construed to be a dwelling and, as such, shall be subject to all the regulations of the fire limits and building code and zoning ordinance. 
(Comp. Ords. 1975, § 22.1(4)). 
State Law reference- Authority of city to regulate parked trailers when located off the public highways, G.S. § 7-148(c)(7)(A)(iv). 
Sec. 3-5. - Trailer parks and camps. 
(a)  No trailer park or trailer camp for the accommodation of transient or permanent trailers shall be permitted in any zone in the city. 
(b)  No automobile trailer, or trailer coach, used for human habitation shall be allowed to remain for more than seven (7) days within one (1) year upon any land within the city except in the existing trailer camps. 
(c)  Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be fined in accordance with section 1-11. 
(Comp. Ords. 1975, § 22.1(4, 5)). 
State Law reference- Authority of city to regulate trailer parks and mobile home parks, G.S. § 7-148(c)(7)(A)(iv). 
Sec. 3-6. - Violation of state building code; penalty. 
    Any person who shall violate a provision of the state building code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or shall erect, construct, alter or repair a building or structure in violation of any approved plan or directive of the building official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of the state building code shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding one (1) year, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 122, § 1, 2-24-72) 
Sec. 3-7. - Stop work order; penalty for violation. 
    Any person who shall continue any work in or about the building after having been served with a stop order, except such work as he is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe conditions, shall be liable to a fine of not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) or more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 122, § 2, 2-24-72) 
Secs. 3-8-3-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PERMITS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 9. 

Sec. 3-26. - Required. 
    A separate building permit for each type of work, including but not limited to the following, shall be required for construction performed in the city: 
(1)  Building permit required for: 
a.  Buildings; new construction, alterations, repairs, renovations, rehabilitation. 
b.  Demolition; all structures, fee based on twenty-five (25) percent of assessed value or minimum of ten dollars ($10.00). 
c.  Swimming pools, sheds, barns, garages, greenhouses, etc. 
d.  Signs; fifty cents ($0.50) per square foot, each face, plus structure as applicable. 
e.  Fireplace additions; approved prefab wood, coal and coke burning stoves, etc. 
f.  Electric generating systems, requiring a conventional energy resource such as petroleum products, natural gas or electricity, structure. 
g.  Radio, T.V., etc., tower structures. 
h.  Reroofing; one dollar ($1.00) per square or fraction thereof (1 square = 100 sq. ft.); permit is not required for first recovering (second layer) second recovering (third layer) is prohibited and roofing must be stripped down to roof sheathing and a permit shall be required; structural inspection shall be made before covering. 
i.  Residing; one dollar ($1.00) per square or fraction thereof (1 square = 100 sq. ft.) 
j.  Outside liquid storage. 
k.  Dry bulk storage. 
l.  Building moving. 
(2)  Electrical permit required for: 
a.  Electrical; all work including new installations, revamp, additions, etc. 
b.  Air conditioning systems. 
c.  Refrigeration systems. 
d.  Temporary electrical service. 
e.  Swimming pool, electrical portion. 
f.  Electric hot water heaters. 
g.  Security/burglary alarm systems. 
h.  Fire/smoke/heat detector systems. 
i.  Electric generating systems requiring a conventional energy resource such as petroleum products, natural gas or electricity, electrical portion. 
j.  Radio, T.V. cable systems. 
(3)  Plumbing permit required for: 
a.  Plumbing; all work including new installations, revamp, additions, etc. 
b.  Hot water heaters, plumbing portion. 
c.  Outside liquid storage tanks (oil tanks, etc.); requires fire marshal approval for plumbing portion. 
d.  Building sewer/septic system connection lines to city sewer. 
e.  Building water connection to public supply. 
(4)  Heating permit required for: 
a.  Heating; all work including new installations, revamp, additions, etc., for oil, gas, hot water, forced air, steam, wood, coal systems, etc. 
(Ord. No. 290, 3-14-77) 
Sec. 3-27. - Application procedures generally. 
(a)  No application for a building permit required by this article shall be accepted for review and approval by the building official, unless the applicant presents, if applicable, the following: 
(1)  Permit for installation of sanitary sewage disposal system issued by the Lower Naugatuck Valley district public health department or a permit for connection to city sewer system issued by the sewer administrator; 
(2)  An approved application for a certificate of zoning compliance issued by the zoning officer; 
(3)  In the case of a lot where utilities are not extended to the street line, and installation within the city right-of-way is necessary an excavation permit issued by the city engineer is required; 
(4)  An approved application for a driveway permit, for each driveway, issued by the city engineer. Off-street parking must be provided to accommodate the automobiles of all persons using or visiting a use, building or other structures at any one (1) time. Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with the parking space standards of the zoning regulations of the city. 
(b)  When the Valley health authority or the duly authorized health authority of the city indicates that a builder must install a specially designed or engineered septic system due to soil conditions which are unfavorable for normal septic system operation, the certificate of occupancy shall not be issued until there is compliance with all provisions of the regulations and conditions of the specially designed septic system and private portable well water supply, if applicable, as indicated on appropriate permits. Compliance will be based upon written notification to the building official of the Valley health department or the duly authorized health authority of the city that both the sewage disposal system and the potable well water supply, if applicable, have met existing state and local health code regulations. 
(Ord. No. 290, 3-14-77; Ord. No. 293, 5-9-77) 
Sec. 3-28. - Fee schedule. 
(a)  Permit fees for all construction and mechanical (electrical, plumbing, heating) work performed within the city shall conform to the following fee schedule: 
Minimum fee, all permits\$10.00 
Certificate of Occupancy\$20.00 
Mobile home inspection (Public Act Number 76-143)\$30.00 
Demolition permit: Estimated value based on twenty-five (25) percent of assessed structure value. 
(b)  All building department permits: 
First thousand, per hundred\$2.00 
Everything above $1,000.00, per thousand or fraction thereof\$10.00 
(Note: The forgoing equates approximately to one (1) percent of the total construction value based upon the following per square foot cost). 
Residential 
1 st Floor\$80.00 SF 
2 nd Floor\$60.00 SF 
Finished Basement\$25.00 SF 
Garage\$40.00 SF 
Open Deck\$25.00 SF 
Enclosed Deck\$30.00 SF 
Shed\$10.00 SF 
Room Over Garage\$60.00 SF 
Carport\$30.00 SF 
Barn\$40.00 SF 
Commercial 
First Floor\$100.00 SF 
Second Floor\$60.00 SF 
(c)  Processing and handling fee (used for technology): 
For all permits\$5.00 
(d)  Search fee. For any request of records which exceeds five (5) years and stored off-site, there shall be a search fee of twenty dollars ($20.00). 
(Ord. No. 290, 3-14-77; Ord. No. 504, 7-10-86; Ord. No. 725, 6-11-98; Ord. No. 886, 2-11-15) 
Sec. 3-29. - Sign required on lots. 
    On any lot for which a building permit has been issued under the provisions of this article, the applicant shall post an all-weather sign, visible from the street line, twelve (12) inches by twelve (12) inches minimum, with numerals seven (7) inches high indicating the lot number. No permit shall be required for such sign. No inspections will be conducted unless the lot has been so identified. 
(Ord. No. 290, 3-14-77) 
Sec. 3-30. - Swimming pool. 
(a)  No person shall construct any permanent type swimming pool or any portable-type swimming pool with a capacity exceeding fifteen thousand (15,000) gallons within the limit of the city until he has obtained a permit therefor from the building inspector. The building inspector shall require the construction of a fence of a minimum height of four (4) feet, suitable in construction to prevent access to the pool other than by a designated gate with a latch, or other safety provision as a condition precedent to the granting of such permit. 
(b)  All presently existing pools shall be provided with such fence within one (1) year from the date of passage of the ordinance from which this section derives. 
(Ord. No. 44, 9-14-64) 
Sec. 3-31. - Radiation fallout or bomb shelters. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any provision of the building code or ordinance of the city, the building inspector shall not require any fee or money payment for a building permit for the construction of any shelter designed and declared by the builder to be a radiation fallout or bomb shelter built in accordance with plans and specifications established by the office of civil defense. 
(b)  If any such radiation fallout or bomb shelter is to be erected or constructed as a part of any new construction, only that part of the value of the new construction attributable to the shelters shall be exempt from building permit fees. 
(c)  The structural, fire, health and safety minimum requirements of the shelters shall comply with the city building codes or ordinances where applicable. 
(Ord. No. 10, 11-13-61) 
Sec. 3-32. - Requirements for subdivisions. 
    In proposed or existing subdivisions no building permit shall be issued for construction of any nature on any lot or proposed lot until such time as the subdivision or proposed subdivision has received approval of the planning commission and not until the subdivider or owner has complied with all conditions of approval and has completed all subdivision improvement or has caused such road and subdivision to be bonded in accordance with the regulations of the planning commission. 
(Comp. Ords. 1975, §§ 22.1(1), 22.3(2)) 
Cross reference- Subdivisions, App. B. 
Sec. 3-33. - Compliance with zoning ordinance required. 
    No building permit shall be issued except in conformity with the zoning ordinance and other applicable ordinances of the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 1975, § 22.3(3)) 
Cross reference- Zoning, App. A. 
Sec. 3-34. - Requirements for structures not on a public street. 
(a)  No building permit shall be issued for the erection of a building or structure unless such building or structure is to be located on a lot having frontage on a state highway, other than a limited access state highway, an accepted city highway or street, a highway [or street shown on a map approved by the municipal] planning commission and filed in the office of the city/town clerk and either constructed in accordance with the requirements of the municipal planning commission or guaranteed to be so constructed by a bond in full force and effect. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) of this section building permits may be issued for the erection of farm buildings or farm-related structures not used for human occupancy or for the erection of additions to or buildings or structures accessory to an existing building or structure, provided that such addition or accessory building or structure is not designed or intended to achieve conversion of a seasonal cottage dwelling to a year-round dwelling or to permit occupancy of a dwelling by additional families. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, building permits may be issued for the erection of buildings or structures to be owned or leased by the city, the state or United States government or of a public utility company as defined in section 16-1 of the general statutes when the provisions of chapter 354 of the general statutes are applicable to such buildings or structures, provided that the access to such governmental or utility company buildings or structures is approved by the board of aldermen after finding that the access specified in subsection (a) of this section is not necessary or appropriate to the use of such building or structure and the access provided is sufficient for any existing building or structure also relying upon such access. 
(d)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, building permits may be issued for the erection of buildings or structures located on a lot having frontage on a street or highway, or portion thereof, which fails to meet the requirements of subsection (a) if such street or highway, or portion thereof, is already actually in daily use for travel to an existing building on the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives, provided that all of the following requirements are met: 
(1)  Such street or highway, or portion thereof, shall be shown on a map filed in the office of city/town clerk, and shall have a right-of-way not less than fifty (50) feet in width unless a lesser width is approved by the board of aldermen, such width being not less than forty (40) feet. 
(2)  Such street or highway, or portion thereof, shall have been improved with a travelway not less than thirty (30) feet in width and consisting of a uniform gravel or broken stone base, or equivalent, eight (8) inches or more in depth after compaction except where ledge rock is encountered the depth shall have been increased to twelve (12) inches, with a surface course, meeting the requirements of the public works director uniformly graded and rolled and treated with a coating of bituminous material, meeting the requirements of the public works director and applied at a rate of not less than three-quarters gallon per square yard. Such bituminous material shall be covered with clean, sharp sand. The travelway shall be provided with adequate drainage. 
(3)  The above required improvements shall be subject to the approval of the board of aldermen, and the requirements of subsections (d)(2) and (d)(3) of this section shall be applicable to the entire length of such street or highway or portion thereof, where the lot has frontage and from such frontage to a street or highway meeting the requirements of subsection (a) of this section. 
(e)  Building permits may be issued for the erection of buildings or structures located on a lot having frontage on a street or highway, or portion thereof, already actually in daily use for travel to an existing building and even though such street or highway fails to meet the above requirements, provided that construction plans for the above required improvements are submitted to and approved by the board of aldermen and either such improvements are so constructed or a bond in sufficient amount and with satisfactory surety and conditions is presented to and accepted by the board of aldermen to guarantee completion of such improvements. 
(f)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, building permits may be issued for the erection of buildings or structures located on a lot having frontage on a street or highway, or portion thereof, which fails to meet the requirements of subsection (a) even though such street or highway, or portion thereof, is not already actually in daily use for travel to an existing building on the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives, provided that all of the following requirements are met: 
(1)  Such street or highway, or portion thereof, shall be shown on a map, filed in the office of the city/town clerk, and shall have a right-of-way not less than fifty (50) feet in width. 
(2)  Construction plans shall be submitted to and approved by the board of aldermen showing proposed construction of a travelway, drainage, curbs, sidewalks and other improvements meeting city specifications for new streets and either such improvements are so constructed or a bond in sufficient amount and with satisfactory surety and conditions shall be presented to and accepted by the board of aldermen to guarantee completion of such improvements. 
(3)  The above requirements shall be applicable to the entire length of such street or highway, or portion thereof, where the lot has frontage and from such frontage to a street or highway meeting the requirements of either subsection (a) or subsection (d) of this section. 
(g)  For the purpose of this section the term "frontage" is defined as a line which is both the boundary of a lot and the right-of-way, easement or taking line of a street or highway, other than a limited-access state highway, when such "frontage" has a length of twenty (20) feet or more and is practicable for use for vehicular access as determined by the building inspector. 
(h)  The provisions of this section shall not be construed to abrogate or lessen any other regulations, codes or ordinances of the city pertaining to the issuance of building permits. 
(i)  This section is enacted under the provisions of section 8-27 of the general statutes and is intended to promote the development of a street and highway system in the city that is safe and convenient and to assure that all buildings and structures will have ingress and egress satisfactory for fire trucks, ambulances, police cars and other emergency vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 203, §§ 1-8, 1-14-74; Ord. No. 690, 6-8-95; Ord. No. 731, 2-11-99) 
Cross reference- Acceptance of new streets, § 14-14. 
Sec. 3-35. - Permit waiver; municipal projects. 
    When a municipal project shall require a permit, the department issuing that permit may waive any city-mandated fees. 
(Ord. No. 746, 3-8-01) 
Secs. 3-36-3-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ANTI-BLIGHT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 845, adopted Sept. 10, 2009, amended Ord. Nos. 714, 757 and 823, and has been treated as superseding the provisions of said ordinances, which had been codified as §§ 3-41-3-46, to read as now herein codified. 

Sec. 3-41. - Declaration of policy. 
    This section is authorized pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes Section 7-148 (C)(7)(H)(XV) and Section 7-148aa. The Board of Aldermen hereby finds that the prevention and remediation of housing blight is essential to the economic well-being of the City and to the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the City. 
(Ord. No. 845, 9-10-09; Ord. No. 846, 2-11-10; Ord. No. 887, 2-11-15; Ord. No. 892, 11-12-15) 
Sec. 3-42. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this section, the following words and terms shall have the following meanings: 
1)  "Blighted Premises" shall mean any building or any part of a building or structure that is a separate unit, or a parcel of land which is vacant or improved (hereinafter collectively referred to as "Premises") in which at least one (1) of the following conditions exist: 
a)  The Premises are determined by the city Building Official, Zoning Enforcement Officer, Anti-Blight Officer, or by health department reports that existing conditions pose a serious or immediate danger to the community, i.e. a life-threatening condition or a condition which puts at risk the health or safety of the citizens of the city. 
b)  The Premises are not being adequately maintained. The following factors may be considered in determining whether the Premises are not being adequately maintained: missing or boarded windows or doors; collapsing or missing walls, roof or floor; siding that is seriously damaged or missing; graffiti; fences in a state of disrepair; fire damage; a foundation that is structurally faulty; garbage, trash, rubbish, boxes, paper, plastic or refuse of any kind; old furniture, bedding, appliances or anything of the like, or abandoned cars, boats, or any motorized vehicle or other inoperable machinery situated on the Premises or the public right of way (unless the premises is a junkyard legally licensed by the State of Connecticut); rodent harborage and/or infestation; overgrown brush, shrubs or weeds (specifically excluding land which is farmland); dumpsters/steel storage containers on a non-construction site for a period exceeding forty-five (45) days; unauthorized equipment on site (backhoes, bulldozers, dump trucks, etc.); stockpile of wood or stone for a period exceeding forty-five (45) days; which is not intended for use at the Premises or unfinished exterior residential construction projects which shall include the installation of doors, windows, siding and roofing for a period exceeding sixty (60) days. 
c)  The Premises have been cited for code violations as documented in the Office of Building Inspection and Enforcement, Housing Code Inspection, Zoning Enforcement Officer's and Anti-Blight Officer's Reports. 
d)  The Premises have become a place where criminal activity has taken place as documented by police department reports. 
e)  The Premises are a fire hazard as determined by the fire marshal. 
f)  The Premises are a factor creating a substantial and unreasonable interference with the reasonable and lawful use and enjoyment of other space within the building or of other premises within the neighborhood as cancellation of insurance on proximate properties. 
2)  "Building Official" shall mean Building Official as defined in Connecticut General Statute Section 29-260. 
3)  "Dilapidated" shall mean a building or structure or part thereof that would not receive a certificate of occupancy if applied for. 
4)  "Director" shall mean the Director of the Office of Community Development for the City of Shelton. The Director may also be the Anti-Blight Officer. 
5)  "Vacant" shall mean a period of sixty (60) days or longer during which a building or structure or part thereof, or land is not legally occupied or a parcel of land with no structures thereon. 
6)  "Appeals Board" and/or "Hearing Officer" shall mean the Hearing Officer as defined by section 1-11.1 of the Code of Ordinances. 
7)  "Legal Occupancy" shall mean occupancy that is legal by virtue of compliance with state building, state fire safety, local zoning, local housing, and all other pertinent codes, which habitation must be substantiated by a bona fide lease agreement, a rent receipt or a utility statement. 
8)  "Neighborhood" shall mean an area of the city comprised of all premises or parcels of land any part of which is within a radius of four hundred (400) feet of any part of any other parcel or lot within the city. 
9)  "Unit" shall mean any space within a building that is or can be rented by or to a single person or entity for his or its sole use, and is intended to be single and distanced space. 
(Ord. No. 845, § (a), 9-10-09; Ord. No. 846, § (a), 2-11-10; Ord. No. 887, 2-11-15; Ord. No. 892, 11-12-15) 
Sec. 3-43. - Prohibition of creating or maintaining blighted premises. 
    No person, firm or Corporation shall cause or permit blighted premises, as defined herein, to be created or the existence thereof continued on any real property located in the City of Shelton. 
(Ord. No. 845, § (b), 9-10-09; Ord. No. 846, § (b), 2-11-10; Ord. No. 887, 2-11-15; Ord. No. 892, 11-12-15) 
Sec. 3-44. - Certification of list of blighted premises. 
1)  The Anti-Blight Officer shall require members of the Building Department, Police Department, Housing Department, Zoning Enforcement Officers, Anti-Blight Officer and the Fire Marshal's Office to report any real property that they are aware of that appears to be blighted to the Anti-Blight Officer. 
2)  The Anti-Blight Officer shall use this information and any other information on blighted premises that may be available to complete a list of Blighted Premises. 
3)  The Anti-Blight Officer shall review and certify a list of Blighted Premises. Said director shall either approve, disapprove or modify said list. 
4)  The Anti-Blight Officer and Director shall inform the Board of Aldermen's Public Health & Safety Committee at a meeting and at such other times as the Director deems appropriate, of said list. 
5)  On or about the first of each month, all city department heads shall report any real property they are aware of that appears to be blighted to the Director. The Director shall conduct inspections and prepare and update on a monthly basis a list of blighted premises. A copy of the updated list shall be provided monthly to the aldermanic subcommittee. 
(Ord. No. 845, § (c), 9-10-09; Ord. No. 846, § (c), 2-11-10; Ord. No. 887, 2-11-15; Ord. No. 892, 11-12-15) 
Sec. 3-45. - Enforcement. 
1)  The Anti-Blight Officer is charged with enforcing this chapter. The Anti-Blight Officer shall undertake regular inspections of the blighted premises for the purpose of documenting continuing blight. The Anti-Blight Officer shall impose a fine of not less than $50.00 nor more than $100.00 for each day that a building, structure or any part thereof or a parcel of land violates this chapter. The fine shall be retroactive to the date that the Anti-Blight Officer, serves the notice of citation to the owner. Each day that the building or structure or the parcel of land is in violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense. The Anti-Blight Officer shall impose fines for blight by serving a notice of citation on the owner in accordance with this section and shall notify the Board of Aldermen of the citation and amount of the fine imposed. Further, if the condition which exists on the Premises is similar to a condition which existed in the prior 24 month period on the Premises and was subject to action pursuant to the Ordinance, the Anti-Blight Officer shall impose the maximum fine. 
2)  The Anti-Blight Officer may prescribe administrative procedures for the purpose of effectuating this section. 
3)  Notice of Violations; Corrective Action; Appeal; Lien. 
a)  Once a blighted property is on the list of blighted properties approved by the Anti-Blight Office, the Anti-Blight Officer shall serve a notice of citation on each owner of such blighted property by certified mail or a city sheriff or a state marshal or, in the case of an owner who cannot be identified or one whose address is unknown, by publishing a copy of such notice of citation in a daily or weekly newspaper having general circulation in the City of Shelton. The notice of citation (hereinafter "citation") shall state that the property is cited for violating this section, list the specific violation or violations, set forth the specific amount of the daily fine levied and state that such fine shall be levied from the date of the citation for each day that any listed violation continues unless all violations are corrected by a designated date, which date shall not be more than thirty (30) days from the date of said citation. 
b)  If all of the violations listed in the citation are not corrected within the initial or extended designated period, as the case may be, or a corrective action plan has not been approved by the Anti-Blight Officer, the Anti-Blight Officer shall send written notice to the person cited. Such notice shall inform the person cited: 
a)  Of the alleged violation(s) of this section that have not been corrected and the amount of the fines due and accruing; 
b)  That a lien has been filed on the City of Shelton Land Records against the Blighted Premises pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes Section 7-148aa; 
c)  c That he may contest his liability pursuant to Section 1-11.1 of the Code of Ordinances as to the amount of the fine only before the Hearing Officer by delivering in person or by mail to the Director a written demand for such a hearing within 10 days of the date of said notice set forth above in subsection (b); 
d)  That, if he does not timely demand such a hearing, an assessment and judgment shall be entered against him; and the decision of the Anti-Blight Officer shall be final. 
e)  That such judgment may issue without further notice. 
f)  If the owner does not timely demand a hearing as set forth in section (c) above, and the owner fails to correct and/or remove the blighted condition within the time frame set forth pursuant to Section (d)(3)(a) above, then the City may cause such correction and/or removal of the blighted condition by use of the Public Works Department or independent contractor engaged by the City at the expense of the owner of the property. Further, if a hearing is requested and the hearing officer determines that the owner failed to correct and/or remove the blighted condition, the hearing officer shall provide the property owner with an additional ten (10) days to correct and/or remove the blighted condition. If the property owner fails to correct and/or remove said blighted condition, the city may cause such correction and/or removal of the blighted condition by use of the Public Works Department or by use of an independent contractor engaged by the city at the expense of the owner of the property. 
5)  Unpaid fines constitute a lien upon the real estate; payment and release of fines. 
a)  Any unpaid fine imposed pursuant to the provisions of this section shall constitute a lien upon the real estate against which the fine was imposed from the date of such fine. Each such lien may be continued, recorded and released in the manner provided by the general statutes for continuing, recording and releasing property tax liens. Each such lien shall take precedence over all other liens filed after July 1, 1997, and encumbrances, except taxes, and may be enforced in the same manner as property tax liens. The fine shall be retroactive to the date of service of the Anti-Blight Officer initial notice of citation to the owner. 
b)  All funds shall be deposited into a trust in agency account to be administered by the Board of Aldermen to be used for associated costs in enforcing and administering this ordinance (i.e. legal fees, court costs, serving of papers, etc.) which shall be a continuing account. 
c)  The Board of Aldermen may waive and release blight fines and liens of the City of Shelton. If in the Board's opinion, a buyer has the financial ability and intention to immediately rehabilitate the blighted premises, or the Board may hold all penalties and liens until all rehabilitation is completed to the satisfaction of the Director. 
d)  Unpaid fines shall accrue interest at the rate of 1.5% per month. 
e)  If the City of Shelton has been required to expend costs and expenses pursuant to Section (d)(3)(6) above, the reasonable expenses and costs incurred by the City of Shelton shall be a lien against the real property in accordance with Connecticut General Statutes Section 49-73 b. 
(Ord. No. 845, § (d), 9-10-09; Ord. No. 846, § (d), 2-11-10; Ord. No. 887, 2-11-15; Ord. No. 892, 11-12-15) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 887, adopted February 11, 2015, amended the title of § 3-45 to read as set out herein. Previously § 3-45 was titled enforcement by director of community development. 
Chapter 4 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 3; housing, Ch. 8; planning, Ch. 12; police, Ch. 13. 
State Law reference- Authority to provide for fire protection, G.S. § 7-148(c)(4)(B). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 4-1. - False fire alarms and unauthorized use of fire alarm telegraph system. 
(a)  Every person who shall wilfully ring in a false alarm of fire on the fire alarm telegraph system, or shall give a false alarm of fire over any other means of communication in the city, or who shall ring or cause to have rung, the fire alarm telegraph without consent of the proper authorities shall be fined in accordance with section 1-11. 
(b)  Any person who shall give information which leads to the arrest and conviction of any person violating this section shall be paid a reward of fifty dollars ($50.00) by the city for each person so arrested and convicted. 
(Ord. No. 284, 12-13-76; Ord. No. 395, § 18, 7-10-80) 
Sec. 4-2. - Water for fire purposes. 
    The board of aldermen shall provide by contract with any water company, or otherwise according to law, a sufficient supply of water at all times for fire purposes. 
(Comp. Ords. 1975, § 5.2(1)) 
Sec. 4-3. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 874, adopted April 11, 2013, repealed § 4-3 in its entirety. Former § 4-3 pertained to fire vehicle replacement fund and was derived from Ord. No. 450, adopted December 8, 1983. 
Sec. 4-4. - Fire lanes. 
(1)  Fire lanes shall be established by the fire marshal at all buildings and structures designed for human occupancy, to minimize danger to life and safety from fire or other emergencies. This section shall encompass all places of assembly and occupancies as defined in chapter 4, section 29-41-4.01 through section 29-41-4.11 of the State Fire Safety Code. Nothing herein shall prevent the use of an existing driveway or public street from serving as a fire lane providing, in the judgment of the fire marshal, said existing driveway or public street provides sufficient access for fire and other emergency vehicles to the particular building. 
(2)  It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to mark and maintain, in legible condition, the fire lane upon the pavement. The property owner shall install traffic control signs on buildings or stanchions at the elevation of approximately eight (8) feet zero (0) inches to the bottom of a sign ten (10) inches in width and eighteen (18) inches high. This sign shall read "Fire Lane - No Parking or Standing" - Tow Zone". 
(3)  Any person violating the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction, be punished in accordance with section 1-11 and the enforcing authority is empowered to have motor vehicles towed away at the owner's expense in order to clear a fire lane. 
(Ord. No. 370, §§ 1-3, 3-12-79; Ord. No. 865, 4-12-12) 
Cross reference- Parking, stopping and standing, § 16-21 et seq. 
Sec. 4-5. - Access to fire hydrants. 
(a)  No person shall place, deposit, or maintain any object, debris, garbage, trash or other material on any public sidewalk, highway or right-of-way within ten (10) feet of a fire hydrant. 
(b)  No person shall, in the course of removing or plowing snow from private property, deposit, pile or leave any such snow on any public sidewalk or public right-of-way within ten (10) feet of any fire hydrant. 
(c)  Any person who violates this section shall be subject to a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(Ord. No. 709, §§ 1-3, 3-13-98) 
Cross reference- Removal of garbage and trash, § 7-5; obstructing sidewalks, etc., § 14-15. 
Secs. 4-6-4-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE DEPARTMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- Fire department, § 6.9.3 et seq. 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2. 
State Law reference- Fire departments generally, G.S. §§ 7-301-7-313e; assumption of liability for damages caused by firemen, G.S. § 7-308; volunteer firemen generally, G.S. §§ 7-314-7-322a; death, disability and injury benefits, G.S. § 7-314a; benefits for volunteers rendering service to another fire company, G.S. § 7-322a. 

Sec. 4-26. - Powers of officers. 
(a)  The fire chief and assistant chiefs shall severally have all power and authority provided by law during a fire emergency. 
(b)  The authority officers during emergencies shall be in accordance with section 7-313e of the general statutes. 
(Ord. No. 395, § 4, 7-10-80) 
Sec. 4-27. - Number of personnel in each company. 
    The several companies active membership shall not exceed the number per company established by the board of fire commissioners and approved by the board of aldermen. No person under the age of eighteen (18) years shall be an active member of any company, however, company sponsored organizations such as junior firemen or brigades, shall be allowed with membership restricted to persons between the age of sixteen (16) and eighteen (18) and these persons shall be carried on the active member rolls of the company. Persons in these categories shall not be counted against the active membership of the parent company. 
(Ord. No. 395, § 6, 7-10-80) 
Sec. 4-28. - Personnel files required. 
    The board of fire commissioners shall maintain an up-to-date personnel file on each active member. It will be the responsibility of the captain of each company to supply the information requested by the board of fire commissioners concerning each member of his company. The recordkeeping outlined above is required by the insurance service office manual, reading schedule for municipal fire protection, dated 1973, page 23, paragraph 5. 
(Ord. No. 395, § 10, 7-10-80) 
Sec. 4-29. - Allowance to companies. 
    There shall be allowed and paid to each company the sum of one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) per annum. 
(Ord. No. 395, § 11, 7-10-80; Ord. No. 710, 3-13-97) 
Sec. 4-30. - Deputy chief; communications; assistant superintendent of fire alarms-Appointed; duties and responsibilities. 
(a)  The board of fire commissioners shall appoint a deputy chief, communications and an assistant superintendent of fire alarms and communications. 
(b)  The board of fire commissioners shall establish the duties and responsibilities of these positions and shall designate those functions for which additional compensation will be paid. 
(Ord. No. 395, § 20, 7-20-80) 
Sec. 4-31. - Same-Terms, removal. 
(a)  The terms of the office of deputy chief, communications and assistant superintendent of fire alarms shall be in accordance with established policies of the board of fire commissioners. 
(b)  The deputy chief, communications and the assistant superintendent of fire alarms may be removed in accordance with Section 6.9.3.2 of the City Charter. 
(c)  All policies of the commissioners shall be in writing. 
(Ord. No. 395, § 20, 7-20-80) 
Sec. 4-32. - Fire station custodians; appointment, removal. 
(a)  The board of fire commissioners shall appoint a building custodian or custodians on a part-time basis for each fire station. The various companies may recommend applicants for these positions but such recommendations are not binding upon the board of fire commissioners. 
(b)  Custodians can be removed in the manner provided in accordance with section 6.9.3.2 of the City Charter. 
(Ord. No. 395, § 27, 7-10-80) 
Sec. 4-33. - Wages of employees. 
    The wages of the employees of the fire department shall be as follows: 
(1)  For attendance at the monthly meetings of the board of fire commissioners, the clerk shall be recompensed at the hourly rate as established by the board of aldermen. 
(2)  The board of fire commissioners is authorized to establish an equitable hourly rate for those persons hired to do fire alarm maintenance and installation work. 
(3)  The hourly rate of pay for employees of the fire department placed on storm watch and/or fire scene preservation shall be eighty-five (85) percent of the rate paid for outside services. Any other fire related services requested, consisting of fire watches for public function and/or fire service requests by outside contractors, shall be the same regular rate of pay as members of the police department acting as supernumeraries called in to work a shift for the police department which will be paid to the individual(s) performing the service by the contractor. 
(Ord. No. 474, 2-14-85; Ord. No. 481, 8-8-85; Ord. No. 658, 10-14-93; Ord. No. 742, 6-8-00) 
Cross reference- Any ordinance setting salaries for merit and nonmerit positions saved from repeal, § 1-12(11). 
Sec. 4-34. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 875, adopted April 11, 2013, repealed § 4-34 in its entirety. Former § 4-34 pertained to fire chief, fire marshal automobile allowance and was derived from Ord. No. 234, adopted January 13, 1975. 
Sec. 4-35. - Officers' stipends. 
    The stipends for Fire Department Personnel shall be as follows per annum: 
Fire Chief stipend $20,000.00 Deputy Fire Chief stipend $10,000.00 Assistant Chief's stipend, each $7,500.00 Custodians (4) stipend, each $5,000.00 Fire Prevention Coordinator $5,000.00 Quartermaster stipend $5,000.00 Recruitment officer stipend $5,000.00 Director of training stipend $5,000.00 Training assistants (4) stipend $1,000.00  
(Ord. No. 226, 8-12-74; Ord. No. 378, 7-25-79; Ord. No. 492, 12-12-85; Ord. No. 530, 7-9-87; Ord. No. 581, 7-12-90; Ord. No. 723, 5-14-98; Ord. No. 826, 5-10-07; Ord. No. 844, 7-9-09; Ord. No. 868, 4-11-13; Ord. No. 895, 12-10-15; Ord. No. 903, 4-13-17) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 895, adopted December 10, 2015, amended § 4-35 to read as set out herein. Previously § 4-35 was titled "Officers' salaries." 
Cross reference- Any ordinance setting salaries for merit and nonmerit positions saved from repeal, § 1-12(11). 
Sec. 4-36. - Benefit for surviving spouses of fire personnel. 
    Up to five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) annually in real estate taxes of property owned by the surviving spouse of a city fireman killed in the line of duty for the city shall be abated during the period that the surviving spouse remains unmarried. Benefit will apply to current surviving spouses who otherwise qualify but the benefit will not be retroactive. This benefit does not apply to a city resident whom another municipality employs and who subsequently loses their life in the line of duty. 
(Ord. No. 779, 6-10-04; Ord. No. 783, 9-9-04; Ord. No. 869, 4-11-13) 
Secs. 4-37-4-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OPEN BURNING 

Sec. 4-41. - Purpose and definitions. 
(a)  Purpose. It is the purpose of this article to prescribe regulations consistent with the state and nationally recognized standards for the safeguarding of life, health and property from the hazards of fire and explosion arising from the kindling of outdoor fires. 
(b)  Definitions. The following definitions shall apply to all parts of this article: 
    Combustible material. Any substance which is inflammable, readily ignitable or free burning, such as, but not limited to, paper, rubbish, wood, grass and leaves. 
    Grill or outdoor fireplace. Any metal or masonry structure used for the sole purpose of cooking outdoors. 
    Outdoor fire. Any fire in the open air, or outside the confines of a building, for the purpose of disposing of any combustible material. 
(Ord. No. 713, § 1, 5-8-97; Ord. No. 817, § 1, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 4-42. - Powers and duties of the fire marshal. 
    The fire marshal shall be certified as an open burning official as same is defined by Connecticut Administrative Regulation section 19-508-17, as may be amended from time to time, and shall be authorized to enforce the provisions of this article. To assist such enforcement, the fire marshal is authorized to enter private property for the purpose of detecting and extinguishing fires created without compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 713, § 2, 5-8-97; Ord. No. 817, § 2, 4-12-07; Ord. No. 856, § 2, 10-14-10) 
Sec. 4-43. - Permits. 
(a)  Application for permit. All applications for permits required by this article shall be made to the fire marshal in such form and in such detail as he shall prescribe. The fire marshal may require, where he deems it necessary, proof of compliance with the city zoning or building ordinances and may revoke a permit in case there has been a false statement or misrepresentation as to material fact in such application. 
(b)  Issuance of permits. The fire marshal shall issue all permits required by this article when satisfied that the activity or condition for which the permit is sought poses no threat to life, health or property and is in conformance with the State of Connecticut Administrative Regulations section 19-508-17, relative to the control of open burning, as same may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 713, § 3, 5-8-97; Ord. No. 817, § 3, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 4-44. - Prohibited acts. 
    The following acts are prohibited: 
(1)  Kindling or allowing to be kindled an outdoor fire for the purpose of disposing of garbage; brush, branches or other vegetation. 
(2)  Leaving unattended an outdoor fire. 
(3)  Storage of combustible material outside a building in such a manner or condition as to pose a threat to life, health or property. 
(4)  Kindling an outdoor fire within any public right-of-way, highway, street or sidewalk. 
(5)  When outdoor fire/burning causes embers to become airborne, causing smoke conditions which pose a threat to life, health and safety as determined by the fire marshal or other law or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 713, § 4, 5-8-97; Ord. No. 817, § 4, 4-12-07; Ord. No. 856, § 4, 10-14-10) 
Sec. 4-45. - Permit required. 
    The kindling or allowing to be kindled of an outdoor fire is permitted under this article provided that a written permit is first obtained from the fire marshal of the City of Shelton. 
(Ord. No. 713, § 5, 5-8-97; Ord. No. 817, § 5, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 4-46. - Penalties. 
    Any person or persons who violated any provision of this article as enacted, or who shall fail to comply with any notice or order of the fire marshal shall be subject to arrest and prosecution by the proper authorities and may be fined two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each violation. A violation of each provision of this article shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 713, § 6, 5-8-97; Ord. No. 817, § 6, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 4-47. - Interpretation; severability; etc. 
(a)  Grill or outdoor fireplace excluded. Nothing in this article shall be interpreted to prohibit the construction and use of any grill or outdoor fireplace, provided same is not in violation of section 4-44(5), above. 
(b)  Conflict. In any case when a provision of this article is found to conflict with a provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety or other statute, regulation, code or ordinance of the state or city, the provision which established the higher standard shall prevail. 
(c)  Liability. This article shall not be construed to render the city or any of its officers liable for any damage to person or property by reason of the inspection or reinspection authorized herein or the failure to inspect or reinspect or by reason of the issuance of any permit as herein provided. 
(d)  Severability. If any provision of this article or any section, sentence, clause, phrase or work or the application thereof in any circumstance is held invalid, the validity of the remainder of the article and the application of any such provision, section, sentence, clause, phrase or word in any other circumstances shall not be affected thereby. 
(e)  Inclusive terms. Whenever used in this article the term "person" includes persons, firms, businesses and the term "fire marshal" includes the fire marshal and other duly authorized agents. 
(Ord. No. 713, § 7, 5-8-97; Ord. No. 817, § 7, 4-12-07; Ord. No. 856, § 7, 10-14-10) 
Chapter 5 - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 623, adopted June 20, 1991, repealed Ord. No. 339, adopted Aug. 14, 1978, from which former Ch. 5, relative to similar subject matter, derived. Sections 1-7 of Ord. No. 623 were included as a new Ch. 5 at the discretion of the editor. 
Cross reference- Board of aldermen to act as municipal flood and erosion control board, § 2-42; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 3; housing, Ch. 8; planning, Ch. 12; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 14; zoning, App. A; subdivisions, App. B. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 5-1. - Purpose and objectives. 
    It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas. The flood hazard areas of the City of Shelton are subject to periodic inundation that results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(Ord. No. 623, § 1, 6-13-91; Ord. No. 847, § 1, 4-8-10) 
Sec. 5-2. - Definitions. 
    Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. 
    Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO, AH, AR/AO, AR/AH, or VO zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one (1) percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one (1) to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
    Area of special flood hazard means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to one (1) percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. 
    Basement means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
    Base flood means the flood having a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
    Base flood elevation (BFE) means the elevation of the crest of the base flood (100-year flood). The height in relation to mean sea level (NAVD of 1988) expected to be reached by the waters of the base flood at pertinent points in the floodplains of coastal and riverine areas. 
    Building. See the definition for "Structure". 
    Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, the construction of buildings or structures; the construction of additions, alterations or substantial improvements to buildings or structures; the placement of buildings or structures; mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment; the storage, deposition, or extraction of materials; and the installation, repair or removal of public or private sewage disposal systems or water supply facilities located within the areas of special flood hazard. 
    Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, as a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date, August 14, 1978, of the floodplain management ordinance adopted by the community. 
    Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufacturing homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
    Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) means the federal agency that administers the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). 
    Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of the City of Shelton, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has delineated both the special hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
    Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from either the overflow of inland or tidal waters, or the unusual rapid accumulation/runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    Flood insurance study means the official report by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) which contains flood profiles, the water surface elevation of base flood, determination of flood hazards, and other flood data. 
    Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one (1) foot. 
    Functionally dependent use or facility means a use or facility that cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading or unloading of cargo or passengers, and shipbuilding and ship repair facilities. The term does not include seafood processing facilities, long-term storage, manufacturing, sales or service facilities. 
    Highest adjacent grade (HAG) means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
    Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(a)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(b)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historic significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(c)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(d)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
(1)  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(2)  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
    Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor. 
    Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one (1) or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term also includes recreational vehicles, park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable structures placed on a site for one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
    Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel or contiguous parcels of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
    Market value means the value of the structure shall be determined by the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. 
    Mean sea level means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
    New construction means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after August 14, 1978, the effective date of this chapter and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
    New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date, June 20, 2000, of the floodplain management regulation adopted by the community. 
    Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(a)  Built on a single chassis; 
(b)  Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(c)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and 
(d)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
    Start of construction includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of a structure (including a manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation or placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
    Structure means a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally aboveground, as well as manufactured home. 
    Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    Substantial improvement means any combination of repairs, reconstruction, alteration, or improvements to a structure taking place over a ten-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure. The market value of the structure should be: (1) the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement; or (2) in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not the alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include any project for improvement of a structure required to comply with existing health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions. 
    Variance means a grant of relief by a community from the terms of the floodplain management ordinance that allows construction in a manner otherwise prohibited and where specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. 
    Violation means a failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without required permits, lowest floor elevation documentation, floodproofing certificates or required floodway encroachment calculations is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
    Water surface elevation means the height, in relation to the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or other datum, where specified) of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the flood plains of coastal and riverine areas. 
(Ord. No. 623, § 2, 6-13-91; Ord. No. 743, § (a)1.-3., 6-8-00; Ord. No. 847, § 2, 4-8-10) 
Sec. 5-3. - Areas of special flood hazard identified. 
    The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in its flood insurance study (FIS) for Fairfield County, Connecticut, dated June 18, 2010, and accompanying flood insurance rate maps (FIRM), dated June 18, 2010, and other supporting data applicable to the City of Shelton, and any subsequent revisions thereto, are adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. Since mapping is legally adopted by reference into this chapter it must take precedence when more restrictive until such time as a map amendment or map revision is obtained from FEMA. The areas of special flood hazard include any area shown on the FIRM as Zones A, AO and AE, including areas designated as a floodway on a FIRM. Special flood hazard areas are determined utilizing the base flood elevations (BFE) provided on the flood profiles in the FIS for a community. BFEs provided on a FIRM are only approximate (rounded up or down) and should be verified with the BFEs published in the FIS for a specific location. A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this chapter prior to the commencement of any development activities. 
(Ord. No. 623, § 3, 6-13-91; Ord. No. 743, § (a)4., 6-8-00; Ord. No. 847, § 3, 4-8-10) 
Sec. 5-4. - Duties and responsibilities of zoning enforcement officer. 
    Duties of the zoning enforcement officer shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(2)  Advise permittee that additional federal or state permits may be required. Notify adjacent communities and the Department of Environmental Protection, Water Resources Unit prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse. Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished. 
(3)  Record the elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved or floodproofed structures. When floodproofing is utilized for a particular structure the zoning enforcement office shall obtain certification from a registered professional engineer or architect. 
(4)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided, then the zoning enforcement officer and/or the city engineer shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source in order to administer the provisions of sections 5-12 and 5-13. 
(5)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard, the zoning enforcement officer and/or the city engineer shall make the necessary interpretation. All records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter shall be maintained in the office of the zoning enforcement officer. 
(6)  Each development permit shall authorize, as a condition of approval, the zoning enforcement officer or designated agents to make regular inspections of the subject property. The zoning enforcement officer or designated agents are also authorized to inspect any property in a special flood hazard where it appears that violations of these regulations may be taking place. 
(Ord. No. 623, § 4, 6-13-91; Ord. No. 743, § (a)5., 6., 6-8-00; Ord. No. 847, § 4, 4-8-10) 
Sec. 5-5. - Variance procedures. 
    The planning and zoning commission shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter. Those claiming to be aggrieved by the decision of said commission may appeal such decision to the superior court. 
(1)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(2)  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(3)  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and in the instance of a historical building, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
(4)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation to which the structure is to be built and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation up to amounts as high as twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for one hundred dollars ($100.00) of insurance coverage. 
(Ord. No. 623, § 7, 6-13-91; Ord. No. 847, § 7, 4-8-10) 
Sec. 5-6. - Violations. 
    Violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with any of its requirements, including violation of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants or variances, shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person subject to a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per day and to further penalty of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each and every day that such violation continues to exist. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of Shelton from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. No. 847, § 5.4, 4-8-10) 
Secs. 5-7-5-10. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

Sec. 5-11. - General standards. 
    In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and substantial improvments. New construction and substantial improvements shall be: 
a.  Anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; 
b.  Constructed with materials and utility equipment, resistant to flood damage; 
c.  Constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
d.  Constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment, and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating with the components during conditions of flooding. 
(2)  Water supply and sanitary sewage systems. New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system. New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the system into floodwaters. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(3)  Manufactured homes. All manufactured homes to be placed within Zone A on a community's FIRM shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage. For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not to be limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. 
(Ord. No. 623, § 5.1, 6-13-91; Ord. No. 847, § 5.1, 4-8-10) 
Sec. 5-12. - Specific standards. 
    In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation data has been provided, as set forth in section 5-3 or as determined in section 5-4(4), the following provisions, in addition to those in section 5-11, are required: 
(1)  Residential structures. New construction or substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above the base flood elevation. 
(2)  Nonresidential structures. New construction or substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial, or nonresidential structure located in a special flood hazard area shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above the level of the base flood elevation. 
(3)  Floodproofing. Nonresidential structures located in all A Zones may be floodproofed in lieu of being elevated provided that together with all attendant utilities and sanitary facilities the areas of the structure below the required elevation are water tight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and use structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall review and/or develop structural design, specifications, and plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with acceptable standards of practice for meeting the provisions of this subsection. 
(4)  Elevated building. New construction or substantial improvements of elevated buildings that include fully enclosed areas formed by foundation and other exterior walls below the base flood elevation shall be designed to preclude finished living space and designed to allow for the entry and exit of floodwaters to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls. Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
a.  Provide a minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding. 
b.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above grade. 
c.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in both directions. 
(5)  Manufactured homes. Manufactured homes which are placed or substantially improved (i) outside of a manufactured home park, (ii) in a new manufactured home park, (iii) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park, or (iv) in an existing manufactured home park in which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as a result of a flood, shall have the lowest floor elevated to or above the base flood level. They shall be placed on a permanent, securely anchored foundation. The structure must be securely anchored to the foundation to resist floatation, collapse, and lateral movement. Manufactured homes which are placed or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park shall be elevated so that either (i) the lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base flood elevation, or (ii) the manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than thirty-six (36) inches in height above grade and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist floatation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
(6)  A Zones. In A Zones where base flood elevations have been determined, but before a floodway is designated, require that no new construction, substantial improvement, or other development (including fill) be permitted which would increase base flood elevations more than one (1) foot at any point along the watercourse when all anticipated development is considered cumulatively with the proposed development. 
(7)  Area of special flood hazard AO. Within any AO zone, all new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures must have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two (2) feet if no depth number is specified). Within any AO zone, all new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures must have (i) the lowest floor, including basement, elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two (2) feet if no depth number is specified), or (ii) together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be completely floodproofed above the highest adjacent grade to or above the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two (2) feet if no depth is specified), so that any space below that level is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. Designs for complying with this requirement must be certified by either a registered professional engineer or architect. 
(8)  Recreational vehicles. Recreational vehicles shall either be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days and be fully licensed and ready for highway use, or meet all the general standards of article II and the elevation and anchoring requirements of subsections 5-11(3) and 5-12(5) for a manufactured home. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick-disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions. 
(9)  Equal conveyance. Within the floodplain, except those areas which are tidally influenced on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) for the community, encroachments resulting from filling, new construction or substantial improvements involving an increase in footprint of the structure, are prohibited unless the applicant provides certification by a registered professional engineer demonstrating, with supporting hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice, that such encroachments shall not result in any (0.00 feet) increase in flood levels (base flood elevation). Work within the floodplain and the land adjacent to the floodplain, including work to provide compensatory storage shall not be constructed in such a way so as to cause an increase in flood stage or flood velocity. 
(10)  Compensatory storage. The water holding capacity of the floodplain, except those areas which are tidally influenced, shall not be reduced. Any reduction caused by filling, new construction or substantial improvements involving an increase in footprint to the structure, shall be compensated for by deepening and/or widening of the floodplain. Storage shall be provided on-site, unless easements have been gained from adjacent property owners; it shall be provided within the same hydraulic reach and a volume not previously used for flood storage; it shall be hydraulically comparable and incrementally equal to the theoretical volume of floodwater at each elevation, up to and including the 100-year flood elevation, which would be displaced by the proposed project. Such compensatory volume shall have an unrestricted hydraulic connection to the same waterway or water body. Compensatory storage can be provided off-site if approved by the municipality. 
(11)  Aboveground storage tanks. Aboveground storage tanks (oil, propane, etc.) which are located outside or inside of the structure must either be elevated above the base flood elevation (BFE) on a concrete pad, or be securely anchored with tie-down straps to prevent flotation or lateral movement, have the top of the fill pipe extended above the BFE, and have a screw-fill cap that does not allow for the infiltration of floodwater. 
(12)  Portion of structure in flood zone. If any portion of a structure lies within the special flood hazard area (SFHA), the entire structure is considered to be in the SFHA. The entire structure must meet the construction requirements of the flood zone. The structure includes any attached additions, garages, decks, sunrooms, or any other structure attached to the main structure. Decks or porches that extend into a more restrictive flood zone will require the entire structure to meet the standards of the more restrictive zone. 
(13)  Structures in two flood zones. If a structure lies within two (2) or more flood zones, the construction standards of the most restrictive zone apply to the entire structure (i.e., V Zone is more restrictive than A Zone; structure must be built to the highest BFE). The structure includes any attached additions, garages, decks, sunrooms, or any other structure attached to the main structure. (Decks or porches that extend into a more restrictive zone will require the entire structure to meet the requirements of the more restrictive zone.) 
(14)  No structures entirely or partially over water. New construction, substantial improvements and repair to structures that have sustained substantial damage cannot be constructed or located entirely or partially over water unless it is a functionally dependent use or facility. 
(Ord. No. 623, § 5.2, 6-13-91; Ord. No. 743, § (a)7., 6-8-00; Ord. No. 847, § 5.2, 4-8-10) 
Sec. 5-13. - Floodways. 
    In areas where floodways have been designated or determined, prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other developments unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice by a registered professional engineer that the proposed encroachment would not result in any (0.00 feet) increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. When utilizing data other than that provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), the following standard applies: select and adopt a regulatory floodway based on the principle that the area chosen for the regulatory floodway must be designed to carry the waters of the base flood, without increasing the water surface elevation of that flood more than one (1) foot at any one (1) point. 
(Ord. No. 623, § 5.3, 6-13-91; Ord. No. 743, § (a)8., 6-8-00; Ord. No. 847, § 5.3, 4-8-10) 
Sec. 5-14. - Standards for subdivision proposals. 
    In all special flood hazard areas the following requirements shall apply: 
(1)  All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
(2)  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
(3)  All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(4)  In Zone A, base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals and other proposed development (including manufactured home parks and subdivisions) which are five (5) acres or fifty (50) lots, whichever occurs first. 
(Ord. No. 623, § 6, 6-13-91; Ord. No. 847, § 6, 4-8-10) 
Sec. 5-15. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
    This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 743, § (b), 6-8-00; Ord. No. 847, § 5.5, 4-8-10) 
Sec. 5-16. - Disclaimer of liability. 
    The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered the minimum reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering consideration. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the special flood hazard areas or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the City of Shelton or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from the reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. The City of Shelton, its officers and employees shall assume no liability for another person's reliance on any maps, dates, or information provided by the city. Notwithstanding the preceding disclaimer, the City of Shelton shall assume normal responsibilities in indemnifying its public officials and citizen board members for "good faith" decisions made on their part in carrying out the duties of their positions. 
(Ord. No. 743, § (b), 6-8-00; Ord. No. 847, § 5.6, 4-8-10) 
Sec. 5-17. - Severability. 
    If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this chapter should be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, such decision shall not affect the remaining portions of this chapter, which shall remain in full force and effect; and to this end the provisions of this chapter are hereby declared to be severable. 
(Ord. No. 743, § (b), 6-8-00; Ord. No. 847, § 5.7, 4-8-10) 
Chapter 6 - GARBAGE, TRASH AND REFUSE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 3; health and sanitation, Ch. 7; housing, Ch. 8; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 14. 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate garbage, trash, rubbish, ashes or waste material collection and disposal, G.S. § 7-148(c)(4)(H). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Article I, §§ 6-1-6-15, was deleted as being superseded by the provisions of Ord. No. 866, adopted August 9, 2012. The deleted provisions pertained to the same subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 559, adopted Oct. 13, 1988; Ord. No. 616, adopted March 14, 1991; Ord. No. 635, adopted March 12, 1992; Ord. No. 809, adopted April 12, 2007; and Ord. No. 859, adopted June 28, 2011. 

Sec. 6-1. - Declaration of policy. 
    The accumulation, collection, removal and disposal of refuse must be controlled by this municipality for the protection of the public health, safety, and welfare. It is consequently found and declared that: 
(a)  The City of Shelton is authorized by law to regulate the disposition of "refuse" generated within its boundaries and to collect a charge therefore and to license "refuse collectors". 
(b)  This article is adopted pursuant to the authority granted to the municipality by Connecticut General Statutes Section 22a-220a which authorizes the city to designate the area where refuse generated within its boundaries shall be disposed. 
(c)  The public health, safety and welfare of this municipality will be best served by requiring the delivery of acceptable solid waste generated within the city limits and collected by "refuse collectors" licensed by the city to facilities designated by the city for processing into products which have an economic value. 
(d)  Pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes Section 22a-226d(b), any police officer and any other person so authorized by the chief executive officer may issue a citation to any person who commits a violation under (1) subsection (a) of Section 22a-250, (2) subsection (f) of Section 22a-220, (3) subsection (f) of Section 22a-220a, (4) subsection (i) of Section 22a-220a. Each day a violation persists shall constitute a separate offense. This penalty shall be in addition to any civil penalties applicable under Connecticut General Statutes Section 22a-220a(i). Three (3) citations in one (1) year may result in the revocation of any permits, certificates and/or licenses issued by the city. 
(Ord. No. 866, 8-9-12) 
Sec. 6-2. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their deviations shall have the following meanings as prescribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Acceptable solid waste (waste) shall mean unwanted or discarded materials, garbage and refuse that the city is permitted by the state to collect and transported from the city to a resource recovery combustion facility, transfer station or landfill that are licensed to accept municipal solid waste but shall not include recyclable materials, bulky waste, or hazardous waste. 
    Bulky solid waste shall mean solid waste comprised of demolition materials of any nature obtained from the destruction or demolition of a building or other structure; or, land clearing debris including natural materials such as stumps, logs, wood, tree limbs, branches, and waste resulting directly from other demolition activities. Also included shall be "white goods" and other unwanted or discarded materials which in the judgment of the city cannot be disposed of or processed by the designated facility. 
    City shall mean the City of Shelton. 
    Collection cart shall mean the wheeled container approved by the city for residential collection of waste and recycling. 
    Commercial refuse shall include waste from the preparation, cooking, and consumption of food, condemned food products and all refuse from the handling, storage, preparation and sale of produce originating primarily in commercial kitchens, stores, restaurants, food markets and factories, but shall exclude refuse generated by residential dwelling units and bulky solid waste or hazardous waste. 
    Director shall mean the director of public works of the City of Shelton. 
    Disposal charge shall be that amount of money to be charged for each ton of processible solid waste delivered to the designated facility and the procedures established by the city. 
    Dwelling unit (residential unit) shall mean any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used, arranged or designed to be occupied for living, sleeping, cooking and eating. 
    Facility shall mean a processing facility as designated by the city and permitted to receive acceptable waste and recycling materials for processing. 
    Hazardous wastes shall mean solid and liquid wastes in the following classifications: 
(1)  Explosives. 
(2)  Pathogenic or medical pathological waste. 
(3)  Radioactive wastes. 
(4)  Cleaning fluids, acids, poisons or other chemical wastes which either create an immediate safety hazard to persons disposing of the waste or which by virtue of their chemistry and/or the method of disposal present a threat to the quality of ground or surface waters. 
Hazardous waste shall include, but not be limited to, pathological, biological, cesspool or other human waste, human and animal remains, radioactive, toxic or other types of waste which according to federal, state or local rules or regulation from time to time in effect require special handling in their collection, treatment or disposal, including those regulated under 42 U.S.C. Sections 6921-6925 and regulations thereunder adopted by the United States Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to the Resources Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976, 90 Stat. 2806, 42 U.S.C. Section 6901, such as cleaning fluids, crank-case oils, cutting oils, paints, acids, caustics, poisons, drugs, fine powdery earth used to filter cleaning fluid and refuse of a similar nature. 
    Health authority shall mean the Valley Health District, the legally designated health authority of the city. 
    Household garbage shall include waste from preparation, cooking and consumption of products used primarily in private homes. 
    Industrial refuse shall include putrescible and nonputrescible matter from the manufacturer, fabrication or processing of any product. 
    Municipal contract shall mean the municipal solid waste management services contract between this municipality and one (1) or more processing facilities. 
    Municipality shall mean the City of Shelton. 
    Private dwellings shall mean all one-family and multifamily units to a maximum of six (6) units in any building or complex, or multifamily dwelling which received city collection of residential waste and recyclable materials on or before July 1, 2012, and shall include all residential condominiums as the term is defined by the Condominium Act of the General Statutes, all mobile home parks, and homes on commonly owned roads. It shall not include apartment buildings or complexes larger than six (6) units or cooperative housing ownership. 
    Processible solid waste shall mean that refuse acceptable to the facility pursuant to the municipal agreement. 
    Refuse shall mean all putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes including household garbage, rubbish, ashes, bulky wastes and solid commercial and industrial refuse. It shall not include hazardous wastes. 
    Refuse collectors shall include any person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of collecting and transporting commercial, household or industrial refuse for hire within this municipality. 
    Rubbish shall mean waste materials from normal household or living conditions, other than "household garbage" and includes garden, lawn, tree trimmings and leaves. It shall not include factory wastes or refuse from industrial plants. In general; the kinds of materials classed as "rubbish", are such as, rags, worn out clothing or furniture, excelsior and the like. 
    Transfer station shall mean that facility located on Route 110, Shelton, Connecticut. 
    Yard waste shall mean grass clippings, leaves, brush, branches from pruning and other organic material as may be generated through land maintenance activities, but not including tree stumps. 
(Ord. No. 866, 8-9-12) 
Sec. 6-3. - License required for refuse collections. 
(a)  All refuse accumulated in this municipality shall be collected, conveyed and disposed of 1) by this municipality or 2) by person licensed by the municipality to perform such work and in accordance with the provisions of this article. No other person shall collect, convey over any street or dispose of any refuse in this municipality; except that a) the actual producers of refuse or the owners of premises in this municipality upon which refuse has accumulated may personally collect, convey and dispose of such refuse; b) collectors of refuse licenses by the municipality; and c) collectors of refuse which have executed a municipal contract with the municipality may deliver processable solid waste to the facility designated by the city upon identifying the source of such refuse; in each case upon complying with the other provision of this article and with any other applicable ordinances and regulations. (Except as provided in subsection (b) hereof, no refuse collected from outside this municipality shall be disposed of under a license of registration issued pursuant to this article.) 
    The director or his designee shall have removed all rubbish and household garbage, when properly prepared as provided in this article, from all private dwellings, dwelling units and apartment buildings which have curbside pickup, as may come within the requirements of this article. Collection schedules and methods of collection shall be as determined by the director and/or his designee provided that not less than one (1) waste collection per week and one (1) bi-weekly recycling collection shall be made from each and every place to be served; provided further that collections from households or other places served shall not be begun before 5:00 a.m. The citizens of the city shall be informed of collection schedules or any changes therein by means of appropriate posting on the city web page or by such other means as any be found expedient. The service of refuse removal provided to private dwellings and apartments for curbside pickup shall be financed by appropriations from general tax revenues. 
(b)  No city-owned, leased or contracted vehicle shall enter upon private roads or private property for the purpose of collecting refuse under the provisions of this article except if, in the opinion of the director and/or his designee for health or safety reasons, it is necessary for the collection vehicles to travel on private roads and/or private property. It will be the responsibility of the property owner to provide a hold harmless agreement and adequate insurance naming the city additionally insured, if such property owner wishes to have curbside pickup on private roads. Such hold harmless agreements and insurance policies must meet with the requirements as set forth by the city. Neither the city nor its contractor shall be held liable for damage caused to such private roadways by due to the weight of the collection vehicles. 
(c)  Commercial refuse, industrial refuse and other refuse generated within the City of Shelton, except for household waste collected by the city pursuant to the municipal contract for residential curbside collection shall be collected by person licensed by the municipality as set forth herein. 
(d)  All refuse collectors handling bulky solid waste shall comply with the licensing requirements of this article and State of Connecticut laws and regulations. 
(e)  No household garbage or commercial refuse shall be transported into the city from any place beyond the limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 866, 8-9-12) 
Sec. 6-4. - Refuse containers. 
    Provision for containers. The owner of each premise whose refuse is created or generated shall provide a suitable place upon such premises, sufficient receptacles for receiving and holding such refuse during the intervals between collections. Refuse containers shall be maintained in good condition, free of holes and fissures and shall be equipped with securely fitting covers and must be removed from the curb the same day as collected 
    Containers for commercial refuse. Commercial establishments, business establishments and apartments containing more than six (6) dwelling units shall be required to provide such covered refuse containers suitable for mechanical pickup to be emptied in a refuse truck, as may be required by the director and/or his designee and of sufficient size and quantities so as to not cause any overflow which would constitute a violation of this article. 
    Containers for household garbage; number of collections. 
    Collection Carts for the collection of recyclable materials and residential waste will be provided by the City of Shelton of a size deemed appropriate. All other containers will be deemed inappropriate and waste placed in them will not be collected. 
Collection Carts are the property of the City and shall not be removed from their assigned property. Each cart will have a serial number on it which will contain the size and location assigned to the property and entered into a data base. 
One (1) curbside refuse collection shall be made each week and bi-weekly curbside recycling collection, from dwelling units. Notwithstanding, a condominium or other occupant of property within the City of Shelton, may contract to have additional pickups of refuse and recycling, at their own costs which are contained in the City bid for collections services. Leaves from lawns shall be collected semi-annually if they are placed in a biodegradable paper bag at the times scheduled by the City for such collection. 
The number of Collection Carts for Residential Waste and Recyclable Materials provided without charge for each eligible Property shall be determined in the sole discretion of the Mayor or his designee. Eligible properties seeking Additional Collection Cars, if approved by the Mayor or his designee, shall be charged a fee as established by the City. 
Collection Carts shall not be marked, tagged, or otherwise individually identified as property of a person (examples include spray paint markings, stickers, address numbers, carved letters or addresses, and the like). 
Collection Carts shall not be destroyed, mangled, modified, altered in any form, including use for the incineration of material. 
Collection Cart loss or damage is the responsibility of the property owner. There shall be a fee, as determined by the City, for the replacement of Collection Carts should there be any loss or damage as described above. The only instances where this may be waived are theft, contractor neglect or, as determined by the Public Works Director or his designee. Theft of Collection Cart should be promptly reported to police. A copy of police report will be required before a new Collection Cart is obtained and fee is waived. 
    Sanitary conditions. All waste and recycling containers shall be kept clean and dry in a sanitary condition and their contents disposed of as provided in this article. 
    Placing for collection. The occupant of private dwellings shall have the Collection carts placed on the roadside abutting the property before the hour of 5:00 a.m. on the days on which collections will be made; provided that containers may so be placed, for the collection of their contents only, in the evening preceding the day on which collections will be made 6:00 p.m. or dusk, whichever is earlier and must be removed no later than (16) hours after collections have been made. Any container or other items placed at the roadside in other than the approved cart or the prescribed time is hereby declared to be a nuisance and will deemed to be a violation of this article. Carts shall be placed at curbside as described by instructions prepared and distributed by the City and or its Contractor. 
    Disturbing containers. It shall be unlawful for anyone, other than the tenants or occupants of the premises on which containers are stored, or the regularly authorized agents, employees or licensees of the city, to disturb any waste or recycling containers or to remove their covers or and of the contents thereof, or to cause such refuse, waste or recycling containers or their contents to be strewn or scattered on the lawns, sidewalks or streets. 
    Interfering with, disturbing, etc., property. Every agent, officer or employee of the city engaged in the work of collection and removing of garbage, refuse, recyclables, rubbish from private properties shall in no way interfere with, disturb, break, destroy, handle, take or use any article or substance or trespass upon any property of the householders, except insofar as the requirements of such collection shall warrant such handling, taking or using of the cans or receptacles containing such garbage. No employee shall remove or dispose of, for the employee's individual use or benefit, any of the contents of any container used for the collection, removal or disposal of refuse. 
(Ord. No. 866, 8-9-12; Ord. No. 879, 4-10-14) 
Sec. 6-5. - Storing. 
(a)  Generally. During intervals between collection days, or collection by private licensed hauler or the city, refuse, garbage, waste, recyclables and rubbish shall be kept and stored in a sanitary manner. Such containers shall not be stored on the sidewalks. 
(b)  Prohibited accumulations. The accumulation or deposit of refuse, waste, recyclables or unsanitary material of any kind not otherwise provided for in this article, except in watertight metal or plastic containers, is prohibited. 
(c)  Public places. No person shall place any refuse in any street, alley or other public place or upon any private property, whether owned by such person or not, within this municipality except in proper containers or otherwise properly prepared for collection or under express approval granted by the director and/or his designee. Nor shall any person throw or deposit any refuse in any stream or other body of water. 
(d)  Accumulation of materials. Any un-containerized accumulation of refuse, waste, recyclables or unsanitary materials on any premises not placed in an approved container is hereby declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited. Where any matter has accumulated in any place, the director and/or his designee shall serve notice thereof upon the owner of, or person in charge or control of, the land or building on which such refuse appears, and the owner or other person shall within five (5) days of receipt of such notice cause the same to be removed. If neither the owner nor any person in charge or control of such land or building can be found by the director and/or his designee, they shall thereupon enter upon the property and remove such materials. The expense of such removal shall be charged to the owner of such property and may be collected by the city in an action at law. Failure to remove any accumulation as defined herein within five (5) days after notice by the director and/or his designee to remove same shall be deemed a violation of this article. 
(e)  Scattering of refuse. No person shall cast, place, sweep or deposit anywhere within this municipality any refuse in such a manner that it may be carried or deposited by the elements upon or in any street, sidewalk, alley, sewer, parkway or other public place, or into any occupied premises. 
(f)  Hazardous wastes. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to place hazardous wastes or similarly dangerous substances into any refuse container or to transport any such substance to the transfer station or the facility. 
(g)  Burning of refuse. Burning of refuse within the city limits is prohibited. 
(h)  Production of nuisances. Nothing in this article shall be construed to permit the storage, collection or disposal of any kind of refuse in such a way as to produce a nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 866, 8-9-12; Ord. No. 879, 4-10-14) 
Sec. 6-6. - Licensing of refuse collectors; registration of vehicles, etc. 
(a)  Licensing and registration authority designated. The director shall be the licensing and registration authority for refuse collectors and vehicles and containers. The director and/or his designee shall grant a license within a reasonable time following the filing of a proper application and payment of the prescribed fee unless he finds one (1) or more of the following conditions to prevail: 
(1)  The applicant has been irresponsible in the conduct of refuse collection and hauling operations based upon previous suspensions and/or revocations of licenses. 
(2)  The applicant lacks suitable equipment with which to collect refuse in a safe and nuisance-free manner and in compliance with this article. 
(b)  License required. Each refuse collector shall annually on or before July 1 apply for a license from the director and/or his designee on such form as they shall prescribe to engage in the business or refuse collection in this municipality. 
(c)  Registration of vehicles, containers. Each licensed refuse collector shall obtain a separate registration for each vehicle he operates within this municipality. When a vehicle is employed to transport more than one (1) container, each container to be transported instead of the vehicle shall require a registration. Registration shall not be transferable from vehicle to vehicle, or container to container, provided however, the director and/or his designee may allow such temporary transfer of registrations in hardship situations, such as a temporary breakdown of an individually licensed vehicle. 
(d)  Registration term, fee, renewal. All registrations shall be issued for the term not to exceed one (1) year and shall be renewable on or before the first day of July of each year. The registration fee shall be twenty dollars ($20.00) for each vehicle and/or truck and a ten dollar ($10.00) registration for each "roll-off". The registration fee for any other vehicles or container shall be ten dollars ($10.00). 
(e)  Reinspection upon sale, transfer of vehicle during registration year. Whenever a duly registered vehicle is sold or transferred to another refuse collector licensed in this municipality during the registration year, said vehicle shall be reinspected within seven (7) days of such transfer date but no additional fee shall be required. 
(f)  Display of registration. The registration issued shall be conspicuously displayed on the left front of the body of each vehicle or container so licensed, or as may be directed. 
(g)  Identification of vehicles and containers. Each licensee shall prominently display at all times on each registered vehicle or container in letters as least four (4) inches in height his name, registration number and telephone number. 
(h)  Notification required upon sale, transfer of route. When any licensee shall sell or transfer all or part of his route to another refuse collector presently licensed to collect refuse in this municipality, he shall forthwith give written notice to the director and/or designee at least seven (7) days before the date of the sale or transfer stating the name of the buyer or transferee and the intended date of sale. 
(i)  Licenses nontransferable. Licenses are not transferable. When any licensee shall sell, or transfer, all or part of his route to any refuse collector not licensed in this municipality, he shall first notify the director and/or his designee, in writing, of his intent to sell and the transferee shall, at the same time, make application for a license to operate in this municipality. 
(j)  Routes serviced. As a prerequisite to the issuance of renewal of any license, the refuse collector must, during the month of June, furnish to the director and/or superintendent the geographical routes within this municipality that such refuse collector services or intends to service. 
(Ord. No. 866, 8-9-12) 
Sec. 6-7. - Revocation or suspension of license or registration. 
(a)  Generally. A license to engage in refuse collection and to use the transfer station or other refuse facilities provided by this municipality is a privilege, not a right. Failure to comply with the provisions of this article shall be grounds for revocation or suspension of any license or registration issued under the provisions of this article in addition to any other penalty impossible by law. 
(b)  Notice required. Revocation or suspensions shall only become effective five (5) calendar days after receipt of written notice from the director and/or his designee. 
(c)  Request for review; filing; effect of failure to file. If a refuse collector objects to the director and/or his designee's action described in paragraph (b) above to revoke or suspend his license or registration, he may, within the five (5) calendar days of receipt of said notice, file a written request for review with the mayor. Failure to timely file such request for review shall make the director and/or his designee's action final and binding upon the collector. 
(d)  Effect of timely filing. Timely filing of such request for review shall operate as an automatic stay of the director and/or designee's action. 
(e)  Special appeals board; hearing. The mayor shall appoint forthwith a special appeals board consisting of two (2) electors of this municipality and a member of the board of aldermen and said board shall then within fifteen (15) days hear and decide the matter. Such hearing shall be private, except, however, such hearing may be public if so requested, in writing, by the refuse collector. The decision of said board shall be final and binding upon the collector. 
(f)  Names, addresses of customers to be furnished upon revocation, suspension. Whenever a collector's license or registration is revoked or suspended, he shall furnish the director and/or his designee within twenty-four (24) hours the names and addresses of his customers to insure continuity of service. 
(g)  Refusal of permission to use transfer station or facilities designated by the city. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein, the director and/or his designee shall have power to refuse permission to use the transfer station or any facility designated by the city when, in his opinion, such collector has violated this article or any other applicable rule or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 866, 8-9-12) 
Sec. 6-8. - List of rates. 
    Each collector shall furnish to his customers, upon request, a list of rates for the various services he provides. 
(Ord. No. 866, 8-9-12) 
Sec. 6-9. - Administration; promulgation of rules and regulations. 
(a)  The director and/or designee shall administer the licensing of any refuse collector engaged in the collecting and transporting of refuse in this municipality. 
(b)  The director and/or his designee shall, when considering an application for a refuse license, including renewal, ascertain that the applicant has adequate liability insurance. 
(c)  The director may promulgate additional rules on all collection and disposal procedures from time to time as he deems proper, but such rules shall not be inconsistent with this article. 
(Ord. No. 866, 8-9-12) 
Sec. 6-10. - Refuse collector's responsibilities and obligations. 
(a)  Place of delivery. Each refuse collector shall deliver all processible [processable] solid waste collected within the territorial limits of this municipality to be permitted facility directly and pay the disposal charge. All other refuse shall be delivered to such place as the director and/or his designee may from time to time designate. Any applicable charge for the disposal of refuse shall be paid by the refuse collector to the municipality. 
(b)  Failure to pay. Any refuse collector failing to pay to this municipality any charge within twenty (20) days after the date of a bill therefore, shall pay, in addition to the charge shown on such bill, interest on such charge at the rate of one and one-half (1.5) percent per month and no less than eighteen (18) percent in a year or fraction thereof commencing on the date of such bill, plus all costs of collection, including an attorney's reasonable bill, incurred by this municipality. A failure to pay shall also be grounds for revocation of suspension of a license and registration. 
(c)  Construction and maintenance of vehicles and containers. All vehicles registered to collect and transport refuse shall be of a watertight construction and shall be maintained free of obnoxious odors and accumulated refuse. Such vehicles shall have a watertight lining of metal or other material on the entire bottom and on the front and sides, and a metal tailgate of not less than eighteen (18) inches. A container utilized primarily for non-liquid refuse need not be of watertight construction and it may have an open top, provided that it be covered when it is in motion, to prevent the escape of refuse. 
(d)  Covers. All garbage trucks shall be equipped with metal covers. Whenever any such truck is in use the lid shall be closed so as to prevent escape of any refuse or dust and the access of flies. 
(e)  Sanitary condition. All vehicles and equipment used in the transportation of refuse shall be kept in a sanitary condition. 
(f)  Delivery to disposal facility. Refuse and other putrefactive matter collected by a collector shall be delivered to disposal facility on the same day it is placed on the truck. 
(g)  Scattering of papers, etc. All papers or the other lightweight articles mingled with the refuse shall be so deposited and secured as to prevent scattering or being blown about the streets, walks, lots or yards. 
(h)  Customer's containers. Refuse collectors shall leave their customer's containers in a neat upright position, with lids replaced, and off the road. 
(i)  Spill refuse. Refuse collectors shall cleanup refuse that may have spilled when carrying or transferring refuse. 
(Ord. No. 866, 8-9-12; Ord. No. 879, 4-10-14) 
Sec. 6-11. - Disposal of refuse from homes or businesses where contagious diseases existed. 
    The removal of medical waste, wearing apparel, bedding or other refuse from homes or other places where highly infectious or contagious diseases have prevailed shall be performed under the supervisions and direction of the health authority. Such refuse shall not be placed in containers for regular collection with the normal production. 
(Ord. No. 866, 8-9-12) 
Sec. 6-12. - Scavenging prohibited. 
    It shall be a violation of this article for any persons not authorized by the city to remove any refuse, recyclables or other materials deposited at the transfer station or that have been placed outside or otherwise set aside for collection whether at the curb or other locations collected by the city. Any person in violation of this section shall be fined one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first offense and up to two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each additional violation. Fines must be paid within thirty (30) days. Fines not paid will be charged one and one-half (1.5) percent and not more than eighteen (18) percent in a year. The city in order to collect payment for fines and legal costs incurred shall exercise its options as detailed in section 6-67(d). 
(Ord. No. 866, 8-9-12; Ord. No. 879, 4-10-14) 
Sec. 6-13. - Demolition material. 
    The depositing, or burying or use as fill of demolition materials on private property is hereafter prohibited. Anyone found depositing or burying demolition material or other refuse on private property shall be subject to the penalties provided in this article and in addition shall be required to remove such materials. The director and/or his designee may cause notice to the violator or the owner of the property in accordance with section 6-5(d) of this article, ordering said violator or owner to remove such buried material. If neither party removes such material, the city may remove the material and the expense of such removal shall be charged to the owner of such property and may be collected by the city in an action at law, including reasonable attorney fees. Specifically excluded, however, shall be the existing foundation of a demolished building which may be buried by the owner of the property after the owner has received a permit from the building inspector and the director and/or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 866, 8-9-12) 
Sec. 6-14. - General. 
    All references granting authority to the public works director or his designee shall be subject to approval of the mayor. 
(Ord. No. 866, 8-9-12) 
Secs. 6-15-6-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LANDFILL 

Sec. 6-46. - All refuse to be disposed of at municipal sanitary landfill. 
    No refuse, garbage or rubbish shall be disposed of by dumping except at a public sanitary landfill maintained by the city for that purpose, except that uncontaminated demolition materials may be disposed of as provided in section 6-22. 
(Comp. Ords. 1975, § 3.1 (9.23); Ord. No. 324, 5-8-78). 
Sec. 6-47. - Flammable, dangerous substances not to be dumped. 
    No gunpowder, dynamite, cartridge shells, gasoline, naphtha, benzine, ether or any other explosive or similarly dangerous substance or material shall be cast into any refuse container or transported to any sanitary landfill. 
(Comp. Ords. 1975, § 3.1 (9.25)) 
Sec. 6-48. - Scavenging prohibited; penalty. 
    No person shall trespass upon any land used by the city for the dumping of refuse for the purpose of scavenging. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be fined not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(Comp. Ords. 1975, § 3.1 (9.26)) 
Sec. 6-49. - Liability insurance required to operate landfill; penalty. 
(a)  No person shall operate any landfill for the deposit of waste within the city until and unless the person obtains and maintains a policy of liability insurance covering the operation of the landfill and insuring against any liability resulting from contamination of water supplies and such other damage to the environment and other risks, and with such policy amounts and with such insurer, as shall be acceptable to the director of public works and the Lower Naugatuck Valley public health district, in their discretion. 
(b)  Any person operating a landfill for the deposit of waste within the city shall provide a copy of the required insurance policy to the director of public works and to the Lower Naugatuck Valley public health district, and shall provide a copy of all renewal policies or evidence of renewal of the insurance policy at least ten (10) days prior to the expiration of the current policy of insurance. 
(c)  Upon lapse, nonrenewal or cancellation of the policy of liability insurance required pursuant to this section, all landfill operations at the subject landfill site shall cease until a policy of insurance, in conformity with this section is obtained and a copy thereof is provided to the director of public works and the Lower Naugatuck Valley public health district. 
(d)  In addition to any equitable relief available in the courts of the state to enjoin the operation of any landfill in violation of this section, each violation of this section shall subject the offending party, and any knowing accomplice in the violation, to a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each violation. Each day of operation shall constitute a separate violation, in the case of any continuing violation. 
(e)  Accomplices shall include, but not be limited to, any trucking company or hauler of waste into the landfill. In such case, each truckload or container knowingly hauled to or deposited into a landfill in violation of this section shall be a separate violation of this section and shall subject the accomplice to the fines provided herein. 
(f)  This section shall not affect or apply to any landfill operation of, or to the deposit of waste under any contract or agreement with the city or any department of the state. 
(Ord. No. 496, 4-10-86) 
Sec. 6-50. - Pine Rock Park Environmental Impact Fund. 
(a)  Upon approval of this section, a trust account shall be established for the purposes contained herein. 
(b)  Any balance of funds remaining in any other fund designated for Pine Rock Park environmental concerns shall be transferred to this account. 
(c)  "Environmental concerns" shall be defined as matters having a direct impact upon the residents or the property of the residents within the sphere of influence of the landfill, the affects of water, ground and air quality contamination and the affects of noise and odor pollution created by the landfill, it's operation, or any subsidiary operation within or in conjunction with the landfill. Matters such as litigation costs, monitoring, testing and investigation as well as special aesthetic and quality of life improvements designed to lessen or compensate for, the effects of the landfill on the generally affected area may also be considered to fall within the parameters of this fund. 
(d)  Matters which would normally be handled by existing city procedure or departments shall remain the responsibility of such. This fund shall exist solely to address special needs and situations created by the landfill related concerns. 
(e)  All expenditures of funds from this account shall be made after a vote of approval by the board of aldermen, upon recommendation by the two (2) aldermen representing the affected area. This fund shall be subject to all proper and legal controls now or forever existing for the procedure of expending such funds. 
(Ord. No. 650, 11-12-92) 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 650, adopted November 12, 1992, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, inclusion as § 6-50 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Secs. 6-51-6-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SOLID WASTE RECYCLING PROGRAM[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Article III, §§ 6-61-6-69, was deleted as being superseded by the provisions of Ord. No. 866, adopted August 9, 2012. The deleted provisions pertained to the same subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 814, adopted April 12, 2007; and Ord. No. 859, adopted June 28, 2011. 

Sec. 6-61. - Establishment of city recycling program. 
    There is established a city solid waste single stream (mixed) recycling program with standards to effect the maximum level of recycling of solid waste and source separation. 
(Ord. No. 866, 8-9-12) 
Sec. 6-62. - Administrator of city recycling program. 
    The director of public works or his designee shall be the administrator of the recycling program and is vested with full powers to develop and operate a recycling program consistent with this ordinance and the laws and regulations of the state. All references granting authority to the public works director or his designee shall be subject to approval of the mayor. 
(Ord. No. 866, 8-9-12) 
Sec. 6-63. - Issuance of regulations and instructions governing the operation of the recycling program. 
    The successful operation of the recycling program shall require the issuance of regulations and instructions setting forth detailed procedures to be followed by residents, businesses and institutions, collectors and others. The administrator of the recycling program is authorized and directed to promulgate such regulations and instructions, to be binding upon all persons with the city, to effect an efficient and economical recycling program consistent with this article and applicable state laws and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 866, 8-9-12) 
Sec. 6-64. - Separation of items required to be recycled from other solid waste. 
    Residential and nonresidential. Each person who generates solid waste from any property within the city shall separate from other solid waste the following items required to be recycled: 
(1)  Acceptable items for recycling: 
Plastic: Containers with the #1-#7 in the triangle on the bottom, coat hangers. Toys and other hard plastic items. 
Metal and Aluminum: Cans, jar lids, bottle caps, aluminum foil, and empty aerosol cans, coat hangers, pots/pans, and small appliances. 
Glass: Clear, green and brown glass bottles and jars. 
Aseptic Packaging: Milk and juice cartons and juice boxes (with the straws removed). 
Paper: School and office paper, newspaper, junk mail, magazines, paper egg cartons, paper bags, telephone books, shredded paper (in paper bags only), paperback books and hardcover books with covers removed. 
Paper Board: Gift boxes, cereal and cracker boxes (liner remover), pasta boxes, tissue boxes, shoe boxes, aluminum foil and saran wrap boxes and uncontaminated pizza boxes. 
Corrugated Cardboard: Cut in pieces to fit into recycling cart. 
Note: All items must be rinsed and free of food residue. 
(2)  Unacceptable items: 
Plastic bags, food waste, used paper plates, styrofoam, foam egg cartons, ice cream cartons, black plastic, medicine bottles, dishes, ceramics, sporting goods, CD cases, electronics, batteries, hazardous chemical containers, motor oil containers. 
All such other materials with the same composition of the above. 
Such other items as may be designated by the administrator and allowable by state law and regulation. 
Leaves generated from residential property shall be collected curbside by the city during periods prescribed by the director of public works. Leaves must be placed on the curb in paper leaf bags of approximately thirty-gallon capacity, two-ply, fifty-pound wet strength, with decomposing glue and reinforced self-supporting square bottom closure. Twigs, branches, stones, grass clippings and other yard waste or garbage shall not be mixed with leaves. Leaves shall not be placed in plastic bags for collection and disposal. If a resident fails to comply with the requirements of this section, such refuse will not be collected and the resident shall be required to remove such materials from the curb. The city shall perform random spot checks on paper leaf bags by the director of public works or his designee prior to being shredded. 
Metal items from residential properties that are too large to fit into the recycling container, shall be brought by residents to the city's transfer station for disposal. 
Storage batteries from residential properties shall be brought by residents to the city transfer station. Residents are prohibited from dumping or leaving behind storage batteries anywhere but in the designated area. The administrator shall determine the dates and times the facility will be open for residential drop off of storage batteries. 
Waste oil uncontaminated by antifreeze, acid or other chemicals or substances. shall be brought by residents in sturdy containers of not more than five (5) gallons to an area designated by the administrator, where residents shall empty their containers of waste oil into a waste oil tank. The administrator will determine the dates and times the facility will be open to residents for waste oil disposal. 
Corrugated cardboard, uncontaminated by other materials, such as styrofoam, metal wires, plastic bindings, etc. that cannot be accommodated for in the container provided for recyclables shall be brought by the residents to the city transfer station for disposal in a designated container. Residents shall empty all corrugated cardboard boxes of packing material and flatten said boxes before putting them in the designated container. 
(3)  The administrator of the recycling program shall prescribe procedures by which other solid waste generated from residential properties required to be recycled (such as leaves) shall be handled. 
(4)  Bulky waste, appliances, electronics (e-waste) and brush may be delivered by residents to the transfer station including home demolition material generated by residents performing their own alterations and improvements. If the extent of work performed requires a building permit a copy must be presented prior to depositing demolition materials. 
(5)  Refer to the city web page "Guide to Recycling and Trash" for additional information and changes. 
(Ord. No. 866, 8-9-12) 
Sec. 6-65. - Collection, recycling and sale of items required to be recycled. 
(a)  The administrator of the recycling program shall be responsible for and shall arrange for the items listed in section 6-64 above, which are generated from properties within the city to be collected and delivered to the processing facilities for the processing of items required to be recycled. The administrator through the purchasing agent will solicit proposals for the acceptance and processing of recycling materials in conformance with the city's request for proposal/qualifications procedures as may be revised from time to time by the board of aldermen, from as many permitted processing facilities as practical and the facility that offers the most favorable terms and conditions shall be selected. 
(b)  The administrator of the recycling program shall take appropriate action to cause each owner of property used for business, institutional and nonresidential purposes, at such owner's expense, to either collect and have recycled the items listed in section 6-64 which are generated from properties other than residential properties, in accordance with the provisions of this article and applicable state laws and regulations. 
(c)  To assist the city in monitoring the separation, collection, recycling and sale of items required to be recycled that are generated from properties other than residential properties, the administrator of the recycling program may require such nonresidential generators to submit plans for recycling to the city and may require such generators to submit periodic reports to the city setting forth specific data relating to the amount and nature of items recycled. 
(d)  The administrator of the recycling program, with the consent of the chief executive officer of the city, may require the separation and recycling of items in addition to those designated above. 
(Ord. No. 866, 8-9-12) 
Sec. 6-66. - Regulation of collectors. 
(a)  Any collector hauling solid waste or recyclable materials generated by residential, business or other establishments within the city shall register with the city within thirty (30) days of the effective date of this article and shall renew same on an annual basis, and shall disclose the name of any other municipality in which such collector hauls solid waste. The administrator of the recycling program is authorized and directed to establish reasonable requirements and qualifications for a person to be a collector of solid waste within the city. 
(b)  The cab doors of any private vehicle used to haul solid waste generated within the city shall be clearly marked with a business name and address and telephone number of the hauler. 
(c)  The administrator of the recycling program shall, by mail, give notice of this article and any other provisions promulgated for the collection, hauling, processing and marketing of items required to be recycled to all collectors registered under subsection (a) of this section. After such notice, any collector who has reason to believe that a person from whom he has collected solid waste has discarded items required to be recycled with such solid waste, shall promptly notify the administrator of the recycling program of the alleged violation. Upon request by the administrator of the recycling program, a collector shall provide a warning notice, by tag or other means, to any persons suspected by the collector or by the city of violating separation requirements. Each collector shall also assist the city to identify any persons responsible for creating loads containing significant quantities of items required to be recycled mixed with solid waste which are delivered to a resources recovery facility of solid waste facility by the collector. Each collector is also required to keep tonnage records of recyclables collected from commercial generators within the city limits and submit copies of these records to the administrator of the recycling program on a quarterly basis. 
(d)  As required by section 4(b) of Public Act No. 90-220, the owner or operator of each resources recovery facility or solid waste facility who has reason to believe, upon visual inspection, that a load of solid waste which is delivered to the facility, contains significant quantities of any items required to be recycled is required to provide prompt notification of such belief to the driver of the vehicle delivering the load and to the administrator of the recycling program if the load originated within the city. Under said section 4(b) of Public Act 90-220, the owner or operator of each resources recovery facility or solid waste facility is also required to conduct unannounced inspections of loads delivered to resources recovery facilities or solid waste facilities. 
(e)  Any collector who dumps more than one (1) cubic foot in volume of solid waste at one (1) time in any area not designated for such disposal or who knowingly mixes other solid waste with items required to be recycled shall for a first violation be liable for a civil penalty of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and for a subsequent violation shall be liable for a civil penalty of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). The city or the attorney general, at the request of the commissioner, may bring an action under section 3(f) of Public Act 90-220, which action shall have precedence in the order of trial as provided in Connecticut General Statutes Section 52-191. 
(Ord. No. 866, 8-9-12) 
Sec. 6-67. - Penalties. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other sections of the General Statutes to the contrary the city, acting by the administrator of the recycling program, may impose a penalty not to exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each violation by a commercial establishment of the requirements of section 22a-241b(c) of the Connecticut General Statutes as amended by section 1 of Public Act 90-220 as set forth in section 6-64(b)(1). 
(b)  The owner or operator of a resources recovery facility or other solid waste facility who fails to notify the city about the delivery of loads of solid waste originating from the city containing significant quantities of items required to be recycled as required by section 4 of the Public Act 90-220 and as set forth in section 6-66(d), shall be subject to a warning by the city for a first violation and to a civil penalty of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for any subsequent violation. If the city fails to receive such notification as required, the city may bring an action under section 3 of Public Act 90-249. 
(c)  Any person who violates the provisions of this article shall, in addition to other legal remedies available to the city, be cited or fined not more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each offense, and each violation of this article or of regulations and instructions promulgated pursuant to this article, shall be a separate violation. This article and the regulations and instructions promulgated pursuant to this article may be enforced by citations issued by the director or his designee. Before issuing any citation the director or his designee shall issue a written warning providing notice of the specific violation in accordance with section 7-148(c)(10)(A) of the Connecticut General Statutes. 
(d)  Any owner of residential property who violates any provisions of this article shall be cited and fined as follows: 
(1)  A written warning on the first violation. 
(2)  A fine of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for the second violation within a one (1) year period. 
(3)  A fine of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for the second violations within a year. 
    All fines will be in addition to any cost incurred by the city including costs to correct the violation if required. 
    Each day such violation is continued, after notice to abate, shall be deemed a separate offense and shall be punishable as such. 
    All fines and penalties are due and payable within ten (10) days of receipt). 
    Fines not paid shall result in the city taking any of the following steps to collect fines and legal costs incurred by the city: 
    Actions may include the city taking violators to court, a collection agency, wage attachments and placing liens on the property or properties of violators. 
(e)  The citation hearing procedure provided in section 7-152c of the Connecticut General Statutes is established as the city's citation hearing procedure to be followed when citations pursuant to section 6-69(c) are issued. The chief executive officer of the city is authorized to issue such rules and regulations governing the operation of the citation hearing procedure so long as such rules and regulations are consistent with G.S. § 7-152c. 
(Ord. No. 866, 8-9-12; Ord. No. 879, 4-10-14) 
Chapter 7 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Health and welfare, § 6.8 et seq. 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 3; garbage, trash and refuse, Ch. 6; housing, Ch. 8. 
State Law reference- Uniform Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act, G.S. §§ 21a-91-21a-120; city health authorities generally, G.S. §§ 19a-200-19a-230. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 7-1. - Nuisance odors prohibited; exclusions; penalty. 
(a)  Any person, who causes, suffers, allows or permits or fails to take reasonable steps to abate or terminate the emission from any source whatsoever of obnoxious, disagreeable or foul odors which are offensive or cause an annoyance to the public, or which adversely affect the comfort, enjoyment or health of the public including but not limited to those living or owning property in the vicinity shall be deemed to be creating and/or maintaining a nuisance which is hereby declared unlawful. 
(b)  This section shall specifically exclude, however, agricultural or farming operations as defined in general statutes section 19a-341 as amended. 
(c)  Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be fined one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each violation, with each day constituting a separate violation in the case of continuing violation. The fine shall be in addition to and not in lieu of injunctive relief which shall be enforced through the issuance of an injunction by a court of competent jurisdiction and any other remedy permitted by law. 
(Ord. No. 494, 2-13-86) 
State Law reference- Authority of city to prohibit and abate nuisances, G.S. § 7-148(c)(7)(E). 
Sec. 7-2. - Slaughterhouses prohibited. 
    No building, enclosure, place or structure of any kind shall be kept or used within the limits of the city, as a slaughterhouse, for the purpose of killing, butchering or dressing any kind of animals for market or sale. Every building, enclosure, place or structure so kept or used shall be deemed a nuisance; and any person, persons or corporation who shall violate the provisions of this section shall forfeit and pay to the city the sum of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(Comp. Ords. 1975, § 4.1(1)) 
Sec. 7-3. - Soap and candle factories. 
    No building, enclosure, place or structure of any kind within the limits of the city shall be kept, used or occupied as a soap or candle factory, or for the purpose of making soap or candles for sale, or for carrying on the business of boiling bones, or rendering fat, tallow or grease of any kind, or for salting hides, or for carrying on, following, or conducting any trade, business or occupation of any kind whatsoever productive of noxious, offensive, or unwholesome vapors, fumes, smoke and stenches, without first having obtained a license or permit therefor, in writing, under the hand of the mayor of the city; which license or permit shall designate the place where such business, trade or occupation may be carried on; and such license or permit may at any time be revoked by the board of aldermen at their discretion, by a notice in writing to that effect. Any person who shall keep or use, or cause to be kept or used, any building, enclosure, place or structure of any kind, within the limits aforesaid, for any of the purposes enumerated in this section, and contrary to the true intent and meaning thereof, without being so licensed or permitted, or after notice in writing of the revocation of such license or permit, shall forfeit and pay to the city the sum of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each and every period of twenty-four (24) hours during which such trade, business or occupation aforesaid shall be carried on in violation of this section. 
(Comp. Ords. 1975, § 4.1(2)) 
Sec. 7-4. - Privies, etc. 
    No necessary house or privy shall be erected or suffered to continue or remain within the city, without a suitable and convenient vault under the same. Every house erected, continued, or suffered to remain in the city, contrary to the true intent and meaning of this section shall be deemed a nuisance; and whatever person shall erect, continue, or suffer to remain on his or their lands any necessary house, contrary to the form, force and effect of this section, shall, for each week during which such necessary house shall be so suffered to remain and continue, forfeit and pay five dollars ($5.00) to the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 1975, § 4.1(3)) 
State Law reference- Authority of city to regulate cesspools, sewers, privies, etc., G.S. § 7-148(c)(7)(C). 
Sec. 7-5. - Keeping of swine; filth, rubbish, etc.; penalty. 
(a)  The keeping of swine in a sty, pen, or other close in the city, in such manner to become offensive, by disagreeable effluvia arising from such sty, pen, or close; the casting of filth, ashes, cinders, bones, lobster shells, decayed fruit, vegetable or animal matter, or rubbish of any kind, in or upon any street, sidewalk, highway, court or open space, or public square in the city; any filth, dung manure, offal, or brine, or any rubbish accumulated in any barn, stableyard, dwellinghouse or outhouse, enclosure, or other place, so as to be offensive; any privy or necessary house; the same having such vault remaining at any time more than three-quarters full, the dressing or cleaning fish, birds, poultry, or animals of any kind in or upon any public or private landing place, or any wharf or bridge or on the margins of any basin or cover or in any of the public highways or streets of the city, or upon the banks or margins of the gutter not properly and securely covered and protected; the leaving or causing to be left, unburied for an unreasonable length of time of any dead animal, or the throwing of any dead animal into the waters of the city; fastening horses or cattle to any shade tree, or placing or leaving them so that they injure the bark or the tree in any way; the placing or leaving any horse or horse and carriage, or horses and carriages, before the door or gate of any dwelling house or yard, except for the purpose of receiving or delivering persons about to go to or come from such house or gate, or the placing or leaving any cart with oxen or horses before any such door or gate, in the manner described, except for the purpose of receiving or delivering a load at such door or gate, without the permission of the occupant of such house or yard; the stopping of any horse and carriage, or horses and carriages, or any cart, wagon, or other vehicle drawn by animals, or the leaving or permitting any such animals or vehicles to stand upon any walk or crosswalk in the city, shall each and every of such acts and things be deemed a nuisance. 
(b)  Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be fined not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each violation. 
(Comp. Ords. 1975, § 4.1(4)) 
Cross reference- Access to fire hydrants, § 4-5. 
Sec. 7-6. - Abandoned iceboxes, refrigerators, etc. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to leave outside of any building or dwelling in a place accessible to children any abandoned, unattended or discarded iceboxes, refrigerators or any other container of any kind which has an airtight door or lock which may not be released for opening from the inside of the icebox, refrigerator or container. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to leave outside of any building or dwelling in a place accessible to children any abandoned, unattended or discarded icebox or refrigerator or any other container of any kind which has an airtight snaplock or any other devices therein without first removing the snaplock or doors from the icebox, refrigerator or container. 
(c)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in accordance with section 1-11. 
(Comp. Ords. 1975, § 4.1(11)) 
Sec. 7-7. - Quonset huts. 
    No quonset hut-type of building or used government surplus buildings of any type shall be erected in the city to be used for human habitation. 
(Comp. Ords. 1975, § 4.1(12)) 
Sec. 7-8. - Removal of dog feces. 
    No owner, keeper or attendant of any dog shall permit said dog to defecate on any public or private sidewalk or property of another. If any dog shall defecate upon such public or private sidewalk or property of another, the owner, keeper or person then in control of the dog shall immediately remove, or cause to be removed from said place all feces deposited by said dog and disposed of in an appropriate manner. Any person who violates this article shall be fined not more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each violation. 
(Ord. No. 716, 10-9-97; Ord. No. 819, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 7-9. - Littering or dumping prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall throw, scatter, spill, or place or cause to be blown, scattered, spilled, thrown, or placed, or otherwise dispose of any litter upon any public property in the City of Shelton, or upon private property in the City of Shelton not owned by him, or in the waters of the City of Shelton including, but not limited to, any public highway, public park, beach, campground, forest land, recreational area, mobile manufactured home park, highway, road, street, or alley except: (1) when such property is designated by the City of Shelton for the disposal of garbage and refuse, and such person is authorized to use such property for such purpose, (2) into a litter receptacle in such a manner that the litter will be prevented from being carried away or deposited by the elements upon any part of said private or public property or waters. 
(b)  Any person who violates any provision of subsection (a) of this section shall be subject to a fine of two hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00). When any such material or substances are thrown, blown, scattered, or spilled from a vehicle, the operator thereof shall be deemed prima facie to have committed such offense. 
(c)  "Litter" means any discarded, used, or unconsumed substance or waste material, whether made of aluminum, glass, plastic, rubber, paper, or other natural or synthetic material, or any combination thereof, including, but not limited to, any bottle, jar, or can, or any top, cap, or detachable tab of any bottle, jar or can any unlighted cigarette, cigar, match, or any flaming or glowing material, or any garbage, trash, refuse, debris, rubbish, grass clippings or other lawn or garden waste, newspaper, magazines, glass, metal, plastic or paper containers, or other packaging or construction material which has not been deposited in a litter receptacle. "Litter" also means and includes items, books, telephone books or advertising material placed, thrown or distributed on property without the prior permission of the owner. 
(Ord. No. 755, 6-14-01; Ord. No. 822, 4-12-07; Ord. No. 894, 11-12-15; Ord. No. 907, 10-12-17) 
Secs. 7-10-7-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES (EMS) COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 676, adopted July 14, 1994, amended Ord. No. 557, adopted October 13, 1988, from which Ch. 7, Art. II, §§ 7-26-7-33 was derived. The provisions of Ord. No. 676 have been included as a new Ch. 7, Art. II to read as herein set out at the discretion of the editor. 
Cross reference- Boards, commissions and committees, § 2-41 et seq. 

Sec. 7-26. - Purpose. 
    The emergency medical services commission (EMS) shall oversee, monitor, coordinate and regulate emergency medical services and city owned assets used in conjunction with delivery of these services for the city. Their mission shall be to deliver the highest quality, cost effective patient care to those individuals requesting or requiring emergency medical services within the city. 
(Ord. No. 676, Art. I, 7-14-94) 
Sec. 7-27. - Membership; terms. 
(a)  The emergency medical services commission shall consist of five (5) members. 
(b)  The commissioners shall be equal in rank and authority. All commissioners shall serve without compensation, but may be reimbursed (subject to approval of the board of aldermen) for reasonable and necessary expenses. 
(c)  The commission shall elect a chairman and vice chairman as provided by the Charter of the city. The chairman shall preside at all meetings of the EMS commission. The vice chairman shall assume the powers and duties of the chairman in the absence of the chairman. Both the chairman and the vice chairman shall have a vote in any matter before their commission. 
(d)  The original and subsequent appointments to the commission shall be made by the board of aldermen at its first regular meeting following the effective date of this article subject to confirmation by the mayor with the board able to override an unfavorable confirmation by two-thirds vote of the board. The appointments shall provide for minority representation with no more than four (4) members from one (1) party and shall be as follows: 
(1)  Two (2) persons for a term to expire on June 30, 1995. 
(2)  Three (3) persons for a term to expire on June 30, 1996. 
(3)  Thereafter, all appointments shall be for two (2) years with commissioners serving until their replacement is appointed. 
(4)  Vacancies on the commission shall be filled within sixty (60) days in the same manner used to make original appointments. 
(e)  Four (4) absences from regularly scheduled meetings by any commissioner within a twelve-month period shall be grounds for removal on the basis of good cause under the City Charter. 
(Ord. No. 676, Art. II, 7-14-94) 
Sec. 7-28. - Minutes, records and reports. 
    The commission shall have a clerk who shall keep proper minutes and records of its meetings and activities. 
(Ord. No. 676, Art. III, 7-14-94) 
Sec. 7-29. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  The EMS commission shall review the need for EMS services, determine the type and manner of providing such services, oversee the emergency medical services for the city and negotiate contracts with the providers. All contracts will be subject to the approval of the board of aldermen. 
(b)  The EMS commission will be responsible for preparation and submission to the finance director and the mayor an annual line item budget covering all EMS service related costs such as provider costs, EMS building costs and other EMS related expenditures. The commission shall be responsible for managing such budget, once approved. They shall have the authority to authorize payment for services rendered and shall follow the budget process required of city departments. 
(c)  The EMS commission shall establish policies and procedures for the city and its EMS providers to follow and insure compliance with all state and federal requirements. In so doing, the EMS commission shall have the authority to set standards of performance and adopt rules and regulations necessary to provide this essential public service and shall do so in a manner that allows for public comments prior to adoption. 
(d)  The EMS commission shall be responsible to insure that all providers of emergency medical services to the city coordinate their activities through the EMS commission. 
(e)  The EMS commission shall have the authority to require providers of emergency medical services within the city to appear and to answer questions before the commission relating to their training, equipment, standards, procedures and delivery of emergency medical services and any other matter relevant to the provision of such services. The commission may also require such providers to produce records, including financial records or other physical evidence relevant to such inquiry that they may require. Failure of any such provider to appear, answer such questions or produce such physical evidence shall be grounds for removal or disqualification of such provider from providing emergency medical services within the city. 
(f)  The EMS commission shall maintain a communication link with the mayor and the board of aldermen through the public health and safety committee monthly meetings and by distribution of the EMS commission meeting minutes to such parties. These actions are to be supplemented by an EMS annual report to accompany the EMS budget submission. Advisory reports may be submitted at any time the commission so determines the need or, in response to a specific request of the mayor or the board of aldermen. 
(g)  The EMS commission shall establish policies for the emergency medical services building with regard to its use and operation and shall have appropriate enforcement authority over same. 
(h)  The EMS commission shall have such further authority and duties as the board of aldermen shall designate. 
(Ord. No. 676, Art. IV, 7-14-94) 
Sec. 7-30. - Miscellaneous. 
    All prior provisions and ordinances relating to emergency medical services which are inconsistent with these provisions are hereby repealed. 
(Ord. No. 676, Art. V, 7-14-94) 
Secs. 7-31-7-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - NOISE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 803, adopted Jan. 11, 2007, amended Art. III in its entirety to read as codified herein. Former Art. III pertained to the same subject matter, was comprised of §§ 7-41-7-47, and derived from Ord. No. 311, adopted May 8, 1978; Ord. No. 679, adopted Nov. 10, 1994; Ord. No. 682, adopted Feb. 9, 1995; and Ord. No. 787, adopted Nov. 10, 2004. 
State Law reference- Authority to prevent disturbing noises, G.S. § 7-148(c)(7)(H)(viii). 

Sec. 7-41. - General prohibition. 
(1)  No person shall make, create or maintain unreasonably loud, unnecessary or disturbing noises, as defined in this article, that effect and are a detriment to the public health, comfort, convenience, safety, welfare, peace and quiet of persons within the City of Shelton. 
(2)  No person shall cause to make, create or maintain unreasonably loud, unnecessary or disturbing noises, as defined in this article, that effect and are a detriment to the public health, comfort, convenience, safety, welfare, peace and quiet of persons within the City of Shelton. 
(3)  No person shall create, cause to be created or allow the emission of sound beyond the boundaries of their property so as to cause noise pollution as defined herein in the City of Shelton, or so as to violate any provisions of this article. 
(4)  All construction activities not specifically excluded or exempt herein which are conducted on Sundays and holidays as observed by the City of Shelton shall be required to comply with the night sound levels as same are defined by this article. 
(Ord. No. 803, § 1, 1-11-07; Ord. No. 824, § 1, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 7-42. - Definitions. 
    When used in this article, the terms below shall have the following meanings: 
    Day shall be from 7:30 a.m. to 9:00 p.m., local time. 
    Decibel shall mean a unit measuring the volume of sound, equal to twenty (20) times the logarithm to the base ten (10) of the ratio of the root mean square of the pressure of the sound measured to a reference pressure of twenty (20) micropascals. 
    Emitter shall be the person who creates, causes to be created or allows the noise. 
    L-10 shall mean the A-weighted sound level exceeded ten (10) percent of the time period during which the measurement was made. 
    L-50 shall mean the A-weighted sound level exceeded fifty (50) percent of the time period during which the measurement was made. 
    Night shall be from 9:00 p.m. until midnight, and from midnight until 7:30 a.m., local time. 
    Overall sound level shall mean the overall sound pressure level, expressed in decibels (dB), measured on a sound level meter using the C-weighting network and set to the slow response. 
    Person shall be any individual, firm, partnership, company, corporation, association trust, syndicate, agency, or other legal entity of any kind. 
    Receptor shall be the person who receives the noise impact. 
    Sound level shall mean the A-weighted sound pressure level, expressed in decibels (dBA), measured on a sound level meter using the A-weighting network and set to the slow response. 
    Sound level meter shall mean an instrument which includes a microphone, amplifier, RMS detector, integrator or averager, output meter and weighing networks all conforming to the requirements set forth in the American National Standards Institutes American National Standard for Sound Level Meters (ANI S1.4-1974) for a precision (type 1) sound level meter. 
(Ord. No. 803, § 2, 1-11-07; Ord. No. 824, § 2, 4-12-07) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 7-43. - Classification of noise zones. 
(a)  Noise zones within the City of Shelton shall be classified in accordance with the applicable zone for that parcel or tract of land and the surrounding parcels or tracts, as detailed by the "Standard Land Use Classification Manual of Connecticut", hereafter referred to as "SLUCONN". Noise zone specified herein shall correspond to the following zoning descriptions in the zoning regulations and zoning map of the City of Shelton. Starting times commercial and industrial zones may be flexible with approval from proper authorities but excessive noise is prohibited. 
Zone Actual or 
Intended Use Current Zoning** A Residential R1A, R-1, R2, R3, R4, R5 B Commercial CA1, CA2, CA3, CB1, CB2 C Industrial IA1, IA2, IA3, IB1, LB2, LIP ** Based on zoning regulations and zoning map of the City of Shelton  
A PDD shall comply with the foregoing based upon the use of the land. 
(b)  Lands designated as "Class A Noise Zone" shall generally be residential areas where human beings sleep, or areas where serenity and tranquility are essential to the intended use of the land. The specific SLUCONN categories in Class A shall include: 
(1)  Residential. 
11  Household units* 
12  Group quarters 
13  Mobile home parks and courts 
19  Other residential 
*  Mobile homes are included whether or not on foundation. 
(2)  Trade. 
583  Residential hotels 
584  Hotels, tourist courts and motels 
585  Transient lodgings 
(3)  Services. 
651  Medical and other health services; hospitals 
674  Correctional institutes 
691  Religious activities 
(4)  Cultural. 
711  Cultural activities 
712  Nature exhibits 
713  Historic and monument sites 
(5)  Undeveloped, unused and reserved lands and water areas. 
92  Reserved lands 
941  Vacant floor area-Residential 
(c)  Lands designated as "Class B Noise Zone" shall generally be commercial in nature, areas where human beings converse and such conversation is essential to the intended use of the land. The specific SLUCONN categories in Class B shall include: 
(1)  Transportation, communication and utilities. 
46  Automobile parking 
47  Communication 
49  Other transportation, communication and utilities 
(2)  Trade. 
51  Wholesale trade 
52  Retail-Building materials 
53  Retail-General merchandise 
54  Retail-Food 
55  Retail-Automotive dealers and gasoline service stations 
56  Retail-Apparel and accessories 
57  Retail-Furniture, home furnishings and equipment 
58  Retail-Eating, drinking and lodging, except 583, 584, 585 
59  Retail-Not elsewhere classified 
(3)  Services. 
61  Finance, insurance and real estate services 
62  Personal services 
63  Business services, except 637 
64  Repair services 
65  Professional services, except 651 
67  Government services, except 672, 674, 675 
68  Educational services 
69  Miscellaneous services, except 691 
(4)  Cultural, entertainment and recreational. 
71  Cultural activities and nature exhibits, except 711, 712, 713 
72  Public assembly 
73  Amusements 
74  Recreational activities 
75  Resorts and group camps 
76  Parks 
79  Other, not elsewhere classified 
(5)  Agricultural. 
81  Agriculture 
82  Agricultural related activities 
(6)  Undeveloped, unused and reserved lands and water areas. 
91  Undeveloped and unused land area 
93  Water areas 
94  Vacant floor areas, except 941 
99  Other undeveloped land and water areas, not elsewhere classified 
(d)  Lands designated as "Class C Noise Zone" shall generally be industrial where protection against damage to hearing is essential and the necessity for conversation is limited. The specific SLUCONN categories in Class C shall include: 
(1)  Manufacturing-Secondary raw materials. 
(2)  Manufacturing-Primary raw materials. 
(3)  Transportation, communications and utilities, except SLUCONN categories 46, 47, 49. 
(4)  Services. 
637  Warehousing and storage services 
66  Contract construction services 
672  Protective functions and related activities 
675  Military bases and reservations 
(5)  Agriculture. 
83  Forestry activities and related services 
84  Commercial fishing activities and related services 
85  Mining activities and related services 
89  Other resource production and extraction, not elsewhere classified 
(Ord. No. 803, § 3, 1-11-07; Ord. No. 824, § 3, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 7-44. - Noise zone standards. 
(a)  No person shall emit or cause to be emitted sound exceeding the sound levels stated herein when measured at any point on a tract or parcel of land not under their ownership or control. The determination of allowable sound shall be in accordance with the following objective numerical standards for the respective noise zone classes: 
C B A-Day A-Night Class C Emitter to 70 dBA 66 dBA 61 dBA 51 dBA Class B Emitter to 62 dBA 62 dBA 55 dBA 45 dBA Class A Emitter to 62 dBA 55 dBA 55 dBA 45 dBA  
Sound levels determined by the police department or planning and zoning administrator to be in excess of these values shall constitute proof of violation of this article. 
(b)  It shall be a violation for any person to: 
(1)  Use or operate any construction equipment singly or in combination with other equipment on any construction or demolition site if such use or operation results in the emission of noise, measured at any boundary of the nearest receptor in any noise zone in excess of the values listed below: 
Maximum Level of Sound** Zone L-50 L-10 A 70 dBA 80 dBA B 75 dBA 85 dBA C 80 dBA 90 dBA ** The minimum level shall not be exceeded for longer than six (6) minutes in any one-hour period.  
(2)  Conduct a utility street work installation or repair, paving work or sewer cleaning which produces a sound level exceeding eighty (80) dBA at a distance of fifty (50) feet from the operation: 
(c)  The provisions of subsections (b)(1) and (2) above shall not apply to those construction devises commonly referred to as "impact tools", including but not limited to grinders, pile drivers, paving breakers, jack hammers, rock drills or well drilling rigs, provided that such impact tools shall have intake and exhaust mufflers recommended by the manufacturer thereof, installed and working. 
(d)  In addition to the above objective standards, no person shall emit noise exceeding an overall sound level of seventy (70) dB. 
(e)  The chief of police and planning and zoning administrator shall be responsible for developing the measurement methodology to determine compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 803, § 4, 1-11-07; Ord. No. 824, § 4, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 7-45. - Exclusions. 
    This article shall not apply to: 
(a)  Sound generated by natural phenomena, including, but not limited to, wind, storms, insects, birds, amphibious creatures and water flowing in its natural course. 
(b)  The unamplified sound of the human voice. 
(c)  The unamplified sound made by wild or domestic animals. 
(d)  Sound created by bells, carillons or chimes associated with specific religious observances. 
(e)  Sound created by a public emergency sound signal attached to an authorized emergency vehicle in the immediate act of responding to an emergency, or located within or attached to a building, pole or other structure for the purpose of sounding an alarm relating to fire or civil preparedness. 
(f)  Sound created by safety and protective devices provided that such device is sounded as a warning of imminent danger or from the release of pressure buildup. 
(g)  Sound created by an intrusion alarm, provided that the emission of noise from such devices does not exceed ten (10) minutes when attached to any vehicle or thirty (30) minutes when attached to any building or structure. 
(h)  Backup alarms required by OSHA or other municipal, state or federal safety regulations. 
(i)  Farming equipment or farming activity. 
(Ord. No. 803, § 5, 1-11-07; Ord. No. 824, § 5, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 7-46. - Exemptions. 
    The following noise shall be exempted from the provisions of this article: 
(a)  Noise created by signal testing, principally siren-testing by city fire departments and civil preparedness units. 
(b)  Noise created by the regularly scheduled signaling of a specific time of day. 
(c)  Noise generated by engine-powered or motor-driven lawn care or maintenance equipment on Class "A" property between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. provided that noise discharged from exhausts is adequately muffled to prevent loud noises therefrom. 
(d)  Noises created by snow removal equipment at any time provided that noise discharged from exhausts is adequately muffled to prevent loud noises therefrom. 
(e)  Noise created by blasting provided that the blasting is conducted between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. at specified hours previously announced to the local general public or hours as determined by the fire marshal or planning and zoning commission for approved projects. 
(f)  Noise created by on-site recreational or sporting activity which is sanctioned by city government. 
(g)  Patriotic or public celebrations, such as parades, carnivals and firework displays, are exempted provided that a permit has been obtained in advance from the chief of police. 
(h)  Noise created by aircraft, or components designed for, or utilized in the development of aircraft. 
(i)  The chief of police may permit that the "day" noise standards may be applicable in industrial and commercial zones under circumstances which will not adversely effect the adjoining landowners as determined by the chief of police. 
(j)  Noise created by solid waste and recycling collection. 
(k)  Construction activities performed for nonprofit agencies or city recreational groups and/or facilities or other city purposes. 
(Ord. No. 803, § 6, 1-11-07; Ord. No. 824, § 6, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 7-47. - Prohibited noise activities. 
(a)  Vehicle horns. No person shall, at any time, sound any horn or other audible signal device of a motor vehicle unless it is necessary as a warning to prevent or avoid a traffic accident. 
(b)  Advertising. No person shall, at any time, use any drum, bell or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention to any performance, show or sale, or to the display or advertisement of merchandise. 
(Ord. No. 803, § 7, 1-11-07; Ord. No. 824, § 7, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 7-48. - Motor and recreational vehicle noise. 
(a)  All motor and recreational vehicles within the limits of the city shall be subject to the noise standards and decibel levels as found in title 14, section 14-80a of the Connecticut General Statutes. 
(b)  No sound amplifying devices on or within motor vehicles shall emit noise in excess of the noise levels as specified in section 7-44. 
(Ord. No. 803, § 8, 1-11-07; Ord. No. 824, § 8, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 7-49. - Inspections. 
(a)  For the purpose of determining compliance with the provisions of this article, the chief of police or his designated representative is hereby authorized to make inspections of all noise sources and to take measurements and make tests, whenever necessary, to determine the quantity and character of noise. In the event that any person refuses or restricts entry and free access to any part of a premises, or refuses inspection, testing or noise measurement of any activity, device, facility, or process where inspection is sought, the chief of police or his designated representative may seek, from the appropriate court, a warrant, without interference, restriction or obstruction, at a reasonable time, for the purpose of inspecting, testing or measuring noise. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to allow or permit the chief of police or his designated representative free access to any premise, when the chief of police or his designated representative is acting in compliance with a warrant for inspection and order issued by the appropriate court. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate the provisions of any warrant or court order requiring inspection, testing or measurement of noise sources. 
(d)  No person shall hinder, obstruct, delay, resist, prevent in any way, interfere or attempt to interfere with any authorized person while in the performance of his/her duties under this article. 
(Ord. No. 803, § 9, 1-11-07; Ord. No. 824, § 9, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 7-50. - Violations and enforcement. 
(a)  The police department under the direction of the chief of police shall be responsible for investigating complaints of noise pollution. 
(b)  The police department or planning and zoning personnel shall be responsible for making acoustic measurements to determine that a violation has in fact occurred, at the request of the chief of police or his designee. 
(c)  The chief of police shall formulate a schedule, based upon economically reasonable and technologically feasible noise control procedures, that will bring the noise emitter into compliance with this article. 
(d)  Any person violating this article shall be subject to a fine that shall be the maximum allowed by Connecticut General Statutes section 7-148 for each offense, in accordance with section 1-11 of the City Ordinances. 
(e)  Each separate instance shall be considered a separate violation 
(f)  Nothing in this article shall prevent the police department, because of the perceived nature of the offence, from proceeding not under the terms of this article, but under the provisions of Connecticut General Statutes sections 531-181, 53a-181a and 53a-182, as they may be amended from time to time, which sections relate, generally to breach of peace, creating a public disturbance, and disorderly conduct, etc. 
(Ord. No. 803, § 10, 1-11-07; Ord. No. 824, § 10, 4-12-07) 
Secs. 7-51-7-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DUST[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Authority of city to regulate the emission of smoke, etc., G.S. § 7-148(c)(8)(D). 

Sec. 7-61. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
    Dust shall mean all dust, ash, soot, fly ash, dirt or other fine particles of matter. 
    Dust-producing substance shall mean all coal, charcoal, coke, sand, gravel, dirt or any other substance composed of, mixed with, producing or otherwise capable of spreading or disseminating dust. 
(Ord. No. 132, § I, 6-12-72) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 7-62. - Coverings required when transporting dust or dust-producing substances. 
    No dust or dust-producing substance shall be transported through any street without protection and covering, at all times, sufficient effectually to prevent the spreading or dissemination of dust from such dust-producing substance into the air or upon any public or private property. Each violation thereof shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 132, § II, 6-12-72) 
Cross reference- Traffic and motor vehicles, Ch. 16. 
Sec. 7-63. - Responsibility of persons handling dust or dust-producing substances. 
    No person shall handle, transport, work, load, unload, trade or deal with any dust or dust-producing substance in any place in the city so as, by the dissemination of dust, to annoy or disturb unreasonably or to endanger the health of, any other person or to damage or render unsightly any property or thing. 
(Ord. No. 132, § III, 6-12-72) 
Chapter 8 - HOUSING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 3; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 4; flood damage prevention, Ch. 5; garbage, trash and refuse, Ch. 6; health and sanitation, Ch. 7; planning, Ch. 12; utilities, Ch. 17; zoning, App. A; subdivisions, App. B. 
State Law reference- Authority to make rules relating to maintenance of safe and sanitary housing, G.S. § 7-148(c)(7)(A)(i); creation of housing authorities, G.S. § 8-40; powers of housing authorities, G.S. § 8-44; state grants-in-aid for housing code enforcement, G.S. § 8-208. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 8-1. - Purposes. 
(a)  It is hereby declared that the purpose of this chapter is to protect, preserve, and promote the physical and mental health and social well being of the people; to regulate private and publicly owned dwellings for the purpose of maintaining adequate sanitation and public health; and to protect the safety of the people and to promote the general welfare by legislation which shall be applicable to all rental or leased dwellings now in existence or hereafter constructed. 
(b)  It is hereby further declared that the purpose of this chapter is to: 
(1)  Establish minimum standards for basic equipment and facilities for light, ventilation, heating and cooling; for safety from fire and accidents; for the use and location and amount of space for human occupancy; and for safe and sanitary maintenance; 
(2)  To determine the responsibilities of owners, operators and occupants of dwellings and commercial structures; and 
(3)  To provide for the administration and enforcement thereof. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 1.01, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 1.01, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-2. - Legislative finding. 
(a)  The enactment and enforcement of this chapter is thereby, declared to be essential to the public interest: 
(1)  To avoid premises (as defined in section 8-3) existing within the city either occupied or unoccupied by human beings, which are blighted, and such buildings or structures are blighted because of faulty design or construction, or failure to keep them in a proper state of repair, or lack of proper sanitary facilities, or lack of adequate lighting or ventilation, or the inability to properly heat, or improper management of them, or any combination of these factors, resulting in such buildings becoming so deteriorated, dilapidated, neglected, overcrowded with occupants, or so unsanitary as to jeopardize or be detrimental to the health, safety, morals or welfare to the people of the municipality; 
(2)  To further avoid that the general appearance and improper maintenance of commercial structures or commercial units which are blighted have a detrimental effect upon the property value and business activities of the entire area as well as contribute to the blighted conditions which are dangerous to the public health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the people; 
(3)  To further avoid the development of or increase in physical, mental or social ill-health or disease, mortality, crime and juvenile delinquency; 
(4)  To further avoid conditions existing on such blighted premises which are dangerous to the public health, safety, morals and general welfare of the people, and that conditions existing on such blighted premises necessitate excessive and disproportionate expenditure of public funds for public health and safety, crime prevention, fire protection and other public services, and that the conditions existing on such blighted premises cause a drain upon public revenue, impairing the efficient and economical exercise of governmental functions in such areas; 
(5)  To further the elimination of blighted premises; 
the prevention of the recurrence of blighted premises, is in the best interest of the public, and that the accomplishment of this end will be fostered and encouraged by the enactment of this chapter. 
(b)  The policy of this chapter shall be to achieve compliance with the provisions contained herein, through the cooperation of owners and occupants. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 1.02, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 1.02, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-3. - Title. 
    This chapter shall be known, and may be cited, as the "Housing and Commercial Code of the City of Shelton." 
(Ord. No. 310, § 1.03, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 1.03, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-4. - Definitions. 
    The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter: 
    Accessory structure shall mean a structure, the use of which is incidental to that of the main building or structure, which is located on the same lot with a dwelling, or commercial structure. 
    Approved shall mean approved by the local or state authority having such administrative authority. 
    Ashes shall mean the residue from the burning of combustible materials and the noncombustible portion of refuse loaded into an incinerator. 
    Basement shall mean a portion of a building located partly underground, but having less than half its clear, floor-to-ceiling height below the grade plane as defined by the state basic building code. 
    Cellar shall mean a portion of a building located partly or wholly underground, and having half or more than half of the clear floor-to-ceiling height below the grade plane as defined by the state basic building code. 
    Central heating system shall mean a single system supplying heat to one (1) or more dwelling units or more than one (1) rooming unit. 
    Code enforcement officer shall mean the official charged with the administration and enforcement of this chapter, or his authorized representative. 
    Commercial activity shall mean any wholesale or retail sale of goods, commodities, insurance, or services or the activities which make possible such sale. 
    Commercial structure shall mean any structure which is wholly or partly used or intended to be used for the wholesale or retail sale of goods, commodities, insurance, or services or for the activities which make possible such sale. 
    Commercial unit shall mean any unit excluding those portions which are used as dwellings, dwelling units or habitable rooms, which is used or partly used or intended to be used for the wholesale or retail sale of goods, commodities, insurance, or services, or for the activities which make possible such sale by a single owner or operator, company or corporation. 
    Dwelling shall mean any enclosed space which is wholly or partly used or intended to be used for living or sleeping by human occupants, provided that temporary housing shall not be regarded as a dwelling. 
    Dwelling unit shall mean any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating. 
    Extermination shall mean the control and elimination of insects, rodents, or other pests by eliminating their harborages, by removing, or making inaccessible, materials that may serve as their food; by poisoning, spraying, fumigating, trapping, or by any other recognized and legal pest elimination methods approved by the health officer. 
    Family shall mean a person or group of related persons, plus guests and domestic servants thereof, or a group of not more than six (6) persons who need not be so related, who are living as a single housekeeping unit maintaining a common household. A roomer or boarder to whom rooms are let or board is furnished shall not be considered a member of a family. 
    Flush watercloset shall mean a toilet bowl flushed with water under pressure with a water sealed trap above the floor level. 
    Garbage shall mean the animal and vegetable waste resulting from handling, preparation, cooking, serving and nonconsumption of food. 
    Guest shall mean any person who shares a dwelling unit in a nonpermanent status for not more than thirty (30) days in a calendar year. 
    Habitable room shall mean a room or enclosed floor space used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking, or eating purposes, excluding bathrooms, water closet compartments, laundries, furnace rooms, pantries, kitchenettes and utility rooms of less than fifty (50) square feet, foyers or communicating corridors, stairways, closets, storage spaces and workshops, hobby and recreation areas in unsealed or uninsulated parts of a structure below ground level or in attics or hobby and recreation areas for communal use in buildings containing several dwelling units. 
    Health officer shall mean the legally designated health authority of the city or his authorized representative. 
    Heated water shall mean water heated to a temperature of not less than one hundred twenty (120) degrees Fahrenheit at the outlet. 
    Hotel shall mean a building or portion of a building used as a place where sleeping accommodations are furnished for hire or other consideration, with or without board for sixteen (16) or more guests or employees of the management. The term "hotel" shall include all clubs, schools, dormitories or other buildings which have similar sleeping accommodations, but shall not include apartment houses, hospitals, penal institutions or buildings housing the insane. Members of the management's family shall not be considered as guests or employees. 
    Household shall mean a family of one (1) or more unrelated persons, including servants and not more than two (2) boarders, who share the same dwelling and use some or all of its cooking and eating facilities. 
    Infestation shall mean the presence of insects, rodents or other pests within or around a dwelling or other structure in numbers considered hazardous. 
    Kitchen or kitchenette shall mean any room containing any or all of the following equipment, or area of a room within three (3) feet of such equipment: sink or other device for dish washing, stove or other device for cooking, refrigerator or other device for cool storage of food. 
    Lavatory shall mean a bowl or basin for washing the face and hands, or a room equipped with such a basin. 
    Lead paint shall mean any pigmented, liquid substance applied to surfaces by brush, roller or spray, in which the total nonvolatile ingredient contains more than five-tenths (0.5) percent of lead, by weight, calculated as metallic lead. 
    Meaning of certain words. Wherever the words "dwelling," "dwelling unit," "rooming house," "rooming unit," "commercial structure," "commercial unit," "premises," and "structure" are used in this chapter, they shall be construed as though they were followed by the words "or any part thereof". 
    Motel shall be defined the same as hotel. 
    Multiple dwelling shall mean any dwelling containing more than three (3) dwelling units. 
    Occupant shall mean any person, over one (1) year of age, living, sleeping, cooking, or eating in, or actually having possession of, a dwelling unit or a rooming unit, except that in dwelling units a guest will not be considered an occupant. 
    Operator shall mean any person who has charge, care or control of a building, or part thereof, in which dwelling units or rooming units are let, or where commercial activity is conducted. 
    Owner shall mean any person, who, alone or jointly or severally with others: 
(a)  Shall have legal title to any commercial structure or commercial unit or dwelling or dwelling unit, with or without accompanying actual possession thereof; or 
(b)  Shall have charge, care or control of any commercial structure or commercial unit, dwelling, or dwelling unit as owner or agent of the owner, or as executor, administrator, trustee or guardian of the estate of the owner. Any such person thus representing the actual owner shall be bound to comply with the provisions of this chapter and of rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto to the same extent as if he were the owner. 
    Permissible occupancy shall mean the maximum number of persons permitted as family or household to reside in a dwelling unit or rooming unit based on the required square footage per person in habitable rooms. 
    Person shall mean and include any individual, firm, corporation, association or partnership. 
    Plumbing shall mean and include all of the following supplied facilities and equipment: gas pipes, gas burning equipment, water pipes, garbage disposal units, waste pipes, water closets, sinks, installed dishwashers, lavatories, bathtubs, shower baths, installed clothes washing machines, catch basins, drains, vents, and other similar supplied fixtures, together with all connections to water, sewer, septic tank or gas lines. 
    Premises shall mean a plotted lot or part thereof, or unplotted lot or parcel of land, or plot of land, either occupied or unoccupied by any dwelling or nondwelling structure, and including any such building, accessory structure or other structure thereon. 
    Privacy shall mean the ability of a person or persons to carry out an activity commenced without observation, unwarranted interruption, or unwarranted interference, either by sight or sound, by unwanted persons. 
    Refuse shall mean all putrescible and nonputrescible solids (except body wastes) including garbage, rubbish, ashes and dead animals. 
    Rodent proofing shall mean a form of construction which will prevent the ingress or egress of rodents to or from a given space or building, or gaining access to food, water or harborage. It consists of the closing and keeping closed of every opening in foundations, basements, cellars, exterior and interior walls, ground or first floors, roofs, sidewalk gratings, sidewalk openings, and other places that may be reached and entered by rodents by climbing, burrowing or other methods, by the use of materials impervious to rodent gnawing and other methods approved by the appropriate authority. 
    Rooming house shall mean any dwelling or that part of any dwelling containing one (1) or more rooms in which living and sleeping accommodations are let, or intended to be let by the owner or operator, to five (5) to fifteen (15) guests who are not husband or wife, son or daughter, mother or father, or sister or brother of the owner; provided that hospitals, homes for the aged, and other institutions licensed by the state department of health under chapter 333 of the Connecticut General Statutes shall not be regarded as rooming houses. 
    Rooming unit shall mean any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not for cooking or eating purposes, excluding rooms in convalescent and nursing homes. 
    Rubbish shall mean nonputrescible solid wastes (excluding ashes) consisting of both: 
(a)  Combustible wastes such as paper, cardboard, plastic containers, yard clippings, and wood; and 
(b)  Noncombustible wastes such as tin cans, glass and crockery. 
    Safety shall mean the condition of being free from danger and hazards which may cause accidents or disease. 
    Septic tank shall mean an underground receptacle to which sewage is drained and retained to effect disintegration of the organic matter by bacteria, and as defined in section 19-13-B20A of the state public health code, as revised. 
    Space heater shall mean a self-contained, automatically controlled, vented, fuel-burning appliance of either the circulating type or the radiant type. 
    Supplied shall mean paid for, furnished, provided by, or under the control of the owner or operator. 
    Temporary housing shall mean any trailer, mobile home, or any other structure used for human shelter which is designed to be transportable and is not attached to the ground, to another structure, or to any utility system on the same premises for more than thirty (30) consecutive days. 
    Ventilation shall mean the process of supplying or removing air by natural or mechanical means to or from any space. Such air may or may not have been conditioned. 
    Workmanlike. Whenever the words "workmanlike state of maintenance and repair" are used in this chapter, they shall mean that such maintenance and repair shall be made in a reasonably skillful manner. 
    Yard shall mean an open unoccupied space, on the same lot with a building extending along the entire length of a street, or rear, or interior lot line, or other unoccupied space on a lot with a building. 
(Ord. No. 310, §§ 2.01-2.51, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, §§ 2.01-2.51, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-5. - Liability of officials. 
    The director of inspection and compliance, code enforcement officer and his assistants shall be free from personal liability for acts done in good faith in the performance of official duties. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 23.03, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 23.03, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-6. - Lawsuits against officers, agents, employees, to be defended by corporation counsel. 
    Any suit brought against any officer, agent, or employee of the municipality, as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties under this Code, shall be defended by the legal representative of the municipality until the final determination of the proceedings therein. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 23.04, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 23.04, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-7. - Compliance with state building code required. 
    All new residential rentals or commercial construction or any reconstruction initiated after the effective date of this chapter shall be in compliance with the State of Connecticut Basic Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 3.01, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 3.01, 4-12-07) 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 3. 
Sec. 8-8. - Conflicts between codes, ordinances or regulations. 
    In any case where a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict with any existing code, ordinance, or regulation of this City of Shelton existing on the effective date of this chapter, the provision which established the higher standard for the promotion and protection of the health and safety of the people shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 23.01, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 23.01, 4-12-070 
Sec. 8-9. - Housing site development agency designated. 
    The community development office of the City of Shelton has been designated a housing site development agency as per Public Act 88-280, section 1, of the Connecticut General Statutes. 
(Ord. No. 569, 6-8-89) 
Sec. 8-10. - Identification of a landlord. 
(a)  Every nonresident property owner or their agents in charge of any rental property within the city limits shall be required to maintain their current residential address and telephone number(s) on file with the fire marshal of the City of Shelton. On and after thirty (30) days of the effective date of this section and upon request by the fire marshal; the property owner shall file with the fire marshal of the City of Shelton a statement containing such information together with five (5) copies thereof. The fire marshal shall provide one (1) copy to each of the following: building official, chief of police and to such other departments as the board of aldermen may by resolution direct from time to time. 
(b)  The property owner or agent shall maintain the residential address on file whether the rental property is occupied or vacant. 
(c)  The property owner or agent shall inform the fire marshal when his/her residential address changes not more than seven (7) days after the date that the address change occurred. The fire marshal shall notify the individuals designated in paragraph (a) above. 
(d)  If the nonresident owner or agent fails to file an address and telephone number(s) including cell phones with the city, the address to which the city mails property tax bills for the rental property shall be deemed to be the nonresident owner or agent's current address. 
(e)  Service of state or municipal orders relating to maintenance of such rental real property or compliance with state law and local codes concerning such real property directed to the nonresident owner or agent at the address on file, or deemed to be on file in accordance with the provisions of this section, shall be sufficient proof of service of notice of such orders in any subsequent criminal or civil action against the owner or agent for failure to comply with the orders. 
(f)  Any person who violates any provision of the section after being requested by the fire marshal for the requested information shall be subject to a fine of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each day that the violation continues. The city may place a lien on the land records for any property owner in violation of this section which lien shall state the effective date that the lien commenced. 
(g)  The fire marshal and assistant fire marshals are designated to enforce this section and the fire marshal shall issue citations for violations hereof. 
(h)  Definitions: 
    Address means a location as described by the full street number, if any, street name, the city or town and the state. A post office box shall not be considered an address. 
    Agent in charge means one who manages real estate, including, but not limited to, the collection of rents and supervision of property. 
    Dwelling unit means any house, or building, or portion thereof (which includes single, family, multifamily apartment building, apartment, etc.), which is rented, leased or hired out to be occupied, or is arranged or designed to be occupied, as the home or residence of one (1) or more persons, living independently of each other, and doing their cooking upon the premises, and having a common right in the halls, stairways or yards. 
    Nonresident shall mean a property owner who does not reside at the property. 
(Ord. No. 827, 6-12-07; Ord. No. 857, 2-10-11) 
Secs. 8-11-8-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RESPONSIBILITIES OF OWNERS AND OCCUPANTS OF NONCOMMERCIAL STRUCTURES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 8-21. - Housing code certificate of occupancy required. 
    A housing code certificate of occupancy shall be issued after approval of a rented dwelling or dwelling unit by the code enforcement officer. It shall be the responsibility of each owner to notify the code enforcement officer of all vacancies in rented dwellings or dwelling units and as vacancies occur. The code enforcement officer shall inspect a rented dwelling or dwelling unit no later than two (2) normal working days after receiving an application for a housing code certificate of occupancy. No rented dwelling or dwelling unit may be let unless and until it has been inspected and approved and the housing code certificate of occupancy has been issued by the code enforcement officer. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 3.02, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 3.02, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-22. - Dwellings and premises to be clean, sanitary and fit before occupancy. 
    No person shall let to another person any vacant dwelling or dwelling unit unless it and the premises are clean, sanitary, fit for human occupancy, and comply with all applicable legal requirements of the state and the city. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 3.03, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 3.03, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-23. - Owners to keep shared or public areas sanitary. 
    Every owner of a dwelling containing two (2) or more dwelling units shall maintain in a clean and sanitary condition the shared or public areas of the dwelling and premises thereof. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 3.04, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 3.04, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-24. - Occupant to maintain premises in sanitary condition. 
    Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall maintain in a clean and sanitary condition that part or those parts of the dwelling, dwelling unit and premises thereof that he occupies and controls. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 3.05, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 3.05, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-25. - Safe and sanitary disposal of rubbish. 
    Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall dispose of all his rubbish in a clean, sanitary and safe manner. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 3.06, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 3.06, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-26. - Safe and sanitary storage of garbage and organic waste. 
    Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall store and dispose of all his refuse and garbage and any other organic waste which might provide harborage or food for rodents or insects, in a clean, sanitary and safe manner, and, if a container is used for storage pending collection, it shall always conform to city refuse collection ordinance requirements. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 3.07, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 3.07, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-27. - Owner to provide screens, storm doors, storm windows; occupant to maintain. 
    The owner of the dwelling or dwelling unit shall provide and hang all screens and double or storm doors and storm windows or thermopane equivalent. Maintenance or replacement of screens, storm doors and windows, once installed, become the responsibility of the occupant. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 3.08, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 367, 2-13-79; Ord. No. 806, § 3.08, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-28. - Extermination of insects and rodents. 
(a)  Responsibilities of occupants. Every occupant of a dwelling containing a single dwelling unit shall be responsible for the extermination of any insects, rodents, or other pests therein or on the premises; and every occupant of a dwelling unit, in a dwelling containing more than one (1) dwelling unit, shall be responsible for such extermination whenever his dwelling is the only one infested. 
(b)  Responsibilities of owners. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this section, whenever infestation is caused by failure of the owner to maintain a dwelling in a rodent proof or reasonable insect proof condition, extermination shall be the responsibility of the owner. Whenever, infestation exists in two (2) units or more of the dwelling containing two (2) or more dwelling units, extermination thereof shall be the responsibility of the owner. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 3.09, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 3.09, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-29. - Occupant to use care in the use and operation of plumbing fixtures. 
    Every occupant of a dwelling unit or structure shall keep all plumbing fixtures and facilities therein in a clean and sanitary condition, and shall be responsible for the exercise of reasonable care in the proper use and operation thereof. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 3.10, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 3.10, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-30. - Rubbish accumulation. 
    Every owner of a dwelling containing two (2) units or more dwelling units, and every occupant of a dwelling containing a single dwelling unit shall be responsible for preventing an accumulation on the premises of boxes, lumber, scrap metal or other materials which may provide insect or rodent harborage or food. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 3.11, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 3.11, 4-12-07) 
Secs. 8-31-8-40. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ROOMING HOUSES, HOTELS AND MOTELS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Authority of city to prohibit and regulate the construction of boarding houses, hotels, etc., G.S. § 7-148(c)(7)(A)(viii). 

Sec. 8-41. - Compliance with article required. 
    No person shall operate a rooming house, hotel or motel, or shall occupy, or let to another for occupancy, and rooming house, hotel or motel unit except in compliance with the provisions of this chapter and zoning regulations of the City of Shelton. No owner or other person shall occupy, or let to another person, any vacant unit unless it is clean, sanitary and fit for human occupancy, and in compliance with all applicable requirements of the City of Shelton. 
(Ord. No. 310, Ch. IX, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, Ch. IX, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-42. - Water closets, lavatory basins, bathtubs and showers. 
    At least one (1) flush water closet, lavatory basin and bathtub or shower, properly connected to a water and sewer system or septic tank system, approved by the code enforcement officer and in good working condition, shall be supplied for each six (6) persons, or fraction thereof, residing within a rooming house, hotel or motel, including members of the operator's family, wherever they share the use of said facilities, provided: 
(1)  In a rooming house, hotel or motel unit where rooms are let only to males, flush urinals may be substituted for not more than one-half (1/2) the required number of water closets. 
(2)  All such facilities shall be so located within the premises as to be reasonably accessible from a common hall or passageway to all persons sharing such facilities. 
(3)  Each lavatory basin and bathtub or shower shall be supplied with adequate hot water under pressure. 
(4)  No such facilities shall be located in a basement or cellar except by written approval of the code enforcement officer. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 9.02, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 9.02, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-43. - Cooking prohibited. 
    Cooking in a rooming house, hotel or motel unit shall be prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 9.03, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 9.03, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-44. - Communal cooking, dining facilities prohibited; exception. 
    Communal cooking and dining facilities in a rooming house, hotel or motel shall be prohibited, except as approved by the Valley Health Department. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 9.04, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 9.04, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-45. - Units to have operating locks. 
    Rooming unit, hotel or motel unit doors shall have operating locks to insure privacy. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 9.05, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 9.05, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-46. - Bed linen and towels. 
    The operator of every rooming house, hotel or motel shall change supplied bed linen and towels therein at least once a week, and prior to the letting of any room to any occupant, except where an arrangement exists between the owner and occupant in writing. The operator shall be responsible for the maintenance of all supplied bedding in a clean and sanitary manner. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 9.06, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 9.06, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-47. - Required space in rooming house sleeping rooms. 
    Every room occupied for sleeping purposes in a rooming house by one (1) person shall contain at least eighty (80) square feet of floor space, and every room occupied for sleeping by more than one (1) person shall contain at least forty (40) square feet of floor space for each additional occupant thereof, provided no more than three (3) occupants shall occupy the same room. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 9.07, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 9.07, 4-12-07) 
State Law reference- Overcrowding in tenement and lodginghouses, G.S. § 47a-54a. 
Sec. 8-48. - Means of egress required. 
    Every rooming house, hotel or motel shall have two (2) or more safe, unobstructed means of egress leading to safe and open space at ground level, as required by the laws of this city and this state. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 9.08, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 9.08, 4-12-07) 
State Law reference- Required stairways and fire escapes, G.S. § 19-386. 
Sec. 8-49. - Unit windows to have drapes, etc. 
    Every window of every rooming house, hotel or motel unit shall be supplied with shades, draw drapes, or other devices or material which, when properly used, will afford privacy to the occupant of the rooming unit. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 9.09, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 9.09, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-50. - Unit arrangement. 
    Access to or egress from each rooming unit shall be provided without passing through any other rooming unit. A bathroom or water closet compartment shall not be used as the passageway to any hall, basement, or cellar, or to the exterior of a dwelling unit. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 9.10, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 9.10, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-51. - Maintenance standards for hotel, motel operators. 
(a)  Each hotel or motel operator shall observe and comply with the following standards in the maintenance of the premises operated by him: 
(1)  Size of sleeping rooms. The sleeping room occupied by each occupant shall contain not less than one hundred (100) square feet in single-occupancy rooms and not less than seventy-five (75) square feet per person for multiple-occupancy rooms. 
(2)  Toilet facilities. The toilet facilities for each room shall be adequate and there shall be a lavatory and bath or shower with running hot and cold water and a toilet with cold running water at all times and at least one (1) such facility for each six (6) person or fraction thereof using each facility. The shower shall have a shower curtain in good repair or the shower area should be otherwise enclosed. A tub mat, safety strips, or a built-in slip-resistant tub shall be supplied. 
(3)  Window space. Each room used for sleeping purposes shall contain at least one (1) outside window of not less than ten (10) percent of floor area which shall be so constructed that at least forty-five (45) percent opens readily except where there is supplied some other device affording adequate ventilation and approved by appropriate authority. 
(4)  Exterior and interior physical condition. Furniture, walls, ceilings, lighting, drapes, Venetian blinds, carpets, floors, elevators, windows, and wall decorations shall be clean and neat and in good physical repair. Stairways, walkways, and lobbies shall be clean and uncluttered. Refuse and rubbish shall not be allowed to accumulate in or on any portion of the premises used as a hotel or motel but shall be kept in approved receptacles and containers. 
(5)  Guest room supplies. Drinking glasses, where supplied, should be sanitized in accordance with state and local ordinances. A waste basket will be provided in every room. Soap and toilet tissues are to be supplied in sufficient quantity. A fresh supply of soap is to be provided with each new occupant. Towels and wash cloths that have been used shall be replaced daily. Bed linens, pillows, mattresses, mattress pads, box springs, springs, and frames shall be clean, in good repair and free of stains and foreign matter. Clean bed linens shall be supplied at least once a week and prior to the letting of any room to any occupant. 
(6)  Mechanical room and storage area. Ceilings, walls, pipes, pumps, heating and air conditioning equipment should all be neat and clean, well painted and in good repair. Floors must be clean, uncluttered and free of safety hazards. 
(7)  Food and drink vending machines. Where supplied to hotel or motel guests, vending machines shall be kept in a clean and sanitary manner. All refrigerated drinking fountains shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary manner. All ice machines shall be supplied with scoops and/or tong which shall not be stored in ice chest of machine. 
(8)  Restaurants. All Restaurant facilities are to comply with the State of Connecticut Public Health Code and city ordinances. Restaurant facilities must have a separate identity from hotel or motel living quarters and are to be licenses by the Valley Health Department. 
(9)  Swimming pools. All swimming pool shall comply with the State of Connecticut Basic Building Code, the State of Connecticut Public Health Code, all City of Shelton ordinances and zoning regulations. 
(10)  Rodent and vermin infestation, etc. The entire premises constituting the hotel or motel shall be kept free of rodent and vermin infestation. 
(11)  Operating locks. All hotel or motel rooms shall have operating locks to insure privacy. 
(b)  In addition to the specific terms of this section, the housing code enforcement officer shall have the power to order the rectification of any condition or situation in any hotel or motel licenses hereunder which, in his opinion, is detrimental or dangerous to life and public safety. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 9.11, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 9.11, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-52. - Permit-Required; display; transferability; change of ownership; expiration. 
    No person shall operate a rooming house, hotel or motel unless he holds a valid rooming house, hotels, motel permit issued by the code enforcement officer in the name of the operator and for the specific premises specified therein. The operator shall apply to the code enforcement officer upon compliance by the operator with the applicable provisions of this chapter and with any rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto. This permit shall be displayed in a conspicuous place within the rooming house, hotel or motel at all times. No such permit shall be transferable. Every person holding such permit shall give notice in writing to the code enforcement officer within twenty-four (24) hours after having sold, transferred, given away, or otherwise disposed of ownership of, interest in, or control of any rooming house, hotel or motel. Such notices shall include the name and address of the person succeeding to the ownership or control of such rooming house, hotel or motel. Every rooming house, hotel or motel permit shall expire at the end of the year following its date of issuance, unless sooner suspended or revoked as hereinafter provided. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 9.01, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 9.01, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-53. - License-Requirements. 
    No person shall subsequent to the effective date of this chapter, operate a rooming house, hotel or motel, as herein defined, within the City of Shelton unless a rooming house or hotel or motel license shall be issued to him as herein provided. Applications for such licenses shall be made in writing to the housing code enforcement officer upon such forms as may be prescribed by him. Such application, whether original or for renewal of a license already issued, shall contain in addition to such other information as may be required by the housing code enforcement officer, the applicant's name, address, the address at which he proposed to operate a rooming house, hotel or motel, the number of rooms, roomers, and beds to be for hire, the number of beds and roomers in each room, and the name of the individuals who will be charged with the control, management and maintenance of said rooming house, motel or hotel. Application for the renewal of a license already issued shall be made to the housing code enforcement officer not later than one (1) month prior to the date of the expiration of the existing license. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 9.12, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 9.12, 4-12-07) 
Cross reference- Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 9. 
Sec. 8-54. - Same-Application; expiration. 
    Each original application for the licensing of a rooming house, hotel or motel, must be accompanied by a certificate of zoning compliance, issued by the zoning officer, certifying that the proposed use of the premises is a permitted use under the zoning regulations of the City of Shelton. Upon acceptance of an application for the licensing of a rooming house, hotel or motel, original or renewal, the code enforcement officer shall cause the premises to be inspected within seven (7) days, with the assistance, as he may require, of the police, fire, building and valley health departments. Upon certification of these departments, as may be required, that the premises comply with the applicable rules, regulations, ordinances and statutes within the jurisdiction of these departments and with the housing code of the City of Shelton, the code enforcement officer shall, upon payment of the prescribed free, issue the operating license to the applicant within fifteen (15) days after all certifications and/or approvals are received. If the premises or the applicant shall fail to meet or pass all the foregoing requirements, the application shall be denied. Each license issued hereunder shall expire one (1) year from the issued date recorded thereon, unless sooner revoked in the manner herein provided. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 9.13, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 9.13, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-55. - Same-Display. 
    Each rooming house, hotel and motel operator shall be responsible for plainly displaying the license granted to him hereunder in a prominent place within said premises. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 9.13, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 9.13a), 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-56. - Suitability of licensees. 
    The chief of police may require such information as will disclose whether the applicant has been convicted of keeping a house of ill-fame or assignation, or a house in which lewd, dissolute or drunken person resort or which has been used for the purpose of gaming. If any applicant shall have been convicted of any of the aforesaid offenses or has such criminal record that the chief of police reasonably believes that he is not a suitable person to be licensed hereunder, he may in his discretion, so advices the housing code enforcement officer not to issue a license to the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 9.14, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 9.14, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-57. - Suspension of license. 
    The code enforcement officer, chief of police, fire marshal, building official and Valley Health Department Director are hereby authorized and shall have the power to enter, inspect and examine, or cause to be entered, inspected and examined, any portion of all rooming houses, hotels and motels licensed hereunder. Whenever, upon inspection at any of these premises, the code enforcement officer finds, or any of the other aforementioned authorities submits to the code enforcement officer a report of their findings that conditions or practices exist which are in violation of any provisions of this chapter, or of any applicable rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, the code enforcement officer shall give notice in writing to the operator of such facilities that unless such conditions are corrected within a reasonable time, the operator's license will be suspended. At the end of such period of time the code enforcement officer shall reinspect such facilities, under the conditions of his first entry and inspection as set forth in this subsection above; and, if he determines that such conditions have not been corrected, he shall issue an order suspending the operator's license. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 9.15, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 9.15, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-58. - Appeal on suspension of license. 
    Any person whose license to operate a rooming house, hotel or motel has been suspended by order of the code enforcement officer may petition for and shall be granted a hearing on the matter in the manner prescribed by section 8-186 et seq., on hearings. If no such petition is forthcoming within five (5) working days following the day on which the license was suspended, said license shall be deemed revoked, except that at any time within five (5) working days following such suspension any person whose license has been suspended shall have the opportunity to demonstrate to the code enforcement officer that his rooming house, hotel or motel has been put in compliance with this chapter and with all regulations pursuant thereto. Where such compliance is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the code enforcement officer, the suspension of the rooming house, hotel or motel license shall be terminated. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 9.16, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 9.16, 4-12-07) 
Secs. 8-59-8-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STANDARDS FOR NONCOMMERCIAL STRUCTURES 

Sec. 8-66. - Compliance with article required. 
    No person shall let to another for occupancy, any dwelling or dwelling unit for the purposes of living, sleeping, cooking, or eating therein, which does not comply with the following requirements. 
(Ord. No. 310, Ch. IV, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, Ch. IV, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-67. - Food preparation and cooking facilities. 
    Every dwelling unit shall have a room or portion of a room in which food may be prepared and/or cooked, and which shall be equipped with the following: 
(1)  Kitchen sink. A kitchen sink in good working condition apart from the lavatory sink required in section 8-69, and properly connected to a water supply system which is approved by the appropriate authority, and which provides an adequate amount of heated and unheated running water under pressure, and which is connected to a sewer system or septic tank system which is approved by the appropriate authority. 
(2)  Cabinets and/or shelves. Cabinets and/or shelves for the storage of eating and drinking and cooking equipment and utensils, and of food that does not, under ordinary maximum summer conditions, require refrigeration for safe keeping; said cabinets and/or shelves shall be adequate for the permissible occupancy of the dwelling unit. 
(3)  Stove and refrigerator. A stove or similar device for cooking food, and a refrigerator, or similar device, for the safe storage of food at temperatures less than forty-five (45) degrees Fahrenheit, but more than thirty-two (32) degrees Fahrenheit, under ordinary maximum summer conditions, which are properly installed with all necessary connections for safe, sanitary and efficient operation, provided that such stove, refrigerator, and/or similar devices, need not be installed when a dwelling unit is not occupied and when the occupant is expected to provide same on occupancy, that sufficient space for the safe and efficient installation and operation of said stove, refrigerator and/or similar devices, is provided. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 4.01, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 4.01, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-68. - Flush water closet required. 
    Within every dwelling unit there shall be a nonhabitable room, affording privacy to a person within said room, which is equipped with a flush water closet in good working condition. Said flush water closet shall be connected to a water system that at all times provides an adequate amount of running water under pressure so as to cause the flush water closet to be operated properly, and shall be connected to a sewer system or septic tank which is approved by the appropriate authority. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 4.02, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 4.02, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-69. - Lavatory required. 
    Within every dwelling unit there shall be a room, affording privacy to a person, which is equipped with a lavatory. Said lavatory shall be in the same room as the flush water closet. The lavatory shall be in good working condition and properly connected to a water supply system which is approved by the appropriate authority, and which provides an adequate amount of heated and unheated, running water under pressure, and to a sewer system or septic tank system which is approved by the appropriate authority. Said requirement may be waived by the building official and the code enforcement officer when they agree that said installation would be impossible. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 4.03, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 4.03, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-70. - Bathtub or shower required. 
    Within every dwelling unit there shall be a nonhabitable room, which affords privacy to a person within said room, and which is equipped with a bathtub or shower bath in good working condition. Said bathtub or shower bath may be in the same room as the flush water closet, or in another room, and shall be properly connected to a water supply system which is approved by appropriate authority and which provides an adequate amount of heated and unheated, running water under pressure, and to a sewer system or septic tank which is approved by the appropriate authority. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 4.04, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 4.04, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-71. - Proximity of habitable rooms, bathrooms or water closets to commercial uses. 
    No habitable room, bathroom or water closet compartment which is accessory to a dwelling unit shall open directly into, or shall be used in conjunction with a food store, public eating room, food preparation room, barber or beauty shop, doctor's or dentist's examination or treatment room or office, or any similar room used for public purposes, or other areas as outlined in the state public health code. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 4.05, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 4.05, 4-12-07 
Sec. 8-72. - Roof requirements. 
    The roof shall be structurally sound, tight, and have no defects which might admit rain, and roof drainage shall be adequate to prevent rain water from causing dampness in the walls or interior portion of the building. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 4.06, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 4.06, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-73. - Floor requirements. 
    Every floor shall be reasonably weather tight, water tight, and damp free, and shall be kept structurally sound and in good repair. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 4.07, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 4.07, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-74. - Windows, exterior doors, hatchway requirements. 
    Every window, exterior door and basement hatchway or similar devices, shall be rodent proof and reasonably watertight, and shall be kept in sound working condition and good repair, and shall be quipped with operating locks. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 4.08, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 4.08, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-75. - Window sashes to have glass panes or approved substitute. 
    Every window sash shall be supplied with glass window panes or an approved substitute. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 4.09, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 4.09, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-76. - Rodentproofing required for ground level windows, openings. 
    Every window located at or near ground level, or intended to be used for ventilation, and every other opening located at or near ground level which might provide entry for rodents, shall be supplied with adequate gauge screening or such other devices as will effectively prevent their entrance. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 4.10, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 4.10, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-77. - Means of egress from dwelling unit required. 
    Every dwelling until shall have two (2) or more approved means of egress leading to safe and open space at ground level, as required by the laws of the State of Connecticut and the City of Shelton. 
(Ord. No. 310, §§ 4.11, 8.08, 5-8-78 ; Ord. No. 806, §§ 4.11, 8.08, 4-12-07) 
State Law reference- Required stairways and fire escapes, G.S. § 19-386. 
Sec. 8-78. - Minimum window or skylight areas required. 
    Every habitable room shall have at least one (1) window or skylight facing directly outdoors. The minimum total window area, measured betweens tops, for every habitable room shall be not less than ten (10) percent of the floor area of such room. Wherever walls, or other portions of structures, face a window of any such room, and such light-obstructing structures are located less than three (3) feet from the window and extend to a level above that of the ceiling of the room, such window shall not be deemed to face directly to the outdoors and shall not be included as contributing to the required minimum total window area. Whenever the only window in a room is a skylight type window in the top of such room, the total window area of such skylight shall equal at least ten (10) percent of the total floor area of such room. Each window shall be not less than three (3) square feet in area. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 5.01, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 5.01, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-79. - Operable window or skylight areas required. 
    Every habitable room shall have at least one (1) window or skylight which can be easily opened, or such other device as will adequately ventilate the room. The total of openable window area in every habitable room shall be equal to at least forty-five (45) percent of the minimum window area size, or minimum skylight type window size, as required in section 8-78 of this chapter, except where there is supplied some other device affording adequate ventilation and approved by the housing code enforcement officer or building inspector. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 5.02, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 5.02, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-80. - Lighting and ventilation requirements for kitchenette, bathroom and water closet compartments. 
    Every kitchenette, bathroom and water closet compartment shall comply with the light and ventilation requirements for habitable rooms contained in sections 8-78 and 8-79, except that no window or skylight shall bee required in such rooms equipped with a ventilation system which his in compliance with the State of Connecticut Basic Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 5.03, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 5.03, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-81. - Electrical service, outlets and fixtures. 
    Every dwelling unit, and all public and common areas, shall be supplied with electric service, outlets, and fixtures which shall be properly installed, shall be maintained in good and safe working condition, and shall be connected to the source of electric power in a manner prescribed by the ordinances, rules and regulations of the City of Shelton. The minimum capacity of such services, and the number of outlets and fixtures, shall be as follows: 
(1)  Every habitable room shall have an electric service and outlets and/or fixtures capable of providing at least three (3) watts per square foot of floor area. 
(2)  Every habitable room and nonhabitable room used for food preparation shall have at least one (1) floor or wall-type duplex electric convenience outlet for each sixty (60) square feet, or fraction thereof, of floor area. 
(3)  Every water closet compartment, bathroom, kitchen or kitchenette, laundry room, furnace room and public hall shall contain at least one (1) supplied ceiling or wall type of electric light fixture. 
(4)  Every water closet compartment, bathroom, kitchen or kitchenette, laundry room and furnace room shall contain at least one (1) floor or wall-type duplex electric convenience outlet, except that kitchens or kitchenettes shall have at least two (2) duplex electric convenience outlets. 
(5)  Convenient switches for turning on lights shall be located in accordance with the State of Connecticut Basic Building Code. 
(6)  Every dwelling unit shall be supplied with a maximum of sixty (60) amperes of electric service. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 5.04, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 5.04, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-82. - Lighting in public halls and stairways in multiple dwellings. 
    Every public hall and stairway in every multiple dwelling shall be adequately lighted by natural or artificial light at all times so as to provide at least six (6) footcandles of light at the tread or floor level. Every public hall and stairway in structures containing not more than three (3) dwelling units, may be supplied with conveniently located light switches, controlling an adequate system which may be turned on when needed, instead of fulltime lighting. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 5.05, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 5.05, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-83. - Heating facilities required; minimum temperature capability required. 
    Every dwelling or dwelling unit shall be supplied with heating facilities which are properly installed, are maintained in safe and good working conditions, and are capable of safely and adequately heating all habitable rooms, kitchen or kitchenette, bathrooms and water closet compartments located therein to a temperature of not less than sixty-eight (68) degrees Fahrenheit at five (5) feet above the floor at all times, and shall be installed and operated in the manner required by the statutes, ordinances and regulations of the State of Connecticut and the City of Shelton. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 6.01, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 6.01, 4-12-07) 
State Law reference- Required heating, G.S. § 19a-109. 
Sec. 8-84. - Minimum floor space required for occupancy. 
    Every dwelling unit shall contain at least one hundred fifty (150) square feet of floor space for the first occupant thereof, and at least one hundred ten (110) square feet of floor space for additional occupant thereof, the floor space to be calculated on the basis of total habitable room space. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 8.01, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 8.01, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-85. - Minimum floor space required in sleeping rooms. 
    In every dwelling unit of two (2) or more rooms, every room occupied for sleeping purposes shall contain at least seventy (70) square feet of floor space for the first occupant, and at least fifty (50) square feet of floor space for each additional occupant thereof, and shall be no less than seven (7) feet in width. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 8.02, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 8.02, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-86. - Room arrangements. 
    No dwelling or dwelling unit containing two (2) or more sleeping rooms, shall have such room arrangement that access to a bathroom or water closet compartment, intended for use by occupants of more than one (1) sleeping room, can be had only going through another sleeping room. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 8.03, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 8.03, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-87. - Ceiling height. 
    At least seventy-five (75) percent of the floor area of every habitable room shall have a ceiling height of no less than seven (7) feet four (4) inches and the floor area of that part of any room where the ceiling height is less than five (5) feet, shall not be considered as part of the floor area of the room for the purpose of determining the maximum permissible occupancy thereof. At least fifty (50) percent of the floor area in attic rooms shall have a ceiling height of seven (7) feet. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 8.04, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 8.04, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-88. - Use of space below grade as habitable room. 
    No space, located totally or partially below grade, shall be used as a habitable room or dwelling unit, unless: 
(1)  The floor, and those portions of the walls below grade, are of waterproof and dampproof construction. 
(2)  The minimum window area, required in section 8-78, is located entirely above grade of the ground adjoining such window area or, if windows are located below grade, that there be constructed a properly drained window well whose ground area shall be equal to, or greater than, the area of the window opening; the bottom of the window shall be below the top of the impervious masonry under this window; the minimum horizontal projections of the bottom of the window well shall be equal to, or greater than, the vertical dimension of this window opening, and no part of the window well, opposite this window, shall protrude above a line projected at a forty-five-degree angle from the bottom of the window opening at right angles to the outer wall. 
(3)  The total openable window area in each room is equal to at least the minimum, as required under section 8-79 of this chapter, except where there is supplied some other device affording adequate ventilation and approved by the appropriate authority. 
(4)  There are no pipes, or other obstructions less than six (6) feet eight (8) inches above the floor level which interfere with the normal use of the room or area. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 8.05, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 8.05, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-89. - Storage space. 
(a)  Every dwelling unit shall have at least four (4) square feet of floor to ceiling height closet space for the personal effects of each permissible occupant; if it is lacking, in whole or in part, an amount of space equal in square footage to the deficiency shall be subtracted from the area of habitable room space used in determining permissible occupancy. 
(b)  Each dwelling shall have a suitable facility for the safe storage of medicines, toxic materials, and household poisons, such as ammonia, paint, etc., to ensure safety for children in a residential environment. 
(Ord. No. 310, §§ 8.06, 8.07, 5-8-78 ; Ord. No. 806, §§ 8.06, 8.07, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-90. - Exterior property areas to be clean, sanitary. 
    All exterior property areas shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition, free from any accumulation of garbage, rubbish and other debris. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 7.01, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 7.01, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-91. - Premises to be properly graded. 
    All premises shall be graded and maintained as to prevent the accumulation of stagnant water thereon, or within any building or structure located thereon. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 7.02, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 7.02, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-92. - Exterior wood surfaces to be painted. 
    Every foundation, floor, wall, ceiling and roof shall be weathertight, watertight, and rodent proof and shall be kept in good repair. All exterior wood surfaces shall be protected from the elements and decay by paint or other protective covering or treatment. Toxic paint and materials will not be used on such exterior surfaces as are readily accessible to children. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 7.03, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 7.03, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-93. - Lead paint. 
(a)  Lead paint or potentially hazardous material on the interior surfaces of any dwelling unit, rooming unit, rooming house or on any fixtures or other objects used, installed or located in or upon any exposed surface in any such facility subject to letting or occupancy by children, is prohibited. Such interior surfaces shall include, but not be limited to, window sills, window frames, doors, door frames, walls, ceilings, stair rails and spindles, and all other appurtenances of the interior portion of the dwelling premises. 
(b)  In each instance where conditions disclose loose, flaking, chipping or falling paint, and there is reason to believe that the presence of lead paint or other toxic material exists as a potential hazard, the enforcing officer shall take samples for analysis to the Valley Health Department. Upon determination by Valley Health Department that lead paint is present, the code enforcement officer shall notify the landlord to take necessary procedures to rectify this problem. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 7.03, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, §§ 7.03.01, 7.03.02, 4-12-07) 
State Law reference- Restrictions on sale and use of paint, G.S. §§ 19-65a-19-65f. 
Sec. 8-94. - Exterior walls. 
    Every exterior wall shall be free of holes, breaks, loose or rotting boards or timbers, and any other conditions which might admit rain or dampness to the interior portions of the walls, or to the occupied spaces of the building. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 7.04, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 7.04, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-95. - Safety requirements for stairs, porches, railings and other exit facilities. 
    Stairs, porches, railings and other exit facilities shall be adequate for safety as provided by the State of Connecticut Basic Building Code, and shall comply with the following subsections: 
(1)  Every flight of stairs which is more than two (2) risers high shall have handrails which shall be located as required by the State of Connecticut Basic Building Code; 
(2)  Eery porch which is located more than three (3) feet higher than the adjacent area shall have handrails and balustrades or other approved protection so located and of such design as required by the building code; 
(3)  Every handrail and balustrade shall be firmly fastened and shall be maintained in good condition. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 7.05, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 7.05, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-96. - Structural parts of dwellings to be safe; capable of supporting normal loads. 
    Every foundation, roof, floor, exterior and interior wall, ceiling, inside and outside stair, every porch, and every appurtenance thereto, shall be safe to use and capable of supporting the loads that normal use may cause to be placed thereon, and be kept in sound condition and good repair. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 7.06, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 7.06, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-97. - Water closet compartment; bathroom floor surface. 
    Every water closet compartment, bathroom and kitchen floor surface shall be constructed and maintained so as to be reasonably impervious to water, and so permitting such floor to be easily kept in clean and sanitary condition. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 7.07, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 7.07, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-98. - Supplied facilities; safe and effective. 
    Every plumbing fixture and pipe, every chimney flue and smoke pipe, and every other facility, piece of equipment, or utility which is present in a dwelling unit, or which is required under this chapter, shall be constructed and installed in conformance with the applicable local or state codes, at the time of construction or alteration, and shall be maintained in satisfactory working conditions. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 7.08, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 7.08, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-99. - Plumbing fixtures. 
    Every plumbing fixture, and water and waste pipe, shall be properly installed and maintained in good sanitary working condition. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 7.09, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 7.09, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-100. - Removal, discontinuance, of service facilities or utilities. 
    No owner, operator, or occupant shall cause any service, facility, equipment, or utility which is required under this chapter to be removed from, or shut off from, or discontinued from any occupied unit let or occupied by him except for such temporary interruption as may be necessary while actual repairs or alterations are in process, or during temporary emergencies when discontinuance of service is approved by the appropriate authority. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 7.10, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 7.10, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-101. - Fire protection. 
    All construction and materials, ways and means of egress, and all installation and use of equipment shall conform to applicable state and local laws dealing with fire and protection. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 7.11, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 7.11, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-102. - Application, maintenance of interior paint. 
    The responsibility for the application and maintenance of interior paint may be transferred by agreement between landlord and tenant, to the tenant. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 7.12, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 7.12, 4-12-07) 
Secs. 8-103-8-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - INSPECTION OF DWELLINGS, DWELLING UNITS AND PREMISES 

Sec. 8-111. - Authorization to inspect; right of entry; purpose; policy re notice. 
(a)  All dwellings or dwelling units which are let shall be inspected when vacant in accordance with section 8-21, or in response to a complaint that an alleged violation of the provisions of this chapter may exist, or when the code enforcement officer has valid reason to believe that a violation of this chapter has been or is being committed. 
(b)  The code enforcement officer is hereby authorized and directed to make inspections, as authorized by this chapter, by and with the consent of the owner, occupant or person in charge, to determine the condition of the dwellings, dwelling units and premises within this city for the purposes of determining compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  For the purpose of making such inspections the code enforcement officer, with consent of the owner, occupant or person in charge, is hereby authorized to enter, examine and survey all dwellings, dwelling units and premises between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., or such other time mutually satisfactory to and agreed upon by the code of enforcement officer and the owner or occupant of a dwelling, dwelling unit, or the person in charge thereof. 
(d)  Such inspection, examination or survey shall be made so as to cause the least amount of inconvenience to said owner or occupant, consistent with an efficient performance of the duties of the code enforcement officer. The code enforcement officer shall make every effort to inspect a dwelling or dwelling unit no more than seven (7) working days after receipt of a complaint. 
(e)  To further ensure that the police of this chapter, which is to achieve compliance through cooperation of owners and occupants, be successfully maintained, it shall be the practice of the code enforcement officer, whenever practicable, to provide reasonable advance notice to owners and/or occupants of inspection. 
(Ord. No. 310, §§ 10.01, 10.02, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, §§ 10.01, 10.02, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-112. - Owner or occupant to grant right of entry; search warrant to be obtained upon denial; emergency right of entry; penalty. 
(a)  The owner or occupant of each dwelling, dwelling unit or premises, or the person in charge thereof, upon presentation by the code enforcement officer of proper identification, may give the code enforcement officer entry to the dwelling, dwelling unit, or premises, and free access to every part thereof, provided that no inspection shall be conducted except during the hours designated above, or at such time as is mutually satisfactory to and agreed upon by the code enforcement officer and the owner, agent or occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit. 
(b)  Whenever an owner, occupant or person in charge of a dwelling, dwelling unit, or premises shall deny the code enforcement officer right of entry for the purpose of inspection, examination or survey, the code enforcement officer shall not so enter until he presents a duly issued court order describing the dwelling, dwelling unit or premises, to the owner, occupant or person in charge thereof. 
(c)  Any owner, occupant, or person in charge of a dwelling, dwelling unit, or premises refusing to permit, or impeding entry of and free access to any part of any dwelling, dwelling unit or premises for the purposes of inspection, examination, or survey under the provisions of this subsection and section 8-111 above, shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 10.03, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 10.03, 4-12-07) 
Secs. 8-113-8-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - RESPONSIBILITIES OF OWNERS AND OCCUPANTS OF COMMERCIAL STRUCTURES 

Sec. 8-121. - Housing code certificate of occupancy required. 
    A housing code certificate of occupancy shall be issued after an inspection has been made and the premises approved by the code enforcement officer. It shall be the responsibility of the owner to notify the code enforcement officer of all vacancies in commercial structures or commercial units. No commercial structure or commercial unit may be let until it passed inspection and a certificate of occupancy has been issued. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 11.01, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 11.01, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-122. - Units must be clean, sanitary, fit for commercial activity. 
    No owner or other person shall occupy, or let to another person, any vacant commercial structure or unit unless it and the premises are clean, sanitary, fit for commercial activity, and comply with all applicable legal requirements of the State of Connecticut and the City of Shelton. Said restriction is lifted when the occupant or rentee has promised, in writing, to bring the property up to these requirements. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 11.02, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 11.02, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-123. - Owner to maintain shared, public areas. 
    Every owner of a commercial structure containing two (2) or more commercial units shall maintain in a clean and sanitary condition the shared or public areas of the structure and premises thereof. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 11.03, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 11.03, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-124. - Occupant to maintain occupied area in clean and sanitary condition. 
    Every occupant of a commercial structure or commercial unit shall maintain in a clean and sanitary condition that part or those parts of the commercial structure, commercial unit, and premises thereof, that he controls and occupies. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 11.04, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 11.04, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-125. - Occupant to dispose of rubbish. 
    Every occupant of a commercial structure, or commercial unit shall dispose of all his rubbish in a clean, sanitary and safe manner. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 11.05, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 11.05, 4-12-07) 
Cross reference- Garbage, trash and refuse, Ch. 6. 
Sec. 8-126. - Occupant to dispose of garbage and organic waste. 
    Every occupant of a commercial structure or commercial unit shall dispose of all has garbage and any other organic waste which might provide food for rodents in a clean, sanitary and safe manner, and if a container is used for storage pending collection, it shall be rodent proof, insect proof and watertight. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 11.06, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 11.06, 4-12-07) 
Cross reference- Garbage, trash and refuse, Ch. 6. 
Sec. 8-127. - Containers for rubbish and garbage required. 
    Every owner of a commercial structure containing three (3) or more units shall supply an area with facilities or containers for the sanitary and safe storage and/or disposal of rubbish and garbage. In the case of single or two-unit commercial structures it shall be the responsibility of the occupant to furnish such facilities or containers, if not supplied by the owner. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 11.07, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 11.07, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-128. - Extermination of insects and rodents. 
(a)  Responsibilities of occupants. Every occupant of a commercial structure containing a single unit shall be responsible for the extermination of any insects, rodents, or other pests therein or on the premises; and every occupant of a commercial unit, in a commercial structure containing more than one (1) commercial unit, shall be responsible for such extermination whenever his commercial unit is the only one infested. 
(b)  Responsibilities of owners. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this subsection, whenever infestation is caused by failure of the owner to maintain a dwelling in a rodent proof or reasonably insect proof condition, extermination shall be the responsibility of the owner. Whenever infestation exists in two (2) or more of the units in any commercial structure, or in the shared or public parts of any commercial structure containing two (2) or more units, extermination thereof shall be the responsibility of the owner. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 11:08, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 11.08, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-129. - Occupant responsibility for maintenance, care of plumbing fixtures. 
    Every occupant of a commercial unit shall keep all plumbing fixtures in a clean and sanitary condition, and shall be responsible for the exercise of reasonable care in the proper use and operation thereof. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 11.09, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 11.09, 4-12-07) 
Secs. 8-130-8-135. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - STANDARDS FOR COMMERCIAL STRUCTURES 

Sec. 8-136. - Compliance with article required. 
    No person shall occupy as owner, occupant, or let to another for occupancy, any commercial structure or commercial unit, for the purpose of commercial activity therein, which does not comply with the following requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 310, Ch. XIII, 5-8-78 ; Ord. No. 806, Ch. XIII, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-137. - Toilet facilities. 
(a)  oilet facilities, in toilet rooms separate for each sex, shall be provided in all places of employment in accordance with the following table, per CONN-OSHA regulations. The number of facilities to be provided for each sex shall be based on the number of employees of that sex for whom the facilities are furnished. Where toilet rooms will be occupied by no more than one (1) person at a time, can be locked from the inside, and contain no more than one (1) water closet, separate toilet rooms for each sex need not be provided. Where such single occupancy rooms have more than one (1) toilet facility, only one (1) such facility in each toilet room shall be counted for the purpose of the table. Lavatory facilities shall be provided in accordance with the following table, and shall be in the same toilet rooms provided for water closets: 
Number of 
Employees Minimum Number 
of Water 
Closets/Lavatories 1 to 15 1 16 to 35 2 36 to 55 3 56 to 80 4 81 to 110 5 111 to 150 6 over 150 1 additional fixture of each type for each additional 40 employees  
(b)  All water closets and lavatory sinks shall be in good working condition and properly connected to a water supply system which is approved by the appropriate authority and which provides an adequate amount of running water under pressure so as to cause flush water closets to operate properly and an adequate amount of heated and unheated running water under pressure for lavatory sinks. Water closets and lavatory sinks shall be properly connected to a sewer or septic system which is approved by the appropriate authority. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 12.01, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 12.01, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-138. - Forced air ventilation. 
    Every commercial structure or commercial unit shall have a system of forced air ventilation providing fresh air at a rate of not less than two (2) cubic feet per minute per square foot of floor area, except where there are supplied windows or some other device affording adequate ventilation in accordance with the State of Connecticut Basic Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 13.01, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 13.01, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-139. - Electrical service, outlets and fixtures. 
    Every commercial structure or commercial unit and all public and common areas shall be equipped with electric service, outlets, and fixtures which shall be properly installed, shall be maintained in good and safe working condition, and shall be connected to the source of electric power in a manner prescribed by the State of Connecticut Basic Building Code and in accordance with the rules, regulations and ordinances of the City of Shelton. The capacity of such services and the number of outlets and fixtures shall be as follows: 
(1)  Commercial structures or units shall have an electric service and outlets or fixtures capable of providing at least three (3) watts per square foot or floor area. 
(2)  Every water closet, bathroom, furnace room and public hall shall contain at least one (1) supplied ceiling or wall type electric light fixture. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 13.02, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 13.02, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-140. - Adequate light. 
    Every commercial structure, commercial unit, public hall or stairway, shall be adequately lighted when open to the public so as to provide at least six (6) footcandles of light at the tread or floor level. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 13.03, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 13.03, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-141. - Water closet compartments. 
    Every water closet compartment shall comply with the light and ventilation requirement for dwellings and dwelling units contained in section 8-80 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 13.04, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 13.04, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-142. - Exterior property areas to be clean, sanitary. 
    All exterior property areas shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition free from any accumulation of garbage, rubbish and other debris. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 14.01, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 14.01, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-143. - Premises to be properly graded. 
    All premises shall be graded and maintained as to prevent the accumulation of stagnant water thereon, or within any building or structure located thereon. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 14.02, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 14.02, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-144. - Rodentproofing required of foundation walls, roof. 
    Every foundation, wall, roof and all other interior or exterior surfaces shall be maintained in a workmanlike state of maintenance and repair and shall be kept in such condition to exclude rodents. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 14.03, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 14.03, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-145. - Foundation. 
    The foundation elements shall adequately support the building at all points. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 14.04, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 14.04, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-146. - Exterior walls. 
    Every exterior wall shall be free of holes, breaks, loose or rotting boards or timbers, and any other conditions which might admit rain or dampness to the interior portions of the walls, or to the occupied spaces of the building. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 14.05, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 14.05, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-147. - Roof requirements. 
    The roof shall be structurally sound, tight and have no defects which might admit rain, and roof drainage shall be adequate to prevent rain water form causing dampness in the wall ors interior portion of the building. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 14.06, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 14.06, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-148. - Floor requirements. 
    Every floor shall be reasonably weathertight, watertight, and dampfree, and shall be kept structurally sound and in good repair. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 14.07, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 14.07, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-149. - Safety requirements for stairs, porches, railings and other exit facilities. 
    Stairs, porches, railings and other exit facilities shall be adequate for safety as provided by the State of Connecticut Basic Building Code, and shall comply with the following: 
(1)  Every flight of stairs which is more than two (2) risers high shall have handrails which shall be located as required by the building code. 
(2)  Every porch which is more than three (3) feet higher than the adjacent area shall have handrails and balustrades or other approved protection so located and of such design as required by the building code. 
(3)  Every handrail and balustrade shall be firmly fastened and shall be maintained in good condition. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 14.08, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 14.08, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-150. - Windows, exterior doors, hatchway requirements. 
    Every window, exterior door and basement hatchway or similar devices shall be rodentproof and reasonably watertight, and shall be kept in sound working condition and good repair. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 14.09, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 14.09, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-151. - Window sashes to have glass panes or approved substitute. 
    Every window sash shall be supplied with glass window panes or an approved substitute. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 14.10, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 14.10, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-152. - Rodentproofing required for ground level windows, openings. 
    Every window located at or near ground level or intended to be used for ventilation, and every other opening located at or near ground level which might provide entry for rodents, shall be supplied with adequate gauge screen or such other device as will effectively prevent their entrance. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 14.11, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 14.11, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-153. - Flaking, peeling paint prohibited. 
    All walls, ceilings, exterior woodwork, doors and windows shall be kept free of flaking, peeling or loose paint. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 14.12, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 14.12, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-154. - Paint requirements. 
    Paint used after the effective date of this chapter on walls and ceilings and other interior portions of structure shall comply with the standards in section 8-93. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 14.13, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 14.13, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-155. - Accessory structures to be rodentproof. 
    Every accessory structure shall be rodent proof and maintained so as to prevent rodent harborage. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 14.14, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 14.14, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-156. - Structural parts of units to be safe; capable of supporting normal loads. 
    Every foundation, roof, floor, exterior and interior wall, ceiling, inside and outside stair, every porch, and every appurtenance, thereto, shall be safe to use and capable of supporting the loads that normal use may cause to be placed thereon, and shall be kept in sound condition and good repair. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 14.15, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 14.15, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-157. - Water closet compartment; bathroom floor surface. 
    Every water closet compartment, bathroom and kitchen floor surface shall be constructed and maintained so as to be reasonably impervious to water, and so permitting such floor to be easily kept in clean and sanitary condition. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 14.16, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 14.16, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-158. - Supplied facilities; safe and effective. 
    Every plumbing fixture and pipe, every chimney, flue and smoke pipe, and every other facility, piece of equipment or utility which is present in a commercial unit, or which is required under this chapter shall be constructed and installed in conformance with the applicable local or state codes, and shall be maintained in satisfactory working condition. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 14.17, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 14.17, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-159. - Plumbing fixtures. 
    Every plumbing fixture, and water and waste pipe, shall be properly installed and maintained in good sanitary working condition. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 14.18, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 14.18, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-160. - Removal, discontinuance of service facilities or utilities. 
    No owner, operator, or occupant shall cause any service, facility, equipment or utility, which is required under this chapter, to be removed from or shut off from, or discontinued for any occupied unit let or occupied by him except for such temporary interruption as may be necessary while actual repairs or alterations are in process, or during temporary emergencies when discontinuance of service is approved by the appropriate authority. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 14.19, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 14.19, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-161. - Fire protection. 
    All construction and materials, ways and means of egress, and all installation and use of equipment shall conform to applicable state and local laws dealing with fire protection. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 14.20, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 14.20, 4-12-07) 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 4. 
Sec. 8-162. - Ceiling height. 
    All of the floor area shall have a ceiling height of no less than seven (7) feet, four (4) inches. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 15.01, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 15.01, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-163. - Use of space below grade. 
    No space, located totally or partially below grade, shall be used as a commercial structure or commercial unit unless: 
(1)  The floor, and those portions of the walls below grade, are of waterproof and dampproof construction. 
(2)  If windows are located below grade, they shall be constructed in a properly drained window well whose ground area shall be equal to, or greater than, the area of the window opening; the bottom of the window shall be below the top of the impervious masonry construction under this window; the minimum horizontal projections of the bottom of the window well shall be equal to, or greater than, the vertical dimension of this window opening, and no part of the window well opposite this window shall protrude above a line projected at a forty-five (45) degree angle from the bottom of the window opening at right angles to the outer wall. 
(3)  Ventilation in below grade areas shall be equal to at least the minimum, as required under section 8-138 of this chapter. 
(4)  There are no pipes or other obstructions less than six (6) feet, eight (8) inches, above the floor level which interferes with the normal use of the area. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 15.02, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 15.02, 4-12-07) 
Secs. 8-164-8-169. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 8-170. - Appointment of code enforcement officer. 
    The code enforcement officer shall be appointed by the mayor or his designated representative on the basis of merit and shall have all the qualifications, training, education and experience as outlined in the position classification plan of the City of Shelton. 
(Ord. No. 310, Ch. XVI, 5-8-78 ; Ord. No. 806, Ch. XVI, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-171. - Notice of violations. 
(a)  Whenever the enforcing officer finds that there has been a violation of any provision of this chapter, he shall give notice of such alleged violation to the person or person responsible therefore, as hereinafter provided: 
(1)  Be put in writing; 
(2)  Set forth the alleged violation or violations of this chapter, or of the rules and regulations pursuant thereto, and describe the premises where the violation is alleged to exists or to have been committed; 
(3)  Specify a reasonable time for the correction of any violation alleged. Such time shall not exceed thirty (30) calendar days. The code enforcement officer and the building official may jointly extend this requirement an additional thirty (30) days. Any extension beyond such point must be requested to the housing code board of appeals within twelve (12) days of the last extension; 
(4)  Be served upon the owner or his agent, or the occupant, as the case may require; provided that such notice shall be deemed to be properly served upon such owner or agent, or upon such occupant, if a copy thereof is sent by registered or certified mail to his last known address; about the premises affected by the notice; or if he is served with such notice by any other method authorized or required under the laws of this state; 
(5)  Inform the owner, occupant or person in charge that any evidence of a violation of any provisions of this chapter, or any regulation pursuant thereto, may form the basis of criminal prosecution; 
(6)  Inform the owner, occupant or person in charge of his right to appeal said notice to the housing code board of appeals in accordance with section 8-192. 
(b)  After the period of time provided for in subsection (a)(3) above, the code enforcement office shall reinspect the premises described in the notice. If the violation still exists, then a copy of said notice shall be put on the land records of the City of Shelton and indexed by the clerk in the grantor index under the name of the then owner of the property. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 16.01, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 16.01, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-172. - Court order required upon refusal to allow inspection. 
    In the event consent to reinspection is refused, and where the code enforcement officer has reasonable grounds to believe that a violation of any provision of this chapter or any regulation pursuant thereto has occurred, or is occurring, he shall apply to the appropriate court, or any judge thereof, for an order directing the owner, operator or occupant of the premises to permit him to make such inspection. Upon procurement of a duly issued order, the code enforcement officer is hereby authorized to enter, inspect, examine and survey the described premises, for the purposes of determining whether there has been compliance with the notice of violation. In the event of refusal to obey such order, the permit for the occupancy of such premises shall be revoked and the owner, operator or occupant shall be subject to the penalties as detailed in article X of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 16.02, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 16.02, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-173. - Code enforcement officer to have exclusive responsibility of inspections, orders. 
    Inspection of premises and the issuing of orders in connection therewith under the provisions of this chapter shall be the exclusive responsibility of the code enforcement officer of the City of Shelton. Wherever, in the opinion of the code enforcement officer it is necessary or desirable to have inspections or any condition by any other department or official, he shall arrange for this to be done in such a manner that the owners or occupants of buildings shall not be subjected to visits by numerous inspectors nor to multiple or conflicting orders. No order for correction of any violation under this code shall be issued without the approval of the code enforcement officer and it shall be the responsibility of that official before issuing any such order to determine that it has notified, in writing, any other city department or official of the City of Shelton who have a concern with any matter involved on the case in question. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 16.03, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 745, 10-12-00; Ord. No. 806, § 16.03, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-174. - Emergency orders; appeal; penalty for failure to comply. 
    Whenever, in the judgment of the code enforcement officer, an emergency exists which requires immediate action to protect the public health, welfare or safety, he may forthwith and without notice or hearing, cause to be issued and served, an order reciting the existence of the emergency and requiring such action as he deems necessary to eliminate it. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, such order shall become effective immediately. Any person to whom such order is directed shall comply forthwith provided, however, such order may be appealed to the code enforcement officer for a stay not to exceed five (5) days, within which period, the code enforcement officer, for good cause shown, may modify or revoke such order. Any individual who fails to comply with said order shall be fined two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) a day for each day of failure to comply. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 16.04, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 16.04, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-175. - Housing code enforcement officer to keep records of orders; daily log. 
    The code enforcement officer shall keep records of all orders issued and a daily log of his enforcement activities for a period of at least three (3) years after the date of said order(s) or activities. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 16.05, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 16.05, 4-12-07) 
Secs. 8-176-8-185. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - HEARINGS AND APPEALS 

Sec. 8-186. - Housing code board of appeals-Created; composition; terms of regular members. 
    There is hereby created a housing code board of appeals, which shall consist of five (5) electors of the City of Shelton, appointed by the mayor, subject to the approval of the board of aldermen. No more than three (3) members of said board shall be from the same political party. Each member so appointed shall serve for a term of five (5) years, except that of those appointed immediately following passage of this code; one (1) member shall be appointed for a term of one (1) year, one (1) member shall be appointed for a term of two (2) years, one (1) member shall be appointed for term of five (5) years. Upon expiration of terms of office, the mayor shall make new appointments, subject to the approval of the board of aldermen, each for a term of five (5) years. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 17.01, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 17.01, 4-12-07) 
Cross reference- Boards, commissions and committees, § 2-41 et seq. 
Sec. 8-187. - Same-Alternate members appointed; terms. 
    The mayor, with the approval of the board of aldermen, shall also appoint three (3) alternate members of the housing code board of appeals for the term of five (5) years; however, no more than two (2) members shall be from the same political party. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 17.02, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 17.02, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-188. - Same-Vacancies. 
    If any vacancy shall occur on the housing code board of appeals, the mayor, with the approval of the board of aldermen, shall appoint one (1) of the alternate members of said board to serve for the remainder of the unexpired term of office; provided, however, said member appointed shall be a representative of the same political party as the member he replaced. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 17.03, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 17.03, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-189. - Same-Officers; bylaws. 
    The housing code board of appeals shall meet annually to nominate and elect, by majority vote, a chairman and secretary of said board. Said board shall prepare and adopt a set of bylaws to govern its affairs by affirmative vote of at least four (4) members of said board and may amend said by-laws in the same manner. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 17.04, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 17.04, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-190. - Same-Conflict of interest prohibited. 
    No member of the housing code board of appeals shall participate as a member of the board in the hearing on an appeal involving premises in which he has an interest direct or indirect. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 17.06, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 17.06, 4-12-07) 
Charter reference- Conflicts of interest, § 9.7. 
Sec. 8-191. - Responsibilities of building official. 
    The building official shall be responsible for coordinating the housing and commercial properties code enforcement program for the City of Shelton, in conjunction with the code enforcement officer in charge of enforcing this Code, shall be under the director of inspection and compliance, who also shall be responsible for making recommendations to the board of aldermen for any changes or amendments to this Code. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 17.05, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 17.05 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-192. - Notice of violation; hearing; filing of petition; notice. 
    Any person aggrieved by a notice of the code enforcement officer issued in connection with any inspection, examination or survey pursuant thereto, may request, and shall be granted, a hearing on the matter before the housing code board of appeals, provided that such person shall file in the office of the housing code board of appeals a written petition requesting such a hearing and setting forth the grounds therefore within five (5) normal working days after the notice of the code enforcement office was served upon such person. Said board shall meet upon notice of the chairman following receipt of an appeal, not later than six (6) normal working days after such receipt, to hear the appeal. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 17.07, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 17.07, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-193. - Hearings to be public. 
    All hearings shall be open to the pubic and the appellant, his representative, the code enforcement officer and any other person whose interests may be affected by the matter on appeal, shall be given the opportunity to be heard. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 17.08, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 17.08, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-194. - Powers of housing code board of appeals. 
    The housing code board of appeals is hereby authorized to administer oaths and affirmations to witnesses at such hearings to request the subpoena witnesses and documents employed in such hearings. Subpoenas shall be served in the method prescribed by the rules of the courts of the State of Connecticut. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 17.09, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 17.09, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-195. - Notices of code enforcement officer under appeal to be suspended. 
    Any notice of the code enforcement officer which is under appeal shall be suspended. The board's decision, confirming, modifying or revoking such notice shall then prevail. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 17.10, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 17.10, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-196. - Variances. 
    All variances granted by the board which requires rehabilitative work, must specify a reasonable amount of time for the completion of such work. If, after having begun rehabilitation, the appellant feels he cannot meet the specified time limit, he may request and shall be granted another hearing before the board, for an extension of the time limit. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 17.11, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 17.11, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-197. - Timely decisions. 
    The board shall render a decision on an appeal not later than five (5) working days following the day of the hearing thereon, and shall require a minimum of four (4) concurring votes. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 17.12, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 17.12, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-198. - Proceedings to be reduced at writing. 
    All proceedings at such hearings, including the findings and decision of the board of appeals, shall be reduced to writing and entered as a matter of public record in the office of the code enforcement officer within five (5) working days following the day of the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 17.13, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 17.13, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-199. - Judicial review of decision. 
    Any person aggrieved by any ruling of the Shelton Housing Code Board of Appeals may appeal to a court of common pleas by complaint returnable within sixty (60) days of the board's decision. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 17.14, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 17.14, 4-12-07) 
Secs. 8-200-8-205. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - FEES 

Sec. 8-206. - Schedule. 
    The fees for the inspection of and the issuance of certificates of occupancy and/or permits for dwellings, dwelling units, rooming house, premises, commercial structures and commercial units, shall be payable at the time application for same is made and shall be in accordance with the following schedule: 
Type Fee Per Unit Dwelling/dwelling unit $10.00 Commercial structure/commercial unit  25.00 per each 
5,000 sq. ft. or 
fraction thereof  
Rooming House (Hotel, Motel) Annual Fee 1-6 rooms/rooming units $10.00  7-12 rooms/rooming units 15.00 13-18 rooms/rooming units 20.00  
Add five dollars ($5.00) for each additional six (6) rooms/rooming units or fraction thereof. 
(Ord. No. 310, Ch. XIX, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, Ch. XIX, 4-12-07) 
Secs. 8-207-8-210. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - PENALTIES 

Sec. 8-211. - Adopted. 
    Any person who shall willfully violate any standard, requirement or provision of this chapter or of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant hereto, or who shall willfully refuse or fail to obey any order properly issued by the code enforcement officer shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00), or by imprisonment for not more than one (1) year, or both. Each day's failure or refusal to comply shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 310, Ch. XX, 5-8-78) 
Secs. 8-212-8-215. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - CONDEMNATION 

Sec. 8-216. - Defects requiring condemnation; placarding. 
(a)  The designation of structures, or units thereof as unfit for human habitation/occupancy/use and the procedure for the condemnation and placarding of such, shall be carried out in accordance with the following requirements. 
(b)  Any structure, or unit thereof, which shall be found to have any of the following defects, shall be condemned as unfit for human habitation/occupancy/use and shall be so designated and placarded by the code enforcement officer: 
(1)  One which is so damaged, decayed or dilapidated, unsanitary, unsafe, or vermin-infested that it creates a serious hazard to the health or safety of the occupants or of the public. 
(2)  One which lacks illumination, ventilation, heat or sanitation facilities adequate to protect the health or safety of the occupants or of the public. 
(3)  One which, because of its general condition or location, is unsanitary or otherwise dangerous to the health or safety of the occupants or of the public. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 21.01, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 21.01, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-217. - Condemned building to be vacated. 
    Any structure, or unit thereof, condemned as for human habitation/occupancy/use, and so designated and placarded by the code enforcement officer, shall be vacated within thirty (30) days, except that dwellings, rooming houses, and hotels or units thereof, shall be vacated within ten (10) days. Every reasonable effort shall be made by city agencies to relocated families or households of such units. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 21.02, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 21.02, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-218. - Approval to reoccupy condemned building required. 
    No structure or unit thereof, that has been condemned and placarded as unfit for human habitation/occupancy/use shall be again used for such purpose until written approval is secured from, and said placard is removed by, or with the permission of, the code enforcement officer. Following reinspection of the structure, or unit thereof, in question, the code enforcement officer shall permit removal of such placard by the owner, occupant or person in charge of the structure or unit thereof, whenever the defect or defects upon which the placarding action was based, have been eliminated. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 21.03, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 21.03, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-219. - Defacing or removing placard prohibited. 
    No person shall willfully deface or remove the placard from any structure, or unit thereof, which has been condemned as unfit for human habitation/occupancy/use, and placarded as such, except when such action has been authorized by the code enforcement officer as provided for in section 8-218 above. Whoever violates this provision shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). 
(Ord. No. 310, § 21.04, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 21.04, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-220. - Hearing on condemnation notice or order. 
    Any person aggrieved by any order involving the placarding of a structure, or unit thereof, may request and shall be granted a hearing under the conditions specified in section 8-192 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 21.05, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 21.05, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-221. - Demolishing of building authorized. 
    Where no corrective action is taken by the owner or person in charge of a structure, or unit thereof, designated as unfit for human habitation/occupancy/use, within thirty (30) days following the placarding action, and when no hearing is pending, the code enforcement officer may order the structure in violation to be demolished in accordance with the procedures specified in the State of Connecticut Basic Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 21.06, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 21.06, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-222. - Subsequent transferees of condemned structures. 
    All subsequent transferees of the condemned structure, or unit thereof, shall be deemed to have notice of the continuing existence of the violations alleged; and said transferees shall be liable to all penalties and procedures provided by this chapter and by the applicable rules and regulations issued pursuant thereto to the same degree as was their transferor. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 21.07, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, § 2.07 4-12-07) 
Sec. 8-223. - Commercial structures. 
    The legal procedure for condemnation of commercial structures is under jurisdiction of the building inspector. 
(Ord. No. 310, Ch. XXII, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 806, Ch. XXII, 4-12-07) 
Secs. 8-224-8-250. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - HOUSING PARTNERSHIP 

Sec. 8-251. - Created. 
(a)  Generally. There is hereby created the Shelton Housing Partnership, appointed by the chief elected official of the municipality, subject to the approval of the board of aldermen. The partnership shall consist of the following members: 
(1)  The chief elected official of the City of Shelton; 
(2)  Representatives of the planning and zoning commission, inland/wetlands commission, housing authority, board of aldermen and any local community development agency, not to exceed six (6) in number; 
(3)  Representatives of the local business community, such as local bankers, realtors and developers, not to exceed ten (10) in number; 
(4)  Representatives of public interest groups, such as housing advocates, members of the clergy, members of the local civic groups and representatives of local nonprofit corporations, not to exceed ten (10) in number; and 
(5)  Local urban planning, land use and housing professionals not to exceed four (4) in number. 
(b)  Approval of representatives. A breakdown of names representing the various constituents as established under subsection (a) shall be furnished by the mayor's office and approved by the board of aldermen. 
(Ord. No. 567, §§ 1, 4, 5-11-89) 
Sec. 8-252. - Responsibilities of city, in order to receive initial designation under Connecticut Housing Partnership Program. 
    The responsibilities of the city, in order to receive initial designation under the Connecticut Housing Partnership Program, shall include the following: 
(1)  Submit evidence to the commissioner of housing that the Shelton Housing Partnership has been formed in accordance with P.A. 88-305; and 
(2)  Submit evidence to the commissioner of housing that sufficient local resources have been committed to the Shelton Housing Partnership. 
(Ord. No. 567, § 2, 5-11-89) 
Sec. 8-253. - Duties of housing partnership in order to receive development designation under Connecticut Housing Partnership Program. 
    The duties of the Shelton Housing Partnership, in order to receive development designation under the Connecticut Housing Partnership Program, shall include the following: 
(1)  To examine and identify housing needs and opportunities in the community; 
(2)  To explore the availability of any state, municipal or other land that is suitable for the development of affordable housing; 
(3)  To review applicable zoning regulations to determine whether such zoning regulations restrict the development of affordable housing in the community; 
(4)  To identify any necessary changes to such regulations; 
(5)  To establish priorities and develop a long range plan to meet identified housing needs in the community consistent with regional housing needs; 
(6)  To establish procedures for the development of a written proposal to achieve such priorities in accordance with the plan; and 
(7)  To start an activity, development or project designed to create additional affordable housing in the city. 
(Ord. No. 567, § 3, 5-11-89) 
Sec. 8-254. - No conflict with state or federal statutes. 
    This article shall not be construed so as to conflict with any state or federal statute, rule or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 567, § 5, 5-11-89) 
Sec. 8-255. - Expenses. 
    No person shall have the right to expend any public funds of the municipality in carrying out any partnership activities authorized by this article without prior approval by the legislative body nor shall any person have any right to find the municipality by contract, agreement or otherwise without prior and specific approval of the legislative body. 
(Ord. No. 567, § 6, 5-11-89) 
Chapter 9 - LICENSES, PERMITS AND MISCELLANEOUS BUSINESS REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Building permits, § 3-26 et seq.; development permit, § 5-24; rooming houses, hotels and motel operators permit, § 8-52; rooming houses, hotels and motel licenses, § 8-53 et seq.; massage establishment, § 9-43 et seq.; amusement center license, § 9-82 et seq.; boat launching permit, § 11-36; excavation permit required, § 14-51; termination of excavation permit, § 14-64; public sewer connection required, § 17-42; state permit required for large domestic discharges, § 17-88. 
State Law reference- Auctioneers' licenses, G.S. §§ 21-1-21-5; itinerant vendors' licenses, G.S. §§ 21-27-21-35; junk dealers' licenses, G.S. §§ 21-9-21-14; package store permits, G.S. § 30-20; pawnbrokers, G.S. §§ 21-39-21-47; peddlers, G.S. §§ 21-36-21-38; regulation of vending machines, G.S. § 21a-43. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 9-1. - Peddlers and street vendors. 
(a)  License required. No person shall peddle any kind of goods, wares, or merchandise about the streets, from house to house, or upon any public street, park, or common within the city without having a license therefor from the chief of police granted in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(b)  Application for license. No person shall receive a peddler's license unless he shall, before the time when he desires his license to be granted, make application in writing for such license over his own signature to the chief of police, in which application shall be truly stated: 
(1)  The name and residence of the applicant; 
(2)  The kind of goods, wares, or merchandise desired to be peddled; 
(3)  The length of time for which the license is desired, which application shall be kept on file in the office of the chief of police. 
(c)  License fee. A fee shall be paid by an applicant for a peddler's license to the chief of police in a sum not to exceed twenty-five dollars ($25.00) before the issue of the peddler's license. 
(d)  Term of license. No peddler's license shall be granted for a longer term than one (1) year. 
(e)  Expiration date of license. All peddlers' licenses shall expire on the first Monday of the March next succeeding the granting of the license. 
(f)  Refusal to show license. Every person licensed under the provisions of this section who shall refuse or neglect to exhibit and show such license on the demand of any officer of the city shall be subject to the penalty provided in subsection (h) of this section. 
(g)  Exemptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the sale within the city of provisions or farmers' produce, nor shall the same apply to or prevent the taking of orders by resident or nonresident merchants for goods, wares or merchandise, to be afterwards filled and delivered by them, their clerks or agents. 
(h)  Penalty. Every person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall be subject to a fine of not more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) and each sale or attempt to sell shall be deemed a separate violation. 
(Comp. Ords. 1977, § 8.1; Ord. No. 578, § 14, 3-8-90; Ord. No. 684, § 1(a)-(c), 4-13-95; Ord. No. 812, 4-12-07) 
State Law reference- Hawkers and peddlers, G.S. § 21-36 et seq.; ordinances authorized, G.S. § 21-37. 
Sec. 9-2. - Bazaars and raffles. 
    The city adopts the provisions of sections 7-170 through 7-186; inclusive, of the general statutes, which sections prescribe the terms and conditions of the adoption of the bazaar and raffle law and sponsorship of or participation in them. 
(Ord. No. 568, 5-11-89) 
Secs. 9-3-9-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SOLICITORS AND CANVASSERS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 578 repealed Ord. No. 442, adopted April 14, 1983, from which former Art. II, §§ 9-16-9-27, solicitors and canvassers, derived. Sections 1-13 of Ord. No. 578 were included as a new Art. II at the discretion of the editor. 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 14. 
State Law reference- Hawkers and peddlers, G.S. § 21-36 et seq.; ordinances authorized, G.S. § 21-37. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 9-16. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this article, the following words as used herein shall be considered to have the meaning herein ascribed thereto: 
    Registered solicitor shall mean and include any person who has obtained a valid certificate of registration as hereinafter provided, which certificate is in the possession of the solicitor or his or her person while engaged in soliciting. 
    Residence shall mean and include every separate living unit occupied for residential purposes by one (1) or more persons, contained within any type of building or structure. 
    Soliciting shall mean and include any one (1) or more of the following activities while calling at residences without the previous consent of the occupant: 
(a)  Seeking to obtain orders for the purchase of goods, wares, merchandise, foodstuffs, services, of any kind, character or description whatever, for any kind of consideration whatever; 
(b)  Seeking to obtain prospective customers for application or purchase of insurance of any type, kind or publication; 
(c)  Seeking to obtain subscriptions to books, magazines, periodicals, newspapers and every other type or kind of publication; 
(d)  Seeking to obtain gifts or contributions of money, clothing or any other valuable thing for the support or benefit of any charitable or nonprofit association, organization, corporation or project; or 
(e)  Solicitation as defined therein shall not include telephone communication. 
(Ord. No. 578, § 1, 3-8-90; Ord. No. 812, § 1, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 9-17. - Notice regulating soliciting. 
    Every person desiring to secure the protection provided by the regulations pertaining to soliciting contained in this article, shall comply with the following directions, to wit: Notice of the determination by the occupant of giving invitation to solicitors, or the refusal of invitation to solicitors, to any residence, shall be given in the manner following: 
(1)  A sign or notice approximately three (3) inches by four (4) inches in size, shall be exhibited upon or near the main entrance door to the residence, indicating the determination by the occupant, containing the applicable words, as follows: 
"Only Solicitors Registered in Shelton Invited" 
or 
"No Solicitors Invited" 
(2)  The letters shall be at least one-third ( 1/3 ) inch in height. For the purpose of uniformity a sign may be provided by the chief of police to persons requesting, at the cost thereof. 
(3)  Such sign so exhibited shall constitute sufficient notice to any solicitor of the determination by the occupant of the residence of the information contained thereon. 
(Ord. No. 578, § 9, 3-8-90; Ord. No. 812, § 9, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 9-18. - Duty of solicitors. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of every solicitor upon going onto any premises in the municipality upon which a residence as herein defined is located, to first examine the notice provided for in this article, if any is attached, and be governed by the statement contained on any if the notice states "Only Solicitors Registered in Shelton Invited", then the solicitor not possessing a valid certificate of registration as herein provided shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises, and if the notice states "No Solicitors Invited," then the solicitor, whether registered or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises. 
(b)  Any solicitor who has gained entrance to any residence, whether invited or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises when requested to do so by the occupant. 
(Ord. No. 578, § 10, 3-8-90; Ord. No. 812, § 10, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 9-19. - Uninvited soliciting prohibited. 
    It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any person to enter upon any premises and ring the door bell upon or near any door, or create any sound in any other manner calculated to attract the attention of the occupant of such residence, for the purpose of securing an audience with the occupant thereof and engage in soliciting as herein defined, in defiance of the notice exhibited at the residence in accordance with the provisions of section 9-17. 
(Ord. No. 578, § 11, 3-8-90; Ord. No. 812, § 11, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 9-20. - Certificate required to be carried. 
    It shall be the obligation of every person who has obtained a certificate of registration under the terms of this article to carry the certificate upon his person at any time while soliciting within the boundaries of the city. Any such solicitor who gains entrance to any residence or any property shall immediately and peacefully depart therefrom when requested to do so by the occupant. 
(Ord. No. 578, § 8, 3-8-90; Ord. No. 812, § 8, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 9-21. - Time limit on soliciting. 
    It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any person whether registered under this article or not, to go upon any premises and ring the door bell upon or near any door of a residence located thereon, or rap or knock upon any door or create any sound in any other manner calculated to attract the attention of the occupant of such residence, for the purpose of securing an audience with the occupant thereof and engage in soliciting as herein defined, prior to 9:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m. of any weekday, or at any time on a Sunday or on a State or national holiday. 
(Ord. No. 578, § 12, 3-8-90; Ord. No. 812, § 12, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 9-22. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to a fine of not more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each offense. Each sale or attempt to sell or contact with a residence in violation of this article shall be deemed a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 578, § 14, 3-8-90; Ord. No. 812, § 14, 4-12-07) 
Secs. 9-23-9-30. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION 

Sec. 9-31. - Required. 
    Every person desiring to engage in soliciting as herein defined from persons in residences within this municipality, is hereby required to make written application for a certificate of registration as hereinafter provided. Such certificate shall be carried by the solicitor. 
(Ord. No. 578, § 2, 3-8-90; Ord. No. 812, § 2, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 9-32. - Application. 
(a)  Application for certificate of registration. Application for a certificate of registration shall be made upon a form provided by the municipality. The certificate of registration shall be obtained from the Shelton Police Department. The applicant shall truthfully state in full the information requested on the application, to wit: 
(1)  Name and address or present place of residence and length of residence at such address; also business address if other than present address; 
(2)  The address of place of residence during the past three (3) years if other than present address; 
(3)  Age of applicant; 
(4)  Physical description of the applicant; 
(5)  Name and address of the person, firm or corporation or association or other entity by whom the applicant is employed or otherwise represents, and the length of time of such employment or representation; 
(6)  The name and address of applicant's employer during the past three (3) years if other than the present employer; 
(7)  A description sufficient for identification of the subject matter of the solicitation in which the applicant will engage; 
(8)  The period of time for which the certificate is applied; 
(9)  The date, or approximate date, of the latest previous application for certificate under this ordinance, if any; 
(10)  A statement as to whether or not any certificate or registration issued to the applicant under this ordinance has ever been revoked; 
(11)  A statement as to whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a violation of a felony under the laws of the state or any other state or federal law of the United States; 
(12)  The names of three (3) most recent communities where the applicant has solicited house to house; 
(13)  A description of the proposed method of operation; 
(14)  The signature of applicant; 
(15)  The Social Security number of applicant. 
(b)  All statements made by the applicant upon the application or in connection therewith shall be under oath. 
(Ord. No. 578, § 3, 3-8-90; Ord. No. 812, § 3, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 9-33. - Investigation of applicant. 
    Upon receipt of an application for a certificate of registration, the chief of police shall cause an investigation of an applicant to be made in such a manner and to such extent as the chief of police deems advisable, and, within ten (10) business days of the filing of the application the chief of police, shall issue the certificate applied for except that no permit shall be issued to an individual who has been convicted of a felony under the laws of this state or of any other state or the federal laws of the United States within five (5) years prior to the date of the application, nor to any person who has been convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this article, nor to any person whose prior certificate of registration issued under this article has been revoked. 
(Ord. No. 578, § 4, 3-8-90; Ord. No. 812, § 4, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 9-34. - Fingerprinting. 
    The applicant for a certificate of registration shall be required to submit to fingerprinting by the police department of the municipality in connection with the application for the certificate. 
(Ord. No. 578, § 5, 3-8-90; Ord. No. 812, § 5, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 9-35. - Records to be kept. 
    The chief of police shall cause to be kept in the office of the police department an accurate record of every application received and acted upon together with all other information and data pertaining thereto and all certificates of registration issued under the provisions of this article, and of the denial of applications. Applications for certificates shall be numbered in consecutive order as filed, and every certificate issued, and any renewal thereof, shall be identified with the duplicate number of the application upon which it was issued. 
(Ord. No. 578, § 6, 3-8-90; Ord. No. 812, § 6, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 9-36. - Term; revocation of certificate. 
(a)  Any certificate of registration issued under the provisions of this article shall be valid for a period of two (2) years from the date of issuance. Any certificate of registration issued hereunder shall be revoked by the chief of police if the holder of the certificate is convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this article. Immediately upon such revocation, written notice thereof shall be given by the chief of police to the holder of the certificate in person or be certified United States mail addressed to his or her residence address set forth in the application. 
(b)  Immediately upon the giving of such notice the certificate of registration shall become null and void. 
(c)  The certificate of registration shall state the expiration date thereof. 
(Ord. No. 578, § 7, 3-8-90; Ord. No. 812, § 7, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 9-37. - Fee. 
    Any person making application for a certificate of registration under the terms of this article shall be required to pay a fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(Ord. No. 578, § 13, 3-8-90; Ord. No. 812, § 13, 4-12-07) 
Secs. 9-38-9-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MASSAGE PARLORS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Massage parlors, G.S. § 19a-92. 

Sec. 9-41. - Policy. 
    It is hereby declared that the business of operating massage establishments as defined herein is a business affecting the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(Ord. No. 302, § 1, 8-8-77; Ord. No. 805, § 1, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 9-42. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
    Employee. Any and all persons, other than the masseurs or masseuses, who render any service to the permittee, who have no physical contact with customers and clients. 
    Massage. Any method of pressure on, or friction against, or stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating or stimulating of the external soft parts of the body with the hands or with the aid of any mechanical or electrical apparatus or appliance with or without any supplementary aids as rubbing alcohol, liniments, antiseptics, oils, powders, creams, lotions, ointments, or other similar preparations commonly used in this practice. 
    Massage establishment. Any establishment having a fixed business where any person, firm, association, or corporation engages in or carries on or permits to be engaged in or carried on any of the activities mentioned in section 9-43 of this article. 
    Masseur and masseuse. Any person, who, for any consideration whatsoever, engages in the practice of massage as herein defined. 
    Person. Any individual, co-partnership, firm, association, joint stock company, corporation, or combinations of individuals of whatever form or character. 
    Recognized school. Any school or institution of learning which has for its purpose the teaching of the theory, the method, profession or work of massage, which school requires in a resident course of study not less than seventy (70) hours to be given in not more than three (3) calendar months before the student shall be furnished with a diploma or certificate of graduation from such school or institution of learning following the successful completion of such course of study or learning. 
(Ord. No. 302, § 2, 8-8-77; Ord. No. 805, § 2, 4-12-07) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 9-43. - Massage establishment permit-Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct or carry on or permit to be engaged in, conducted, or carried on, in or upon any premises in the City of Shelton, the operation of a massage establishment as herein defined without having first obtained a permit as hereinafter set forth. 
(Ord. No. 302, § 3, 8-8-77; Ord. No. 805, § 3(1), 4-12-07) 
Sec. 9-44. - Same-Application; fee; contents. 
(a)  Each applicant for a permit to maintain, operate or conduct a massage establishment shall file an application with the chief of police or his designate and pay a filing fee of one hundred twenty-five dollars ($125.00) which shall not be refundable. 
(b)  Any person desiring a massage business permit shall file written application with the police chief on a form to be furnished by the police. 
(c)  The application for a permit to operate a massage establishment shall set forth the exact nature of the massage to be administered, the proposed place of business and facilities therein and the name and address of each applicant. 
(d)  Each applicant shall also furnish information to prove that the applicant is at least eighteen (18) years of age; list the business, occupation or employment of the applicant for three (3) years immediately preceding the date of the application; furnish proof of any previous massage or similar business licensing, the date and place of such license and whether the same has ever been revoked or suspended and if so, the reason therefor; provide data as to any previous criminal convictions except minor traffic violations; and submit to normal procedures of the police department for photographs and fingerprints. 
(Ord. No. 302, §§ 4, 5, 8-8-77; Ord. No. 805, §§ 4, 5, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 9-45. - Same-Notice of hearing. 
    When the application is filed for a massage establishment permit under this article, the board of aldermen shall fix the time and place for a public hearing where the applicant may present evidence upon the question for this application. Not less than ten (10) days before the date of such hearing, the board of aldermen shall cause to be posted a notice of such hearing in a conspicuous place on the property in which or on which the proposed massage establishment is to be operated. The applicant shall maintain said notices posted for required number of days. 
(Ord. No. 302, § 9, 8-8-77; Ord. No. 805, § 9, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 9-46. - Same-Facilities prerequisite to issuance. 
(a)  No permit to conduct a massage establishment shall be issued unless an inspection by the director of public health or his authorized representative reveals that the establishment complies with each of the following minimum requirements: 
(1)  Construction of rooms used for toilets, tubs, steam baths and showers shall be waterproofed with approved waterproof materials. 
(2)  Toilet facilities shall be provided in convenient locations. When five (5) or more employees and patrons of different sexes are on the premises at the same time, separate toilet facilities shall be provided. A single water closet per section be provided for each twenty (20) or more employees or patrons of that sex on the premises at any one (1) time. Urinals may be substituted for water closets after one (1) water closet has been provided. Toilets shall be designated as to the sex accommodated therein. 
(3)  Lavatories or wash basins provided with both hot and cold running water should be installed in either the toilet room or vestibule. Lavatories or wash basins shall be provided with soap in a dispenser and with sanitary towels. 
(b)  The director of public health shall certify that the proposed massage establishment complies with all the requirements of this section and shall give or send such certification to the chief of police or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 302, § 15, 8-8-77; Ord. No. 805, § 15, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 9-47. - Same-Issuance. 
    The chief of police or his designee may issue a permit within fourteen (14) days following a hearing if all requirements for a massage establishment described in this article are met and may issue a permit to all persons who apply to perform massage services unless he finds: 
(1)  The operation as proposed by the applicant, if permitted, would not have complied with all the applicable laws, including but not limited to, the building, health, city planning, housing, zoning and fire codes of the City of Shelton. 
(2)  That the applicant and any other person who will be directly engaged in the management and operation of a massage establishment has been convicted of: 
a.  A felony; 
b.  An offense involving sexual misconduct with minors; 
c.  Obscenity, keeping or residing in a house of ill fame, solicitation of a lewd or unlawful act, prostitution or pandering; 
d.  Falsification of application. 
(3)  The applicant has had a massage business, masseur, other similar permit or license denied, revoked or suspended for any of the above causes by the city or any other state or local agency within five (5) years prior to the date of the application. 
(4)  The manager or other person principally in charge of the operation of the business has not successfully completed a resident course of study or learning of not less than seventy (70) hours from a recognized school where the theory, method, profession, work of massage is taught. 
(5)  Each such establishment shall conform to all rules and regulations contained herein and the state sanitary code as well as to such terms and conditions as the state commissioner of public health or the local director of health finds necessary and proper. 
(Ord. No. 302, § 10, 8-8-77; Ord. No. 805, § 10, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 9-48. - Same-Revocation or suspension. 
(a)  Any permit issued for a massage establishment may be revoked or suspended by the chief of police or his designee, after a public hearing before the board of aldermen, or it is found that the provisions of this article are violated or where the permittee or any employee of the permittee, including a masseur or masseuse, has been convicted of any offense found in section 9-47(1), (2) or (3), and the permittee has actual or constructive knowledge of the violation or conviction, or in any case where the permittee or licensee refused to permit any duly authorized police officer, health inspector or fire officer of the city to inspect the premises or the operation therein. 
(b)  The chief of police or his designee, before revoking or suspending any permit, shall give the permittee at least ten (10) days' written notice of the charges against him and the opportunity for a public hearing before the board of aldermen, at which time the permittee may present evidence bearing upon the question. In such cases the charges shall be specific and in writing. 
(Ord. No. 302, § 13, 8-8-77; Ord. No. 805, § 13, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 9-49. - Same-Transfer. 
    No permit shall be transferable except with the written consent of the chief of police or his designate and the approval of the department of public health; provided, however, that upon the death or incapacity of the permittee, the massage establishment may continue in business for a reasonable period of time to allow for an orderly transfer of permit. 
(Ord. No. 302, § 18, 8-8-77; Ord. No. 805, § 18, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 9-50. - Masseur, masseuse permit-Required. 
    No person shall practice massage as a masseur, employee or otherwise, unless he has obtained a valid and subsisting masseur's permit as hereinafter set forth. 
(Ord. No. 302, § 3, 8-8-77; Ord. No. 805, § 3(2), 4-12-07) 
Sec. 9-51. - Same-Application; fee. 
    Any person, including an applicant for a massage establishment permit, who engages in the practice of massages as herein defined shall file an application for a masseur or masseuse permit with the chief of police or his designate upon a form provided by said chief of police and shall pay a filing fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) which shall not be refundable. 
(Ord. No. 302, § 6, 8-8-77; Ord. No. 805, § 6, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 9-52. - Same-Contents of application. 
    The application for a masseur or masseuse permit shall contain the following: 
(1)  Name and residence address. 
(2)  Social Security number. 
(3)  Fingerprints and photograph with necessary information must be taken at time of application. 
(4)  Written evidence that the applicant is at least eighteen (18) years of age. 
(5)  The two (2) previous addresses immediately prior to the present address of the applicant. 
(6)  The massage or similar business history and experience, including but not limited to whether or not such person in previously operating in this or another city or state under license or permit has had such license or permit denied, revoked, or suspended and the reason therefore and the business activities or occupations subsequent to such action of denial, suspension or revocation. 
(7)  Business occupation or employment of the applicant for three (3) years immediately preceding date of application. 
(8)  Whether such person has ever been convicted of any crime except minor traffic violations. If any person mentioned in this subsection has been so convicted, a statement must be made giving the place and court in which conviction was obtained and the sentence imposed as a result of such conviction. 
(9)  Name and address of the recognized school attended, the date attended, and a copy of the diploma or certificate of graduation awarded the applicant showing the applicant has successfully completed not less than seventy (70) hours of instruction. 
(10)  Any masseur or masseuse so employed is required to present a certificate from a physician licensed to practice in the State of Connecticut stating that the applicant has been examined and found to be free of any contagious or communicable disease and showing that the examination was conducted within thirty (30) days prior to the submission of the application. 
(11)  Such other information, identification and physical examination of the person deemed necessary by the police chief in order to discover the truth of the matters hereinbefore required to be set forth in the application. 
(12)  Written declaration of the applicant, under penalty of perjury, that the foregoing information contained in the application is true and correct, said declaration being dated and signed in the City of Shelton. 
(Ord. No. 302, § 7, 8-8-77; Ord. No. 805, § 7, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 9-53. - Same-Term; renewal fee. 
    The permit for the practice of massage shall be good for one (1) year from the date of issue and shall be subject to revocation in the vent that the licensee does not comply with the provisions of this article. The renewal fee for such permit thereafter shall be ten dollars ($10.00) per year. Application for renewal shall be accompanied by an updated certificate of health as required in section 9-52(10). 
(Ord. No. 302, § 8, 8-8-77; Ord. No. 805, § 8, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 9-54. - Same-Issuance. 
    The chief of police or his designee may issue a masseur or masseuse permit within twenty-one (21) days following application, unless he finds that the applicant for the masseur or masseuse permit has been convicted of: 
(1)  A felony. 
(2)  An offense involving sexual misconduct with minors. 
(3)  Obscenity, keeping or residing in a house of ill fame, solicitation of lewd or unlawful act, prostitution or pandering. 
(4)  Falsification of application. 
(Ord. No. 302, § 11, 8-8-77; Ord. No. 805, § 11, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 9-55. - Same-Revocation or suspension. 
(a)  A masseur or masseuse permit issued by the chief of police or his designee shall be revoked or suspended after a public hearing before the board of aldermen where it appears that the masseur or masseuse has been convicted of any offense enumerated in section 9-54(1), (2) or (3). 
(b)  The chief of police or his designee before revoking or suspending any masseur or masseuse permit shall give the masseur or masseuse at least ten (10) days' written notice of the examination into his/her conviction record and the opportunity for a public hearing before the board of aldermen, from which hearing the chief of police or his designee shall determine the relevant facts regarding the occurrence of the conviction. 
(Ord. No. 302, § 14, 8-8-77; Ord. No. 805, § 14, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 9-56. - Display of permits. 
    The massage business permittee shall display his permit and that of each and every masseur or masseuse employed in the establishment in an open and conspicuous place on the premises of the massage business. 
(Ord. No. 302, § 12, 8-8-77; Ord. No. 805, § 12, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 9-57. - Time limit for filing application for permit. 
    All persons who possess any outstanding permit heretofore issued as either the operator of a massage establishment or as a masseur or masseuse must file for a new permit within six (6) months of the effective date of the ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 302, § 20, 8-8-77; Ord. No. 805, § 20, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 9-58. - Daily register. 
    Every person who engages in or conducts a massage establishment shall keep a daily register, approved as to form by the chief of police or his designee, of all patrons with names, addresses and hours of arrival and, if applicable, the rooms or cubicles assigned. The daily register shall at all times during business hours be subject to inspection by health department officials, by the police department and shall be kept on file for one (1) year. The permittee of a massage establishment shall also maintain a daily register of all persons employed by the establishment including the hours of work. 
(Ord. No. 302, § 17, 8-8-77; Ord. No. 805, § 17, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 9-59. - Applicability of regulations to existing businesses. 
(a)  Holders of any outstanding massage establishment permits heretofore issued under any provision of law are required to comply with all provisions of this article. 
(b)  Applicants for a masseur or masseuse permit may substitute one (1) year's continuous experience as a masseur or masseuse in lieu of a requirement of a diploma or certificate of graduation from a recognized school or other institution of learning wherein the method and work of massage is taught. Such masseur or masseuse must obtain an affidavit attesting to such experience from the owner of the establishment where the continuous one (1) year of experience occurred. If, after diligent effort, the masseur or masseuse is unable to obtain an affidavit from the owner, such masseur or masseuse may submit an affidavit from a person who has firsthand knowledge of his or her continuous year of experience. 
(Ord. No. 302, § 19, 8-8-77; Ord. No. 805, § 19, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 9-60. - Rules and regulations. 
    The chief of police or his designee or the director of public health may, after a public hearing, make and enforce reasonable rules and regulations not in conflict with, but to carry out, the intent of this article. 
(Ord. No. 302, § 22, 8-8-77; Ord. No. 805, § 22, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 9-61. - Operating requirements. 
(1)  Every portion of the massage establishment, including appliances, apparatus and personnel shall be kept clean and operated in a sanitary condition. 
(2)  All employees shall be clean and wear clean outer garments whose use is restricted to the massage establishment. Provisions for a separate dressing room for each sex must be available on the premises with individual lockers for each employee. Doors to such dressing rooms shall open inward and shall be self-closing. 
(3)  All employees, masseurs or masseuses must be modestly attired. Diaphanous, flimsy, transparent, form-fitting or tight clothing is prohibited. Clothing must cover the employees', masseurs' or masseuses' chests at all times. 
(4)  Private parts of patrons must be covered by towels, cloth or undergarments when in the presence of any employee, masseur or masseuse. Any contact with a patron's genital area is strictly prohibited. 
(5)  All massage establishments shall be provided with clean, laundered sheets and towels in sufficient quantity and shall be laundered after each use thereof and stored in an approved sanitary manner. 
(6)  Wet and dry heat rooms, shower compartments, and toilet rooms shall be thoroughly cleaned each day business is in operation. Bathtubs shall be thoroughly cleaned after each use. 
(7)  Advertising. No massage establishment granted a permit under provisions of this article shall place, publish, or distribute or cause to be placed, published or distributed any advertising material that depicts any portion of the human body that would reasonably suggest to prospective patrons that any services are available other than those services as described in section 9-42 of this article, or that employees, masseurs or masseuses are dressed in any manner other than described in subsection (c). Nor, shall any massage establishment indicate in the text of such advertising that any services are available other than those services described in section 9-42. 
(8)  Health services enumerated in section 9-42 of this article must be carried on in one (1) cubicle, room, booth or area within the massage establishment. No service enumerated in section 9-42 of this article may be carried on in any cubicle, room, booth or area except where such cubicle, room, booth or area has doors or walls so that all activity within a cubicle, room, booth or area is visible from outside the same. No massage service or practice shall be carried on within any cubicle, room or booth, or any area within a massage establishment which is fitted with a door capable of being locked. 
(9)  A massage establishment shall not carry on, or engage in conduct or conduct business on Sunday and on any other days shall not carry on, engage in or conduct business before 8:00 a.m. or after 11:00 p.m. 
(10)  No alcoholic beverage or other intoxicant shall be displayed, served, ingested or sold on the premises of said massage establishment. 
(11)  A full schedule of service rates shall be posted in a prominent place within the massage parlor in such a manner as to come to the attention of all patrons. No charges other than the specified rates for specified services are to be allowed with the patron being notified of the full cost prior to the rendering of any service. 
(12)  No person shall permit any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to come or remain on the premises of any massage establishment, as masseur, masseuse, employee or patron, unless such person is on the premises on lawful business. 
(Ord. No. 302, § 16, 8-8-77; Ord. No. 805, § 16, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 9-62. - Exceptions. 
    This article does not apply to schools, hospitals, nursing homes, sanitariums or persons holding an unrevoked certificate to practice the healing arts under the laws of the state, or to persons working under the direction of any such person or in any such establishments. 
(Ord. No. 302, § 21, 8-8-77; Ord. No. 805, § 21, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 9-63. - Violation and penalty. 
    Every person, except persons who are specifically exempt from this article, whether acting as individual, owner, employee of the owner, operator or employee of the operator or acting as a participant or worker in any way, who gives massages or conducts a massage establishment without first obtaining a permit and paying a license fee to the City of Shelton, or who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Conviction of such person shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00), or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed sixty (60) days, or by both such fine and such imprisonment. 
(Ord. No. 302, § 23, 8-8-77; Ord. No. 805, § 23, 4-12-07) 
Secs. 9-64-9-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - COIN-OPERATED, MECHANICAL OR ELECTRONIC AMUSEMENT DEVICES 

Sec. 9-81. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Amusement center shall mean any establishment operated for profit which houses more than three (3) mechanical/electronic amusement devices shall be deemed to be an amusement center. 
    Mechanical/electronic device means any machine which, upon the insertion of a coin, slug or token or upon payment of a charge is operated to register a score or tally of any kind or permits a certain amount of "play" for entertainment or score. It shall include such devices as pinball or pingame machines, shuffleboard devices and TV-like devices, but shall not be strictly limited to same. 
    Operator shall mean any person in whose place of business any such machine or device is placed for use by the public. 
(Ord. No. 421, § 1, 11-24-81) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 9-82. - Amusement center license-Required. 
    Every proposed operator of an amusement center shall be required, before commencing such operation, to obtain an amusement center license from the department of police. 
(Ord. No. 421, § 2, 11-24-81; Ord. No. 428, § 2, 3-11-82) 
Sec. 9-83. - Same-Application; contents. 
    Applications for the amusement center licenses required by section 9-82 shall be made to the police department upon forms supplied by it for that purpose. Each application shall contain the following information under oath: 
(1)  The name of the proposed operator. If the proposed operator is a partnership, the application shall require names of all partners; if the proposed operator is a corporation or unincorporated association, the application shall contain the names of all officers and in addition, thereto, shall contain the name of the manager or other person that the proposed operator designates as the person in charge of the amusement center. 
(2)  The residence address of any person whose name is required to be provided under the provisions of subsection (1) of this section. 
(3)  The age of any person whose name is required to be provided under subsection (1) of the section. If the proposed operator is a corporation, the application shall state the state of organization and the date of organization. 
(4)  The nature of any business or activity engaged in by any person whose name is required under the provisions of subsection (1) of this section. 
(5)  A statement listing whether any of the individuals whose names are required under the provisions of subsection (1) of this section above have ever been convicted of a crime; and if the answer is affirmative, the date and place of conviction and the charge upon which the conviction is based. 
(6)  The location where the machines or devices are to be displayed or operated. 
(7)  A description of the types of machines to be covered by the license. 
(8)  Each proposed operator for, or holder of an amusement center license shall notify the chief of police within seven (7) days of any change in the information set forth in the application. 
(Ord. No. 421, § 3, 11-24-81; Ord. No. 428, § 1, 3-11-82) 
Sec. 9-84. - Same-Background investigation before issuance. 
    The chief of police shall cause such background investigation to be made as he deems advisable of any of the persons whose names are required to be provided for a license. The chief of police shall within thirty (30) days of the filing of an application approve the same except that he may refuse the license if he determines: 
(1)  That the operator has been convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude; 
(2)  That the business proposed for the location is not bona fide; 
(3)  That the operator is at least eighteen (18) years of age; 
(4)  That the location does not have a certificate of zoning compliance or approval by the local or state fire marshal or any other official having jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 421, § 4, 11-24-81; Ord. No. 428, § 3, 3-11-82) 
Sec. 9-85. - Same-Issuance. 
    An amusement center license required by this article shall be issued by the chief of police only in the name of the proposed operator. One (1) mechanical electronic/amusement device may be substituted by a licensee for another similar material or device under this license; but in the event of a sale or a transfer of the business by an operator, a new operator's license shall be obtained by the transferee and the operator shall notify the chief of police of such sale or transfer. In the event that, if the operator is a corporation or an association, and, the person who is the manager of or in charge of the amusement center shall change, the operator shall notify the chief of police of such change who shall cause the investigation required by section 9-84 to be made with regard to the new manager or other persons in charge. 
(Ord. No. 421, § 5, 11-24-81; Ord. No. 428, § 5, 3-11-82) 
Sec. 9-86. - Same-Fees. 
(a)  At the time of filing an application for the amusement center license required by this article, the applicant shall pay a fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(b)  In the event that a manager changes, the notification to the chief of police shall be accompanied by a fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) to defray the cost of the investigation of the new proposed manager. 
(Ord. No. 421, § 6, 11-24-81; Ord. No. 428, § 6, 3-11-82) 
Sec. 9-87. - Same-Term. 
    The amusement center license required by this article shall be valid for so long a period of time as the licensee shall be the operator of the establishment which is licensed. When the licensee is no longer the operator of the premises licensed, any new operator shall be required to obtain a license as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 421, § 7, 11-24-81) 
Sec. 9-88. - Same-Display. 
    An amusement center operator's license required by this article shall be posted permanently and conspicuously in public view on the premises where the machines or devices are to be operated or maintained. 
(Ord. No. 421, § 9, 11-24-81) 
Sec. 9-89. - Conduct of operator's place of business. 
(a)  Each operator shall maintain a good order in his place of business and shall not permit any mechanical/electronic amusement device to be used for gambling. 
(b)  Each operator shall have at all times, during his hours of business, a responsible employee on duty for the purpose of supervising activities within and such employee shall be at least eighteen (18) years of age and shall not have been convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude. 
(c)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize, license or permit any gambling device whatsoever, or any mechanism judicially determined to be a gambling device, or declared contrary to law. 
(Ord. No. 421, § 8, 11-24-81) 
Sec. 9-90. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating any provision of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished in accordance with section 1-11 of this Code and be subject to revocation of such amusement center license. 
(Ord. No. 421, § 10, 11-24-81) 
Secs. 9-91-9-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ALARM SYSTEMS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 657, adopted October 14, 1993, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, inclusion as Ch. 9, Art V, §§ 9-101, 9-102 was at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 9-101. - Definitions. 
(a)  Intent. The intent of this article is to encourage the proper functioning of alarm systems in order to avoid the necessity of taking personnel away from their regular duties and dispatching police and/or fire apparatus to respond quickly. 
(b)  Definitions. For purposes of this article the following terms and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them: 
    Alarm system means any device or equipment which is capable of automatically calling and relaying recorded emergency messages to any state police or municipal police or fire department telephone number, or which is capable of automatically calling and relaying recorded emergency messages or other forms of emergency signals to an intermediate third party, which shall thereafter call and relay such emergency messages to a state police or municipal police or fire department telephone number, as well as any audible sounding device or equipment which does not automatically call or relay as described above. An alarm system shall include, but not be limited to, a burglar alarm, fire alarm, and carbon monoxide detection and warning equipment, which are defined as follows: 
(1)  Burglar alarm means any alarm system falling within the definition of "alarm system" hereinabove which is designed to transmit a signal in the event of an intrusion, hold-up, or other type of emergency situation. 
(2)  Fire alarm means any system which falls within the definition of "alarm system" hereinabove which is designed to transmit an alarm relating to fire. 
(3)  Carbon monoxide detection and warning equipment means any system which falls within the definition of "alarm system" hereinabove which is designed to transmit an alarm relating to carbon monoxide. 
    Alarm owner or user means any person, firm, corporation or other business entity who owns, controls, operates, or maintains any "alarm system" as defined hereinabove. 
    Automatic telephone dialing service refers to an alarm system which automatically sends over regular telephone lines, by direct connection, or otherwise via a prerecorded voice message that indicates the existence of an emergency situation that the alarm system is designed to detect. 
    Central station operating company refers to a company equipped to receive a burglar, fire, panic, intruder, or hold-up alarm from each of its customers which then transmits to the Shelton Police Department or the Shelton Fire Department the location of any such alarm the central station operating company may receive. 
    Chief of police refers to the chief executive officer or the acting chief executive officer of the police department of the City of Shelton. 
    False alarm includes any transmission or relay of a message, signal or warning to police or fire authorities caused by error, mechanical or otherwise, or malfunction of an alarm device, or resulting from the test of such alarm device without prior notice to police or fire department officials. A false alarm is the unintentional activation of an alarm system as hereinbefore defined as a result of negligence, mechanical failure, malfunction, improper installation, improper operation, ignorance, inadvertence, or other cause excluding activation caused by hurricanes, tornadoes, earthquakes, or other abnormal weather events or other abnormal events which are generally referred to as acts of God; also excluded is the intentional activation of a system with criminal, malicious or mischievous intent which would be a violation under the applicable criminal statutes. 
    Fire marshal refers to the duly appointed fire marshal of the City of Shelton. 
    Hearing officer means the person or persons designated to hear appeals pursuant to section 7-152c of the Connecticut General Statutes and the city ordinance entitled "Ordinance Relative to Hearing Procedure for Municipal Ordinance Citations" [section 1-11.1 of this Code]. 
    Time period is January 1 through December 31, of any calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 657, 10-14-93; Ord. No. 776, 4-8-04; Ord. No. 797, 4-13-06) 
Sec. 9-102. - Requirements. 
(a)  Any person, firm, corporation or other business entity who owns, controls or operates an alarm system as hereinbefore defined who has not complied with the provisions of section 7-282b of the Connecticut General Statutes shall provide the information required by the following section of this article within thirty (30) days after notification to do so. 
(b)  Any person or persons, firm or corporation installing an alarm system within the City of Shelton shall register, with the Shelton Police Department, at least five (5) working days prior to installation of any alarm. No alarm device may be installed before obtaining such permit. The chief of police and the fire marshal are allowed the prerogative to authorize installation sooner if they so choose. Any such person, corporation or commercial enterprise shall designate a permittee responsible for fines authorized under this section and provide proof of financial responsibility before such permit is issued. 
(1)  For monitored systems the name, address and telephone number of the central station operating company. 
(2)  For systems not monitored by a central station monitoring company, the name, street number (apartment number, suite number or floor, as may apply) and home and work telephone number of the premises to be protected. The names, addresses, home and work telephone numbers of at least two (2) persons other than the alarm owner/user who can be contacted twenty-four (24) hours a day, who are authorized by the alarm owner/user to respond to the premises upon request of the police or fire officer in charge and who have access to the premises and the authorization to silence or reset an alarm system. 
(c)  Every alarm owner/user shall be responsible for updating the information herein required to be provided to the Shelton Police Department or Shelton Fire Department. If the information changes, the alarm owner/user shall notify the Shelton Police Department or Shelton Fire Department within five (5) working days of the change. 
(d)  No alarm system shall be installed by other than a licensed person, owner or other person meeting the requirements set forth in the building and electrical codes of the State of Connecticut and the Connecticut Fire Safety Code. No alarm system shall be installed unless an electrical permit to install has been obtained from the town building official or his designated representative, as is required by the building and electrical codes of the State of Connecticut. 
(e)  No person, firm, business or corporation shall install an automatic telephone dialing device which will transmit an alarm message within the City of Shelton terminating at the Shelton Police or Fire Departments. 
(f)  All alarm systems, as defined in this section, which sound an audible signal, which may be heard outside of the protected premises, shall be equipped with a device that will limit the duration of such audible signal to not more than ten (10) minutes in accordance with section 22a-69-5.1 of the Administrative Regulations of the Department of Environmental Protection of the State of Connecticut. 
(g)  Any person, corporation, business or commercial enterprise that controls, owns or operates an alarm system from which system there are two (2) false alarms from a particular residence, business, firm or corporation within the prescribed annual twelve-month period, the chief of police may cause to be issued, a written warning for the first two (2) false alarms and if there is a third false alarm within the same twelve-month period, the chief of police may thereafter issue a citation in accordance and a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each false alarm which occurs during the remainder of the twelve-month time period. 
(h)  Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this article may be fined a sum not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each violation thereof. Each violation shall be considered a separate offense. 
(i)  In the event of five (5) false alarms from any particular residence, business, firm or corporation within the designated annual time period, the chief of police may summon the designated permittee together with the permittee's alarm company responsible representative to a meeting with the chief of police and/or fire marshal in order to identify and correct the source of the false alarms. Alarm companies shall be subject to the penalties as described in this article. 
(1)  Failure to respond to efforts to correct defective alarm systems or to provide the information required herein may result in additional sanctions including an order to immediately disconnect said alarm. 
(2)  Upon the issuance of the citation, the provisions of section 7-152c of the Connecticut General Statutes as implemented by an ordinance entitled "Ordinance Relative to Hearing Procedure for Municipal Ordinance Citations" [section 1-11.1 of this Code] shall apply. 
(j)  Pursuant to any penalty provided, the chief of police or the fire marshal are authorized to seek an injunction or take such other legal action as may be applicable to the particular situation. 
(k)  The provision of this article shall be deemed to be severable, and if any of its provisions shall be held unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, the decision of such court shall not affect or impair any of the remaining, provisions. 
(l)  City properties and buildings shall be exempt from the provisions of this article. 
(m)  This article shall become effective after publication as provided in the City Charter. 
(Ord. No. 657, 10-14-93; Ord. No. 703, 7-11-96; Ord. No. 776, 4-8-04; Ord. No. 797, 4-13-06) 
Secs. 9-103-9-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PAWNBROKERS, PRECIOUS METALS OR STONES DEALERS, SECONDHAND DEALERS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 864, adopted April 12, 2012, amended Art. VI in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. VI pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 670, adopted May 12, 1994; Ord. No. 816, adopted April 12, 2007; and Ord. No. 858, adopted May 12, 2011. 

Sec. 9-111. - Definitions. 
    Pawnbroker means a person who is engaged in the business of loaning money upon the deposit or pledge of wearing apparel, jewelry, ornaments, household goods or other personal property or purchasing such property on condition of selling the same back again at a stipulated price. 
    Person means an individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership or association. 
    Precious metals or stones dealer means a person who is primarily engaged in the business of purchasing gold or gold-plated ware, silver or silver-plated ware, platinum ware, watches, jewelry, precious stones, bullion or coins. 
    Licensing authority means the chief of police of the city. 
    Secondhand dealer means a person who is primarily engaged in the business of purchasing personal property of any type from a person who is not a wholesaler, for the purpose of reselling or exchanging such property, and has physical possession of such property, other than an antiques dealer, art dealer, coin and stamp dealer, precious metals or stones dealer, pawnbroker, consignment shop operator, special collectibles dealer, musical instrument dealer, used book dealer, dealer in motor vehicles as described in chapter 246 of the Connecticut General Statutes, auctioneer as described in chapter 403 of the Connecticut General Statutes, junk dealer, as defined in section 21-9 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended by this act, scrap metal processor, as defined in section 14-67w of the Connecticut General Statutes, recycling facility, as defined in section 22a-207 of the Connecticut General Statutes, bona fide charitable or religious corporation, or any retailer that is primarily engaged in the business of selling new items but also gives consideration other than cash in exchange for one (1) or more items traded in to such retailer. 
(Ord. No. 864, 4-12-12; Ord. No. 882, 10-9-14) 
Sec. 9-112. - License. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to engage in the city in business as a pawnbroker, precious metals or stones dealer and/or a secondhand dealer as defined by the laws of the state, sections 21-39-21-45 of the Connecticut General Statutes, and the ordinances of the city without a license, pursuant to section 21-40 of the Connecticut General Statutes and this article. 
(Ord. No. 864, 4-12-12; Ord. No. 882, 10-9-14) 
Sec. 9-113. - Applications for licenses. 
    Applications for a pawnbroker's, second hand dealers, and precious metals or stones dealer licenses shall be made to the chief of police of the city on forms provided by said chief. Said application shall be reviewed by the chief of police, who shall grant or deny such license. The chief of police may grant licenses to suitable persons. The chief of police may reject said application for cause provided that said "cause" shall be one (1) which would be sufficient to revoke a license as provided by Connecticut General Statutes section 21-40. No license shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of a felony. Upon approval by the chief of police said license shall be valid for one (1) year from the date of issuance, unless sooner revoked or suspended, with cause, by the chief of police. It shall be the responsibility of the license holder to renew his/her license. The person so licensed shall pay, for the benefit of any such city, to the authority for granting such license a license fee as set forth below. 
Type of License Initial Fee Renewal Fee Bond Pawnbroker * $50.00 $25.00 $2,000.00 Secondhand Dealer $250.00 $100.00 $2,000.00 Precious metals or stones Dealer $10.00 $10.00 $2,000.00  
       * The renewal fee and bond requirement for a pawnbroker will be waived if the applicant is licensed in the city as a secondhand dealer. 
    Applicants shall file with the chief of police a bond to such city with competent surety, in the penal sum listed above, to be approved by such licensing authority, and conditioned for the faithful performance of the duties and obligations pertaining to the business so licensed. 
    The application for any license shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The type of business to be engaged in; 
(2)  The applicant's full name, age and date and place of birth; 
(3)  The applicant's residence addresses and places of employment within the preceding five (5) years; 
(4)  The applicant's present occupation; 
(5)  Any crime of which the applicant has been convicted and the date and place of such conviction; 
(6)  All locations used or intended to be used for the purchase, receipt, storage or sale of property; 
(7)  If the applicant is a corporation, limited liability company, partnership or association, the application shall contain the information required by this subsection for each individual who is or will be an officer, shareholder, financial backer or creditor, other than a financial institution, of such entity or any other individual with a relationship to such entity similar to that of an officer, shareholder, financial backer or creditor; 
(8)  The application for such license and any renewal thereof shall contain information on any Internet web site or account used by such applicant to conduct the business. During the term of the license, the licensee shall notify the licensing authority in writing of the addition or discontinuation of any Internet web sites or accounts used to conduct the business; 
(9)  A statement that the applicant is the owner of the premises where the business is to be conducted or evidence of a written lease thereon for the full period for which the license is issued, i.e. one (1) year; 
(10)  A statement as to whether a previous license was granted to any person, member/manager of the limited liability, shareholder/officer of a corporation, partition by any governmental authority and the status of same and if revoked, the reason therefore. 
    The chief of police may require additional information as deemed necessary to investigate the qualifications, character, competency and integrity of the applicant. 
    The city police department will complete a background check, including a criminal records check, on the applicant, any person employed in the operation of the business and any person with an ownership interest. A successful completion of this background check is mandatory both prior to the issuance of a permit and when it is renewed. 
    The applicant must also be fingerprinted for the initial application. The chief of police shall charge each individual a fee equal to the fees established by the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the state police bureau of identification for performing such criminal history record checks. 
    The licensing authority shall grant or deny an application for a license not later than ninety (90) days after the filing of such application with the licensing authority. A licensee seeking renewal of such license shall file an application for renewal at least sixty (60) days before the expiration of such license and the licensing authority shall grant or deny such renewal not later than thirty (30) days after the filing of such application for renewal. Failure of the licensing authority to act on such initial application or renewal application within the applicable period specified in this subsection shall be deemed to be a denial. The licensing authority may suspend, revoke or modify any license issued under this section at any time during the period of the license for good cause shown, upon notice to the licensee and following a hearing. The licensing authority shall hold any such hearing not later than five (5) days after the date of issuance of such notice, and shall issue a decision not more than fourteen (14) days after any hearing. Any person aggrieved by any action of the licensing authority in denying, suspending, revoking, modifying or refusing to renew a license issued pursuant to this section may appeal from such action to the Superior Court. 
(Ord. No. 864, 4-12-12; Ord. No. 882, 10-9-14) 
Sec. 9-114. - Change of address. 
    In the event the licensee shall change any of the addresses stated in the application during the term for which the license is issued, such licensee shall notify the chief of police in writing, certified mail or hand delivery to police headquarters of such change not later than one (1) business day after such change. 
(Ord. No. 864, 4-12-12; Ord. No. 882, 10-9-14) 
Sec. 9-115. - Operations. 
    Pawnbroker. 
All operations carried on pursuant to said license shall be in accord with the provisions of Connecticut General Statutes sections 21-39-21-47. 
The pawnbroker shall only operate at the address that his/her license has been issued to and shall be required to post his/her license and tax ID number in an area visible to the public within the premises. Additional permits shall be required for additional locations and each permit is nontransferable. It shall be the responsibility of the licensee holder to renew his/her license. 
Pawnbrokers shall be required to keep a computerized record in a format approved by the chief of police. All items received shall be entered immediately into an electronic record. Included shall be all transactions pawned or purchased and it shall include the dollar amount of the pawn or purchase. Every pawnbroker shall be required to electronically transmit a weekly report of all transactions to the city police department detective division. The day and time that the weekly electronic report is due shall be determined by the commander of the detective division. If the day that the weekly electronic report is due falls on a legal holiday the electronic report shall be due the next business day. The records shall be transmitted electronically in a stored format specified by the chief of police or his designee. 
When items are deposited or pledged for money loaned purchased by the pawnbroker, the pawnbroker shall sell the items only after the pawnbroker has held them for at least sixty (60) days from the date when the same was left in deposit or pledged or the purchase of said item. A law enforcement agency in the course of an investigation may require a pawnbroker to hold an item for a longer period of time, if necessary. 
The pawnbroker shall require and record positive identification from all customers selling goods to the pawnbroker. Positive identification shall mean valid, current identification, issued by a governmental entity, which contains a numerical identifier, a current residence address, and a photograph of the person identified. The pawnbroker shall be required to keep at least three (3) years written and computerized records of all the pawnbroker's transactions. 
All transaction records shall accurately describe all items, including, but not limited to: distinguishing marks, manufacturer's name, model names or numbers, serial numbers, engravings, etchings, color and size, affiliation with any institution or organization, dates, initials, vintage or image represented. Any description of audio, video or electronic media of any kind shall also indicate the title and artist or any other identifying information contained in the cover or external surface of such media. Jewelry item description shall include the material, ring size, weight, chain length, shapes, carat weight and color, also any other unique identifying features. Items that are new or obviously never used or still in the original box or packaging shall be documented as such. No jewelry or gold shall be described as scrap. Every pawnbroker shall photograph any jewelry or precious metal pawned or sold and keep such photograph on file for at least three (3) years. A photo shall be stored in a digitized format associated with the transaction number, must be retrievable and must be furnished to police upon request. 
A digital photograph of each article that does not contain any identifiable numbers or markings shall be included. Each entry in the record-keeping system shall be numbered consecutively. A tag shall be attached to the article in a visible and convenient place with a number written on such tag corresponding to the entry number in the record-keeping system and shall remain attached to the article until the article is sold or otherwise disposed of, provided the licensing authority shall prescribe procedures authorizing the removal of such tags from articles, including those articles consisting of jewelry that are cleaned and repaired on the premises by the pawnbroker, that will provide accountability for such articles. Such tag shall be visible in a digital photograph taken in accordance with this section. 
The pawnbroker shall be subject to random inspections by the city police department for the purpose of monitoring compliance with this article. Any officer of the city police department may, during business hours, enter upon any premises used by the pawnbroker for the purpose of the business, to examine all articles taken in pawn, kept, stored in or upon said premises. All records and inventories are subject to examination. 
Items transferred or received from another licensed pawnbroker located within or outside the city shall be recorded in the premises to which they are transferred or received. Any items taken in pawn or purchased, which is disposed of other than by sale or auction shall have a notation in the record indicating the method of disposal. 
All records maintained pursuant to this section shall be retained by the pawnbroker for not less than two (2) years. 
    Secondhand dealer. 
The operations for a secondhand dealer are the same as a pawnbroker except for the holding period. No secondhand dealer shall sell or dispose of any personal property acquired in any transaction in the course of business in less than ten (10) days after the date of its receipt. Upon the sale or disposition of such property, such dealer shall, if such property is not sold at retail at the place of business of such dealer, include a record of such sale or disposition in the record-keeping system required by this section. 
    Precious metal and stone dealers. 
The operations for a precious metal and stone dealers are the same as a pawnbroker except for the following conditions: 
(1)  No licensee may pay for property received with cash. Said licensee shall pay be check or money order. 
(2)  No precious metal and stone dealer shall sell or dispose of any personal property acquired in any transaction in the course of business in less than ten (10) days after the date of its receipt. 
(Ord. No. 864, 4-12-12; Ord. No. 882, 10-9-14) 
Sec. 9-116. - Property from minor. 
    No pawnbroker shall have any business dealings as a pawnbroker with any unemancipated minor under the age of eighteen (18) years, except with the written consent of the parent or guardian of the minor unless a parent or legal guardian is present and must show positive identification as set forth in this article to each particular transaction. No pawnbroker's license shall be issued to any person who is not eighteen (18) years of age or over. No person under eighteen (18) shall be an agent for any pawnbroker. 
(Ord. No. 864, 4-12-12; Ord. No. 882, 10-9-14) 
Sec. 9-117. - Stolen goods. 
    It shall be the duty of every pawnbroker to report to the police any article pledged with him, or which it is sought to be pledged with him, if he shall have reason to believe that the article was stolen or lost, and found by the person attempting to pledge it, in the case of a lost article. The pawnbroker shall not accept any property if upon inspection it is apparent that serial numbers, model numbers, or identifying characteristics have been intentionally defaced on that article of property. 
(Ord. No. 864, 4-12-12; Ord. No. 882, 10-9-14) 
Sec. 9-118. - Penalties. 
    Complaints concerning pawnbrokers shall be investigated by the detective division of the city police department. An investigation shall be made in all such instances and a report with recommendations shall be forwarded to the chief of police. In the event the chief of police determines that disciplinary action should be instituted against the pawnbroker the detective division shall cause to be served upon the pawnbroker, notice as to time, date and place of hearing of the charges with a statement of the reasons. The hearing will be conducted by the chief of police or his/her designee. 
    Violation: 
Any person, corporation, limited liability company, partnership, agent or employee thereof who violates the provisions of this article shall be fined an amount not to exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). 
(Ord. No. 864, 4-12-12; Ord. No. 882, 10-9-14) 
Sec. 9-119. - Conflict with statute. 
    Any provisions herein which is determined to conflict with Connecticut General Statutes sections 21-39-21-47 shall be void. 
(Ord. No. 864, 4-12-12; Ord. No. 882, 10-9-14) 
Sec. 9-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - ADULT ORIENTED BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS 

Sec. 9-121. - Short title. 
    This article shall be known as the "Adult Oriented Business Establishments Ordinance for the City of Shelton." 
(Ord. No. 718, § 1, 3-12-98; Ord. No. 820, § 1, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 9-122. - Policy statement. 
    The board of aldermen of the City of Shelton, Connecticut (hereinafter the "aldermen") finds: 
(a)  There are or may in the future be adult oriented business establishments, hereinafter defined, located in the City of Shelton, which establishments require special supervision from the town's public safety agencies in order to protect and preserve the health, safety and welfare of the patrons of such establishments, as well as the health, safety and welfare of the town's citizens. 
(b)  Statistics and studies performed by a substantial number of cities and towns in the United States indicate that: 
(1)  Large numbers of persons, primarily male, frequent such adult oriented business establishments, especially those which provide closed booths, cubicles, studios and rooms for the private viewing of so-called "adult" motion pictures and/or video tapes and/or live entertainment; and 
(2)  Such closed booths, cubicles, studios and rooms have been used by patrons, clients or customers of such adult oriented business establishments for the purpose of engaging in certain sexual acts; and 
(3)  Male and female prostitutes have been known to frequent such establishments in order to provide sex for hire to the patrons, clients or customers of such establishments within such booths, cubicles and rooms; and 
(4)  Such establishments attract an undesirably large number of transients as customers, leading to an increase in crime, particularly prostitution, and an adverse effect particularly on residential neighborhoods; and 
(5)  Doors, curtains, blinds and/or other closures installed in or on the entrances and/or exits of such booths, cubicles, studios and rooms which are closed while such booths, studios and rooms are in use encourage patrons using such booths, cubicles, studios and rooms to engage in sexual acts therein with prostitutes and/or with other persons, thereby promoting and encouraging prostitution and the commission of sexual acts which cause blood, semen and urine to be deposited on the floors and/or walls of such booths, cubicles, studios and rooms, which deposits could prove detrimental to the health and safety of other persons who may come into contact with such deposits; and 
(6)  The reasonable regulation and supervision of such adult oriented business establishments tends to discourage such sexual acts and prostitution, and thereby promoted the health, safety and welfare of the patrons, clients and customers of such establishments. 
(c)  The continued unregulated operation of such adult oriented business establishments is and would be detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City of Shelton. 
(d)  The Constitution and Laws of the State of Connecticut grant to the city powers, especially regulatory and police powers, to enact reasonable legislation and measures to regulate and supervise such adult oriented business establishments in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare. 
(e)  It is not the intent of the aldermen, in enacting this article, to deny any person rights to speech protected by the United States and/or state constitutions, nor is it the intent of the aldermen to impose any additional limitations or restrictions on the contents of any communicative materials, including sexually-oriented films, video-tapes, books and/or other materials. Further, by enacting this article, the aldermen does not intend to deny or restrict the rights of any adult to obtain and/or view any sexually-oriented materials protected by the United States and/or state constitutions, nor does it intend to restrict or deny any constitutionally-protected rights that distributors of exhibitors of such sexually-oriented materials may have to sell, distribute or exhibit such materials. 
(Ord. No. 718, § 2, 3-12-98; Ord. No. 820, § 2, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 9-123. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this article, the words and phrases used herein shall have the following meanings, unless otherwise clearly indicated by the context: 
    Accessory adult use. An establishment having less than ten (10) percent of its stock and trade in books, magazines, video tapes, adult materials and devices used for sexual stimulation or display films for sale, barter or rent or for viewing on premises by use of motion picture devices or any other coin operated means and other printed materials which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matters depicting or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specific anatomical areas", as defined below. 
    Adult amusement machine. Includes any amusement machine, as defined below, that is regularly used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specific anatomical areas", as defined below. 
    Adult book store. An establishment having ten (10) percent or more of its stock and trade in books, magazines, films, video tapes, adult materials and devices used for sexual stimulation or display, films for sale or rent or for viewing on premises by use of motion picture devices or any other coin operated means and other printed materials and other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specific anatomical areas", as defined below. 
    Adult cabaret. A public or private establishment which is licensed to serve food and/or alcoholic beverages, which features nude or partially nude dancers, go-go dancers, exotic dancers, strippers, male or female impersonators, or similar entertainers, or acts relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specific anatomical areas", as defined below, for observation by patrons therein and from which minors are excluded by virtue of age. 
    Adult entertainment. Any exhibition of any adult oriented motion pictures, live performance, display or dance of any type, which has as a significant or substantial portion of such performance any actual or simulated performance of "specified sexual activities" or "specific anatomical areas," as defined below. 
    Adult mini motion-picture theater. An enclosed building with a capacity of less than fifty (50) persons used regularly and routinely for presenting materials having as a dominant theme material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specific anatomical areas", as defined below, for observation by patrons therein and from which minors are excluded by virtue of age. 
    Adult motion-picture theater. An enclosed building with a capacity of fifty (50) or more persons used regularly and routinely for presenting motion picture films, video cassettes, cable television, or any other such visual media, distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specific anatomical areas", as defined below, for observation by patrons therein and from which minors are excluded by virtue of age. 
    Adult novelty business. An establishment having ten (10) percent or more of its stock in trade in adult materials, toys and other devices designed for sexual stimulation and which excludes minors by virtue of age. 
    Adult oriented business establishment. A public or private establishment which is customarily not open to the general public but only to one (1) or more classes of the public, thereby excluding any minor by reason of age, and whose principal activity includes but is not limited to one (1) or a combination of the following types of businesses: adult book store, adult motion picture theater and adult mini-motion picture theater, as well as any premises to which the public, patrons or members are invited or admitted and which are so physically arranged as to provide booths, cubicles, rooms, studios, compartments or stalls separate from the common areas of the premises for the purposes of viewing adult entertainment, any premises to which the public, patrons or members are invited or admitted wherein an "entertainer," as defined below, provides adult entertainment to a member of the public, a patron or a member, when such adult entertainment is held, conducted, operated or maintained for a profit, direct or indirect, regardless of how such premises are advertised or represented, but including, without limitation, adult entertainment studio, rap studio, exotic dance studio, encounter studio, sensitivity studio, modeling studio or any other term of like import, as well as adult cabaret, adult novelty business, adult personal service business. 
    Adult personal service establishments. An establishment, club, or business by whatever name designated which offers or advertises or is equipped or arranged so as to allow a person while clothed, nude or partially nude to provide personal services for a person of the same or other sex on an individual basis in an open or closed room and which excludes minors by virtue of age. Such services or activities include but are not limited to massages, body rubs, alcohol rubs, baths and other similar treatments, as well as modeling studios, body painting studios, tattoo parlors, body piercing studios, wrestling studios, and individual theatrical performances. It does not include the following specific uses and activities, performed by persons pursuant to, and in accordance with, licenses issued to such persons by the State of Connecticut: 
(1)  Treatment by a licensed chiropractor, a licensed osteopath, a Connecticut licensed masseur or masseuse, a licensed practical nurse or a registered professional nurse; 
(2)  Electrolysis treatment by a licensed operator of electrolysis equipment; 
(3)  Hospitals, nursing homes, medical clinics or medical offices; 
(4)  Barbershops, or beauty parlors which offer massage to the scalp, the face, the neck or shoulders only; 
(5)  Athletic facilities of an educational institution including alumni club, or of a philanthropic or charitable institution; and 
(6)  Health establishments including commercial and noncommercial clubs, which are equipped and arranged to provide instruction, services, or activities which improve or affect a person's physical condition by physical exercise or by massage. Physical exercise programs include aerobics, martial arts or the use of exercise equipment. 
    Adult video store. An establishment having ten (10) percent or more of its stock and trade in video tapes or films for barter, sale or rent or for viewing on premises by use of motion picture devices or any other coin operated means, and other printed materials and other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matters depicting or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specific anatomical areas", as defined below. 
    Amusement machine. Any machine which, upon the payment of a charge or upon the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate or disk, may be operated by the public for use as a game, entertainment or amusement, whether or not registering a score and whether or not electronically operated, and shall include but not be limited to such devices as pinball machines, skillball, mechanical grab machines, any and all air-propelled machines or games, pool tables, shooting games, any and all video games and all other games and operations similar thereto under whatever name they may be indicated, including video monitoring machines. 
    Employee. Any and all persons, including independent contractors, who work in or at or render any services directly related to the operation of an adult oriented business establishment. 
    Entertainer. Any person who engages in the performance of "adult entertainment" within an "adult oriented business establishment", as defined in this section, whether or not a fee is charged or accepted for such entertainment and whether or not such person is an employee or an independent contractor. 
    Inspector. An employee of the health district, or the zoning enforcement officer, or an employee of the building department, or a member of the Shelton Police Department, or the Shelton Fire Marshall, or an agent of any or all of such persons, who is designated to inspect premises regulated under this article, and to take the required actions authorized by this article in case of violations being found on such premises, and to require corrections of unsatisfactory conditions found on said premises. 
    Minor. Any person under the age of eighteen (18) years. 
    Operator. Any person, partnership or corporation operating, conducting or maintaining an adult oriented business establishment. 
    Partially nude. Having any part of "specified anatomical areas," as defined below, less than completely and opaquely covered. 
    Principal activity. A use accounting for ten (10) percent or more of a business' stock and trade, in display space, or floor space, or movie display time per month. 
    Specified sexual activities. 
(1)  Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; 
(2)  Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated; and 
(3)  Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breast. 
    Specified anatomical areas. 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, cleft of buttocks, and female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and 
(2)  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
(Ord. No. 718, § 3, 3-12-98; Ord. No. 820, § 3, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 9-124. - Operating requirements. 
(a)  No operator or employee of an adult oriented business establishment shall allow or permit any minor to loiter in any part of such establishment, including parking lots immediately adjacent to such establishment used by patrons of such adult oriented business establishment. 
(b)  Every adult oriented business establishment doing business in the city on and after ____________ shall be well lighted at all times and shall be physically arranged in such a manner that the entire interior portion of the booths, cubicles, rooms or stalls wherein adult entertainment is provided shall be clearly visible from the common areas of the premises. Visibility into such booths, cubicles, rooms or stalls shall not be blocked or obscured by doors, curtains, partitions, drapes, or any other obstruction whatsoever. It shall be unlawful to install enclosed booths, cubicles, rooms or stalls within adult oriented business establishments for the purpose of providing for adult entertainment. 
(c)  On and after ____________ , the operator of each adult oriented business establishment shall be responsible for and shall provide that any room or other area used for the purpose of viewing adult oriented pictures or other types of adult entertainment shall be well lighted and readily accessible at all times and shall be continuously open to view in its entirety. The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted to access at an illumination of not less than one (1) footcandle as measured at the floor level. It shall be the duty of the operator and its agents to ensure that the illumination described above is maintained at all times that any patron is present in the premises. 
(d)  Every act or omission committed by an employee constituting a violation of the provisions of this article shall be deemed the act or omission of the operator if such act or omission occurs either with the authorization, knowledge or approval of the operator, or as a result of the operator's negligent failure to supervise the employee's conduct, and the operator shall be subject to penalties for such act or omission in the same manner as if the operator had committed the act or caused the omission. 
(e)  All adult oriented business establishments shall be open to inspection at all reasonable times by the Shelton Police Department and/or any other inspector as defined in section 9-123, or such other persons as the aldermen may designate, for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the law. 
(Ord. No. 718, § 4, 3-12-98; Ord. No. 820, § 4, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 9-125. - Locations. 
    All adult oriented business establishments shall comply with the following locational requirements: 
(a)  No adult oriented business establishment shall be located within two hundred (200) feet of any residentially zoned area. 
(b)  No adult oriented business establishment shall be located within five hundred (500) feet of the property line of any public or private school or other educational facility serving individuals under the age of seventeen (17) years, day care center, library, park or other public building, playground, place of worship, or cemetery. 
(c)  No such adult oriented establishment shall be located within five hundred (500) feet of the property line of any lot containing a preexisting establishment which sells alcoholic beverages (other than beer and wine) for on-premises consumption, or within two hundred (200) feet of the property line of any lot containing a preexisting restaurant or other food service establishment which does not sell alcoholic beverages (other than beer and wine) for on-premises consumption. 
(d)  No such adult oriented establishment shall be located within one thousand (1,000) feet of another existing adult oriented business establishment. 
(e)  For purposes of compliance with these separation requirements, distances shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest principal entrance to the adult oriented establishment to the residential zone boundary or to the nearest boundary of the premises containing the uses specified in subsections (b), (c) and (d) above. 
(Ord. No. 718, § 5, 3-12-98; Ord. No. 820, § 5, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 9-126. - License requirement. 
    All adult oriented business establishments shall acquire and maintain a license from the City of Shelton in the following manner: 
(a)  The operator or proposed operator, as defined in section 9-123 above, of an adult oriented business establishment shall submit an application to the Shelton Chief of Police upon a form to be provided by the chief of police. Within forty-five (45) days after receipt of a completed application, the chief of police shall mail to the applicant a license or a notice of intent to deny. If he fails to do so, the license shall be deemed granted. The application shall be deemed complete when the chief of police has received the fees, all pertinent information required in section 9-127 below, photograph and fingerprints of the applicant and, in the case of a corporation or other business organization, photographs and fingerprints of all persons for whom information is required under section 9-127. 
(b)  The premises must be inspected by the Valley Regional Health District Department, Shelton Fire Department, Shelton Zoning Department and Shelton Building Department within thirty (30) days of receipt of the completed application. If the premises are in compliance with state and local health, fire and building codes and zoning regulations, a license shall be issued within forty-five (45) days of receipt of the completed application, unless the applicant is deemed unqualified. 
(c)  The applicant shall be unqualified if one (1) or more of the following is true: 
(1)  An applicant is under eighteen (18) years of age; 
(2)  An applicant is overdue in payment to the City of Shelton of taxes, fees, fines or penalties assessed against him/her in relation to an adult oriented business establishment; 
(3)  An applicant has failed to provide information reasonably necessary for issuance of the license or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form; 
(4)  An applicant has violated a provision of this article within two (2) years immediately preceding the application; 
(5)  The premises to be approved for the adult oriented business establishment have not been approved by the Valley Regional Health District Department, Shelton Fire Department, Shelton Zoning Department and Shelton Building Department as being in compliance with applicable laws, ordinances and regulations within thirty (30) days of the filing of the application; 
(6)  An applicant is in violation of the City of Shelton's Zoning Regulations; 
(7)  The license fee required by section 9-128 of this article has not been paid at the time the application was filed with the chief of police; 
(8)  An applicant has been employed in an adult oriented business establishment in a managerial capacity within the preceding twelve (12) months and has demonstrated an inability to operate or manage an adult oriented business establishment in a peaceful and law-abiding manner, thus necessitating action by law enforcement officers; and/or 
(9)  An applicant has been convicted of or has pleaded guilty or nolo contendere to a felony or a crime of moral turpitude; i.e., a racketeering offense, a prostitution offense, a drug offense or a sexual offense, as those offenses are defined in the Connecticut General Statutes, or for conduct in another jurisdiction which would constitute an offense set forth above if carried out in Connecticut within the previous sixty (60) months. 
(d)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (c)(9) above, an applicant shall not be deemed unqualified solely because of prior conviction of a crime; however, if the applicant has been convicted of a crime, the chief of police may consider the following when determining applicant qualification: 
(1)  The nature of the crime and its relationship to the granting of a license to operate an adult oriented business establishment; and/or 
(2)  Information pertaining to the degree of rehabilitation of the convicted person. 
(e)  If an applicant is deemed unqualified, said rejection shall be in writing and shall specifically state the evidence presented and the reason(s) for rejection and shall be sent to the applicant by registered mail, as further provided in this article. 
(f)  The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person(s) to whom it is granted, the expiration date and the address of the adult oriented business establishment. The license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the adult oriented business establishment so that it may be easily read at any time. 
(Ord. No. 718, § 6, 3-12-98; Ord. No. 820, § 6, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 9-127. - License application information required. 
    The application shall include the information called for in subsections (a) through (i) below. If the applicant is an enterprise, it shall designate an officer or partner as applicant. In such case, in addition to the information in subsections (a) through (i) below, the application shall state the date of formation of the organization and the information called for in subsections (b) through (f) below, with respect to each officer, director, general partner and all other persons with authority to participate directly and regularly in the management of the business, but such information need not be provided with respect to attorneys, accountants and other persons whose primary function is to provide professional assistance to the licensee. 
(a)  The name, business location, business mailing address and phone number of the adult oriented business establishment; 
(b)  The full true name and any other names, aliases or stage names used in the preceding five (5) years; 
(c)  Current residential mailing address and telephone number; 
(d)  Written proof of age in the form of a birth certificate, current driver's license with picture or other picture identification document issued by a governmental agency; 
(e)  The issuing jurisdiction and the effective dates of any license or permit relating to an adult oriented business establishment or adult service, whether any such license or permit has been revoked or suspended and, if so, the reason(s) therefore; 
(f)  All criminal charges, complaints or indictments in the preceding five (5) years which resulted in a conviction or a plea of guilty or nolo contendere; 
(g)  The name and address of the statutory agent or other agent authorized to receive service of process; 
(h)  The name(s) of the adult oriented business establishment manager(s) who will have actual supervisory authority over the operations of the business; and 
(i)  An accurate, drawn to scale but not necessarily professionally drawn, floor plan of the business premises clearly indicating the location of one (1) or more manager's stations. 
    The information provided pursuant to subsections (e) and (f) shall be supplemented in writing by certified mail to the chief of police within ten (10) working days of a change of circumstances which would render information originally submitted as false or incomplete. 
(Ord. No. 718, § 7, 3-12-98; Ord. No. 820, § 7, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 9-128. - Fees. 
    A license fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00) shall be submitted with the application for a license. If the application is denied, one-half (1/2) of the fee shall be returned. 
(Ord. No. 718, § 8, 3-12-98; Ord. No. 820, § 8, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 9-129. - Renewal of license. 
(a)  Each license shall expire one (1) year from the date of issuance and may be renewed annually by making an application, as provided in section 9-126 of this article. Application for renewal should be made at least thirty (30) days before the expiration date to allow city officials to review the application in a timely manner; however, when an application for renewal is made less than thirty (30) days before the expiration date, the expiration of the license will not be affected. 
(b)  An annual license renewal fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) shall be submitted with the renewal application. In addition to the renewal fee, a late penalty of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be assessed against the applicant who files for renewal less than thirty (30) days before the license expires. If the application for renewal is denied, one-half (1/2) of the total fees collected shall be returned. 
(c)  No adult oriented business establishment shall operate if its license expires by lapse of time. 
(Ord. No. 718, § 9, 3-12-98; Ord. No. 820, § 9, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 9-130. - Suspension. 
    The chief of police shall suspend a license for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days if he determines that an operator or an employee of an operator has violated any part of this article or violated any state statute regarding the subject establishment. 
(Ord. No. 718, § 10, 3-12-98; Ord. No. 820, § 10, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 9-131. - Revocation. 
(a)  The chief of police shall revoke a license if a cause of suspension in section 9-130 occurs and the license has been suspended within the preceding twelve (12) months. 
(b)  The chief of police shall revoke a license if he determines that: 
(1)  An operator gave false or misleading information in the material submitted during the application process; 
(2)  An operator or an employee of an operator has knowingly allowed possession, use or sale of controlled substances on the premises of the adult oriented business establishment; 
(3)  An operator or an employee of an operator has knowingly allowed or promoted prostitution of the premises of the adult oriented business establishment; 
(4)  An operator or an employee of an operator has knowingly operated the adult oriented business establishment during the period of time when the operator's license was suspended; 
(5)  An operator or an employee of an operator has knowingly allowed, or as a result of his/her negligent failure to supervise, has allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation or sexual contact to occur in or on the premises of the adult oriented business establishment; or 
(6)  An operator is convicted or pleads guilty or nolo contendere to an offense stated in section 9-126(c)(9), above. 
(c)  Any operator whose license is revoked shall not be eligible to receive a license for one (1) year from the date of revocation. 
(Ord. No. 718, § 11, 3-12-98; Ord. No. 820, § 11, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 9-132. - Transfer of license. 
(a)  An operator shall not transfer his/her license to another, nor shall an operator operate an adult oriented business establishment under the authority of a license at any place other than the address designated in the application. 
(b)  The transfer of a license or any interest in a license shall automatically and immediately revoke the license. 
(Ord. No. 718, § 12, 3-12-98; Ord. No. 820, § 12, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 9-133. - Appeal. 
    If the chief of police denies the issuance of a license or suspends or revokes a license, he shall, within ten (10) days of his decision, send to the applicant or operator at the address listed on the application by certified mail, return receipt requested, written notice of his decision and shall further specifically state the evidence presented, the reason for the decision and the right to an appeal. The aggrieved party may appeal the decision to the board of police commissioners within thirty (30) days of receipt of the notice. The board must render a decision within forty-five (45) days of receipt of the appeal. The aggrieved party may file an appeal from the board of police commissioners directly to the superior court for the judicial district of the City of Shelton within fifteen (15) days of issuance of notice of denial of the appeal by the board of police commissioners. The filing of an appeal stays the action of the city in suspending or revoking a license until the board of police commissioners or superior court makes a final decision. Nothing in this paragraph shall prevent the City from proceeding with an injunction action pursuant to section 9-134 hereof. 
(Ord. No. 718, § 13, 3-12-98; Ord. No. 820, § 13, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 9-134. - Penalties for offenses. 
(a)  Any person, partnership or corporation who is found to have violated this article shall be fined a definite sum not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each such violation. 
(b)  Each violation of this article shall be considered a separate offense, and any violation continuing for more than one (1) hour of time shall be considered a separate offense for each hour of violation. 
(c)  Nothing contained in this article shall be deemed to limit any remedy the city may have for the enforcement of this article. 
(Ord. No. 718, § 14, 3-12-98; Ord. No. 820, § 14, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 9-135. - Savings clause. 
    Should any court of competent jurisdiction declare any section, clause or provision of this article to be unconstitutional, such decision shall affect only such section, clause or provision so declared unconstitutional, and shall not affect any other section, clause or provision of this article. 
(Ord. No. 718, § 15, 3-12-98; Ord. No. 820, § 15, 4-12-07) 
Secs. 9-136-9-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - STREET VENDORS 

Sec. 9-141. - Applicability. 
    Except as excluded under the provisions of this article, it shall be unlawful for any person as defined herein, to solicit, peddle, or vend on an itinerant basis, as defined in this article, within the City of Shelton without first obtaining a permit or license, as the case may be, from the police department in compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 726, § 1, 6-11-98; Ord. No. 821, § 1, 4-12-07; Ord. No. 891, 11-12-15; Ord. No. 899, 6-28-16) 
Sec. 9-142. - Definitions. 
    The term "person," as used herein, means any individual, organization, trust, foundation, group, association, partnership, corporation, society, or any combination of them, whether principal or agent: 
(a)  Who shall go from place to place within the city soliciting orders for future delivery of any goods, wares, or merchandise and shall include the words "solicitor" and "canvasser"; or 
(b)  Who shall sell or barter or carry for sale or barter or expose any goods, wares, or merchandise either on foot or from any animal, vehicle or stand, on or near the streets of the city and shall include the words "street vendor" "peddler," or "hawker"; or 
(c)  Who shall engage in a temporary or transient business in the City either in one locality or in traveling from place to place, selling goods, wares or merchandise and who, for the purpose of carrying on such business, shall hire, lease, or occupy any building, structure, or land for the exhibition and sale of such goods, wares or merchandise in the city and shall include the words "itinerant vendor as same is defined by CT General Statutes." Temporary or transient business means and includes any exhibition and sale of goods, wares, or merchandise which is carried on in any tent, booth, building, or other structure, unless such place is legally open for business during usual business hours for a period of at least nine (9) months in each year. 
(Ord. No. 726, § 2, 6-11-98; Ord. No. 821, § 2, 4-12-07; Ord. No. 891, 11-12-15; Ord. No. 899, 6-28-16) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 891, adopted November 12, 2015, amended § 9-142 to read as set out herein. Previously § 9-142 was titled "Definition." 
Sec. 9-143. - Exemptions from the provisions of this article. 
    The provisions of this article, except as herein provided, shall not apply to: 
(a)  Sales made by traveling sales agents who sell and supply goods, wares and merchandise to established local businesses; or 
(b)  Sales, distribution, and delivery of milk, teas, coffees, groceries, meats, bakery goods and newspapers; or 
(c)  Sales of products raised on any farm or garden located within the city; or 
(d)  Sales by a local business in a location other than that of their usual business location, provided such business has been established within the city and remained open for at least twelve (12) months prior, and such off-location sales shall be limited to five (5) days in any calendar year; or 
(e)  Sales of goods, wares or merchandise on the grounds of any incorporated agricultural society during any annual fair held by such society or to any general sale, fair, auction or bazaar held or sponsored by an ecclesiastical society or church corporation, or occasional tag sales, yard sales or garage sales on premises devoted to residential use; or 
(f)  Sales by representatives of any nonprofit organization operated exclusively for religious, charitable, scientific, literacy, historic, educational, or for the benefit of law enforcement officers, firefighters, or other persons who protect the public safety and exempt from taxation pursuant to federal and state law, provided that such representative(s): 
(1)  Abides by section 9-151 of this article regarding vendor's territorial limits; 
(2)  Abides by state tax regulations governing sales by nonprofit organizations; and 
(3)  Registers with the police department and provides proof of the organization's tax-exempt status. A copy of such registration certificate, for which there shall be no charge, shall be retained and displayed conspicuously at the place where sales are conducted. 
(Ord. No. 726, § 3, 6-11-98; Ord. No. 821, § 3, 4-12-07; Ord. No. 891, 11-12-15; Ord. No. 899, 6-28-16) 
Sec. 9-144. - Veterans licensed without fee. 
    Pursuant to Section 21-30 of the Connecticut General Statutes, veterans shall be licensed under this article without paying a license fee, provided that the veteran: (1) Has resided in the state for two (2) years preceding the date of application for such license; (2) Served in time of war as defined by Section 27-103 of the Connecticut General Statutes; and (3) Was honorably discharged from military service. The veteran shall produce his/her certificate of honorable discharge from military service or a copy thereof certified by the city/town clerk from the records of the city/town where such certificate of discharge is recorded as provided in Section 12-93 of the Connecticut General Statutes, for inspection, together with a certificate from the city/town clerk that the applicant is a resident of the state. 
    Any person who makes a false representation for the purpose of obtaining a license under this section shall be fined not more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) and said license shall be automatically revoked. 
(Ord. No. 726, § 4, 6-11-98; Ord. No. 821, § 4, 4-12-07; Ord. No. 891, 11-12-15; Ord. No. 899, 6-28-16) 
Sec. 9-145. - License required; application; issuance; fee; term. 
(a)  Every person desiring to solicit, peddle or vend on an itinerant basis, as defined herein, in the City of Shelton other than those exempted herein, shall make application under oath to the chief of police for a license on a form provided by the chief of police. The application shall include but not be limited to the following information: 
(1)  Proof of compliance with all state requirements; 
(2)  Permanent home address and full local address of the applicant; 
(3)  A personal physical description, including the submission of two (2) photographs taken within thirty (30) days of the date of application; 
(4)  The applicant's fingerprints; 
(5)  Make, model or registration number of motor vehicle to be used by applicant and his state driver's license operator's number; 
(6)  Employer, if any; 
(7)  A detailed description of applicant's business and goods, wares and merchandise; 
(8)  The exact location where applicant's goods, wares, and merchandise will be sold; 
(9)  Whether, when, where and on what charges the applicant has ever been arrested, together with the disposition of such charges and whether the applicant has ever been convicted of any crime(s), misdemeanor(s), or violation(s) of any municipal ordinance; 
(10)  Whether, when, where, in what court, and by whom the applicant or his employer, partner, principal or contract associate has ever been sued in a civil action alleging fraud or misrepresentation in connection with or as a result of the applicant's activities in soliciting or in selling any goods, wares or merchandise, materials or services. 
(11)  Proof of a valid license from the department of consumer protection. 
A person shall, when qualified, be granted a license by the Chief of Police. 
(b)  Each license shall set forth a copy of the application upon which it was granted and shall not be transferable or give authority to sell goods, wares or merchandise in more than one place at the same time and shall be valid only for the person in whose name it is issued, unless sooner revoked or voided by reason of having been obtained, held or used in violation of this article and/or the Connecticut General Statutes. Each license issued in accordance with this article shall be valid for the calendar year in which it is issued, unless sooner revoked or voided under the provision of this article, and shall expire on the thirty-first day of December of that year. No license shall be issued for any fractional period of a year, nor shall any prorata payment be permitted. 
(c)  The fee for the issuance of a license pursuant to this article shall be the maximum allowed by Connecticut General Statutes. Each location, stand or vehicle to be used by a person shall be separately licensed, and the license fee chargeable hereunder shall be paid for each such location, stand or vehicle. All persons as defined under Section 9-142 herein shall be individually licensed hereunder, and shall pay the license fee chargeable whether acting as a principal or as an agent or employee of another. 
(d)  No one under seventeen (17) years of age shall be eligible for a license. 
(e)  No permit shall be issued under this article until after the expiration of fifteen (15) days from the date of filing of the application in order to permit the city to complete the necessary review and investigation of the application as required by Section 6, supra. 
(f)  Records of all persons issued licenses shall be made available by the chief of police in order that residents may obtain information concerning the person to which such licenses have been granted. 
(g)  The chief of police shall annually (in January) issue a written report to the board of aldermen and the mayor summarizing the number of permits issued for the prior calendar year, the amount of revenue realized and costs associated with the program. 
(Ord. No. 726, § 5, 6-11-98; Ord. No. 821, § 5, 4-12-07; Ord. No. 891, 11-12-15; Ord. No. 899, 6-28-16) 
Sec. 9-146. - Investigation of applicant; grounds for denial of license; revocation of license. 
(a)  Upon receipt of the application, the chief of police shall undertake and complete within two (2) weeks an investigation of the applicants business and moral character, and of the statements made in the application, as well as, in the case of street vendors as described in Section 2(b), the vendor's proposed location. 
(b)  The chief of police may deny the license application if, as a result of his investigation, the applicant's character or business responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory, or if the applicant has been convicted of any misdemeanor, crime, or violation of a municipal Ordinance within the previous (5) five years, or, in the case of a street vendor, it is determined that the location will result in a hazard to traffic or to the general public. The chief of police shall notify the applicant of the reasons for disapproval of the license application. 
(c)  The chief of police may revoke a license issued under this chapter after notice and hearing for any of the following causes: 
(1)  Fraud, misrepresentation, omission, or false statement contained in the license application; 
(2)  Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement made by the person in the course of carrying on his business as a solicitor, canvasser, street vendor, peddler, or hawker; 
(3)  Any violation of this article; 
(4)  Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude; or 
(5)  Conducting the business of peddling, soliciting, or canvassing in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety, or general welfare of the public. 
(d)  Persons whose licenses have been revoked under this article may not reapply for a license within one year of the date of revocation. 
(Ord. No. 726, § 6, 6-11-98; Ord. No. 821, § 6, 4-12-07; Ord. No. 891, 11-12-15; Ord. No. 899, 6-28-16) 
Sec. 9-147. - State tax permit required. 
(a)  Each person, upon applying for a license, must show acceptable proof to the chief of police of having been issued a current State of Connecticut sales and use tax permit pursuant to Section 12-409 of the Connecticut General Statues, or must provide a tax exemption permit. 
(b)  Each person licensed under this article shall be required to: 
(1)  Maintain the validity of their sales and use tax permit for the duration of their license; 
(2)  Collect and turn in all applicable sales taxes to the State of Connecticut; and 
(3)  Conspicuously display their sales tax permit. 
(Ord. No. 726, § 7, 6-11-98; Ord. No. 821, § 7, 4-12-07; Ord. No. 891, 11-12-15; Ord. No. 899, 6-28-16) 
Sec. 9-148. - Insurance; bond; hold harmless agreement required. 
(a)  Before any license shall be issued, the applicant shall file with the chief of police a certificate of insurance naming the City of Shelton as an additional insured party and certificate holder on a liability policy having a minimum of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) combined single limit bodily injury and property damage liability, along with a copy of said policy. Such insurance shall be in force for the duration of the license hereunder covering the activity for which the license is being issued. Said certificate shall also include a notification of cancellation clause which shall provide that the issuing company will mail written notice to the certificate holder within ten (10) days of the proposed cancellation date of the endorsed insurance policy. Revocation, expiration or cancellation of said insurance shall automatically render a license granted under this article null and void. 
(b)  Before any license shall be issued under this article, the applicant shall file with the city/town clerk a bond in the sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), executed by the applicant, as principal, and two (2) sureties upon which service of process may be made in the State of Connecticut. Said bond is to be approved by the corporation counsel conditioned that the applicant shall comply fully with all the provisions of the ordinances of the City of Shelton and the statutes of the State of Connecticut regulating and concerning the sale of goods, wares, and merchandise, and will pay all judgments rendered against said licensee for any violation thereof. 
(c)  It is further required that any person applying for a license under the provisions of this article sign a hold harmless agreement indemnifying the City of Shelton, its officers, agents, and employees, from any liability arising out of or in the course of such business or the granting of license for same. 
(d)  Those persons exempted under Section 3 and those granted special event licenses under Section 10 are exempt from the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 726, § 8, 6-11-98; Ord. No. 821, § 8, 4-12-07; Ord. No. 891, 11-12-15; Ord. No. 899, 6-28-16) 
Sec. 9-149. - Visibility of license. 
(a)  Each person granted a license in accordance with the provisions of this article shall conspicuously exhibit the license at all times while selling within the city limits. 
(b)  Each licensee shall be issued a badge when granted a license, bearing a license number, the vendor's photo and name. Such badge shall be worn conspicuously on the person at all times. 
(Ord. No. 726, § 9, 6-11-98; Ord. No. 821, § 9, 4-12-07; Ord. No. 891, 11-12-15; Ord. No. 899, 6-28-16) 
Sec. 9-150. - Special event license. 
(a)  A special event license may be issued to persons as defined herein engaged in the sale of various products at parades, sidewalk sales, and other special events, as recognized and approved by the city. Application for said license shall be submitted to the Chief of Police along with a one hundred dollar ($100.00) fee. Said license shall be displayed conspicuously at all times. All sales under this special event license will be limited only to the hours of the special event and shall be conducted where the special event is being held. 
(b)  At the discretion of the Board of Aldermen, the application fee may be waived or reduced to a nominal fee and the licensing procedure under this chapter may be waived or curtailed in order to promote a special event, which the Board of Aldermen finds will benefit the entire community. In exercising its discretion, the Board of Aldermen shall consider such factors as the cultural, educational, artistic, humanistic, charitable, scientific, literary, historic, and other benefits to the community of the special event. The sponsor of the special event shall maintain insurance coverage as required under Section 9-148 even if said sponsor is exempt under the provisions of section 9-143. The sponsor shall be required to request of the Board of Aldermen a designation as a "Special Event" and shall comply with any terms and conditions set forth by the Board of Aldermen. 
(Ord. No. 726, § 10, 6-11-98; Ord. No. 821, § 10, 4-12-07; Ord. No. 891, 11-12-15; Ord. No. 899, 6-28-16) 
Sec. 9-151. - Territorial limits/prohibitions. 
    (The following shall not apply to Special Events set forth in Sec. 9-150): 
(a)  No street vendor shall operate: 
(1)  In a residential zone; or except with the permission of the Chief of Police 
(2)  Within one thousand (1,000) feet of another mercantile establishment offering the same or similar goods, wares or merchandise for sale; or 
(3)  Within one thousand (1,000) feet of any public or private school, municipal building, or municipal park; or except with the permission of the Chief of Police 
(4)  Within one hundred (100) feet of driveways, bus stops, or crosswalks; or 
(5)  Within five hundred (500) feet of any intersections; or 
(6)  Within one hundred (100) feet of any other street vendor; or 
(7)  In any metered parking area or no-parking zone; or 
(8)  Directly upon a street, sidewalk, or public place; or 
(9)  In any area, where the operation will be deemed by the chief of police, any police officer or state trooper to endanger or inconvenience the general public, including but not limited to sidewalk and roadside areas; or 
(10)  In a manner that obstructs or prevents the free and convenient use of any street or sidewalk by pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
(b)  No street vendor, peddler, or solicitor shall have an exclusive right to any location in or near the public streets, nor shall they be permitted a stationary location. 
(c)  No street vendor shall set up a street selling operation without the written permission of the owner of the property on which the operation is located. Such document must be conspicuously displayed at all times. 
(d)  No street vendors shall operate on the following streets or in the following restricted areas 
(e)  No person or street vendor shall sell or offer for sale upon a public street, sidewalk, or other public place any spray string, stink bomb, or other similar article. 
(Ord. No. 726, § 11, 6-11-98; Ord. No. 821, § 11, 4-12-07; Ord. No. 891, 11-12-15; Ord. No. 899, 6-28-16) 
Sec. 9-152. - Hold harmless. 
    If any provision of this article is held invalid, the balance of the provision shall not be affected. 
(Ord. No. 726, § 12, 6-11-98; Ord. No. 821, § 12, 4-12-07; Ord. No. 891, 11-12-15; Ord. No. 899, 6-28-16) 
Chapter 10 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Loitering-Generally. 
(a)  Definitions. As used in this section: 
    Loitering shall mean remaining idle in essentially one (1) location and shall include the concept of spending time idly; to be dilatory; to linger; to stay; to saunter; to delay; to stand around and shall also include the colloquial expression "hanging around." 
    Public place shall mean any place to which the general public has access and a right to resort for business, entertainment, or other lawful purpose, but does not necessarily mean a place devoted solely to the uses of the public, but does include parking garages and similar municipal facilities. It shall also include the front or immediate area of any store, shop, restaurant, tavern or other place of business and also public grounds, areas or parks. 
(b)  Prohibited acts. It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter, loaf, wander, stand or remain idle either alone or in consort with others in a public place in such manner so as to: 
(1)  Obstruct any public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other public place or building by hindering or impeding or tending to hinder or impede the free and uninterrupted passage of vehicles, traffic or pedestrians. 
(2)  Commit in or upon any public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other public place or building any act or thing which is an obstruction or interference to the free and uninterrupted use of property or with any business lawfully conducted by anyone in or upon or facing or fronting on any such public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other public place or building, all of which prevents the free and uninterrupted ingress, egress, and regress, therein, thereon and thereto. 
(c)  Police order to disperse; violation. When any person causes or commits any of the conditions enumerated in subsection (b) herein, a police officer or any law enforcement officer shall order that person to stop causing or committing such conditions and to move on or disperse. Any person who fails or refuses to obey such orders shall be guilty of a violation of the section. 
(d)  Penalty. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section shall be subject to punishment as provided in sections 1-11 of this Code. 
State Law reference- Authority of city to regulate loitering in public places, G.S. § 7-148(c)(7)(F)(i). 
Sec. 10-2. - Same-On public-owned property and utilities. 
(a)  No person shall trespass or loiter on any of the properties enumerated in subsection (b) of this section, when such properties are posted with signs which have been approved by the chief of police as being sufficiently well designed and located as to apprise the public of the fact that the property is so restricted. 
(b)  The following properties shall be posted as provided in subsection (a) of this section: 
(1)  Every reservoir, dam, pumping station, aqueduct, main canal or pipeline of a public water system; 
(2)  Every reservoir, dam, generating plant, receiving station, distributing station and transmission line of a company or agency furnishing electrical energy; 
(3)  Every gas generating plant, compressor plant, gas holder, gas tank, and gas main used for the production, storage and distribution of gas; 
(4)  Every plant or vital part thereof, including sewer mains, settling tanks and outfall sewers used for sewage disposal purposes; 
(5)  Every plant or vital part thereof or other principal property essential to rendering telephone or telegraph service; 
(6)  The nonpublic areas, as determined by the owners or operators, of radio and television broadcasting central plants or stations; 
(7)  Every railroad bridge or tunnel. 
Sec. 10-3. - Same-Exceptions. 
    Nothing in section 10-1 or 10-2 shall be construed to prohibit the entry onto restricted property by any law enforcement officer as described in section 10-2, in the normal course of his duties. Nothing in this article shall be construed to interfere with any lawful activities of any labor union or other body of individuals in peacefully disseminating information to its members, to nonmembers or to the public generally. 
Cross reference- Loitering in parks after dark prohibited, § 11-2. 
Sec. 10-4. - Use of public buildings and areas around public buildings. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to be present in any public area at a time where such presence is prohibited by regulation adopted by the board, commission or official or other authority in control of or other authority in control of or responsible therefor, provided that such time prohibition is posted in such area in a reasonable manner so as to give reasonable notice to such person. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to participate in or engage in any activity in a public building or a public area where such activity is prohibited by regulation adopted by the board, commission, official or other authority in control thereof or responsible therefor, provided that notice of the prohibited activity is posted in such area in a reasonable manner so as to give reasonable notice of such prohibition to such person. 
(c)  Any person violating this section shall be fined not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(Ord. No. 683, 2-9-95) 
Secs. 10-5-10-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - POSSESSION AND CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR BY MINORS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 775, adopted April 8, 2004, enacted provisions which are being treated as superceding those of Ord. No. 571, adopted Nov. 9, 1989, which had been codified as §§ 10-51-10-54. 
Cross reference- Drug and alcohol commission, § 2-81 et seq. 

Sec. 10-51. - Findings. 
(1)  The possession and consumption of alcoholic liquor by minors is a matter of a growing local, regional, and national concern. 
(2)  Consumption of alcoholic liquor by minors unsupervised by parental authority creates a health and safety risk not only to our children but also to the general public. 
(3)  The City of Shelton seeks to protect, preserve, and promote the health, safety, welfare and quality of life of its residents by regulating the possession of alcohol by minors. 
(Ord. No. 775, § 1, 4-8-04; Ord. No. 786, § 1, 10-14-04) 
Sec. 10-52. - Purpose. 
    [The purpose of this article is] to regulate the possession of alcoholic beverages by minors on both public and private property. 
(Ord. No. 775, § 2, 4-8-04; Ord. No. 786, § 2, 10-14-04) 
Sec. 10-53. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
    Alcohol or alcoholic liquor means any spirits, wine, beer, ale or other liquid containing more than one-half (1/2) of one (1) percent of alcohol by volume, which is fit for beverage purposes, or such liquid as is defined as alcohol or alcoholic beverage in section 30-1 of the Connecticut General Statutes as amended. 
    Alternate education program means that program conducted by the Shelton Police Department providing at least two (2) hours of alcohol education and requiring a minimum of four (4) hours of community service. 
    Host to organize a gathering of two (2) or more persons, or to allow the premises under one's control to be used with one's knowledge, for a gathering of two (2) or more persons for personal, social, or business interaction. 
    Minor means any person under twenty-one (21) years of age. 
    Person any individual, firm, partnership, association, syndicate, company, trust, corporation, limited liability company, municipality, agency, or political or administrative subdivision of the state or other legal entity of any kind. 
    Possess means to have physical possession or otherwise to exercise dominion or control over tangible property (section 53a-3 of the Penal Code of the General Statutes of Connecticut). 
    Possession means within the custody, control or dominion of a minor. 
(Ord. No. 775, § 3, 4-8-04; Ord. No. 786, § 3, 10-14-04; Ord. No. 811, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 10-54. - Possession. 
    No minor within the City of Shelton shall have any alcoholic liquor in either an opened or sealed container, in his or her possession unless accompanied by his or her parent or guardian. 
(Ord. No. 775, § 4, 4-8-04; Ord. No. 786, § 4, 10-14-04; Ord. No. 811, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 10-55. - Hosting events. 
    No person shall host an event or gathering at which alcohol will be consumed by or dispensed to any minor unless said minor is accompanied by or in the presence of his or her parent, guardian, or spouse who has attained the age of twenty-one (21) years. This restriction shall apply to any event or gathering within the City of Shelton, whether conducted on public or private property. 
(Ord. No. 775, § 5, 4-8-04; Ord. No. 786, § 5, 10-14-04) 
Sec. 10-56. - Exceptions. 
    The provisions of sections 10-54 and 10-55 of this article shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  A minor who possesses alcoholic liquor on the order of a practicing physician or any person who sells, ships, delivers or gives any alcoholic liquors to a minor on the order of a practicing physician 
(2)  A person over the age of eighteen (18) who is an employee or permit holder under chapter 545 of the Connecticut General Statutes and who possesses alcoholic liquor in the course of such person's employment or business or in the course of a sale, shipment, or delivery of alcoholic liquor made to a person over age eighteen (18) who is an employee or permit holder under chapter 545 of the Connecticut General Statutes and where such sale, shipment, or delivery is made in the course of such person's employment or business. 
(3)  Possession, consumption, or use of alcoholic liquor at legally protected religious observances supervised by or in the presence of his or her parent, legal guardian, or spouse, who has attained the age of twenty-one (21) years. 
(Ord. No. 775, § 6, 4-8-04; Ord. No. 786, § 6, 10-14-04; Ord. No. 811, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 10-57. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any minor who knowingly violates the provisions of this ordinance shall be subject to a fine of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each offense. 
(b)  Any person under age twenty-one (21) who commits a first offense prohibited by this ordinance and who regularly attends secondary school shall be eligible for completion of the program said individual shall be refunded the full amount of the fine paid under subsection (a). 
(Ord. No. 775, § 7, 4-8-04; Ord. No. 786, § 7, 10-14-04; Ord. No. 811, 4-12-07) 
Secs. 10-58-10-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DOGS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Sections A-E of Ordinance No. 841, adopted July 9, 2009, not being specifically amendatory in nature, are being treated as superseding Ord. No. 761, which had been codified as §§ 10-61-10-64. 

Sec. 10-61. - Definitions. 
    Owner. Any person or other legal entity owning a dog or, in the case of a person under the age of eighteen (18), the person's parent or legal guardian. 
    Severe injury. Any physical injury to a human being, domestic pets and livestock that results in muscle tears or disfiguring lacerations or requires multiple sutures or corrective or cosmetic surgery. 
(Ord. No. 841, § A, 7-9-09) 
Sec. 10-62. - Vicious dogs. 
(a)  Nuisance. Any dog which has been declared vicious by the animal control officer shall be deemed a nuisance and shall be regulated and controlled in accord with this article. This article shall apply to any dog that enters the territorial jurisdiction of the City of Shelton, regardless of the residence of the dog or its owner or keeper. 
(b)  Determination of viciousness. 
(1)  If the animal control officer has reasonable cause to believe that a dog is vicious, the animal control officer shall conduct an investigation into the conduct and propensities of the dog. The animal control officer may consider, without limitation, provocation, the severity of the attack or injury to a person, domestic animal, pets or livestock previous aggressive history of the dog, observable behavior of the dog, the site and circumstances of the incident and statements from interested parties. 
(2)  The animal control officer shall declare a dog to be vicious only if any one (1) of the following criteria is met: 
a.  Any dog which has severely injured or killed a domestic animal, pets, or livestock while off its owner's or keeper's property. 
b.  Any dog which inflicts severe injury in an attack upon a human being, another dog or domestic animal, or livestock without provocation on any public or private property. 
c.  Any dog which has been used primarily or in part for the purpose of dog fighting, or any dog trained for dog fighting and continues to exhibit signs of aggressiveness. 
(3)  The animal control officer shall not declare a dog to be vicious if any of the following criteria is met: 
a.  If any injury or damage is sustained by a person who, at the time such injury or damage was sustained, was committing a willful trespass or other tort upon premises occupied by the owner or keeper of the dog, or such person was teasing, tormenting, abusing or assaulting the dog or was committing or attempting to commit a crime. 
b.  If any injury or damage was sustained by a domestic animal which, at the time such injury or damage was sustained, was teasing, tormenting, assaulting or invading the premises occupied by the owner or keeper of the dog. 
c.  If the dog was protecting or defending the premises occupied by the owner or keeper of the dog, or was protecting or defending a human being within the immediate vicinity of the dog from an attack or assault. 
(c)  Regulation and control of vicious dogs. If the animal control officer determines a dog to be vicious, the animal control officer may issue any order concerning the restraint or disposition of such dog in order to protect the public health and safety of the inhabitants of the city. 
(d)  Decision and notice. 
(1)  If the animal control officer determines a dog to be vicious, the animal control officer shall notify the dog owner or keeper of any orders or special conditions for the regulation and control of the dog. Initial notification may be provided verbally. Within five (5) days after declaring a dog vicious, the animal control officer shall notify the dog owner or keeper, in writing, of the determination and of any orders of the animal control officer regarding disposition of the dog. Such written notice shall be given either by certified mail, or by personal delivery through the animal control officer or his/her delegate. 
(2)  The animal control officer shall immediately impound the dog until the orders, special restrictions or conditions are satisfied. The dog owner or keeper shall pay all costs of impoundment. In the event the owner or keeper of the dog refuses to surrender the dog for impoundment, the animal control officer or a police officer may obtain a search warrant and seize the dog upon execution of the warrant. 
(e)  Appeals. 
(1)  This article shall not limit or exclude any enforcement powers or authority that the animal control officer has under the Connecticut General Statutes. If any orders of the animal control officer are issued and based upon a finding that a dog has bitten a human being, domestic pets and livestock then any appeal of such orders shall be taken pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes, Section 22-358, as the same may be amended from time to time. 
(2)  If any orders of the animal control officer are issued and based upon a finding of viciousness not involving a bite upon a human being, domestic pets and livestock then the determination and orders of the animal control officer may be appealed to the animal control board (hereinafter referred to as the "board") by the owner or keeper of the dog within fifteen (15) days of receiving written notice of the determination and orders. 
The determination and orders of the animal control officer shall remain in effect pending the appeal. The board shall convene a hearing for the purpose of determining, de novo, whether the dog in question should be declared vicious. 
The board shall notify the owner or keeper of the dog by certified mail, or by personal delivery through the animal control officer or his/her delegate that a hearing will be held, at which time the owner or keeper may have the opportunity to present evidence as to why the dog should not be declared vicious. The hearing shall be held promptly, within no fewer than five (5) nor more than ten (10) days, excluding holidays, after service of notice upon owner or keeper of the dog. 
The board shall conduct the hearing in the order and form and with such methods of proof as the board deems fair and appropriate. The hearing shall be open to the public. The board shall consider the factors set forth in subsection (b), determination of viciousness. If the board determines the dog to be vicious, the board may issue, affirm or modify any orders of the animal control officer. 
(3)  Within five (5) days after declaring a dog vicious, the board shall notify the dog owner or keeper, in writing, of the determination and of any orders regarding disposition of the dog, or the special restrictions and conditions for keeping the dog. Such written notice shall be through certified mail or by personal delivery through the board or his/her delegate. 
(4)  The board shall consist of a licensed veterinarian, the chief of police or his/her delegate and a person trained and experienced in dog behavior and temperament evaluation. 
(5)  Appointments to the board shall be made by the mayor and approved by the board of aldermen. 
(f)  Violations and penalties. Any person violating any order of the animal control officer relating to any vicious dog shall be fined two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each offense, and, in addition, the animal control officer may immediately impound the vicious dog and each day that said person remains in violation shall be a separate violation. The impounded dog shall not be released until the dog owner or keeper complies with all orders of the animal control officer or the board. The dog owner or keeper shall pay all costs of impoundment. The penalties set forth herein shall not be in lieu of or limit the authority of the animal control officer to take other action authorized by the State of Connecticut. 
(g)  Exceptions. The provisions of this article shall not apply to dogs utilized by law enforcement officers in the performance of their duties. 
(Ord. No. 841, § B, 7-9-09) 
Sec. 10-63. - Annoyance by dogs on highways. 
    In addition to the penalties described in Connecticut General Statutes Section 22-362, any person owning or having the custody of any dog which habitually goes out on any highway and growls, bites, or snaps at, or otherwise annoys, any person or domestic animal lawfully using such highway or chases or interferes with any motor vehicle so using such highway shall be fined two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each violation, with each incident constituting a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 841, § C, 7-9-09) 
Sec. 10-64. - Disturbance. 
    In addition to the penalties described in Connecticut General Statutes Section 22-363, no person shall own or harbor a dog or dogs which is or are a nuisance by reason of excessive barking, or other disturbance, or, by such barking or other disturbance, is or are a source of annoyance to any sick person residing in the immediate vicinity. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be fined two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each violation, with each incident constituting a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 841, § D, 7-9-09) 
Sec. 10-65. - Dogs roaming at large. 
    In addition to the penalties described in Connecticut General Statutes Section 22-364, no owner or keeper of any dog shall allow such dog to roam at large upon the land of another and not "under the control of" the owner or keeper or the agent of the owner or keeper, nor allow such dog to roam at large on any public highway and "not under the control of" such owner or keeper or his agent, provided, nothing in this subsection shall be construed to limit or prohibit the use of hunting dogs during the open hunting or training season. The unauthorized presence of any dog on the land of any person other than the owner or keeper of such dog or on any portion of a public highway when such dog is not "under the control of" such owner or keeper, shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of the provisions of this subsection. "Under the control of" as used above requires the use of a leash. Violation of any provision of this subsection shall result in a fine of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each violation, with each incident constituting a separate violation. 
    In addition to the foregoing monetary penalties, the city may pursue a court order for injunctive relief and request of the court, inter alia, an order concerning the restraint or disposal of such dog or dogs as may be deemed necessary. 
(Ord. No. 841, § E, 7-9-09) 
Secs. 10-66-10-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - GRAFFITI 

Sec. 10-71. - Definitions. 
    Graffiti means any unauthorized inscription, word, figure, painting or other defacement that is written, marked, etched, scratched, sprayed, drawn, painted or engraved on or otherwise affixed to any surface of public or private property by any graffiti implement, to the extent that the graffiti was not authorized in advance by the owner or occupant of the property, or, despite advance authorization, is otherwise deemed a public nuisance. 
    Graffiti implement means an aerosol paint container, a broad-tipped marker, gum label, paint stick or graffiti stick, etching equipment, brush or any other device capable of scarring or leaving a visible mark on any natural or manmade surface. 
(Ord. No. 840, § A, 3-12-09) 
Sec. 10-72. - Prohibited acts. 
(1)  Defacement. It shall be unlawful for any person to apply graffiti to any natural or manmade surface on any city-owned property or, without the permission of the owner or occupant, on any non-city-owned property. 
(2)  Possession of graffiti implements. 
(a)  By minors at or near school facilities. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to possess any graffiti implement while on any school property, grounds, facilities, buildings, or structures, or in areas immediately adjacent to those specific locations upon public property, or upon private property without the prior written consent of the owner or occupant of such private property. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the possession of broad-tipped markers by a minor attending or traveling to or from a school at which the minor is enrolled if the minor is participating in a class at the school that formally requires the possession of broad-tipped markers. 
(b)  In designated public places. It shall be unlawful for any person to possess any graffiti implement while in or upon any public facility, park, playground, recreational facility, or other public building or structure owned or operated by the city or while in or within fifty (50) feet of an underpass, bridge abutment, storm drain or similar types of infrastructure unless otherwise authorized by the city. 
(Ord. No. 840, § B, 3-12-09) 
Sec. 10-73. - Enforcement. 
(a)  [Responsibility to remove.] Any person applying graffiti on public or private property shall have the duty to remove the graffiti within twenty-four (24) hours' notice by the city or by the owner of the property involved. The City of Shelton Police Department shall be notified and such removal shall be accomplished in the manner directed by the City of Shelton Police Department. Failure to comply with any such demand shall constitute an additional violation of this article. 
(b)  Property owner responsibility. If graffiti is not removed by the perpetrator according to the section above, graffiti shall be removed by the owner or the person who has primary responsibility for control of property or for the repair or maintenance of property in the city. The City of Shelton Police Department shall provide notice to the owner or the person in control of the property which notice shall contain the following, to wit: 
(1)  The street address and legal description of the property sufficient for identification of the property; 
(2)  A statement that the property is a potential graffiti nuisance property with a concise description of the conditions leading to the finding; 
(3)  A statement that the graffiti must be removed with ten (10) days after receipt of the notice and that if the graffiti is not abated within that time the city will declare the property to be a public nuisance and the city shall have the right to remove the public nuisance at the cost and expense of the property owner. The City of Shelton Police Department may extend the period for an additional ten-day period for weather conditions. If the graffiti is not removed within ten (10) days after service by first class mail of notice to the owner or the person in control, said owner or person in control shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(c)  Right of city to remove. 
(1)  Use of public funds. Whenever the city becomes aware or is notified and determines that graffiti is located on publicly or privately owned property viewable from a public or quasi-public place, the city shall be authorized to use public funds for the removal of the graffiti, or for the painting or repairing of the graffiti, but shall not authorize or undertake to provide for the painting or repair of any more extensive an area than that where the graffiti is located. 
(2)  Right of entry on private property. Prior to entering upon private property or property owned by a public entity other than the city for the purpose of graffiti removal, the city shall attempt to secure the consent of the property owner or responsible party and a release of the city from liability for property damage or personal injury. If the property owner or responsible party fails to remove the offending graffiti within the time specified by this article, or if the city has requested consent to remove or paint over the offending graffiti and the property owner or responsible party has refused consent for entry on terms acceptable to the city and consistent with the terms of this section, the city shall commence abatement and cost recovery proceedings for the graffiti removal. 
(Ord. No. 840, § C, 3-12-09) 
Sec. 10-74. - Prohibition of spray paint to minors. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person other than a parent or legal guardian, within the city limits of Shelton, to sell, exchange, give, loan or otherwise furnish any aerosol paint container, broad-tipped marker or paint stick, or spray paint cans to any individual under the age of eighteen (18) years of age without the written consent of the parent or guardian of the person. Merchants shall be required to view photo identification from the purchaser of proof of age. The illegal sale of spray paint cans to minors, as well as the above-mentioned crimes, shall be investigated, catalogued and enforced by the chief of police and/or his designee and shall be a violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 840, § D, 3-12-09) 
Sec. 10-75. - Penalties. 
    Any person violating this article shall be punished by a fine of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). 
    In addition to any punishment specified in this section, the violator shall make restitution to the victim for damages or loss caused directly or indirectly by the violator's offense in the amount or manner determined by the court. 
(Ord. No. 840, § E, 3-12-09) 
Chapter 11 - PARKS, RECREATION AND OPEN SPACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Parks and recreation commission, § 5.2.1. 
Cross reference- Planning, Ch. 12; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 14; zoning, App. A. 
State Law reference- Authority to provide for entertainment, amusements, concerts, celebrations and cultural activities, G.S. § 7-148(c)(4)(B); authority to establish, maintain, etc., parks, playgrounds, playfields, etc., G.S. § 7-148(c)(6)(A)(i). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 11-1. - Possession, use of intoxicating beverages prohibited; exception. 
(a)  The possession and use of intoxicating beverages are prohibited in any park or on city property. However, waivers of this prohibition may be granted for good and sufficient reason. 
(b)  If a waiver is requested, a waiver application describing the intended activity/use shall be reviewed by the police chief and the fire marshal who shall provide their recommendations. All activity and use requested in the waiver shall be in adherence with any and all state and local law. Said activity and waiver shall be subject to final approval by the mayor or his/her designee. 
(c)  Any person in violation of this ordinance shall be subject to a fine of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). 
(Ord. No. 447, 9-8-83; Ord. No. 835, 2-14-08; Ord. No. 837, 9-11-08) 
State Law reference- Liquor permits, G.S. §§ 30-14-30-62a; classes of liquor permits, G.S. § 30-15; liquor manufacturer's permit, G.S. § 30-16; liquor wholesaler's permit, G.S. § 30-17; hotel liquor permits, G.S. § 30-21; restaurant liquor permits, G.S. § 30-22; tavern permits, G.S. § 30-26; druggist liquor permit, G.S. § 30-36; storage of liquor; approval required, G.S. § 30-38; application for liquor permit, G.S. § 30-39; liquor permit fees, G.S. § 30-41; granting and denial of liquor permits, G.S. § 30-43; permit to specify location and revocability, G.S. § 30-52; revocation of liquor permit, G.S. §§ 30-55-30-59; prohibition against unauthorized sale of liquor, G.S. § 30-74; sales to minors, intoxicated persons and drunkards, G.S. § 30-86; hours and days of closing, G.S. § 30-91. 
Sec. 11-2. - Loitering prohibited after dark. 
(a)  No person shall loiter in any park of the city between the hours of dusk to dawn. 
(b)  Any person desiring to use any park during the hours specified in subsection (a) shall first obtain written permission from the park commissioner. Such permit shall not be refused except for cause, which cause shall be stated in writing to the applicant. 
(c)  Any person found to be in violation of this section shall be fined in accordance with section 1-11. 
(Ord. No. 138, §§ (c)-(e), 10-16-72) 
Cross reference- Loitering generally, § 10-1. 
Secs. 11-3-11-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- Parks and recreation commission, § 5.2.1. 
Cross reference- Boards, commissions and committees, § 2-41 et seq. 

Secs. 11-21-11-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BOATS AND BOATING 

Sec. 11-36. - Boat launching ramp/picnic area, permit fee, non-fee parking. 
    Resident boat owners of the city shall be permitted access to and use of the boat launching ramp and the picnic area which are located east of the Ted Cowey Little League field and bordering the Housatonic River. Any boat owners wishing to use the boat launching ramp and picnic area must register and obtain a permit from the city/town clerk. The annual fee charged shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) for Shelton residents and one hundred dollars ($100.00) for all others. The permit will be in the form of a decal sticker which is to be prominently affixed on the permittee's vehicle or boat trailer so as to be easily visible on any vehicle or boat trailer entering the area. Residents wishing to use the picnic area only, shall be able to do so at no cost. 
(Ord. No. 188, 9-10-73; Ord. No. 515, 3-12-87; Ord. No. 689, 6-8-95; Ord. No. 778, 5-13-04) 
Sec. 11-37. - Nonresident usage; fees. 
(a)  Nonresident boaters will be permitted the use of the boat launching ramp and picnic area after having secured a permit from the city/town clerk for which an annual fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) will be charged. 
(b)  The fee rates established in subsection (a) and section 11-36 are minimum amounts which cannot be decreased except by revision of this article. 
(c)  Increases in the fee rates may be recommended by the parks and recreation commission and by revision of this article. 
(Ord. No. 188, 9-10-73; Ord. No. 515, 3-12-87; Ord. No. 689, 6-8-95; Ord. No. 867, 4-11-13) 
Sec. 11-38. - Same-Parks and recreation commission to control. 
    The parks and recreation commission shall have jurisdiction of the boat launching ramp and picnic area. Its responsibilities shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, the establishment of permitted uses in the area, creation of rules and regulations governing permitted uses and, continued improvement of the boat launching ramp and picnic area. 
(Ord. No. 188, 9-10-73; Ord. No. 515, 3-12-87; Ord. No. 689, 6-8-95) 
Sec. 11-39. - Hours of operation; penalty. 
    The boat launching ramp and picnic area shall be opened at dawn and closed at dusk. The responsibilities for this action shall rest with the police department. In addition, the police department shall enforce the requirement for users to have the proper permit for use of the boat launching ramp. Use of the boat launching ramp without a permit shall be a violation of this article and subject the offender to punishment in accordance with section 1-11. 
(Ord. No. 188, 9-10-73; Ord. No. 515, 3-12-87; Ord. No. 689, 6-8-95) 
Secs. 11-40-11-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OPEN SPACES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Open space program and trust account, § 2-115 et seq. 

Sec. 11-51. - Open space regulations. 
    The board of aldermen of the City of Shelton desires to provide a safe and healthy environment for all residents wishing to enjoy the open spaces of the City of Shelton. The regulations herein are designed to provide uniform understanding of permitted uses and prohibitions on property that has been designated by the board of aldermen as "city open space". 
(1)  The operation of any motorized vehicles or vessels is prohibited on any city open space area, except official vehicles engaged in maintenance, emergency activities, or for handicapped accessibility. 
(2)  No person shall park or store any motorized vehicle, bicycle, trailer or personal property on any city open space are of the City of Shelton, except in those areas set aside and designated as temporary parking. 
(3)  All city open space areas shall be open from dawn to dusk unless the mayor or his designated representative has granted special permission to an individual or a group in writing to extend this time period. 
(4)  Nonmotorized vessels may be used only in city open space areas approved for that purpose. No motorized vessels are allowed in any waters of the city open space unless required for emergency rescue or maintenance operations. 
(5)  Swimming is not allowed in any city open space watercourse, pond or lake except as may be designated by the mayor or his designated representative. 
(6)  Persons utilizing city open space areas shall be appropriately attired. 
(7)  No person or organization shall camp overnight in any city open space area unless they have obtained written permission from the mayor or his designated representative. 
(8)  No person or organization shall erect tents, or construct shelters or other structures of a temporary or permanent nature or hold any sponsored gathering or function in any city open space areas without the express written permission of the mayor or his designated representative. 
(9)  No person shall light, kindle or use any fire on any city open space area except in receptacles installed for that purpose without the express written permission of the fire marshal. 
(10)  Hunting, trapping, archery, discharging firearms, paintball guns, air guns or use of any weapon on or into any city open space area is prohibited. Hunters crossing city open space areas to gain access to private or state property may proceed through city open space areas only with an unloaded firearm. 
(11)  No person shall offer any article or thing for sale in any city open space area unless the chief of police issues a permit for such activity, except that this does not apply to established parks and recreation department and board of education programs. 
(12)  No person shall destroy, injure, herd, harvest or disturb any form of wildlife, plant life, or its habitat on any city open space area excluding state permitted fishing where specifically allowed. 
(13)  No bottles, broken glass, cans, waste paper or other rubbish shall be left in any city open space area except in containers designated for that purpose. No yard waste leaves or refuse, may be deposited on city open space areas; and further, no residential or commercial dumping of any kind is permitted on city open space areas. 
(14)  Ice skating and ice fishing will be allowed upon those bodies of water expressly designated for that purpose by the parks and recreation department and only after the safety of the ice has been confirmed by the mayor or his designated representative. 
(15)  Mountain bikes or other nonmotorized vehicles may be used on designated city open space trails only and at no time may mountain bikes be used off said trails. 
(16)  Dogs must be leashed at all times while within the city open space areas and owners must abide by City Ordinance No. 716, "Pooper Scooper Ordinance" [section 7-8 of this Code of Ordinances]. 
(17)  No person shall deface, mar, remove or otherwise intentionally damage any city open space area's property or any improvement made thereon. 
(18)  No person shall use any alcoholic and/or drugs on any city open space area. 
(Ord. No. 769, 2-13-03; Ord. No. 799, 8-10-06; Ord. No. 833, 12-14-07) 
Sec. 11-52. - Violation, fines. 
    Violation of any provision of this article shall result in a fine of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each offense in addition to any other penalty provided by the city, state or federal governments. Each violation of this article shall be a separate violation. The citation hearing procedure set forth in City Ordinance No. 583 (Code section 1-11.1) shall be applicable to any violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 769, 2-13-03; Ord. No. 799, 8-10-06; Ord. No. 833, 12-14-07) 
Chapter 12 - PLANNING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Planning and zoning commission, § 5.1.4; conservation commission, § 5.2.3. 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; buildings and building regulations; Ch. 3; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 4; flood damage prevention, Ch. 5; housing, Ch. 8; parks and recreation, Ch. 11; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 14; utilities, Ch. 17; zoning, App. A.; subdivisions, App. B. 
State Law reference- Municipal planning commission, G.S. §§ 8-18-8-30a; creation of planning commissions, G.S. § 8-19; plan of development, G.S. § 8-23; requirement that municipal improvement proposals must be referred to planning commission, G.S. § 8-24; requirement that proposals concerning subdivisions of land be approved by planning commission, G.S. § 8-25; requisite of approval of subdivision plans by planning commission, G.S. § 8-26; appeals from planning commission, G.S. § 8-30; municipal redevelopment generally, G.S. §§ 8-124-8-139; authority for urban renewal projects, G.S. § 8-141; urban renewal plan, G.S. § 8-142; powers of redevelopment agency, G.S. § 8-143; powers of municipality concerning urban renewal, G.S. § 8-144; state aid for city redevelopment and urban renewal, G.S. §§ 8-151-8-162; federal aid for city redevelopment and urban renewal, G.S. §§ 8-163-8-169. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 12-1. - Transfers of realty to the Shelton Land Conservation Trust. 
(a)  All transfers of real property by the city to the Shelton Land Conservation Trust, Inc., or to any other entity holding property in trust for the purposes of open space conservation, (hereinafter individually and collectively called the "land trust"), shall be conditioned upon the following terms: 
(1)  The real property shall be kept and held by the land trust, in trust for the enjoyment, use and benefit of and by the residents of the city. 
(2)  The real property shall be kept and preserved in as nearly as natural a state as possible and shall be used only for passive open space recreation for, and free of charge to, the residents of the city. 
(3)  The real property shall not be voluntarily or involuntarily sold, transferred, encumbered or exchanged for other property, nor shall legal title or beneficial ownership be transferred to or vested in any other party without the prior express written approval of the city, after the approval, by motion of resolution, of the board of aldermen. 
(4)  The real property shall not be substantially altered nor shall it be developed or cleared without the prior, express approval, in writing, of the city, after the approval, by motion or resolution of the board of aldermen. 
(5)  Title to said real property shall remain in the land trust only so long as the land trust is a legally existing corporate entity. Upon the dissolution or other termination of the existence of the land trust, title to the real property shall revert to and be vested in the city, to be held and used solely for the purposes of open space conservation. 
(6)  The land trust shall not merge or consolidate with any other corporation, nor shall the land trust change the nature of its corporate existence as a not for profit, nonstock corporation, nor shall it amend its certificate of incorporation or make any other fundamental changes to its corporate existence or status (as set forth in the Connecticut Non-stock Corporation Act, as it may be amended from time to time) without the prior, express approval, in writing, of the city, after the approval, by motion or resolution, of the board of aldermen. 
(7)  Such other terms and conditions as the city or its counsel, shall require. 
(b)  Upon the failure or violation of the foregoing terms, title to said real property shall revert to the city without the requirement of any further act or the recording of any instrument on the land records. Language shall be placed in the instrument of conveyance of any real property by the city to the land trust including, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  The terms and reversions required under the terms of this section; 
(2)  An agreement by the land trust to immediately convey the real property back to the city in the event that any of the reversions, covenants or powers set forth in said instrument shall be or shall become unenforceable; and 
(3)  An agreement by the land trust that title to the real property shall revert automatically to the city one (1) day prior to the expiration of any statutory period limiting the enforceability of any of the reversions or covenants running with the land set forth in the instrument, without the need for the recording of any instrument of conveyance or transfer in the land records. 
(c)  No transfers of real property shall be made to the land trust until and unless the land trust executes an instrument, acceptable to the city and its counsel, for recording in the land records, which places the above restrictions, reversions, powers and covenants upon and with respect to the realty owned by the land trust as of April 9, 1987, which has been transferred to the land trust by the city or as the result of a requirement of the city. 
(Ord. No. 519, 4-9-87) 
Secs. 12-2-12-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - NAUGATUCK VALLEY COUNCIL OF GOVERNMENTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 880, adopted May 8, 2014, amended art. II, §§ 12-16-12-19, in its entirety. Former art. II pertained to valley council of governments and was derived from Ord. No. 110, §§ 1-5, adopted June 8, 1970 and Ord. No. 753, adopted June 14, 2001. 

Sec. 12-16. - City authorized to join. 
    The city shall be a member of the Naugatuck Valley Council of Governments in accordance with sections 4-124i-4-124p, inclusive, of the Connecticut General Statutes. 
(Ord. No. 880, 5-8-14) 
Sec. 12-17. - Mayor to represent city. 
    The representative of the city to the Naugatuck Valley Council of Governments shall be the mayor. 
(Ord. No. 880, 5-8-14) 
Sec. 12-18. - Powers and duties. 
    The Naugatuck Valley Council of Governments shall have such power, purposes, responsibilities and duties as defined by the General Statutes of the state. 
(Ord. No. 880, 5-8-14) 
Sec. 12-19. - Financial commitment. 
    Membership in the Naugatuck Valley Council of Governments shall in no way bind the city to any financial commitments or obligations except as may from time to time be provided by the annual budget. 
(Ord. No. 880, 5-8-14) 
Sec. 12-20. - Withdrawal of city's membership. 
    The city may withdraw from the regional council of governments by repeal of this article. 
(Ord. No. 880, 5-8-14) 
Secs. 12-21-12-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RESERVED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Pursuant to Ord. No. 667, adopted February 10, 1994, the city has withdrawn from the Valley Regional Planning Agency. Former Ch. 12, Art. III, §§ 12-31-12-34 contained provisions pertaining to the Valley Regional Planning Agency and derived from Ord. No. 120, §§ I-IV, adopted July 1, 1972. 

Secs. 12-31-12-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - INLAND WETLANDS COMMISSION[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Charter reference- Inland wetlands commission, § 5.2.6. 

Sec. 12-51. - Established. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of sections 22a-36 through 22a-45 of the general statutes, there is hereby created and established an inland wetlands agency for the city. The inland wetlands agency is hereby vested with such rights and powers as are given to the inland wetlands agency under the general statutes. 
(Ord. No. 195, § 1, 10-16-73) 
Sec. 12-52. - Name. 
    The name of the inland wetland agency shall be the Shelton Inland Wetlands Commission. 
(Ord. No. 195, § 2, 10-16-73) 
Sec. 12-53. - Composition; terms of members; quorum; compensation. 
(a)  The inland wetlands commission shall consist of seven (7) electors of the city holding no salaried municipal office. The mayor and the city engineer shall be ex officio members of the commission. The members of the commission shall be appointed by the mayor. The first three (3) members appointed shall serve for a period of one (1) year and the remaining members each for a period of two (2), three (3), four (4) and five (5) years respectively, and thereafter a member shall be appointed annually to serve for a five-year term. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired portion of the term in the same manner as the original appointment. No more than four (4) members shall be appointed from any one (1) political party. The commission shall elect a chairman and a secretary from among its members and shall adopt rules for the transaction of business and shall keep a public record of its activities. No action of such commission shall be valid unless authorized by a majority of its members present and voting. No business shall be transacted by the commission unless there shall be present a quorum consisting of four (4) members. Meetings of the commission shall be held monthly and whenever called by the chairman of the commission or by the mayor. The members of the commission shall serve without compensation. 
(b)  There shall be two (2) alternate members of the inland wetlands commission, one (1) from each political party which is represented on the inland wetlands commission. Each alternate shall be appointed by the mayor and shall serve for a term of two (2) years. When it is necessary to choose an alternate to act in any particular matter, that alternate shall be chosen who is from the same political party as the member not present or ineligible to vote. 
(Ord. No. 195, § 3, 10-16-73; Ord. No. 467, 9-13-84) 
Sec. 12-54. - Duties. 
    It shall be the duty of the inland wetlands commission: 
(1)  To exercise all powers and responsibilities in regard to inland wetlands and watercourses, as conferred upon inland wetlands agencies by the general statutes or any amendments thereto; 
(2)  To perform such other duties and to exercise such other powers as may be conferred upon inland wetlands agencies by the general statutes or by the ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 195, § 4, 10-16-73) 
Sec. 12-55. - Public hearings. 
    The inland wetlands commission shall hold public hearings on all applications submitted by persons proposing to conduct or cause to be conducted a regulated activity on an inland wetlands or watercourse and shall advertise as provided in section 22a-42a of the general statutes. 
(Ord. No. 195, § 5, 10-16-73) 
Sec. 12-56. - Aquifer Protection Agency. 
(a)  Designation and membership. 
(1)  In accordance with the provisions of Section 22a-354 et seq. of the Connecticut General Statutes, the Inland/Wetlands Commission is hereby designated as the Aquifer Protection Agency (hereinafter "APA") of the City of Shelton. The staff of the inland/wetlands commission shall serve as the staff of the APA. 
(2)  Members of the inland/wetlands commission shall serve co-existing terms on the APA. The membership requirements of the APA shall be the same as those of the inland/wetlands commission, including, but not limited to the number of members, terms, method of selection and removal, and filling vacancies. 
(3)  At least one (1) member of the APA or staff of the APA shall complete the course in technical training formulated by the Commissioner of Environmental Protection of the State of Connecticut, pursuant to Section 22a-354v of the Connecticut General Statutes. 
(b)  Regulations to be adopted. The APA shall adopt regulations in accordance with Section 22a-354p of the Connecticut General Statutes. 
(1)  Said regulations shall provide for: 
a.  The manner in which boundaries of aquifer protection areas shall be established and amended or changed. 
b.  Procedures for the regulation of activity within the area. 
c.  The form for an application to conduct regulated activities within the area. 
d.  Notice and publication requirements. 
e.  Criteria and procedures for the review of applications. 
f.  Administration and enforcement. 
(Ord. No. 664, §§ 1, 2, 12-10-94) 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 664, adopted February 10, 1994, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, inclusion as § 12-56 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Secs. 12-57-12-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - HOUSATONIC LAKE AUTHORITY 

Sec. 12-71. - Declaration. 
    It is found and determined that it would be for the betterment of the city if the city joined the Housatonic Lake Authority and participated in the activities of the authority as provided in section 7-151A of the general statutes. 
(Ord. No. 245, § 1, 6-9-75) 
Sec. 12-72. - Membership; terms of members; vacancies. 
    It is hereby enacted and ordained that the city join and be a member of the Housatonic Lake Authority. There shall be a three-member delegation to the authority from the city responsible to the mayor. The members of the authority shall be appointed by the mayor in the instance of the initial appointment, one (1) for a term of three (3) years, one (1) for a term of two (2) years and one (1) for a term of one (1) year and thereafter all members will be appointed for a term of three (3) years. Vacancies shall be filled by the appointment of the mayor. 
(Ord. No. 245, § 2, 6-9-75) 
Sec. 12-73. - Duties. 
(a)  The Housatonic Lake Authority shall act as agent for the city in cooperating with the state boating commission in the enforcement of the boating laws on bodies of water within the territorial limits of the city. 
(b)  It shall also be the responsibility of the Housatonic Lake Authority to hire adequate personnel to supply the regulatory patrols of the authority. 
(c)  The Housatonic Lake Authority shall be granted the power within the bodies of water within the territorial limits of the city to control and abate algae and aquatic needs in cooperation with the state water resource commission in accordance with the general statutes; study water management including but not limited to water depth and circulation and make recommendation for action to its member towns; act as agent for the city with respect to filing application for grants and reimbursement with the department of environmental protection and other state agencies in connection with state and federal programs and to act as agent for the city with respect to receiving gifts for any of its purposes. 
(Ord. No. 245, § 3, 6-9-75) 
Sec. 12-74. - Assessment. 
    As a member of the Housatonic Lake Authority, the city would be required to pay to the authority its respective share of expenses upon approval of the board of aldermen. These expenses would be reimbursed by the state the following fiscal year. 
(Ord. No. 245, § 4, 6-9-75) 
Sec. 12-75. - Withdrawal by city. 
    The method of withdrawal by the city from the Housatonic Lake Authority shall be governed by section 7-101A of the general statutes. The Housatonic Lake Authority will be operated under provision of section 7-151A of the general statutes. 
(Ord. No. 245, § 5, 6-9-75) 
Secs. 12-76-12-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Charter reference- Economic development commission, § 5.2.5. 

Sec. 12-91. - Created. 
    The provisions of section 7-136 of the general statutes as amended, are adopted and there is hereby created an economic development commission. 
(Ord. No. 102, 8-25-69) 
Sec. 12-92. - Members. 
    The economic development commission shall consist of five (5) members who shall be appointed by the mayor. 
(Ord. No. 102, 8-25-69) 
Sec. 12-93. - Terms. 
    The initial terms of the economic development commission members shall be as follows: 
One (1) for one (1) year; 
One (1) for two (2) years; 
One (1) for three (3) years; 
One (1) for four (4) years; 
One (1) for five (5) years; 
Thereafter each new member shall serve for a term of five (5) years. 
(Ord. No. 102, 8-25-69) 
Sec. 12-94. - Rights, powers, and duties. 
    The rights, powers and duties of the economic development commission shall be as established by section 1-136 of the general statutes. 
(Ord. No. 102, 8-25-69) 
Secs. 12-95-12-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - SCENIC ROADS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 649, adopted September 10, 1992, did not specifically amend this Code, hence, inclusion §§ 1-7 as Ch. 9, Art. VII, was at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 12-101. - Authority. 
    The authority to designate a highway or any portion of any highway as a scenic road is hereby delegated to the board of aldermen of the City of Shelton. 
(Ord. No. 649, § 1, 9-10-92; Ord. No. 815, § I, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 12-102. - Designation criteria. 
(a)  No highway or portion of a highway shall be designated as a scenic road if the abutting property contains intensive commercial development. Prior to designating a highway or portion thereof as a scenic road, the board of aldermen must first specifically find that at least one (1) of the following criteria is met: 
(1)  The highway is unpaved; 
(2)  The highway is bordered by mature trees or stone walls; 
(3)  The traveled portion of the highway is no more than twenty (20) feet in width; 
(4)  The highway offers scenic views; 
(5)  The highway blends naturally into the surrounding terrain; or; 
(6)  The highway parallels or crosses over brooks streams, lakes or ponds. 
(b)  No highway or portion thereof may be designated as a scenic road by the board of aldermen pursuant to this article unless a majority of owners of lots abutting the highway or portion thereof agree to the designation of the highway as a scenic road by filing a written statement of approval with the city clerk of the City of Shelton. 
(Ord. No. 649, § 2, 9-10-92; Ord. No. 815, § II, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 12-103. - Procedure for designation. 
(a)  The board of aldermen on its own initiative may consider a highway or portion thereof for scenic road designation. Property owners may petition the board for a designation of a highway or portion thereof as a scenic road. The petition shall state what road or portion of road is requested to be designated as a scenic road and describe those characteristics of the road which qualify it for scenic road status, as well as other characteristics which enhance the scenic character of the road. The petition shall be signed by a majority of the owners of lots abutting the road or portion of road in question (such ownership shall be verified by the city assessor), stating that they approve of designating the road or portion of road as a scenic road, and indicating, to the best of their knowledge, their lot frontage along the road or portion of the road in question. Each signer of the petition shall indicate his or her address. The petition should also include the names and address of owners of lot frontage abutting the road or portion of road in question who did not sign the petition. The petition must contain the name, address and signature of the circulator of the petition, who must be a resident of Shelton. 
(b)  Any proposal for a scenic road designation appearing before the board of aldermen shall be submitted to the planning and zoning commission for an 8-24 referral. Proposal shall also be submitted to the director of public works for recommendation relative to safety aspects of the road in question. 
(c)  When a road, or portion of road, is to be considered for designation as a scenic road, the board of aldermen shall schedule a public hearing on the proposal. Such hearing shall be subject to any provision in the City Charter pertaining to such hearings. Notice of the public hearing shall be sent to the owners of lots fronting the road or portion of road to be designated and to the director of public works and the superintendent of highways and bridges. 
(d)  The board of aldermen shall act upon the proposed designation within the period of time permitted by City Charter. Within ten (10) days of passage, the ordinance designating the road or portion of road as a scenic road shall be published in a newspaper having general circulation in the city and notice of such passage shall be sent to the owner of lots fronting such road or portion of road. 
(e)  The grounds for designation or nondesignation shall be stated in the records of the board of aldermen and in the case of designation shall include, in detail, the special features which make the road so designated. 
(Ord. No. 649, § 3, 9-10-92; Ord. No. 815, § III, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 12-104. - Rescission. 
    The designation of a road or a portion thereof as a scenic road may be rescinded by the board of aldermen by ordinance, using the same procedures as was used for the designation and provided that a majority of the owners of lots abutting the road or a portion of the road concur with such rescission as set forth in this article. No designation of a road or portion of road as a scenic road may be rescinded, and no petition or request for such rescission may be filed, for at least (2) years after the effective date of the ordinance so designating such road or portion thereof as a scenic road. 
(Ord. No. 649, § 4, 9-10-92; Ord. No. 815, § IV, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 12-105. - Alterations and routine maintenance not requiring application and public hearing. 
(a)  Routine road maintenance. Such maintenance shall include removal of dead and seriously diseased or damaged trees and branches of trees; trimming of the tree branches that encroach on the traveled portion of the roadway below the height needed to allow school buses and emergency vehicles to pass; trimming or removal of brush and removal of boulders or other obstacles that encroach on the traveled portion of the road; necessary trimming for utility lines; trimming of brush to enhance and protect scenic views; stone walls, mature trees and other characteristics of the scenic road set forth in the decision designating it a scenic road; correction of drainage problems; and graveling, retreatment and repair of existing roadway surfaces. 
(b)  Natural disasters. In the case of natural disaster in which a road becomes impassable or unsafe for public travel and access must be provided, emergency repairs may be made as needed. 
(Ord. No. 649, § 5, 9-10-92; Ord. No. 815, § V, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 12-106. - Application for alterations. 
(a)  Preservation objective. Routine maintenance and the regulation of future alterations and improvements of designated roadways shall be carried out so as to preserve to the highest degree possible the scenic characteristics which are indicated in the records of the board of aldermen as the basis for designation. 
(b)  Hearing and decision responsibility. A significant alteration or improvement of a designated scenic road shall be determined by the board of aldermen. Any proposal for a significant alteration or improvement, whether by public or private applicant, shall be submitted to the planning and zoning commission which shall hold a public hearing and submit findings of fact and a recommendation of the Board of Aldermen. 
(c)  Standards for alteration. When contemplating alterations to a scenic road for common convenience and necessity, including, without limitation, safety reasons and fire and police considerations, the following procedures shall be followed: 
(1)  Review of suitable map, and where deemed necessary by the planning and zoning commission, of a technical report documenting the cited hazard and offering alternative solutions. 
(2)  Public hearing to allow full public participation. 
(3)  A decision-making process that not only reviews the specific safety features, but also takes into account the overall impact of the possible change in a scenic road as well as the public response. 
(4)  The final decision shall reflect the least damages to the character of the scenic road. If stone walls or portions thereof must be removed, they shall be rebuilt along the untraveled portion of the scenic road. 
(5)  If alterations to a scenic road are required, then they shall be planned with due regard to the following parameters: 
a.  Speed limits: Scenic values are correlated with lower speeds. The approved speed shall be posted and suitably enforced. 
b.  Curves: Scenic values are correlated with the existence of curves, which allow a constant unfolding of new and changing views. Curves shall not be eliminated until they are found to be a definite hazard within the concept of the specific road. 
c.  Grades: Hills and valleys are correlated with scenic values. They shall not be destroyed by cuts and fills unless deemed essential for road safety. 
d.  Widths: A narrow road is correlated with high scenic beauty. Designated roadways should not be widened unless the amount of traffic, as determined by a factual study demands it. For some rural roads, the amount of traffic that can be handled can be greatly increased by wide by-passes and turn-outs, constructed at intervals where they do least damage to scenic and other values. 
e.  Side slopes: Existing steepness of side-slope is preferable to reduction of gradient by extensive removal of soil and rock. This is especially true where the slope is fully stabilized and where it is rich with existing ground cover, shrubs and trees. 
f.  Vistas: Vistas of distant landscape shall be preserved by suitable vegetation management techniques. 
g.  Utility lines: Wherever possible, utility lines should be put underground. Where they are overhead, the utility corporations should cooperate by implementing suitable vegetation management techniques which preserve the wild flowers and the shrubs. 
h.  Vegetation: Vegetation on the side of the road shall be managed in such a way as to preserve wild flowers, shrubs of ornamental wildlife values and trees. Over-arching isolated trees and the canopy of a closed forest, can have extremely high scenic value. 
i.  Billboards, sand, gravel and salt piles, refuse disposal and other unsightly structures or situations: Billboards, sand, gravel and salt piles, refuse disposal and other unsightly structures or situations shall be forbidden. Where possible, scenic and preservation easements should be acquired from adjacent owners to insure the continuance of natural relief, desirable features and scenic and historic values in the public interest. 
    Any action under section 12-105, subparagraphs (a) and (b) and section 12-106, subparagraphs (a) and (b), shall be taken in a manner which will avoid or reduce adverse effects on the characteristic of the designated roadway specified in the decision designating it a scenic road. Any reconstruction of a designated road shall be done in a similar manner with a view to restoring the road to the extent possible to its scenic character at the time of designation. 
(d)  Paving criteria. Paving of the unpaved traveled portion of a scenic road shall be permitted as determined by the board of aldermen. 
(e)  Rights of landowners. Nothing in this article shall be deemed to prohibit a person owning or occupying land abutting the roadway or portion thereof designated as a scenic road (1) from maintaining and repairing the land which abuts the road so designated if the maintenance occurs on land not within the right of way, paved or unpaved, of the scenic road; or (2) have access to his property by driveway or subdivision road by encroachment within the rights of way, provided that such encroachment is constructed so as to safeguard the roadway's scenic features. 
    Nothing herein shall prohibit a landowner from permanently removing a portion of a stone wall in order to construct or improve a driveway or, in the case of subdivision, to connect a subdivision road with a designated scenic road. 
(Ord. No. 649, § 6, 9-10-92; Ord. No. 815, § VI, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 12-107. - Enforcement. 
    The ordinance shall be enforced by the planning and zoning commission, acting through the appropriate enforcement official(s). 
    Violation of this article shall be subject to a fine not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per day for each day the violation continues and such other legal remedies as may be available to the commission. 
(Ord. No. 649, § 7, 9-10-92; Ord. No. 815, § VII, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 12-108. - List of scenic roads. 
    The following are designated scenic roads by the board of aldermen: 
Birdseye Road 
Burritts Ground Road 
Lane Street 
Mill Street 
Pearmain Road commencing at the westerly end of the currently paved portion for a distance of three thousand five hundred (3,500) feet more or less. 
(Ord. No. 660, 9-22-92; Ord. No. 661, 9-22-92; Ord. No. 662, 9-22-92; Ord. No. 680, 2-9-95; Ord. No. 708, 3-13-97) 
Editor's note- Ordinance Nos. 660, 661 and 662 adopted on September 22, 1992, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, inclusion as § 12-108 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Secs. 12-109, 12-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - CONSERVATION EASEMENT 

Sec. 12-111. - Consent required. 
    No person shall undertake any of the following activities within a conservation easement that has been granted to the City of Shelton without the express, written consent of the board of aldermen after consultation and advice of the city's conservation commission: 
(a)  Removal or cutting of trees or other vegetation; 
(b)  Filling of wetlands; 
(c)  Dumping or disposing of solid, liquid, organic or inorganic waste or debris, including bottles, broken glass, cans waste paper, or other rubbish and lawn clippings; 
(d)  Erection or construction of any structure; 
(e)  The parking or storage of any vehicles or vessels (whether or not licensed or registered with the State of Connecticut), or storage of any other personal property not belonging to the City of Shelton; 
(f)  The fencing off or enclosing any portion of the conservation easement except as expressly set forth in the appropriate land use approval or grant to the City of Shelton; 
(g)  Allowing the encroachment of: private or commercial buildings; accessory structures; or yard area unless expressly set forth in the appropriate land use approval or grant to the City of Shelton. 
    Nothing herein shall prevent the owner of said premises from the removal of "invasives" as said term is defined by the department of environmental protection and subject to the written permission of the City of Shelton's conservation officer. 
(Ord. No. 794, § 1, 9-8-05) 
Sec. 12-112. - Violation penalties. 
    Any person or entity in violation of any provision of this article which refuses to rectify the situation within ten (10) days after notification of such offense shall result in a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each offense in addition to any other penalty or enforcement mechanism provided by state or federal law. Each violation of this article shall be a separate violation, and each day of each individual violation shall be considered a separate violation. The citation hearing procedures set forth in City Ordinance No. 583 (Code section 1-11.1) shall be applicable to any violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 794, § 2, 9-8-05) 
Sec. 12-113. - Replacement of removed trees. 
    In addition to the foregoing penalty described in section 12-112, any person who removes trees and/or vegetation from a conservation easement shall pay the City of Shelton the cost to replace said trees. The cost shall be determined by valuing the cost to replace the identical tree that was removed, i.e. age, height and width. 
(Ord. No. 794, § 3, 9-8-05) 
Sec. 12-114. - Conservation easement form. 
    All conservation easements granted to the city shall be in the following form and approved by the office of the corporation counsel. The grantor shall provide the city with a certificate of title indicating that there are no encumbrances on the property. 
CONSERVATION EASEMENT 
TO ALL PEOPLE TO WHOM THESE PRESENTS SHALL COME, GREETING: 
THAT, ____________ , (hereinafter referred to as the "Grantor"), for the consideration of One ($1.00) Dollar and other valuable consideration, received to its full satisfaction of the CITY OF SHELTON, a municipal corporation organized and existing by virtue of the law of the State of Connecticut, located in the County of Fairfield and State of Connecticut (hereinafter referred to as the "Grantee"), the receipt and sufficience of which is hereby acknowledged, does hereby give and grant a perpetual conservation easement to the CITY OF SHELTON, its successors and assigns, the premises described in Schedule A attached hereto and made a part hereof. Said Conservation Easement shall preclude the Grantors, their successors and assigns, from undertaking any activity prohibited in the City of Shelton's "Protection of Conservation Easement Ordinance" which shall include but not be limited to clearing vegetation, excavating, filling, dispersing fertilizers or pesticides, or constructing buildings or other improvements on the land described in Schedule A; or in any manner disturbing the land. 
The Grantor, their successors and assigns, specifically agree and understand that the Conservation Easement granted herein is subject to the restrictions and penalties of the City of Shelton's Protection of Conservation Easement Ordinance as same may be amended from time to time. 
TO HAVE AND TO HOLD the easement herein conveyed unto the Grantee and the Grantee's successors and assigns forever, to their own proper use and behalf. 
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, ____________ has hereunto caused these presents to be signed and duly authorized this ____________ day of ____________ , ____________ . 
In the Presence of: 
____________ ____________ ____________  
STATE OF CONNECTICUT ) ) ss: COUNTY OF FAIRFIELD )  
Personally appeared ____________ , Signer and Sealer of the foregoing, who acknowledged the same to be his/her free act and deed, before me. 
_____Commissioner of the Superior Court Notary Public My Commission Expires: _____  
(Ord. No. 794, § 4, 9-8-05) 
Chapter 13 - POLICE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Public safety council, § 6.9 et seq.; department of police, § 6.9.2 et seq. 
Cross reference- Hiring of police officers, § 2-145; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, Ch. 10. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 13-1. - Marine police. 
(a)  The chief of police shall appoint and or remove for such a length of time as he determines such number of special police to be called marine police. 
(b)  The officers, after being certified by the commissioner of environmental protection, may enforce the provisions of the state department of environmental protection boating statutes and regulations. They will work under the supervision, rules and regulations of the Lake Housatonic Authority. 
(c)  The Lake Housatonic Authority shall be answerable to the city through the chief of police in all matters relating to marine police. 
(Comp. Ords. 1975, § 11.4) 
Sec. 13-2. - Certain personnel designated special police officers. 
    Personnel holding the following named positions in the city will also be special police officers within the scope of their official positions, only, in the city: 
(1)  Fire marshall; 
(2)  Building official; 
(3)  Zoning enforcement officer; 
(4)  Code enforcement officer; 
(5)  Assistant building official; 
(6)  Deputy fire marshals. 
(Ord. No. 187, 9-10-73; Ord. No. 191, 10-16-73; Ord. No. 477, 3-14-85) 
Sec. 13-3. - Duties of city sheriffs. 
    City sheriffs appointed in accordance with the Charter of the City of Shelton shall have the same power, authority, and duties as constables in accordance with Connecticut General Statutes, section 7-87 et seq., as same may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 751, 5-10-01) 
Secs. 13-4-13-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DEPARTMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2. 
State Law reference- Police departments, G.S. §§ 7-274-7-294f. 

Sec. 13-21. - Duties of members. 
    Each member of the police department shall conform to the rules and regulations of the police department and to the ordinances of the city and rules and regulations of the merit system. 
(Ord. No. 300, § 1, 7-11-77) 
Sec. 13-22. - Chief of police to receive and keep all property. 
    The chief of police or his designee shall receive and keep all property taken from any person under arrest and all property recovered which may have been lost or stolen, including property which may have been found or obtained for evidence, keeping a record of the same, which record shall include a description thereof and of the circumstances under which the same was taken, recovered, found or held, including its estimated value and the disposition which may have been made thereof. 
(Ord. No. 300, § 2, 7-11-77) 
Sec. 13-23. - Chief of police shall keep record of violations of ordinances. 
    The chief of police shall cause to be kept a record of all reported violations of any city ordinances with the date of the offense, the name of the offender and the name of any witnesses thereto, which record shall be kept in the police department and shall be at all times open to the inspection of any officer of the city. 
(Ord. No. 300, § 3, 7-11-77) 
Sec. 13-24. - Arrest. 
    No member of the police department, excepting the chief of police, shall release from arrest any person having been placed under arrest and any member of the department placing any person under arrest shall, without delay, take or convey such person to the station house and deliver him to the officer in charge, or place such person in the lockup. 
(Ord. No. 300, § 4, 7-11-77) 
Sec. 13-25. - Penalty. 
    Any police officer or civilian personnel violating any provisions of any ordinance, department rules and regulations or merit system rules and regulations relating to the police department shall be subject to disciplinary action by the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 300, § 5, 7-11-77) 
Sec. 13-26. - Real property tax exemption for surviving spouse of police officer or firefighter. 
    The board of aldermen, being the legislative body of the city, approve a real property tax exemption of three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) with respect to real property owned and occupied as the principal residence of the surviving spouse of a police officer or firefighter who dies while in the performance of such officer's or firefighter's duties and who was at the time of his or her death a resident of the City of Shelton or a police or firefighter acting for or on behalf of the City of Shelton. 
(Ord. No. 764, 5-9-02) 
Editor's note- It should be noted that separate provisions regarding exemptions for firefighters were adopted by Ord. No. 779. See § 4-36. 
Secs. 13-27-13-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SUPERNUMERARY POLICE OFFICERS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Special constables, G.S. § 7-92; compensation of constables and other officers, G.S. § 7-97. 

Sec. 13-31. - Number limited. 
    There shall not be more than sixty (60) supernumerary police officers who may be called into service by the chief of police or his designated representative when, in his opinion, the services of any or all of them are required. 
(Ord. No. 273, 4-12-76; Ord. No. 343, 8-14-78) 
Sec. 13-32. - Residency requirement. 
    Supernumerary police officers shall be bona fide residents of the city, during the term of their service as supernumerary police officers. 
(Ord. No. 343, 8-14-78; Ord. No. 475, 2-14-85) 
Sec. 13-33. - Compensation. 
    Compensation of supernumerary police officers shall be fixed at an hourly rate of $4.60 per hour, effective September 1, 1978, and effective July 1, 1979, and hereon in, shall be compensated at the same hourly rate as provided to regular probationary police officers the previous July. 
(Ord. No. 273, 4-12-76; Ord. No. 343, 8-14-78) 
Cross reference- Any ordinance setting salaries for merit or nonmerit positions saved from repeal, § 1-12(11). 
Sec. 13-34. - Uniforms. 
    The city will furnish the uniforms for supernumerary police officers as approved by the chief of police and provided for in the department's operating budget. This shall not include shoes, weapons, handcuffs, searchlight or blackjack. 
(Ord. No. 273, 4-12-76; Ord. No. 343, 8-14-78) 
Sec. 13-35. - Death or permanent disability benefits. 
    In case of death or permanent disability in the line of duty, a supernumerary police officer or his survivor, will receive all benefits provided to regular members of the police department in such cases. 
(Ord. No. 343, 8-14-78) 
Sec. 13-36. - Physical requirements. 
    Any person appointed as a supernumerary police officer on and after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives shall meet the same physical requirements as a regular police officer as set forth in the merit system and shall be required to undergo a physical examination and to pass the same in order to determine the physical qualifications. 
(Ord. No. 475, 2-14-85) 
Chapter 14 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 3; garbage, trash and refuse, Ch. 6; health and sanitation, Ch. 7; housing, Ch. 8; parks and recreation, Ch. 11; planning, Ch. 12; traffic and motor vehicles, Ch. 16; utilities, Ch. 17, zoning, App. A; subdivisions, App. B. 
State Law reference- Power of city to control the excavation of the highways and streets, G.S. § 7-148(c)(6)(C)(iii); to lay out, construct, etc., streets, sidewalks, etc., G.S. § 7-148(c)(6)(C)(i); to provide for lighting the streets, etc., G.S. § 7-148(c)(4)(F); to provide for the planting, etc., of shade and ornamental trees on the streets and public grounds, G.S. § 7-148(c)(6)(A)(v); to keep open, etc., the streets, sidewalks, etc., G.S. § 7-148(c)(6)(C)(ii); to require owners or occupants of land adjacent to any sidewalk to remove snow, etc., G.S. § 7-148(c)(6)(C)(v); to regulate and prohibit the excavation, etc., of sidewalks, etc., G.S. § 7-148(c)(6)(C)(iv); to prohibit and regulate the discharge of drains from roofs of buildings over or upon the sidewalks, streets, etc., G.S. § 7-148(c)(6)(B)(iv); to keep the streets, sidewalks and public places free from undue noises and nuisances, etc., G.S. § 7-148(c)(7)(F)(i); highways and bridges, G.S. § 13a-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Building material left in streets. 
    When any lumber, brick, mortar, or other materials used in building, shall necessarily be left out overnight, in any of the streets of said city, the owner thereof shall place over, or near it, in some conspicuous place, a large, well lighted lamp or lantern, which shall be continued burning the whole night, from night to night, until such material shall have been entirely removed and for every neglect so to place and continue said lamp, he, or she, shall forfeit and pay to said city two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per night for every night when said lamps shall not be found burning and continued burning through the whole night. The owner or owners of every lot upon which any building which is being erected, if said building is to be on the line of any street, or within eight (8) feet thereof: and the owner or owners, of any building, which is being removed, shall each night while said building is going up, or removing and until the cellar way and the doors are completed, and said building is removed, keep a large lamp or lantern lighted on or opposite the same in a conspicuous place, and for every neglect to do so he, she or they shall forfeit and pay two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) to said city. 
(Ord. No. 325, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 807, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 14-2. - Storing building material on streets restricted. 
    The board of aldermen shall, on application, prescribe what portion of any street may be occupied for building materials while any house, barn or other building is being erected, and grant a permit or license therefor, specifying the time it shall be so occupied. 
(Comp. Ords. 1975, § 3.1(4)) 
Sec. 14-3. - Removal of ice and snow on sidewalks required. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of any owner, occupant or any person having care of any land adjoining any paved sidewalk within the city to keep the same clear from snow, ice or sleet, and to remove the same within (12) hours after it has fallen. In the event of failure to comply with this section, such owner or occupant shall upon conviction pay a penalty to the city of fifty dollars ($50.00) for single-family dwelling, one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for multiple-family dwelling and commercial property. If, after the time limit in which to remove such snow, ice or sleet, it has not been removed, it shall be the duty of the superintendent of highway and bridges to cause the same to be removed, and the expense thereof shall be reported by the superintendent of highway and bridges to the administrative assistant of the city, who shall notify the owner or occupant in writing, and if payment is not forthwith made, the expense of such removal shall be recorded in the name of the city in any appropriate form of civil action. 
(b)  Deposit of snow on public streets and neighboring properties forbidden. No person shall throw, push or put or cause to be thrown or put, whether by snow blower, plow, shovel, or any other snow removal device, any snow or ice from private premises or from any area near or outside of the sidewalk or from any sidewalk into any street in the City onto the travel way portion of the street, or to cause the deposit of snow upon abutting or adjacent properties or properties which are not immediately contiguous to the property owners' without the consent of the other property owner. The Public Works Director or his designated agent shall cause such snow to be removed and the expense thereof shall be chargeable to the owner or occupant and shall be collectable by the town in the same manner that other debts owed to the town are collected. Such expense shall be and continue to be a lien in favor of the town upon such land. Any person violating any provision of this section shall be subject to a fine of two hundred fifty ($250.00) dollars. 
(Comp. Ords. 1975, § 3.1(6); Ord. No. 834, 3-13-08; Ord. No. 838, 9-11-08; Ord. No. 902, 2-16-17) 
State Law reference- Authority of city to require snow removal, G.S. § 7-148(c)(6)(C)(v). 
Sec. 14-4. - City's liability for ice and snow on public sidewalks. 
(a)  Notwithstanding the provisions of section 13a-149 of the general statutes or any other general statute or special act, the city shall not be liable to any person injured in person or property caused by the presence of ice or snow on a public sidewalk unless the city is the owner or person in possession and control of land abutting such sidewalk, other than land used as a highway or street, provided such city shall be liable for its affirmative acts with respect to such sidewalk. 
(b)  The owner or person in possession and control of land abutting a public sidewalk shall have the same duty of care with respect to the presence of ice or snow on such sidewalk toward the portion of the sidewalk abutting his property as the city had prior to October 8, 1981, and shall be liable to persons injured in person or property where a breach of the duty is the proximate cause of the injury. 
(c)  No action to recover damages for injury to the person or to property caused by the presence of ice or snow on a public sidewalk against a person who owns or is in possession, and control of land abutting a public sidewalk shall be brought but within two (2) years from the date when the injury is first sustained. 
(Ord. No. 420, 10-8-81) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.S. § 7-163a. 
Sec. 14-5. - Coasting on sleds within the city. 
    Every person who shall slide or coast on any sled in or upon any streets or sidewalks in the city shall forfeit and pay for each offense a fine of ten dollars ($10.00) to the city. 
(Ord. No. 322, 5-8-78) 
Sec. 14-6. - Wheelbarrows, handcarts, wood, coal, etc. 
    It shall not be lawful for any person to wheel or drag any wheelbarrow or handbarrow or handcart or sled along any paved or flagged sidewalk in the city, formed for the convenience of foot passengers, nor shall it be lawful for any person to obstruct the sidewalk by leaving, cutting, sawing, or splitting any wood thereon, or depositing coal thereon, except for immediate removal, and each person offending in either of the above particulars shall forfeit and pay one dollar ($1.00) to the city; provided however, that this section shall not extend or be construed to extend to prevent the conveyance of children on such sidewalks in wagons or carriages made and exclusively used for that purpose. All wheel or handbarrows, handcarts, or sleds, and all wood or coal which shall be on any of the sidewalks, in violation of this section, shall be deemed nuisances and liable to be removed by any person or persons whatever. No person shall travel or pass on or across any sidewalk in the city formed for the convenience of foot passengers, with a coach, carriage, chaise, wagon, cart, sleigh or any other vehicle of any kind whatever, drawn by one (1) or more beasts, and no person shall travel or pass on any such sidewalk on horseback; and no person shall drive or lead any animal on or across any such sidewalks; and every person offending in either of the particulars aforesaid shall forfeit and pay ten dollars ($10.00) to the city; provided however, that nothing in this section shall be so construed as to render unlawful the free use of the public streets and highways where sidewalks are formed across the same; and further provided that nothing in this section shall be so construed as to render unlawful the free communications between any land or building and the street or highway in front of such land or building. 
(Comp. Ords. 1975, § 3.1(8)) 
Sec. 14-7. - Damage to mailboxes by snowplows. 
    Any person who has constructed or does construct a mailbox on the untravelled portion of any city right-of-way shall be deemed to have agreed that if the mailbox is damaged by a snowplow which is operating on the travelled portion of the highway and within the city right-of-way, the liability of the city for any damage to the mailbox and associated structure shall be the lesser of the actual cost of repair or the sum of seventy five dollars ($75.00). 
(Ord. No. 437, 11-10-82) 
Sec. 14-8. - Street lamps. 
    The board of aldermen may cause as many public lamps to be erected, placed and maintained in the streets and public grounds of the city as they shall judge expedient, and may make and cause to be executed such orders and regulations respecting the same as they shall think proper. They shall also appoint one (1) suitable person or more to keep the lamps in order and to light and extinguish the same according to the directions of the board of aldermen from time to time to be given. If any person shall wrongfully light or extinguish any of the lamps, or shall wrongfully turn on gas or electricity at any of the lamps, or shall wrongfully injure, break or destroy any of the lamps, or any part of the lamps, such person shall pay to the city just damages therefor, and shall also forfeit and pay to the city the sum of five dollars ($5.00). 
(Comp. Ords. 1975, § 3.1(14)) 
Sec. 14-9. - Sidewalk repair and construction. 
(a)  Definitions. As used in this section, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings: 
    Director or director of public works shall mean the director of public works for the city or his designated agent. Public sidewalk shall mean that sidewalk located within a city street right-of-way, or such other sidewalk for which the city bears responsibility under the general statutes. 
(b)  Sidewalk maintenance required. The owner of land abutting a public sidewalk shall maintain that sidewalk which fronts their property in a safe condition at all times. Whenever a sidewalk is found to be unsafe and in need of repair or replacement, the director of public works shall notify the abutting landowners, in writing, of the defect and order the landowners to repair or replace the sidewalk within thirty (30) days of such notification, or such longer time as may be specified in the notice. Such order and notification shall be either personally served by an indifferent person or sent by certified mail, return receipt requested. 
(c)  Appeal of order to repair. Such landowner shall have the right to appeal such order to the board of aldermen, which appeal shall be filed with the clerk of the board of aldermen within twenty (20) days of the mailing of the original notice. The board of aldermen shall conduct a hearing on the appeal within thirty (30) days of the receipt of the appeal. The decision of the board of aldermen shall be final. 
(d)  Repair of sidewalk by city. If the landowner does not appeal or does not comply with the order to repair a sidewalk or request an extension of time to complete the ordered repairs, the director of public works is authorized to repair or replace the sidewalk. The director may extend time to complete ordered repairs upon request. 
(e)  Assessment upon repair by city. Whenever an abutting landowner fails to complete an ordered sidewalk repair and the city, pursuant to subsection (d) performs the repairs, either by itself or by others, upon the completion of the work, the director of public works shall send a full and complete report to the board of aldermen which report shall contain among other things a complete breakdown of all costs incurred and a description of the property and condition of the sidewalk as it existed before and as it exists after the work. The board of aldermen shall make an assessment of benefits, if any, and the city shall notify, in writing by certified mail, the abutting landowner as to the amount of the assessments, provided that the liability of the abutting landowner shall be limited to the actual cost of repairs or the assessment of actual benefits whichever is lesser. The city may recover such costs in an action at law. 
(f)  Construction specifications. The specifications for sidewalks constructed or repaired under the provisions of this section shall be as follows: 
(1)  All new sidewalks shall be constructed of concrete (cement concrete). Existing asphalt (bituminous concrete) sidewalks located outside of downtown and Huntington Center may be repaired, overlaid or replaced with asphalt. Asphalt overlays, replacements or repairs are not permitted on existing concrete sidewalks or those concrete sidewalks previously overlaid with asphalt. Concrete or stone curbs shall be replaced by concrete curbs only. 
(2)  The construction of new and replacement sidewalks shall conform to the current sidewalk specifications of the department of public works. In general sidewalks shall be concrete (cement concrete) and have a minimum width of four (4) feet and a minimum thickness of four (4) inches. The concrete shall have a twenty-eight (28) day compressive strength of three thousand (3,000) psi and an air entrainment of five (5) to seven (7) percent. Expansion joints shall be provided at least every twenty (20) feet. Asphalt sidewalks shall have a minimum compacted thickness of one (1) inch. Asphalt sidewalks shall be constructed of class two (2) bituminous concrete. 
(3)  All curbs and sidewalks constructed or replaced at or within an intersection or crosswalk, shall include curb cuts or ramps to provide adequate access for the movement of physically handicapped persons. 
(4)  No public sidewalks shall be installed, repaired or replaced without a valid permit from the department of public works. All public sidewalk construction and repair is subject to inspection and approval by the department of public works. 
(g)  City financial responsibility. The city shall be responsible for a percentage of the cost of construction or replacement of concrete sidewalks and curbs constructed within the city right-of-way, which cost shall be calculated according to a unit price list which shall be established by the city engineer. If the actual unit cost of construction is greater than the items listed on the unit price established by the engineer, the city shall be responsible only for the established percentage of the unit cost as calculated from the city engineer's price list. The following percentages are established as the portion of the cost of construction or replacement of sidewalks and curbs which is the financial responsibility of the city: 
1.  Concrete (cement concrete) sidewalks - Sixty (60) percent; 
2.  Curbing (all types) - Thirty (30) percent. 
    Between November 15 th and December 31 st of each year, the city engineer shall prepare a unit price list which he proposes to use for the ensuing calendar year, January 1 st to December 31 st . He shall file the same with the street committee of the Board of Aldermen, with the City/Town Clerk and with the Clerk of the Board of Aldermen. Unless the Board of Aldermen disagrees with the changes to the price list and schedule the same to be discussed at its January meeting, the figures established by the City Engineer shall go into effect and be effective for the calendar year immediately following. No sidewalk shall be replaced or constructed within the city right-of-way without the prior approval of the city engineer and without obtaining such other permits as may be required by law. 
(h)  Exception. The provisions of this section to the contrary notwithstanding, the public works director may approve new sidewalk construction of material other than concrete where the material used is of a quality and cost at least equal to the concrete and where the material is approved by the public works director as safe for use by the general public on a public sidewalk. In such event, the cost of reimbursement by the city shall not be any greater than the reimbursement if the sidewalk had been constructed of concrete. Reimbursement to property owners installing such sidewalks is authorized if such sidewalks were installed after March 1, 1985. 
(i)  Sidewalk district number one. 
(1)  Sidewalk district number one is hereby established. The district shall include the public sidewalks within the state highway right-of-way on Howe Avenue (Route #110) from Hill Street to Beard Street on the south side and from Hill Street to Wooster Street North on the north side. 
(2)  All new or replacement sidewalks within district number one shall be constructed of concrete (cement concrete) with a brick paver accent strip. The width of the concrete sidewalk and brick paver accent strip shall be approved by the public works director. All construction methods and materials shall conform to the current sidewalk specifications of the public works department. 
(3)  Existing asphalt (bituminous concrete) sidewalks located within sidewalk district number one cannot be repaired or overlaid with asphalt. They must be replaced by concrete sidewalks with the brick paver accent strip. 
(4)  An abutting landowner whose existing concrete sidewalk does not require repair or replacement shall not be required to install the brick paver accent strip. However, the landowner may saw cut and remove a portion of an existing concrete sidewalk and install the brick paver strip and still be eligible for reimbursement from the city. 
(5)  The following percentage is established as the portion of the cost of construction or replacement of sidewalks and curbs which is the financial responsibility of the city within sidewalk district number one: 
a.  Brick paver accent sidewalk strip: Forty (40) percent; 
b.  Concrete (cement concrete) sidewalks: Sixty (60) percent; 
c.  New or reset curbing: Thirty (30) percent. 
(6)  All new or replacement curbing within sidewalk district number one shall be either precast or cast in placed concrete curbing. Existing granite curbing may be reset if in a condition acceptable to the public works department. 
(Ord. No. 238, 2-10-75; Ord. No. 344, 9-11-78; Ord. No. 412, 7-9-81; Ord. No. 446, 5-12-83; Ord. No. 465, 8-9-84; Ord. No. 488, 10-10-85; Ord. No. 517, 3-12-87; Ord. No. 877, 3-13-14; Ord. No. 904, 4-13-17) 
Sec. 14-10. - Gutters to be kept safe. 
    It shall be the duty of the occupant or owner, or of the person having the care of any building or land adjoining any street in the city having a gutter, and where there is a footpath or sidewalk, whether the same be paved or not, to keep such gutter free from snow, ice, sleet, mud, garbage, stone or rubbish of any kind so as to permit the free passage of water through the same, and any person who shall violate the provisions of this section shall forfeit and pay to the city a penalty not to exceed fifteen dollars ($15.00). 
(Comp. Ords. 1975, § 3.1(16)) 
Sec. 14-11. - Tacks, nails, etc., on streets prohibited. 
(a)  No person or corporation shall throw, place, or deposit in or upon any street or public way in the city, any tacks, nails, fragments of glass, or any hard substance whatsoever, liable when so placed or deposited, to puncture or injure the tires of bicycles or any motor vehicles passing over and along the streets or ways. 
(b)  Any person who shall wilfully violate any provision of this section shall for each offense, forfeit and pay to the city a penalty of not less than one dollar ($1.00) or more than fifty dollars ($50.00), provided that nothing herein contained shall be so construed as to prohibit any person in the employ of the city from placing upon the streets of the city, or the board of aldermen thereof, for use in repair of the streets. 
(Comp. Ords. 1975, § 3.1(17)) 
Sec. 14-12. - Operation of vehicles on streets with other than pneumatic tires. 
    Any person operating a vehicle equipped with anything other than pneumatic tires upon any street or highway in the city shall be required to secure a permit for the use of such street or highway by the vehicles, from the street commissioner and such person shall designate upon the permit such streets or highways to be used by the vehicles and shall be required to post a bond with the city clerk in an amount sufficient to cover any damage done to streets or highways by the vehicles, the amount of said bond to be determined by and subject to the approval of the street commissioner and the city engineer. A one dollar ($1.00) fee shall be charged for issuance of each permit. Any person violating any provisions of this section shall be subject to fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) or imprisonment in the county jail for not more than thirty (30) days or both. 
(Comp. Ords. 1975, § 3.1(20)) 
Cross reference- Traffic and motor vehicles, Ch. 16. 
Sec. 14-13. - Signs required for new roads. 
    Any person building a new road in the city shall erect street signs at the beginning of the new road. The street signs shall be erected on a metal pole not more than eight (8) feet above the surface of the ground and letters are to be not less than two and one-half (21/2) inches in height. 
(Comp. Ords. 1975, § 3.1(21)) 
Sec. 14-14. - Acceptance of new streets. 
(a)  The owners or parties interested in the acceptance of any new street, highway or public way shall leave with the town clerk a preliminary map of the proposed layout, also a copy of the same with the city engineer together with a profile drawn to a scale of one (1) inch equals forty (40) feet horizontal and four (4) feet vertical, referred to the city datum or a well established assumed datum. Such profile shall show the center line elevations in a solid line, and the property lines elevations by other distinguishing lines. A proposed center line grade may be submitted for consideration. 
(b)  The city engineer after making such recommendations as he considers advisable, shall approve the plan and profile as to engineering features. No street shall be proposed less than fifty (50) feet wide unless permission is obtained from the board of aldermen for a less width. Upon the approval by the city engineer of the proposed lines and grades the owner or owners shall proceed to grade the street its entire width and shall grade a roadway thirty (30) feet wide with such crown or cross-section as the city engineer may direct. 
(c)  Within two (2) years after the approval of the record subdivision plan, the applicant, owner or developer thereof shall complete the following minimum improvements unless an extension of time is granted by the board. All proposed streets shall be laid out, graded and constructed their entire length and full width from street line to street line in full accordance with the following specifications and these regulations and mode of procedure and any amendments thereto. The owner shall engage the services of a competent engineer to lay out the lines and grades of the streets, boulevards, highways and public ways their entire length, in accordance with such approved lines and grades and shall construct a roadway at least thirty (30) feet wide centered between the street lines and having a crown of not more than eight (8) inches as the city engineer or his representative may direct. In no instance, except where unusual conditions may occur, shall the percentage of grade be less than one (1) percent or more than ten (10) percent. If in the opinion of the city engineer, or his duly appointed representative, there limits cause undue hardship, he may adjust the grade to fit existing ground conditions. All sod and other vegetable matter shall be excavated and all boulders or ledge shall be removed or broken off to a depth approved by the street commissioner and city engineer or their representatives, and all excavations shall be made in conformity with the requirements of the subdivision plans. The slopes of earth cuts and fills shall be neat and true to the line shown on the plans and not steeper than one (1) or two (2) or as ordered. The subgrade shall be brought to a uniform surface, the grades of which shall be checked and approved by the city engineer or his representative prior to the surfacing. Upon the prepared subgrade shall be spread a uniform gravel or broken stone surface which shall have a minimum depth after compaction of eight (8) inches except where ledge rock is encountered the depth shall be increased to twelve (12) inches after compaction. All surfacing material shall be approved prior to placing by the street commissioner and city engineer or their representatives. The finished surface shall be thoroughly compacted by rolling and uniformly graded as specified on the plans. Upon this prepared surface a coating of bituminous material approved by the street commissioner or his representative shall be applied at the rate of not less than three-quarters of a gallon per square yard. After application of the bituminous material no traffic shall be allowed on the roadway for a period of at least four (4) hours. The bituminous material shall then be covered with sufficient clean, sharp sand to prevent the formation of any puddles of bituminous material. The sanding shall be done subject to the approval of the street commissioner or his representative. 
(d)  All necessary storm drains that are required by good construction practice and approved by the city engineer and street commissioner shall be built at the sole expense of the applicant, owner or developer. Storm drains shall include all necessary pipe lines, manholes, catch basins and appurtenances sufficient and adequate to provide proper drainage. As an alternate to underground pipes, paved gutters conforming to specifications of the city engineer may be used if approved by the street commissioner on all grades of three (3) percent or greater. 
(e)  The owners shall also at their own expense, set stone or concrete monuments at least six (6) inches by six (6) inches on top by three (3) feet in depth establishing all street corners and angles in the street line. The tops of these monuments are to be set to the accepted grade. Upon the completion of the above procedure the city engineer and street commissioner shall certify to the street committee of the board of aldermen that the various regulations as stated in this section have been complied with. 
(f)  To ensure the completion of the improvements, to the extent required by these regulations or which may be required by the board of aldermen, including the setting of all monuments, the construction of all roads and the installation of all required drainage facilities within two (2) years of the date of the approval of the record subdivision plan, and where required, the dedication of any land to the public use within two (2) years and three (3) months of such approval, the applicant shall within thirty (30) days of the approval of lines and grades by the board of aldermen and prior to the filing of the record map, file with the city clerk a surety bond in favor of the city executed by a surety company authorized to enter into such bonds under the laws of this state which shall be in such amount and in such forms and contain such conditions as the board of aldermen shall require. The bond shall not be released until the board of aldermen, upon written statement by the city engineer and the street commissioner, shall have determined that all of the bond conditions have been fully satisfied and streets, boulevards, highways or public ways have been formally accepted as thoroughfares by the board of aldermen. 
(g)  Any person who shall violate any provisions of this section shall upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) or not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or be imprisoned in the county jail for a period of not more than thirty (30) days, or both such fine and imprisonment, except that nothing herein contained shall be deemed to bar any legal or equitable action to restrain or enjoin any act in violation of this section. Any person found guilty of any such violation who after notification in writing by the city clerk, shall thereafter continue such violation shall be fined for each day of such continued violation, not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and the persons responsible for each continued violation may be imprisoned for not more than thirty (30) days. 
(Comp. Ords. 1975, § 3.2) 
Cross reference- Building permit requirements for structures not on a public street, § 3-34. 
Sec. 14-15. - Obstructions on sidewalks and highway rights-of-way. 
(a)  Sidewalks. 
(1)  It shall be the duty of the occupant, owner, or of the person having the care of any building or land abutting any street in the city where there is a foot path or public sidewalk, whether the same be paved or not, to keep said sidewalk free from snow, ice, sleet, mud, stone, rubbish, or any fixtures or materials including, but not limited to, vending machines, dumpsters, retail merchandise, signs or any other obstruction, so as to permit the free and safe passage of pedestrians through the same. 
(2)  No person shall place, store or display, on a public sidewalk, any object or material such as, but not limited to, vending machines, dumpsters, retail merchandise or signs. Temporary approval for the use of the public sidewalk for a special purpose may be authorized by the board of aldermen. 
(b)  Highway rights-of-way. 
(1)  No person, firm, corporation or company shall place, install, construct or store within the limits of a city street or state highway right-of-way any fence, wall, sign, structures, vending machine or earth materials, (including fill or boulders). 
(2)  Trees or shrubs may be planted within a city street right-of-way with the permission of the tree warden provided it is located at least three (3) feet from the edge of pavement and it is of a species acceptable to the tree warden and such plantings will not hinder the line of sight on any city street or access to or from any private driveway of public road. Permission must be obtained from the state department of transportation in order to plant with the state highway right-of-way. 
(3)  No fence, wall, structure, hedge, shrubbery grading or other obstruction to vision at a street intersection in excess of three (3) feet in height above the centerline road elevation shall be placed or allowed to grow or exist within the area of a triangle formed by joining points on each streetline fifty (50) feet from the point of intersection of the two (2) streetlines, and the two (2) streetlines. No hedge, shrub, tree or other growth shall be maintained so as to create an unsafe condition to the general public 
(c)  Enforcement and penalty. 
(1)  The city police department shall be responsible for enforcing the provisions of this section (subsection (a)(1) and (2)) relative to keeping sidewalks free from snow, ice, sleet, mud, stone rubbish, fixtures, materials, vending machines, retail merchandise, signs or any other obstructions. Any person willfully refusing to remedy and such conditions when notified by the city shall by guilty of a misdemeanor and upon complaint by the city police department to the superior court and upon conviction of the same shall not be fined more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for such offense. The penalty provided in this subsection shall not be in lieu of the collection of the cost of remedying such condition by the city. 
(2)  The city shall have the right to order the removal from the city street right-of-way including sidewalks and areas near intersections, any and all objects including, but not limited to, those previously described in this section which may create an unsafe condition to the general public. The director of public works or his agent shall notify the landowner of occupant in writing of the unsafe condition and order the responsible party to correct the condition within thirty (30) days of such notification or such time as may be specified in the notice. Said order and notification shall be either personally served by an indifferent person or sent by certified mail, return receipt requested. No notice shall be required for removing items including trees and shrubbery from a city right-of-way that hinder pedestrian or vehicular travel including any hedge, tree or shrub. 
(3)  Such landowner or occupant shall have the right to appeal such order to the board of aldermen, which appeal shall be filed with the clerk of the board within ten (10) days of the mailing of the original notice. The board of aldermen shall conduct a hearing on said appeal with thirty (30) days of the receipt of the appeal. The decision of the board of aldermen shall be final. 
(4)  In the event that the landowner or occupant does not comply with the order, requests an extension of time to complete the necessary remedy or appeals the order, the director of public works is authorized to remove the object and/or remedy such condition within the city street right-of-way, and charge the costs thereof to such person so failing, and such costs shall be a lien upon the property occupied by such person where the condition existed, and such lien shall date from the time such notice was served and may be foreclosed in the same manner as liens for taxes. 
(5)  The right of the city to order the removal of objects within a city street right-of-way and adjacent to intersections shall apply to all objects which existed in the right of way before the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived that in the opinion and of the city creates an unsafe condition. 
(Ord. No. 521, 4-9-87; Ord. No. 808, 4-12-07; Ord. No. 877, 3-13-14) 
Cross reference- Access to fire hydrants, § 4-5. 
Sec. 14-16. - Numbering of houses and commercial buildings. 
(a)  Every property located within the city shall be posted with its proper street number visible from its street frontage for clear and ready identification by emergency service personnel. 
(b)  Any owner of property who is found to be in violation of this section shall be directed to comply therewith within fourteen (14) days of notice of the violation. Any owner of property who is thereafter found to be in violation after having received such notification shall be fined ten dollars ($10.00) per day. 
(Ord. No. 702, 7-11-96) 
Secs. 14-17-14-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STREET EXCAVATIONS, TRAFFIC CONTROL 

Sec. 14-51. - Permit-Required. 
(a)  No person shall make any opening, excavation, or construct any walk, curb, pavement, driveway, or perform other construction work within, on, through, or under any public street, highway or public right-of-way located in the city, including a state highway, for any purpose whatsoever, unless a permit has been obtained pursuant to this article from the director of public works or his designated agent. Any permit issued shall be valid for a period of ninety (90) days from the date thereof. Any work performed pursuant to such permit shall be subject to approval by the director of public works or his designated representative. 
(b)  On state highways located within the city, the city street opening permit must be obtained. A twenty-five dollar ($25.00) city street opening permit shall be required where a public sidewalk within a state right-of-way is impacted by the excavation. A no fee city street opening permit is required in all other cases. This article does not supersede any regulations as set forth by the state department of transportation with regard to excavation in state highways. 
(Ord. No. 454, §§ a-c, 2-9-84; Ord. No. 715, 10-9-97; Ord. No. 791, 4-14-05; Ord. No. 818, 4-12-07; Ord. No. 877, 3-13-14) 
Cross reference- Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 9. 
Sec. 14-52. - Same-Notice to director of public works; term. 
    The director of public works and the police department shall be notified at least twenty-four (24) hours in advance of actually starting any work authorized under a permit. Failure of the permittee to notify the city will result in the revocation of the permit. Permits are void three (3) months after their issue date. 
(Ord. No. 454, § j, 2-9-84; Ord. No. 715, 10-9-97; Ord. No. 791, 4-14-05; Ord. No. 818, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 14-53. - Public service companies. 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent making of any necessary excavation or the performance of any work related thereto by any public service company in the event of an emergency. In the event of an emergency, the public utility company shall notify the city immediately or if after hours the start of the next city hall business day at which time application for a permit shall be made. 
    Any public service company which has complied with the provisions of section 16-230 of the Connecticut General Statutes shall be exempted from the requirement of posting a bond as hereinbefore set forth and shall be further exempted from the requirement of paying a fee for the cost of permanent patching of the street opening as hereinbefore set forth provided that the utility shall place on file with the city a written agreement constituting a continuing obligation binding the utility to make the permanent repair required by this article at its own expense and in such a manner as is required by this article as if the work were to be done by the city contractor as further guaranteeing the quality of the workmanship and materials to the same extent as would the city contractor and agreeing to complete the work at the times required by the city engineer. The utility shall warranty all their permanent repairs for one (1) year. 
(Ord. No. 454, § d, 2-9-84; Ord. No. 715, 10-9-97; Ord. No. 791, 4-14-05; Ord. No. 818, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 14-54. - Requirements if closing of public highway required. 
    No highway may be closed without the approval of the traffic authority. Such approval shall only be issued in extraordinary circumstances, for a short period not to exceed one (1) work day, and when occupied properties can obtain access by an alternate route. If the work of the permittee requires the closing of a public highway for any period of time, notice shall be given in writing to the traffic authority and to the director of public works or his designated representative twenty-four (24) hours in advance. The traffic authority may determine the need for closing the highway and may require the work or work method be so altered as to provide for traffic flow. The director or his agent shall provide written notice to the police and fire departments upon receipt of notice of the intent in advance of closing any public highway. 
(Ord. No. 454, § c, 2-9-84; Ord. No. 715, 10-9-97; Ord. No. 791, 4-14-05; Ord. No. 818, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 14-55. - Tunneling or jacking. 
    Tunneling or jacking shall be permitted only when plans prepared by a registered engineer are submitted to and approved by the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 454, § g, 2-9-84; Ord. No. 715, 10-9-97; Ord. No. 791, 4-14-05; Ord. No. 818, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 14-56. - Materials not to interfere with travel; barricades required. 
    All excavation materials shall be compactly piled and shall not interfere with public travel to any greater extent than necessary. Suitable barricades shall be provided, and warning lights kept burning between sunset and sunrise and any other time as may be required by the director of public works or his agent. If the location and extent of work is such that a traffic director, in the opinion of the director of public works or his agent, is required, such traffic director shall be provided at the expense and responsibility of the contractor. 
(Ord. No. 454, § g, 2-9-84; Ord. No. 715, 10-9-97; Ord. No. 791, 4-14-05; Ord. No. 818, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 14-57. - Backfilling. 
    Backfill in trenches within paved areas shall be placed in layers not more than twelve (12) inches thick and shall be thoroughly compacted by tamping or other approved means to the satisfaction of the director or his agent. Compaction equipment must be at the excavation site and shall be utilized during all backfilling operations. 
    The material used for backfill shall be subject to the inspection and approval of the director, or his agent, and if in his opinion, the excavated material is unsuitable for backfill, the contractor shall be required to dispose of the unsuitable materials in the amounts and proportions specified by the director or his agent. When backfill has been completed within fifteen (15) inches of the finished pavement or surface grade, the next fourteen (14) inches shall be filled and compacted using an approved grade of bank-run or processed gravel. The last two (2) inches shall be covered with adequate temporary hot bituminous paving material (when available) and in such a manner as shall be approved by the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 454, § h, 2-9-84; Ord. No. 715, 10-9-97; Ord. No. 791, 4-14-05; Ord. No. 818, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 14-58. - Inspections. 
    The director or his agent is empowered to inspect all excavations for workmanship and materials. The excavation may not be permanently backfilled without the director or his agent present at the site. The city will require the permittee to excavate and expose for inspection any portion of the excavation backfilled without inspection or authorization to backfill. 
(Ord. No. 454, § j, 2-9-84; Ord. No. 715, 10-9-97; Ord. No. 791, 4-14-05; Ord. No. 818, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 14-59. - Maintenance of work by contractor. 
    The contractor will be required to maintain his work until permanently paved by the city. During this period he shall inspect the trench at such regular intervals as may be necessary to maintain the area in satisfactory condition. The contractor shall make all necessary repairs, and in the event that the contractor fails to make such repairs as are deemed necessary and the city must perform any work, the contractor shall pay the cost of this work. Failure on the part of the city to give notice that repairs are needed shall not relieve the contractor of any of the duties set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. 454, § k, 2-9-84; Ord. No. 715, 10-9-97; Ord. No. 791, 4-14-05; Ord. No. 818, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 14-60. - City responsible for permanent repair. 
    The permanent repair of street openings shall be the responsibility of the city. The city shall charge each permittee a fee for cost of the permanent repair based on the area of the final repair as calculated by the city engineer. The square yard unit prices shall be annually determined by the city engineer in accordance with current costs and construction practices. A uniform method on which to base these costs shall be prescribed by the city engineer and approved by the director of public works. 
    In the event the size of the permanent repair exceeds the estimated size of permanent repair, the permittee shall pay the additional fee to the city within ten (10) working days. Failure to pay the additional fee will result in the permittee forfeiting any rights to future permits until the outstanding balance is received. 
(Ord. No. 454, § l, 2-9-84; Ord. No. 715, 10-9-97; Ord. No. 791, 4-14-05; Ord. No. 818, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 14-61. - Bituminous concrete. 
    Hot-laid bituminous concrete shall be as specified by the state department of transportation in their specifications and latest revisions for "Bituminous Concrete, Class 2". 
(Ord. No. 454, § m, 2-9-84; Ord. No. 715, 10-9-97; Ord. No. 791, 4-14-05; Ord. No. 818, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 14-62. - Liability of permittee for unsafe conditions or abandonment. 
    Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this article shall be subject to a fine of not more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each violation. Any person, firm or corporation who receives a permit and leaves an excavation in an unsafe condition in violation of any of the provisions of this article or abandons a street opening, shall be subject to a fine of not more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each violation and shall be liable for all costs incurred by the city to correct any condition. 
(Ord. No. 454, § o, 2-9-84; Ord. No. 715, 10-9-97; Ord. No. 791, 4-14-05; Ord. No. 818, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 14-63. - City's right to not issue, revoke permits. 
    Any permit may be revoked by the director of public works for just cause including, but not limited to, defective workmanship, trench settlement, failure to notify or nonpayment of additional fees. The director of public works may refuse to issue a permit to any person, firm or corporation which has not paid to the city any fees incurred under the provisions of the ordinance prior to making such permit application. 
(Ord. No. 454, § p, 2-9-84; Ord. No. 715, 10-9-97; Ord. No. 770, 2-13-03; Ord. No. 791, 4-14-05; Ord. No. 818, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 14-64. - Termination of permit; release of contractor's obligations. 
    No earlier than Six (6) months after completion of construction, the contractor shall apply for termination of the permit and release from any obligation involved thereafter. If in the opinion of the director or his agent the work is not satisfactorily completed or settlement is occurring, necessary repairs shall be undertaken by the contractor and an additional period of liability established by the director or his agent will be established before release. The installation of permanent repairs by the city to such opening shall terminate the permit and release the permittee from any obligations thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 454, § n, 2-9-84; Ord. No. 715, 10-9-97; Ord. No. 791, 4-14-05; Ord. No. 818, 4-12-07; Ord. No. 877, 3-13-14) 
ARTICLE III. - CONSTRUCTION 

Sec. 14-65. - Driveways, walks and curbs. 
    No driveway, walk or curb shall be constructed and no alteration or repair shall be performed on any driveway, walk or curb, paved or otherwise within the public highway right-of-way of the city, until the required permit has been obtained. Permittees shall conform to the following regulations: 
(1)  No driveway, shall extend into the street further than the curb line or within any regularly constituted crosswalk and shall not be closer than twenty (20) feet to a driveway on the same property. 
(2)  No private driveway shall be constructed in excess of twenty (20) feet in width not shall it extend beyond the extension of the side property line of an abutting property. 
(3)  No public or commercial driveway shall be constructed in excess of thirty (30) feet in width without approval of the chief of police and the director of public works or his authorized representative, nor be closer than five (5) feet from a side property line nor shall the flare of the approach extend beyond the extension of the side property line of an abutting property. 
(4)  Before a permit for a driveway can be issued, the applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the office of the city engineer that adequate sightline will be available and that the installation of the driveway will not cause any adverse condition. In the event of a dispute the final decision will be made by the public works director. 
(5)  All driveways, walks and curbs shall be constructed in accordance with the specifications of the city and as on file in the office of the city engineer. 
(6)  All portions of new driveways within the city street right-of-way (including new subdivisions) shall be paved a minimum distance of ten (10) feet as measured from the edge of street pavement in a manner approved by the city engineer. 
(7)  All curbs shall be constructed of concrete, machine laid asphalt or granite in accordance with the specifications of the city engineer and as on file on his office. Location and elevation shall be obtained from the office of the city engineer. 
(8)  All phases of the work involved in the construction or repair of driveways, walks and curbs shall be subject to the inspection and supervision of the director of public works or his authorized agent. 
(9)  A permit to construct a driveway and other required improvements on a city street shall be obtained prior to the issuance of a building permit. All work required under the permit shall be completed or bonded to the satisfaction of the city prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(10)  The city reserves the right to require a driveway permittee, for a new home, to install curbing along the front of the lot on an existing city accepted street and maintain pre-existing discharges of storm water from the street onto the property. 
(Ord. No. 520, 4-9-87; Ord. No. 800, § 2, 8-10-06; Ord. No. 877, 3-13-14) 
Sec. 14-66. - Stormwater drains. 
    No person, firm, corporation or company shall make any connection or install pipe from surface or subsurface drainage to the stormwater system of the City of Shelton except as herein provided: 
(a)  The property owner shall not have any claim against the city for any and all damages resulting from said connection and specifically relinquishing any claim said property owner may otherwise have against the city caused by the backing up of drain water through said drain system. 
(b)  No one shall be allowed to drain water by means of a pipe into an open gutter or discharge to the ground surface at the highway line unless authorized by the director and in no instance if an underground drainage system exists in the street abutting the property to be drained. 
(c)  The director or his agent may specify the location at which a connection may be made to the system and may at his discretion require a backwater valve to be incorporated in the system. 
(d)  Where a driveway crosses or must cross a ditch, swale or water course, the size of the culvert shall be approved by the city and the structure maintained by the property owner. 
(e)  Where opening of the pavement is required, it shall in all instances conform with previous sections of this article. 
(f)  No person, firm, corporation or company shall discharge water or any other substance, material unto a city street and/or city right-of-way. 
(g)  Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be fined one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each violation with each day constituting a separate violation in the case of continuing violation. The fine shall be in addition to and not in lieu of injunctive relief, which shall be enforced through the issuance of an injunction by a court of competent jurisdiction and any other remedy permitted by law. 
(Ord. No. 520, 4-9-87; Ord. No. 800, § 3, 8-10-06) 
Cross reference- Utilities, Ch. 17. 
Chapter 15 - TAXATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Board of apportionment and taxation, § 5.1.1.1; board of tax review, § 5.3.1. 
Cross reference- Administration generally, Ch. 2; licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 9. 
State Law reference- Boards of finance, G.S. § 7-340 et seq.; finance and taxation, G.S. § 12-40 et seq.; general provisions, G.S. § 7-398 et seq.; municipal auditing act, G.S. § 7-391 et seq.; municipal bond issues, G.S. § 7-369 et seq.; municipal reserve fund, G.S. § 7-359 et seq.; town deposit fund, G.S. § 7-350; treasurer, G.S. § 7-79 et seq.; uniform fiscal years, G.S. § 7-381 et seq. 

Sec. 15-1. - Property tax exemption for tax-exempt organizations. 
(a)  Any property tax exemption permitted by subsections 7 through 16, inclusive, of section 12-81 of the general statutes shall apply to property of such tax-exempt organization as of the date of acquisition, or in the case of property purchased prior to the effective date hereof, such exemption shall apply to the property as of the effective date hereof. 
(b)  If the tax-exempt organization is required at the time of acquisition of the property to reimburse the vendor for any tax liability, covering a period subsequent to the date of purchase, the tax-exempt organization shall be reimbursed therefor by the city, upon filing by the tax-exempt organization of an application for reimbursement. The application shall be filed with the city clerk. In the application there shall be stated, under oath, the amount of the reimbursement. 
(Comp. Ords. 1975, § 7.2) 
Sec. 15-2. - Veteran's exemption. 
    The board of aldermen, being the legislative body of the city, approves the additional exemption of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for those veterans of limited income as set forth in section 12-81F of the general statutes. Any future increase in the exemption shall require additional approval of the board of aldermen. The assessor shall provide such implementation of this section as section 12-81F requires. 
(Ord. No. 484, 10-10-85) 
Sec. 15-2.1. - Same-Motor vehicles of disabled veterans. 
(a)  The board of aldermen, being the legislative body of the city, and pursuant to section 12-81(h) of the Connecticut General Statutes hereby approves an exemption from property tax of any one (1) motor vehicle owned by any veteran provided that such veteran meets the following conditions: 
(1)  Veteran shall be defined as an individual who meets the requirements of section 12-81(19) of the general statutes as that statute may from time to time be amended. 
(2)  The veteran must be disabled and have a disability rating by the Veterans Administration of the United States or is receiving a pension, annuity or compensation from the United States because of the loss in service of a leg or arm or that which is considered by the rules of the United States Pension Office or the Bureau of War Risk Insurance the equivalent of such loss. 
(3)  The motor vehicle must be specially equipped for purposes of adapting its use to the disability of such veteran. 
(b)  Provided all conditions have been satisfactorily met, the assessor shall note an exemption of 100% with the assessment year commencing October 1, 1991, or any assessment year thereafter, following the submission of documentation by the veteran that he qualifies as required herein, whichever is later. 
(c)  The assessor shall require an application to be filed by the veteran annually and not later than the date of the assessment list to which such exemption is claimed together with documentary evidence of disability rating and that the motor vehicle is specially equipped and such other evidence as may be required by the assessor to evidence that the veteran qualifies under these conditions. 
(Ord. No. 615, 3-14-91) 
Sec. 15-3. - Property tax exemption for the blind. 
    The board of aldermen being the legislative body of the city, approves the additional property tax exemption for blind persons allowed by Public Act 85-165 effective with the assessment year commencing October first, 1985; provided however, that any future increase in the exemption shall require specific approval of the board of aldermen. 
(Ord. No. 485, 10-10-85) 
Sec. 15-4. - Abatement of housing authority taxes. 
    Pursuant to section 8-215 of the general statutes, the taxes on property owned by the housing authority of the city used for low and moderate income housing are abated, provided that the city, the housing authority and the commission of community affairs of the state shall enter into a contract providing for such abatement; under the conditions set forth in section 8-215 and for a reimbursement to the city equal to the amount of taxes abated pursuant to section 8-216 such content to be executed by the mayor. 
(Ord. No. 105, § a, 9-29-69) 
Sec. 15-5. - Installment payments on real estate taxes authorized. 
(a)  Taxpayers meeting the requirements of subsection (b) of this section shall have the option of making payment of real estate taxes on their principal residence in quarterly installments which shall become due and payable on the first day of July, October, January and April in each fiscal year. 
(b)  To be eligible to exercise the option in subsection (a) of this section the taxpayer shall: 
(1)  Have been a resident of the city at least one (1) year prior to the date that the first payment becomes due; 
(2)  Be of the age of sixty-five (65) or older or be the spouse of a joint taxpayer sixty-five (65) years of age or older or the surviving spouse of a taxpayer who had, while living, exercised said option; 
(3)  Be current in all taxes owed to the city. 
(c)  For payments due on July first of each year, application for the deferred payment shall be made to the assessor not later than June thirtieth in any year and for payments due on January first of each year, application shall be made not later than the preceding December thirtieth. 
(d)  Tax payments of persons who have exercised their option under this section shall not be considered delinquent until the first day of the month following the due date and shall bear interest from that date forward pursuant to statute. 
(e)  The tax assessor and the tax collector shall maintain records of eligible persons and shall take such other steps as shall be necessary to implement this section. Once a taxpayer has been deemed to be eligible under the terms of this section, reapplication need not be made except where there is a change in status. 
(f)  If at any time a payment of taxes to the city is not paid when due, taxpayers who have qualified for and exercised the quarterly tax payment option shall lose the option until such time as taxes are made current. 
(Ord. No. 448, §§ 1-6, 9-8-83) 
Sec. 15-6. - Tax exemption of certain real property owned by the Shelton Land Conservation Trust. 
(a)  Pursuant to general statutes section 12-81b, the board of aldermen move that the property held by the Shelton Land Conservation Trust, described in Schedule "A" attached hereto shall be exempt from property tax. Such tax exemption shall be effective as of the date of acquisition of such property by the Shelton Land Conservation Trust (December 24, 1986) and shall terminate upon the encumbrance, sale or transfer of such property to any other party. 
(b)  The property referred to in this section and set forth in Schedule "A" attached shall be two (2) parcels located at (i) Leavenworth Road, assessor's map 57, Lot 2, consisting of 43.3 acres and (ii) Beardsley Road, assessor's map 20, Lot 13 consisting of 32.7 acres. 
(c)  The tax exemption granted by this section shall apply exclusively to that property which is specifically described herein: 
(1)  First parcel: That certain piece or parcel of land, with all improvements thereon, situated in the City of Shelton, County of Fairfield, State of Connecticut, bounded and described as follows: 
On the easterly side of the highway, bounded northerly by land of Warren C. Hubbell, easterly by land of Warren C. Hubbell and Hobart C. Hubbell and southerly by land of Hobart C. Hubbell and highway, and westerly by land of Warren C. Hubbell, and contains lots known as woodland, quarry lot, bear lot, Frank's Meadow, Little Booth's Meadow and other small fields. Being the same premises as described as Second Piece in Quit Claim Deed from Steven Kosouski, a/k/a, et al to Frank Kosowsky, et als, dated June 20, 1968 and recorded in Volume 228, Page 559 of the Shelton Land Records. [2] 
(2)  Second parcel: All that certain piece or parcel of land situated in the City of Shelton, County of Fairfield and State of Connecticut, consisting of 32.7 acres, more or less, and described on a certain map entitled "Map of Property in Shelton, Connecticut, for Fay Louise Rodia, dated March 20, 1980, Scale 1" = 100' and prepared by Stephen C. Bombero, Sr." and further bounded as follows: 
Northerly: By land now or formerly of Anna Bachkowsky, et al, 1198.70 feet, more or less; 
Easterly: By land of John F. Bigley, 927.79 feet, more or less; 
Southerly: By land now or formerly of Mary Louise Strand, Trustee, 50 feet, more or less; 
Easterly again: By land now or formerly of Mary Louise Strand, Trustee, 396.50 feet, more or less; 
Southerly: By Route #110, also known as Leavenworth Road, 827.82 feet, more or less; 
Westerly: By land now or formerly of Joseph R. & Solange Kay, 400.00 feet, more or less; 
Southerly again: By land now or formerly of Joseph R. & Solange Kay, 215 feet, more or less; 
Westerly again: By land now or formerly of Robert P. & Marcella Stockmal, 1027.12 feet, more or less. 
(Ord. No. 516, 3-12-87) 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Said first parcel is more particularly bounded and described on a map entitled: "Map prepared for Esther Klos, Frank Kosowsky, Julia Kosowsky, Anne Paluska, Mary Sysko and Helen Torwich, Shelton, Connecticut, Scale 1 in. = 100 ft., September 1980." 

Sec. 15-7. - Elderly tax relief. 
    Pursuant to the authority granted by section 12-129n of the Connecticut General Statutes, the city shall amend its elderly property tax relief program, effective with the fiscal year commencing July 1, 2007, based upon the grand list of October 1, 2006, in the following amounts: 
(1)  For those taxpayers who meet the eligibility requirements set forth in section 12-129b of the Connecticut General Statutes, the income limitations set forth in section 12-170aa of the Connecticut General Statutes, and further meet the eligibility requirement of subsection (2), below, said taxpayer will be eligible to receive, in addition to the tax relief provided by state statute, an additional relief from the City of Shelton in the amount of three hundred dollars ($300.00) per year. 
(2)  To be eligible for property tax relief under this section, the taxpayer must apply on a biennial basis as directed by the city assessor between February 1 and May 15. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (1), above, a taxpayer must also meet the following eligibility requirements: 
a.  The taxpayer must have owned their residence in the City of Shelton for at least one (1) year and the taxpayer must have resided in said residence for at least nine (9) months during the previous fiscal year. 
b.  Excluding the value of the real property located in the City of Shelton, the taxpayer's remaining assets may not exceed two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00) as attested to in the signed application for tax relief. 
c.  The taxpayer must be sixty-five (65) years of age or older. 
d.  No tax credit shall be given under this program to any person(s) who is delinquent in payment of any taxes, assessments, or usage fees to the City of Shelton. 
(3)  The tot al tax abatement of property tax revenue which may be granted in any such tax year shall not exceed an amount equal to ten (10) percent of the total real property tax assessed in the city for the preceding tax year. 
(4)  No relief provided under the provisions of this section, together with any relief received by any such taxpayer under the provisions of section 12-129b et seq. and section 12-170aa et seq. of the Connecticut General Statutes shall exceed in the aggregate the total amount of the tax which would, absent for relief granted under this section, Connecticut General Statutes sections 12-129b et seq. and 12-170aa et seq., be due from said taxpayer. 
(5)  The tax relief granted to a taxpayer under the provisions of this section may not exceed seventy-five (75) percent of the taxes levied against the taxpayer without said programs. 
(6)  For purposes of this section, married taxpayers shall be considered one (1) taxpayer. If an eligible taxpayer dies, the surviving spouse of a taxpayer who has been entitled to relief pursuant to this section must satisfy all of the requirements of this section during the next application phase as described in subsection (2), above, and must meet all requirements provided herein in order to be eligible for the tax relief provided. 
(Ord. No. 666, 2-10-94; Ord. No. 693, 3-14-96; Ord. No. 801, 8-10-06) 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 666, adopted February 10, 1994, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, inclusion as § 15-7 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 15-7.1. - Property tax relief for certain elderly homeowners. 
(a)  The City of Shelton hereby adopts the provisions of Connecticut General Statutes, section 12-170v, as same may be amended from time to time. 
(b)  The City of Shelton hereby adopts the procedure set forth in Connecticut General Statutes, section 12-170w(a), as the application procedure for said program. 
(c)  Any person knowingly making a false application for the purpose of claiming property tax relief under this section and Connecticut General Statutes, section 12-170v or 12-170w, shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(d)  Any person who fails to disclose all matters relating thereto or with intent to defraud or makes a false statement shall refund the municipality all tax relief improperly taken. 
(e)  This tax freeze program shall only be available to eligible Shelton taxpayers whose taxes are paid in full as of the date of application. 
(f)  Passage of this section shall be effective with the fiscal year commencing July 1, 2008, upon the Grand List of October 1, 2007. 
(g)  It is the intent of the municipality not to establish a lien on the "frozen property." 
(h)  It is the intent of the municipality not to impose an asset limit upon the applicant of the "frozen property." 
(i)  Tax relief shall not exceed seventy-five (75) percent of the taxes levied without said program. 
(j)  This section be evaluated when specific enrollment and tax data are known. 
(Ord. No. 831, 10-11-07) 
Sec. 15-8. - Tax refunds of less than five dollars. 
    Pursuant to section 12-129 of the Connecticut General Statutes as amended by section 10 of Public Act 95-283, the tax collector of the city is authorized to retain payments received in excess of the amount of taxes due as defined in section 12-129, provided that the amount of excess payment is less than five dollars ($5.00). 
(Ord. No. 694, 3-14-96) 
Sec. 15-9. - Board of assessment appeals; additional members. 
    The board of aldermen of the City of Shelton may appoint two (2) additional members to the board of tax review, also known as the board of assessment appeals, for any assessment year in which a revaluation becomes effective, for the assessment year of revaluation and for the assessment year following such year of revaluation. No more than two (2) of which shall be from the same political party. The term of said additional member shall be for one (1) year. 
(Ord. No. 754, 6-14-01) 
Sec. 15-10. - Exempting certain motor vehicles adapted for disabled. 
(1)  Purpose. Pursuant to the authority granted to municipalities by section 12-81c of the Connecticut General Statutes, the City of Shelton herein enacts this section to exempt from personal property taxation any specially equipped motor vehicle (as herein defined) owned by a person with disabilities or owned by the parent or guardian of a person with disabilities. 
(2)  Definitions. 
(a)  Person with disabilities means any person who has a physical impairment which requires the special adaptive equipment referenced in the definition of "specially equipped motor vehicle" in order to adapt the use of such vehicle to the physical impairment of that person. Persons with physical impairments of a limited duration shall not be considered as "persons with disabilities". 
(b)  Specially equipped motor vehicle means a motor vehicle which has undergone a permanent and significant modification to its frame or other structural member by the bolting or welding of special equipment for the purpose of adapting its use to the physical impairment of a person with disabilities. Such equipment shall include raised roofs with roll-bar systems, raised doors, special control stations, dropped floors, kneeling systems, wheelchair lift, ramp, hand controls, cart lift and any other device or mechanism necessary to permit the vehicle's operation. 
(c)  Motor vehicle means a vehicle as defined by section 14-1(47) of the Connecticut General Statutes. 
(3)  Exemption. Any specially equipped motor vehicle shall be exempt from personal property taxation upon compliance with the terms of this section. Any such exemption shall expire when the vehicle is sold or ceases to be used for transportation of the disabled person. 
(4)  Medical documentation and expiration of exemption. The assessor shall require written and signed documentation verifying that the installation of the special equipment is directly related to the physical impairment of the person with disabilities in order to adapt the operation or the accommodation of the specially equipped motor vehicle to such person with disabilities. A physician licensed to practice medicine in the State of Connecticut shall provide such documentation. Any such exemption shall expire when the vehicle is sold or ceases to be used for transportation of the disabled person. 
(5)  Applications. Applications to establish eligibility for the exemption permitted by this section shall be filed annually with the office of the assessor not later than October 1. For motor vehicles purchased on or after October 1 in any assessment year, said application shall be filed not later than the following September 30. 
(6)  Assessment year. This section shall be first applicable to the assessment year commencing October 1, 2006. 
(Ord. No. 798, 4-13-06) 
Chapter 16 - TRAFFIC AND MOTOR VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 14. 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate traffic generally, G.S. § 7-148(c)(7)(B)(i); authority to regulate speed of vehicles, G.S. § 7-148(c)(7)(B)(ii); authority restricted, G.S. § 14-162. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 16-1. - Short title. 
    This article shall be known and may be cited as the traffic ordinance. 
(Comp. Ords. 1975, § 12.1(1)) 
Sec. 16-2. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
    Bus stop shall mean a space in a street approximately forty (40) feet long set apart for the use of buses only, for the purposes of picking up or discharging passengers. 
    Loading zone shall mean a space in a street set apart for the use of commercial vehicles only, for receiving or for discharging wares, merchandise or other goods. 
    Operator shall mean the person operating or in control of a vehicle on a public highway. 
    Parking shall mean the standing of a vehicle whether occupied or not upon a highway otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in receiving or discharging passengers or loading or unloading merchandise, or when stopped for any traffic regulations, traffic signs or signals. 
    Vehicle shall mean any device used for conveyance, drawing or other transportation of persons or property whether on wheel or runners or otherwise, when on a public highway. 
(Comp. Ords. 1975, § 12.1(2)) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 16-3. - Duty of department of police. 
    It shall be the duty of the department of police to regulate, direct and control traffic in the streets and highways of the city in accordance with the law. All operators of vehicles shall obey the directions as communicated by signals or otherwise of the traffic officers and police given in the performance of their duty. 
(Comp. Ords. 1975, § 12.1(3)) 
Cross reference- Police, Ch. 13. 
Sec. 16-4. - Official, emergency vehicles to have right-of-way. 
    Police, fire department, fire patrol, traffic emergency repair, United States mail vehicles and ambulances shall have the right-of-way through any street and through any procession. 
(Comp. Ords. 1975, § 12.1(4)) 
Sec. 16-5. - Drivers of vehicles must draw to curb on approach of emergency vehicles. 
    The driver of any vehicle on the approach of a fire engine or any other fire apparatus or any ambulance shall immediately draw the vehicle up to a parallel to the right-hand curb and cause it to stop until the fire engine apparatus or ambulance has passed. 
(Comp. Ords. 1975, § 12.1(5)) 
Sec. 16-6. - Permission to parade. 
    No person shall parade or participate in any parade, procession or public display upon any public street in the city without first obtaining written permission to do so from the mayor. Such permit shall designate the approximate number of persons or vehicles to participate in the parade, procession or public display and shall further specify the route to be taken by such parade, procession or public display and the approximate time when such parade, procession or public display shall start and stop and the traffic commission of the city shall have the power to make regulations for the safe and orderly passage of such parade, procession or public display within the city and may forbid the running or operation of other vehicles upon the streets during such time as such parade, procession or public display are to take place, which regulation shall be published in a newspaper having a circulation in the city at least twenty-four (24) hours before such regulations are to become effective, and shall be enforced by the police department in the same manner as the ordinances of this city. 
(Comp. Ords. 1975, § 12.1(8)) 
State Law reference- Authority of city to regulate parades, G.S. § 7-148(c)(7)(H)(i). 
Sec. 16-7. - Bus stops. 
    The traffic commission of the city shall designate bus stops by proper marking and no operator of a motor vehicle shall park the same within the limits of such designated bus stop. 
(Comp. Ords. 1975, § 12.1(17)) 
Sec. 16-8. - One-way streets. 
    The following streets or portions thereof are designated as "one-way streets": Bridge Street to the west of the canal and on the south side thereof from the viaduct entrance to Canal Street, and Bridge Street to the east of the canal and on the south side thereof. No operator of a vehicle shall cause the vehicle being operated by him to proceed on such southerly portions of Bridge Street except in an easterly direction and on Bridge Street to the west of the canal on the north side thereof from the viaduct entrance to Canal Street, and Bridge Street to the east of the canal and on the north side thereof, and no operator of a vehicle shall cause the vehicle to be operated by him to proceed on such northerly portions of Bridge Street except in a westerly direction. 
(Comp. Ords. 1975, § 12.1(18)) 
Sec. 16-9. - Posting signs. 
    The local traffic authority shall post signs designating restricted parking streets or portions thereof and shall post such signs as are necessary to designate one-way streets, and such other signs as are necessary to indicate the extent of the ordinance. 
(Comp. Ords. 1975, § 12.1(19)) 
Sec. 16-10. - Designation of through streets. 
    The traffic commission of the city may designate any highway or part thereof under the control of the city as a through way, but such designation shall become effective as to regulation of traffic at any intersection thereon only after signs have been erected at such intersection bearing the word "STOP" which signs shall be self-illuminated at night either by headlights of approaching motor vehicles or otherwise. 
(Comp. Ords. 1975, § 12.1(23)) 
Sec. 16-11. - Speed limit. 
    No operator of a motor vehicle shall operate such vehicle on the public streets of the city within the second district at a speed greater than twenty-five (25) miles per hour. 
(Comp. Ords. 1975, § 12.1(24)) 
State Law reference- Authority of city to regulate the speed of vehicles, G.S. § 7-148(c)(7)(B)(ii). 
Sec. 16-12. - Thru trucks prohibited on Grove Street. 
(a)  No person shall operate any truck on Grove Street in the city between Howe Avenue and Myrtle Street and between Riverdale Avenue to Howe Avenue nor on the east side of Park Street between Myrtle Street and Howe Street. 
(b)  "Truck" shall mean any vehicle designed or used for the transportation of property, merchandise, freight or employees of the owner or any vehicle whose body weight or whose combined body and load weight exceeds four thousand (4,000) pounds. 
(c)  The chief of police shall cause to be installed appropriate signs on Grove Street, which signs shall clearly indicate that "NO THRU TRUCKS" are allowed on that portion of Grove Street herein designated by this section. 
(d)  Any person violating the terms of this section shall, upon conviction, be punished in accordance with section 1-11. 
(Ord. No. 506, 8-14-86; Ord. No. 510, 11-13-86) 
Sec. 16-13. - Prohibiting the blocking of an intersection. 
    Prohibition on "blocking the box" as defined in Connecticut General Statutes Section 14-1 is adopted: 
(a)  No operator of a motor vehicle, other than a tractor-trailer unit, as defined in Connecticut General Statutes Section 14-1, shall proceed into an intersection that has been designated in subsection (b), except when making a turn, unless there is sufficient space on the opposite side of the intersection to accommodate such motor vehicle without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding the indication of a traffic control signal that would permit such operator to proceed into the intersection. 
(b)  The provisions of subsection (a) shall apply to the following intersections within the City of Shelton: 
(1)  Howe Avenue and White Street 
(2)  Howe Avenue and Bridge Street 
(3)  Howe Avenue and Center Street 
(4)  Center Street and Coram Avenue 
(c)  The City of Shelton shall post signs at each designated intersection indicating that blocking the intersection is prohibited and violators are subject to a ninety-nine dollar ($99.00) fine. 
(d)  The City of Shelton shall mark, in white paint, the boundary of each designated intersection with a line not less than one (1) foot in width and the area within such boundary line with parallel diagonal lines not less than one (1) foot in width. 
(e)  Any person in violation of the provisions of said section shall have committed an infraction. 
(Ord. No. 862, 2-9-12) 
Sec. 16-14. - Restricting the operation of a dirt bike, all terrain vehicle and mini motorcycle. 
A.  Definitions. 
(i)  All-Terrain Vehicle means a self-propelled vehicle designed to travel over unimproved terrain. 
(ii)  Dirt Bike means a two-wheeled Motorized Recreational Vehicle designed to travel over unimproved terrain and not designed for travel on a highway. 
(iii)  Mini-motorcycle is a vehicle that (1) has no more than three wheels in contact with the ground; (2) has a manufactured seat height of less than 26 inches, measured at the lowest point on top of the seat cushion without the rider; and (3) is propelled by an engine having a piston displacement of less than 50 cubic centimeters. 
(iv)  Motorized Recreational Vehicles (MRV) means snowmobiles, all-terrain vehicles, dirt-bikes and mini-motorcycles. 
(v)  Snowmobile means any self-propelled vehicle designed for travel on snow or ice, except vehicles propelled by sail. 
(vi)  Operate means to control the course of or otherwise use a dirt bike, snowmobile, all-terrain vehicle, mini-motorcycle, or similar vehicle. 
    The terms "dirt bike," "snowmobile," "all-terrain vehicle," "mini-motorcycle" and any motorized recreational vehicles shall not be deemed to include any of the following: 
(1)  Any registered "motorcycle" as defined in the C.G.S. § 14-1(46); 
(2)  Any registered "motor vehicle" as defined in C.G.S. § 14-1(47); 
(3)  Any moped that meets Federal Department of Transportation guidelines for use on streets and is approved by the State of Connecticut Department of Motor Vehicles for use on streets, provided, however, the moped is operated pursuant to all applicable state laws, rules and regulations and all other City of Shelton ordinances. 
(4)  Any wheelchair or similar mobility assisting device by a person with a physical disability or whose ambulatory mobility has been impaired due to age or physical ailment. 
(5)  Any self-propelled snow plow, snow blower or lawn mower when used for the purpose for which it was designed and operated at a speed not to exceed four (4) miles per hour; 
(6)  Any vehicle owned or leased by the City of Shelton; and 
(7)  Any vehicle as described in Sections A (i) - (v) above, which is used or operated by City of Shelton emergency service personnel during a response to an emergency or city task requiring their active participation. 
(8)  Any electric personal assistance mobility device (hereinafter "EPAMD") that is self-balancing, has two (2) non-tandem wheeled devices, is designed to transport only one (1) person, and has an electric propulsion system that limits the maximum speed of the device to twelve and one-half (12.5) miles per hour or less. 
B.  Operations. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to Operate a Motorized Recreational Vehicle and/or for any owner of a Motorized Recreational Vehicle to knowingly permit the operation of his or her Motorized Recreational Vehicle on any street or sidewalk in the City of Shelton or on any public property, including but not limited to school property, playgrounds and parks, within the city. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to ride as a passenger on a Motorized Recreational Vehicle and/or for any owner of a Motorized Recreational Vehicle to knowingly permit any person to ride as a passenger on his/her Motorized Recreational Vehicle operated in violation of subsection (1) above. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a Motorized Recreational Vehicle ride as a passenger on a Motorized Recreational Vehicle, and/or for any owner of a Motorized Recreational Vehicle to knowingly permit its operation on any private property, within the city, without first obtaining the written permission of the property owner if the property is not owned by the operator, passenger, and/or owner of the Motorized Recreational Vehicle. 
a.  It shall be unlawful to operate a Motorized Recreational Vehicle, to ride as a passenger on a Motorized Recreational Vehicle and/or for any owner of a Motorized Recreational Vehicle to knowingly permit its operation on private property before 8:00 a.m. or after 7:00 p.m. on weekdays, or before 9:00 a.m. or after 8:00 p.m. on weekends. 
(4)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an EPAMD and/or for any owner of an EPAMD to knowingly permit the operation of his/her EPAMD on any street in the City of Shelton, provided, however, an EPAMD may be operated on any public, sidewalk and/or crosswalk in the city. An operator of an EPAMD shall yield to pedestrians and any wheelchair or similar mobility-assisting device as defined within this section and shall comply with any applicable State of Connecticut laws or regulations. 
C.  Penalties. 
(1)  Any person who operates a Motorized Recreational Vehicle in violation of subsection (b)(1) of this section or is the owner of a Motorized Recreational Vehicle who knowingly permits its operations in violation of subsection (b)(1) of this section, may be fined a sum not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), but not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for a first offense, may be fined a sum not to exceed one thousand five hundred ($1,500.00), but not less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for a second offense, or may be fined a sum not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00), but not less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for any third or subsequent offense. 
(2)  Any person who rides as a passenger on a Motorized Recreational Vehicle in violation of subsection (b)(2) of this section, or is the owner of a Motorized Recreational Vehicle who knowingly permits a passenger to ride on his/her motor vehicle in violation of subsection (b)(2) of this section, may be fined a sum not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), but not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for a first offense, may be fined a sum not to exceed one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00), but not less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for a second offense, or may be fined a sum not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00), but not less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for any third or subsequent offense. 
(3)  Any person who operates a Motorized Recreational Vehicle in violation of subsection (b)(3) of this section, rides as a passenger on a Motorized Recreational Vehicle in violation of subsection (b)(3) of this section, or is the owner of a Motorized Recreational Vehicle who knowingly permits its operation in violation of subsection (b)(3) of this section may be fined a sum not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), but not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for a first offense, may be fined a sum not to exceed one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00), but not less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for a second offense, or may be fined a sum not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00), but not less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for any third or subsequent offense. 
(4)  Any person who operates a Motorized Recreational Vehicle in violation of subsection (b)(3)a, of this section, rides as a passenger on a Motorized Recreational Vehicle in violation of subsection (b)(3)a, of this section, or is the owner of a Motorized Recreational Vehicle who knowingly permits its operations in violation of subsection (b)(3)a, of this section may be fined a sum not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), but not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for a first offense, may be fined a sum not to exceed one thousand five hundred ($1,500.00), but not less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for a second offense or may be fined a sum not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00), but not less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for any third or subsequent offense. 
(5)  Any person who operates an EPAMD in violation of subsection (b)(4) of this section, or is the owner of an EPAMD who knowingly permits its operation in violation of subsection (b)(4) of this section, may be fined a sum not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00), but not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) for a first offense, may be fined a sum not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00), but not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a second offense, or may be fined a sum not to exceed three hundred dollars ($300.00), but not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for any third or subsequent offense. 
(6)  Any police officer who observes any person in violation of any subsection of subsection (b) of this section may detain such person for purposes of enforcing the provisions of this ordinance and may take the Motorized Recreational Vehicle in question into the custody of the Shelton Police Department, at the owner's expense, pending a disposition of such property by court order or otherwise by law and proof of ownership of such property (i.e., bill of sale). 
D.  In addition, the City of Shelton shall seize such Dirt Bike, All-Terrain Vehicle Snowmobile or Mini-Motorcycle for a violation of such Ordinance and same shall be forfeited to the City of Shelton. Any Dirt Bike, All-Terrain Vehicle, Snowmobile or Mini-Motorcycle ordered forfeited pursuant to such Ordinance shall be sold at public auction conducted by the City. The proceeds from such sale shall be paid to the City of Shelton Treasurer who shall deposit such proceeds into the General Fund of the municipality. 
(Ord. No. 906, 6-8-17) 
Secs. 16-15-16-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PARKING, STOPPING AND STANDING[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Fire lanes, § 4-4. 
State Law reference- Parking authorities, G.S. § 7-202 et seq.; creation, G.S. § 7-203; powers, G.S. § 7-204; financing of city parking authority, G.S. § 7-205; revenue bonds of city parking authority, G.S. § 7-206; rates and charges of municipal parking authority, G.S. § 7-207. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 16-21. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Operator shall mean the person operating or in control of a vehicle on a public highway. 
    Parking shall mean the standing of a vehicle whether occupied or not upon a highway or upon land areas devoted by the parking authority of the city to the standing of vehicles, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in receiving or discharging passengers, or loading or uploading merchandise or when stopped for any traffic regulations, traffic signs or signals. 
    Vehicle shall mean any device used for conveyance, drawing or other transportation of persons or property, whether on wheels or runs or otherwise, when on a public highway, except those which are operated upon rails or tracks. 
(Comp. Ords. 1975, § 16.1(1); Ord. No. 889, 4-9-15) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 16-22. - Parking meters authorized. 
    Whenever because of traffic conditions or otherwise the parking of vehicles on public streets or parts thereof, or upon areas devoted by the parking authority of the city for such purpose, cannot in the opinion of the traffic authority be adequately and efficiently regulated and controlled, the traffic authority of the city authorized the installation of parking meters, and designated parking meter zones, fixed the parking fee and the legal time in such zone, and has also fixed the hours during which the use of parking meters shall be required, and the chief of police in accordance therewith has caused lines or markers to be placed upon the curb or pavement or both of the street or other area set aside for such parking, adjacent to each parking meter in such zone designating the parking meter space for which such meter is to be used. 
(Comp. Ords. 1975, § 16.1(2)) 
Sec. 16-23. - Proper method of parking at metered spaces. 
(a)  When any vehicle shall be parked in any parking meter space adjacent to which a parking meter is located, the operator of such vehicle shall park it within the lines or marks established, excepting such vehicles whose length, width or load overlaps the lines or marks, and upon entering the parking space immediately deposit or cause to be deposited in the parking meter such proper coin of the United States as is required by the traffic authority for such parking meter and as is designated by proper direction on the meter, and failure to deposit such proper coin when so required shall constitute a violation of this section. 
(b)  Upon the deposit of such proper coin, and placing the meter in operation, the parking meter space may be lawfully occupied by such vehicle during the period of parking time which has been prescribed for the part of the street in which the parking meter space is located. If such vehicle shall remain parked in any such parking meter space beyond the parking time limit fixed for such parking meter space, and if the parking meter shall by its dial and pointer or otherwise indicate such illegal parking, then in that event, such vehicle parking time and such parking overtime beyond the period of legal parking time and such parking shall be deemed a violation of this section. 
(Comp. Ords. 1975, § 16.1(3)) 
Sec. 16-24. - Proper coins required in parking meters. 
    It shall be unlawful to deposit or cause to be deposited in any parking meter any slug, device or substitute for a proper coin of the United States. 
(Comp. Ords. 1975, § 16.1(4)) 
Sec. 16-25. - Damaging, defacing, etc., parking meters prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person not so authorized to deface, damage, tamper with, open or wilfully break, destroy or impair the usefulness of any parking meter installed under the provisions of this division or aid or abet in doing the same. 
(Comp. Ords. 1975, § 16.1(5)) 
Sec. 16-26. - Depositing additional coins in parking meters to extend legal parking time prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or cause to be deposited in any parking meter additional proper coins of the United States for the purpose of increasing or extending the legal parking time which has been established by the traffic authority for the parking meter space adjacent to which the parking meter is placed. 
(Comp. Ords. 1975, § 16.1(6)) 
Sec. 16-27. - Commercial vehicles exempted from use of parking meters while loading, unloading. 
    Vehicles bearing commercial license plates may occupy the parking meter space adjacent to any parking meter for the purpose of loading or unloading merchandise or packages without the deposit of a proper coin in the parking meter; provided that such loading or unloading is done as expeditiously as possible. 
(Comp. Ords. 1975, § 16.1(7)) 
Sec. 16-27.1. - Commercial vehicle parking. 
a.  For purposes of this section, "commercial vehicle" means: 
1.  Any vehicle requiring a commercial drivers license ("CDL"). 
2.  Any motor vehicle which exceeds a gross weight rating in excess of six thousand (6000) pounds or has two (2) rear axles or more. 
3.  A vehicle, with the exception of those used and housed at approved school or house of worship, designed to transport sixteen (16) or more passengers, including the driver. 
4.  A "semi-trailer" which is any trailer type vehicle designed and used in conjunction with a motor vehicle so that some part of its own weight and load rests on or is carried by another vehicle. 
5.  A "tractor" or "truck tractor" which is a motor vehicle designed and used for drawing a semitrailer. 
6.  A "tractor-trailer unit" which is a combination of a tractor and a trailer or a combination of a tractor and a semi-trailer. 
7.  A "trailer" which is any rubber-tired vehicle without motive power drawn or propelled by a motor vehicle. 
8.  A "truck" which is a motor vehicle designed, used or maintained primarily for the transportation of property. 
9.  A "commercial trailer" is any nonmotorized vehicle, whether attached or not attached to a motor vehicle, used in the conduct of a business to transport freight, materials or equipment. 
10.  A "camp trailer" is any trailer designed and used exclusively for camping or recreational purposes. 
11.  A "utility trailer" is any trailer designed and used to transport personal property, materials or equipment whether attached or not attached with a gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) of ten thousand (10,000) pounds or less. 
12.  A "camper" is any motor vehicle designed or permanently altered in such a way as to provide temporary living quarters for travel, camping or recreational purposes. 
b.  No commercial vehicle shall be parked on a city street or in a public right-of-way longer than one (1) hour, unless said commercial vehicle is actively engaged in the delivery of the specified commercial service, and the parking of such commercial vehicle is necessary to carry out the delivery of services at a specified address within said zone. 
c.  For a first violation of this ordinance, a written warning shall be issued. For subsequent violations of this ordinance, a ninety-nine dollar ($99.00) fine shall be imposed for each violation that the vehicle(s) is so parked. Each hour shall be an additional violation. In addition, said vehicle(s) may be towed and impounded at the driver's and/or owner's expense. 
(Ord. No. 830, §§ 1-3, 9-13-07; Ord. No. 889, 4-9-15) 
Sec. 16-28. - Towing of vehicles authorized for overtime parking, violation of parking regulations; notice; fees. 
    Whenever any vehicle shall be found parked in any parking space or on city property over the time and beyond the period of legal parking time established for such place by the traffic authority and/or the board/agency designated with the supervision and control of a specific piece of property, or shall be found parking in violation of any of the provisions of any resolution, rule or regulation of the traffic authority, such vehicle may be removed or conveyed by or under the direction of a member of the department of police by means of towing the same or otherwise. Such removal shall be at the risk of the owner; and before the owner or person in charge of such vehicle shall be permitted to remove the same shall furnish evidence of his identity and ownership or right to possession; pay the cost of towing and/or removal of the vehicle; shall sign a receipt for the vehicle; for a violation shall pay the clerk of the police department at headquarters the fine imposed, plus storage charges, provided, however, a police officer may in lieu of towing such vehicle serve upon the owner or operator thereof to appear at the office of police headquarters of the city before the time specified in such notice. 
(Comp. Ords. 1975, §§ 12.1(20), 16.1(8); Ord. No. 780, 5-13-04) 
Sec. 16-29. - Fine for overtime parking. 
    When any person shall receive a notice from the police department under section 16-28 to appear at the office of police headquarters of the city, such person may pay to the clerk the sum of ten dollars ($10.00), and upon payment of such amount a prosecution under this section shall be barred. 
(Comp. Ords. 1975, §§ 16.1(9), 12.1(21); Ord. No. 406, 11-13-80; Ord. No. 744, 6-8-00) 
Sec. 16-30. - Registration plate prima facie evidence of ownership. 
    In any prosecution or proceeding under this article, the registration plate displayed on the motor vehicle shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the owner of such vehicle was the person who parked such vehicle at the place where such violation occurred. 
(Comp. Ords. 1975, §§ 12.1(22), 16.1(10)) 
Sec. 16-31. - Police officer to make collections from parking meters. 
    It shall be the duty of the chief of police to designate a daytime regular duty officer of the police department to make regular collections of the coins deposited in parking meters. It shall be the duty of such person to take out the coins which are deposited in the parking meters and deliver such coins to the office of the chief of police. A supernumerary officer shall be appointed by the traffic commission to make repairs. 
(Comp. Ords. 1975, § 16.1(11)) 
Sec. 16-32. - Purpose of parking meter revenue. 
    The coins deposited in parking meters are required to provide for the proper regulation and control of traffic upon the streets in the city, to provide for the cost of acquiring or developing additional land areas to be devoted to parking vehicles; to provide for the cost of supervision; the regulating and control of the parking of vehicles in parking meter zones; and to cover the cost of purchase, supervision, protection, inspection, installation, operation, maintenance, control, and use of parking meters. 
(Comp. Ords. 1975, § 16.1(13)) 
Sec. 16-33. - Compliance with parking regulations required. 
    This division is adopted in the interest of public safety, convenience and welfare, and shall be liberally construed to effect the purpose hereof. Every person shall comply with, observe and obey, when applicable, all the provisions and requirements contained in this division. 
(Comp. Ords. 1975, § 16.1(12)) 
Sec. 16-34. - Winter parking restrictions. 
A)  No person shall park or cause to be parked any motor vehicle on the streets of the city between the hours of 12:01 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. during the months of January, February, March and December, except as follows: 
1)  On odd numbered days, parking shall be permitted during the aforementioned hours, only on the odd numbered side of any street. 
2)  On even numbered days, parking shall be permitted during the aforementioned hours only on the even numbered side of any street, provided any previously established parking regulation shall remain in effect and shall be superior to the provisions of this section. 
B)  No parking shall be permitted on any street during any snowstorm where the parking interferes with snow removal or cleaning operations. 
C)  This section is supplemental to any previously enacted ordinance concerning the parking of motor vehicles. 
D)  Any vehicles towed shall be stored at the police authorized towing company address. The fees for towing are regulated by the State of Connecticut. 
E)  A snow/winter storm emergency may be declared by the mayor of the city or the mayor's designee. The Mayor shall cause each declaration made pursuant to this chapter to be publicly announced by means of broadcast, telecasts from stations with normal operating range covering the city. Additionally, posting said declaration notice in newspapers of general circulation, and on the city's official web page. Each announcement shall describe the action taken by the mayor including the time it became or will become effective. Said notice may be issued by use of media, by the posting of signs or by any other appropriate means. The mayor or the Mayor's designee may further announce when said snow emergency will cease. 
F)  When such snow emergency is in effect, there shall be no on street parking in sections of the city where access to off-street parking is available including driveways and parking lots, unless otherwise exempted by the police department. 
G)  Any person violating the provisions of this ordinance may be fined $25.00 for the first violation and $50 for repeat violations. 
(Comp. Ords. 1975, § 16.4; Ord. No. 687, 5-11-95; Ord. No. 861, 2-9-12; Ord. No. 901, 12-8-16) 
Sec. 16-35. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 699, adopted May 9, 1996 repealed § 16-35 in its entirety. Former § 16-35 pertained to restricted parking at certain streets and derived from Comp. Ords. 1975, § 12.1(11-16). 
Sec. 16-36. - Parking parallel to curb required. 
    No operator of a vehicle shall park the vehicle except parallel to the curb on the right side of the vehicle so that the right wheels of the vehicle are within ten (10) inches thereof, except as hereinafter mentioned. 
(Comp. Ords. 1975, § 12.1(10)) 
Sec. 16-37. - Parking may be restricted during emergencies. 
    The traffic commission may, in case of emergency, restrict or forbid parking on any street or portion of a street of the city including those streets hereinafter mentioned during the time of such emergency. When practical during such emergency period, signs shall be posted designating such restrictions, and the police shall enforce such emergency restrictions in the same manner as the ordinances of the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 1975, § 12.1(9)) 
Sec. 16-38. - Computing time of parking. 
    When any vehicle shall be removed from one (1) position to another within five hundred (500) feet of where the vehicle was first parked in the city street, the time such vehicle shall be parked in all of such positions shall be reckoned together in computing the time the same has been parked within the meaning of this division. 
(Comp. Ords. 1975, § 12.1(6)) 
Sec. 16-39. - No parking generally. 
    No operator of a vehicle shall park the same or permit the same to stand within the intersection of any street or within ten (10) feet of any hydrant or within twenty-five (25) feet of any street intersection or within the limits of a bus stop, or within the limits of a "loading zone" or so as to obstruct a driveway from a street to abutting property or so as to obstruct traffic in any street except in case of an emergency or in obedience to the direction of a traffic officer. 
(Comp. Ords. 1975, § 12.1(7)) 
Sec. 16-40. - Parking authority-Created; name. 
(a)  Pursuant to the provisions of section 7-202 et seq., of the general statutes, there is hereby created and established a parking authority for the city. The parking authority is hereby vested with all of the rights and powers which are given to parking authorities under the general statutes and any powers which may be given to parking authorities under future additions or amendments to the general statutes. 
(b)  The name of the parking authority shall be the Shelton Municipal Parking Authority. 
(Comp. Ords. 1975, § 16.2(1, 2)) 
Sec. 16-41. - Same-Composition; appointment of members; terms; vacancies; compensation. 
    The parking authority shall consist of five (5) resident electors of the city who shall be appointed by the mayor, not more than three (3) of whom shall be from or of the same political party. Those first appointed shall be designated to serve for one (1), two (2), three (3), four (4), and five (5) years respectively and thereafter a member shall be appointed annually to serve for five (5) years, except that any vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired portion of the term in the same manner as the original appointment. Such authority shall select from among its members a chairman and may employ necessary personnel. The members of the parking authority shall serve without compensation but may be reimbursed for necessary expenses. No action of such parking authority shall be valid unless authorized by a vote of the majority of its members. 
(Comp. Ords. 1975, § 16.2(3)) 
Sec. 16-42. - Same-Revenues; annual report. 
    Any revenues received from off-street parking facilities by such parking authority shall be deposited monthly to the account of the municipal parking authority. Such parking authority shall maintain proper accounting and financial records and shall maintain proper accounting and financial records and shall make an annual report to the mayor and board of aldermen. 
(Comp. Ords. 1975, § 16.2(4)) 
Sec. 16-43. - Same-Collection, control of monies from on-street parking meters. 
    The parking authority of the city shall be authorized to collect and have control of all monies from the on-street parking meters in excess of twenty (20) percent annually of the sum, and may use such monies for its general purposes. The parking authority shall be responsible for the collection of the funds, and the installation and maintenance of the meters. The traffic authority shall designate the location of all on-street meters. 
(Comp. Ords. 1975, § 16.3) 
Sec. 16-44. - Repair, maintenance of parking meters. 
    Repair and maintenance of any and all parking meters in the city shall be done by a regular police officer of the police department. 
(Comp. Ords. 1975, § 16.2(5)) 
Sec. 16-45. - Towing of illegally parked vehicles. 
(a)  The police department and the members thereof assigned to traffic duty are hereby authorized to have removed and towed away by a commercial towing service, any car or vehicle illegally parked in any place where such parked vehicle creates or constitutes a traffic hazard, blocks the use of a fire hydrant, or obstructs or may obstruct the movement of any emergency vehicle or obstructs the free passage of pedestrians on a public sidewalk, or in a marked police tow zone. 
(b)  Within forty-eight (48) hours of the time when such vehicle has been towed, at the order of a police officer of the city, notice shall be given to the owner thereof as required by section 14-150(d) of the general statutes and thereafter the provisions of section 14-150(d), (e) and (f) of the general statutes. 
(Ord. No. 457, 5-10-84) 
Cross reference- Abandoned or unregistered motor vehicles, § 16-101 et seq.; tow trucks, § 16-121 et seq. 
Sec. 16-46. - Parking of nonmotorized vehicles on city streets. 
(a)  No airplane, boat, house car, mobile home, horse trailer, house trailer, semitruck trailer, or other trailer for such vehicle or vehicles whether such vehicle is on the trailer or not shall be permitted to be parked, stand or stored upon a highway or upon land areas devoted by the parking authority of the city or within the limits of a city or state right-of-way within a residential zone as those zones may be defined, from time to time, by the planning and zoning commission of the city, unless the trailer or vehicle is temporarily disabled for not to exceed twenty-four (24) hours while so disabled. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to a commercial vehicle which is parked on a city highway for the purpose of loading or unloading during its ordinary course of business. 
(c)  The registered owner of any vehicle shall be presumed to be the operator of such vehicle. 
(d)  The violation of this section shall be punished by a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00). Each day any such violation shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 618, 3-14-91) 
Secs. 16-47-16-65. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - HANDICAPPED PARKING[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Parking privileges of handicapped persons generally, G.S. § 14-253a; parking privileges of handicapped veterans, G.S. § 14-254. 

Sec. 16-66. - Applicability. 
    This division shall apply to all new and existing nonresidential sites that have a parking area or parking garage for twenty-five (25) or more vehicles, including but not limited to, shopping centers, office buildings, commercial buildings, mercantile buildings, warehouses, manufacturing buildings, convalescent homes, schools and public buildings. In addition, the chief of police may designate handicapped parking spaces on the city roads which shall be of such size and location as they may specify. 
(Ord. No. 432, 7-8-82; Ord. No. 621, 5-9-91; Ord. No. 813, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 16-67. - Use of specially designated spaces. 
    After establishment of specially marked parking spaces for handicapped persons, no person shall park a motor vehicle in such space unless a handicapped person is either a passenger or an occupant of the motor vehicle, and the vehicle contains a designation issued by the commissioner of motor vehicles pursuant to the general statutes which designation shall be visible as per the general statutes, or a handicapped designation issued by other governmental authority. 
(Ord. No. 432, 7-8-82; Ord. No. 621, 5-9-91; Ord. No. 813, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 16-68. - Number of spaces to be provided. 
    On each site having at least twenty-five (25) spaces, at least one (1) space shall be specially designated and reserved for handicapped parking. Additional spaces for handicapped parking shall be in accordance with the following table: 
Total Parking 
on Site Required Number of 
Handicapped 
Parking Spaces 25-50 1 51-100 2 101-150 3 151-200 4  
;hn0; (Ord. No. 432, 7-8-82; Ord. No. 621, 5-9-91; Ord. No. 813, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 16-69. - Location of spaces. 
    Parking spaces for the handicapped shall be located as close as possible to elevators, ramps, walkways and entrances and so located that the handicapped person is not compelled to wheel or walk behind parked vehicles to reach entrances, ramps, walkways and elevators. At sites where four (4) or more handicapped parking spaces are required and the uses on the site have multiple nonconnected entrances the handicapped parking spaces shall be separated and located as close to these entrances as is practicable. The exact location of the parking spaces shall be designated by the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 432, 7-8-82; Ord. No. 621, 5-9-91; Ord. No. 813, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 16-70. - Marking of spaces. 
(a)  Each such space designated for handicapped parking shall not be less than fifteen (15) feet wide including three (3) feet of cross-hatch or parallel to a sidewalk on a city road. Each space shall be designated by above grade signs with white lettering on a blue background and shall bear the words "HANDICAPPED PARKING-STATE PERMIT REQUIRED," or a symbolic representation of a handicapped person in a wheelchair. The signs shall further indicate that the unauthorized use of the space shall subject the violator to a fine. 
(b)  Any parking garage or terminal constructed on and after May 1, 1991, shall have nine (9) feet six (6) inches vertical clearance at its entrance and along the route to at least two (2) parking spaces which conform with the requirements of this division and which have nine (9) feet six (6) inches vertical clearance. 
(Ord. No. 432, 7-8-82; Ord. No. 621, 5-9-91; Ord. No. 813, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 16-71. - Erection and maintenance of signs. 
    Signs designating handicapped parking and pavement stripes shall be erected, installed and maintained by and at the expense of the owner, operator, lessee or tenants of the property. If signs and markings are not installed within thirty (30) days after written request by the chief of police, the city may proceed to install the same and impose the costs thereof against the owner of the site. 
(Ord. No. 432, 7-8-82; Ord. No. 621, 5-9-91; Ord. No. 813, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 16-71.1. - Display of identification required on motor vehicle. 
    Nothing in this division may be construed to allow an otherwise eligible blind or handicapped person to park in a public or private area reserved for the exclusive use of handicapped persons as provided in this division, if identification required hereunder is not displayed on the motor vehicle provided the blind or handicapped person is a bona fide resident of the state. 
(Ord. No. 621, 5-9-91; Ord. No. 813, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 16-72. - Owner's responsibility for violation. 
    The registered owner of any vehicle parked in violation of this division shall be presumed to be the operator at the time of the violation. 
(Ord. No. 432, 7-8-82; Ord. No. 621, 5-9-91; Ord. No. 813, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 16-72.1. - Removal or towing of cars in violation of division. 
    The police department and the members thereof assigned to traffic duty are hereby authorized to have removed and towed away by a commercial towing service, any car or vehicle parked in violation of this division, in accordance with the provisions of Ordinance No. 457 [section 16-45] of the City of Shelton. 
(Ord. No. 621, 5-9-91; Ord. No. 813, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 16-73. - Penalty. 
    Whenever a vehicle is found parked in violation of this division, any city police officer may issue a citation for such violation, which shall provide for a fine not to exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) payable to the police department within seven (7) days. If any fine is not paid within seven (7) days, a penalty in an amount equal to the fine shall immediately become due and payable in addition to the original fine. Each day that such violation continues shall be considered a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 432, 7-8-82; Ord. No. 621, 5-9-91; Ord. No. 813, 4-12-07) 
Secs. 16-74-16-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DESIGNATION OF LIMITED PARKING PERMIT AREAS AND PARKING BY PERMIT ONLY 

Sec. 16-81. - Purpose. 
    The Board of Aldermen (BOA) of the City of Shelton deems it to be in the best interest of the citizens of Shelton to: 
a.  Provide for limited parking permit programs within certain sections of the City of Shelton where parking may be limited or may be restricted. 
b.  Reduce hazardous traffic conditions 
c.  Promote reasonable parking access to Proprietors and Residents within the Limited Parking Permit Areas 
d.  Promote the peace, comfort, convenience and welfare of the residents and proprietors therein. 
(Ord. No. 900, 7-14-16) 
Sec. 16-82. - Definitions. 
    LIMITED PARKING PERMIT AREA: The area/streets where curbside parking on public highways is restricted by this "Permit Parking Ordinance." The designated districts or areas will be particularly designated on maps titled, "Proposed Permit Parking Areas in [the map will insert named designated area within the City where the Limited Parking Permit Area is determined to be located]" and will be on file in the office of the City/Town Clerk of the City of Shelton, where curbside parking on public highways is limited to parking by permit only. The Board of Aldermen may from time to time designate Limited Parking Permit Areas under this ordinance and will then cause a map showing such designated area to be filed with the City/Town Clerk. 
    PARKING: The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, upon a highway other than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in receiving or discharging passengers or loading or unloading merchandise or in obedience of traffic regulations, traffic signs or signals. 
    PROPRIETOR: A person who owns or leases real property within said Limited Parking Permit Area and who operates a business at an address within the Limited Parking Permit Area. A proprietor shall be entitled to parking permits equal to the number of parking spaces available and contiguous with the property where their/its business is located. 
    RESIDENT: A person who owns or leases real property within said residential area and who maintains either a voting residence or a bona fide occupancy, or both, at that address. 
    PERMIT PARKING DISTRICT: A contiguous or nearly contiguous area containing public highways or parts thereof primarily abutted by residential property or business property (including but not limited to such nonresidential activities such as schools, parks, churches, hospitals and nursing homes.) Said Limited Parking Permit Areas shall be so designated from time to time by the Board of Aldermen as set forth above. 
(Ord. No. 900, 7-14-16) 
Sec. 16-83. - Permit process. 
    The Chief of Police shall issue appropriate permits and shall cause parking signs to be erected in said designated Limited Parking Permit Area. Said Limited Parking Permit Area shall be clearly designated and indicate that parking is limited by permit only and that violators will be towed at owner expense. A separate permit shall be required for each motor vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 900, 7-14-16) 
Sec. 16-84. - Permit application. 
A.  The application for a permit shall contain: 
1.  The name and address of the resident or proprietor. 
2.  The make, model, license plate number and registration of each vehicle owned by the resident or proprietor for which a permit is to be issued. 
3.  Such other information as the chief of Police may deem pertinent in issuing and maintain records of such permits. 
4.  Each Permittee shall be issued the number of household resident permits applied for. 
5.  The signature of the resident or proprietor for the Limited Parking Permit Area shall be designated as the Permittee. Said Permittee shall be responsible for applying all permits to each vehicle and shall notify the Police Department if there is any change in ownership of the vehicle. 
B.  Temporary Guest Permit/Special Events. 
1.  Each Permittee shall be issued four (4) guest permits for their use. 
2.  The resident hosting a Special Event (Party/picnics, etc.) in a Limited Parking Permit Area must call ahead to the Police Department to have the ticketing blocked and/or waived for the day of the event. 
C.  General. 
1.  The Permittee shall make said application under penalty of false statement. 
2.  The permit shall be renewable bi-annually. 
3.  There shall be no cost associated with the application for a Permit. 
(Ord. No. 900, 7-14-16) 
Sec. 16-85. - Use of permits. 
a.  All parking permits shall be displayed on or about the front windshield of the vehicle so as to be easily visible from outside the vehicle. Such parking permits shall contain the following: 
(1)  The numerical designation of the parking permit issued; and 
(2)  The expiration date of the parking permit. 
b.  The Police Department shall maintain a list of all permits issued and the name and address of each Permittee or resident or proprietor to whom such permit was issued. 
c.  A parking permit shall not guarantee or reserve a parking space within the Limited Parking Permit Area. A parking permit shall not authorize the standing or parking of any vehicle in such places and during such times as the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles is in violation of traffic regulations, traffic signs or signals, and shall not excuse the observance of any traffic regulations in the parking permit area. 
d.  Whenever the Permittee of a parking permit, no longer fulfills one or more of the applicable provisions of this ordinance or qualify for the issuance of such permit, the Permittee shall so notify the Police Chief who may then direct the Permittee to surrender the parking permit. 
e.  Until its expiration, surrender or revocation, a parking permit shall remain valid in the Limited Parking Permit Area for such time as the Permittee continues to qualify for said permit as provided herein. 
f.  A parking permit shall be valid only in the Limited Parking Permit Area for which it is issued. 
g.  It shall be a violation of this ordinance for the holder of a parking permit to fail to surrender it when directed to do so. 
h.  It shall be a violation of this ordinance for any person to represent in any fashion that a vehicle is entitled to a parking permit, authorized by this ordinance when it is not so entitled. The display of a parking permit on a vehicle not entitled to such a parking permit shall constitute such a representation. 
i.  It shall be a violation of this ordinance for any person to duplicate, or attempt to duplicate, by any means, a parking permit authorized by this ordinance. It shall also be a violation of this ordinance for any person to display on any vehicle such a duplicate parking permit. 
(Ord. No. 900, 7-14-16) 
Sec. 16-86. - Exceptions for service and delivery vehicles. 
    The parking restrictions imposed by this ordinance shall not apply to any service or delivery vehicle when used to provide services or to make deliveries to residences or proprietors within the Limited Parking Permit Area, provided that the parking of the service or delivery vehicle within said Limited Parking Permit Area does not exceed one hour in duration on any given day. 
(Ord. No. 900, 7-14-16) 
Sec. 16-87. - Penalties for offenses. 
    Whoever violates any provision of this ordinance shall have their vehicle towed at the owner's expense and/or be subject to a $100.00 fine. Failure to pay said fine timely shall make the violator liable for further penalties, including imprisonment as provided for in the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut. 
(Ord. No. 900, 7-14-16) 
Secs. 16-88-16-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ABANDONED OR UNREGISTERED MOTOR VEHICLES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 792, adopted July 14, 2005, amended Art. III, §§ 16-101-16-107, in its entirety, and enacted similar provisions to read as codified herein. Former Art. III derived from Ord. No. 548, adopted May 12, 1988. 
Cross reference- Towing of illegally parked vehicles, § 16-45. 

Sec. 16-101. - Prohibition generally. 
    No person, firm or corporation shall abandon any motor vehicle within the limits of any highway within the City of Shelton or upon property other than his own without the consent of the owner for a period of longer than twenty-four (24) hours. 
(Ord. No. 792, § 1, 7-14-05) 
Sec. 16-102. - Fine for violation. 
    Any person who abandons a motor vehicle in violation of the provisions of this article shall be fined not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(Ord. No. 792, § 2, 7-14-05) 
Sec. 16-103. - Provisions supplemental. 
    This article is supplemental to any previously enacted ordinance concerning the parking of motor vehicles within the city limits. 
(Ord. No. 792, § 3, 7-14-05) 
Sec. 16-104. - Owner of record. 
    The last owner of record of a motor vehicle found abandoned, as shown by the files of the State of Connecticut Department of Motor Vehicles, shall be deemed prima facie to have been the owner of such motor vehicle at the time the vehicle was abandoned and the person who abandoned the vehicle or caused or procured its abandonment. 
(Ord. No. 792, § 4, 7-14-05) 
Sec. 16-105. - Taking vehicle into custody. 
    Any police officer of the city upon discovery of any motor vehicle, whether situated within or without any highway of this state or city, which is a menace to traffic is authorized to take such motor vehicle into his custody and cause the same to be taken to and stored in a suitable place. 
(Ord. No. 792, § 5, 7-14-05) 
Sec. 16-106. - Notification sticker. 
    Any police officer of the city upon discovery of any motor vehicle apparently abandoned or a motor vehicle without proper registration, whether situated within or without any highway of this state or city shall affix to such motor vehicle a notification sticker in a manner so as to be readily visible. This notification sticker shall contain the following information: 
(a)  The date and time the notification sticker was affixed to the motor vehicle. 
(b)  A statement that pursuant to this article and state statute, if the vehicle is not removed within twenty-four (24) hours of the time the sticker was affixed; it shall be taken into custody and stored at the owner's expense. 
(c)  The location and telephone number where additional information may be obtained. 
(d)  The identity of the affixing officer. 
    If the motor vehicle is not removed within such twenty-four-hour period, the city police department shall tow such motor vehicle and cause the same to be stored in a place designated by the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 792, § 6, 7-14-05) 
Sec. 16-107. - Disposition of vehicle pursuant to state law. 
    If the vehicle is apparently abandoned, a menace to traffic or has no registration marker plates or invalid registration marker plates, the city police department shall follow the procedures set forth in Connecticut General Statute section 14-150, as amended, relative to the disposition of said vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 792, § 7, 7-14-05) 
Sec. 16-108. - Abandoned or inoperable motor vehicle on private property. 
(a)  Any motor vehicle located on private property that is abandoned or inoperable or unregistered and remains unmoved for a period exceeding thirty (30) days after the zoning enforcement officer has: 
(1)  Provided notice to the property owners on which such motor vehicle remains, requesting removal of such motor vehicle; and 
(2)  Said notice was published in a newspaper having a substantial circulation in such municipality; 
may be removed by the City of Shelton. 
(b)  The zoning enforcement officer shall be responsible for notifying such property owner, publication of the general notice, and for removal and disposition of such motor vehicle by an approved City of Shelton towing company as authorized by the police department. 
(c)  The property owner shall be responsible for the cost of the removal of any motor vehicle and shall be fined not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each day (each day being a separate offense) that the vehicle remains on the property after the thirty-day notice expires. 
(d)  A property owner that moves the motor vehicle on the property does not exempt said vehicle from this article. 
(e)  The Shelton Police Department may issue the city ordinance violation prior to the removal of said vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 792, § 8, 7-14-05) 
Secs. 16-109-16-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - TOW TRUCKS[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Towing of illegally parked vehicles, § 16-45. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 16-121. - Findings. 
    The regulation of tow trucks, regulation of the solicitation of business by the proprietors of tow trucks and regulation of the removal of abandoned vehicles found within the limits of the town, are hereby found and declared to be matters of public interest and necessity, to which public interest and necessity the private interests of proprietors of tow trucks must be subservient, notwithstanding incidental restraints on competition. 
(Ord. No. 558, § 1, 10-13-88; Ord. No. 810, § 1, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 16-122. - Jurisdiction. 
    Vehicles abandoned or disabled under circumstances within the jurisdiction of the police authority shall be removed at the direction of the chief of Police or his delegate to places of storage by tow trucks, the proprietors of which are registered in accordance with this article. "Circumstances under the jurisdiction of the police authority," include, but is not necessarily limited to: 
(a)  Motor vehicle accidents; 
(b)  Motor vehicles abandoned on streets within the limits of the town; 
(c)  Motor vehicles abandoned on town property other than the streets; 
(d)  Motor vehicles abandoned on private property, which property is owned by a party other than the owner of the abandoned vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 558, § 3, 10-13-88; Ord. No. 810, § 3, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 16-123. - Duty procedure. 
(a)  Orders summoning the duty tow truck shall be issued by the police dispatcher under the supervision of the chief of police. Such orders shall be issued exclusively to the duty tow truck, except that if more than one (1) tow truck shall not respond to an order within thirty (30) minutes, the police dispatcher shall summon the next two (2) trucks in series on the call list. 
(b)  The chief of police shall establish and adopt such other rules and regulations as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 558, § 5, 10-13-88; Ord. No. 810, § 5, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 16-124. - Town as an assured. 
    Insurance policies referred to in section 16-143 shall bear endorsement that the City of Shelton is an assured under the policy issued, which endorsement shall provide for notice to the city of not less than thirty (30) days prior to cancellation or any material change. The chief of police is the agent of the town for receipt of such notice. 
(Ord. No. 558, § 8, 10-13-88; Ord. No. 810, § 8, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 16-125. - Rates. 
    Rates for towing and storage shall be as fixed by the Commissioner of Motor Vehicles of the State of Connecticut. The cost of towing and storage of abandoned vehicles shall be charged by the tower against the owner of the vehicles in accordance with Connecticut General Statutes, section 14-150. 
(Ord. No. 558, § 9, 10-13-88; Ord. No. 810, § 9, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 16-126. - Custody of impounded vehicles. 
    Whenever a disabled vehicle shall be impounded by the chief of police, or other governmental authority, the licensee having custody of such vehicle shall not release the same without proper order of the impounding authority. 
(Ord. No. 558, § 10, 10-13-88; Ord. No. 810, § 10, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 16-127. - Sanctions for violation. 
    Any tow truck operator who appears at the scene of an accident not having been summoned by the police dispatcher to tow a disabled or abandoned vehicle, or not having been summoned by the owner of a disabled vehicle to tow such disabled vehicle, shall be fined not more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). 
(Ord. No. 558, § 12, 10-13-88; Ord. No. 810, § 12, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 16-128. - Exclusion. 
    Nothing in this article shall be interpreted to preclude the owner of a disabled vehicle from summoning a tow truck of his choice, whether or not the proprietor of such tow truck shall be authorized on the approved call list, hereunder, proved that such owner act in the interests of public safety. 
(Ord. No. 558, § 13, 10-13-88; Ord. No. 810, § 13, 4-12-07) 
Secs. 16-129-16-140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - REGISTRATION 

Sec. 16-141. - Required. 
    The chief of police shall maintain a list of authorized proprietors of tow trucks to permit the towing of disabled and abandoned vehicles found within the limits of the town. The registration of authorized operators shall be revised from time to time by the chief of police provided that each operator who is authorized agrees to comply with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 558, § 2, 10-13-88; Ord. No. 810, § 2, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 16-142. - Limit on registration; call list. 
    The chief of police shall establish a list of registered proprietors, hereby designated a "call list." Each proprietor on said call list shall supply one (1) duty tow truck for intervals to be established by the chief of police in accordance with the needs of the town. 
(Ord. No. 558, § 4, 10-13-88; Ord. No. 810, § 4, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 16-143. - Application for registration. 
    Application for a registration authorized by this article shall be made to the chief of police on a form prescribed by him. Qualifications for inclusion on the authorized list (call list) are as follows: 
(a)  Individual applicants and all officers of corporate applicants shall be citizens of the United States and shall be of good moral character. 
(b)  The applicant shall hold a Connecticut new car dealer's registration, a used car dealer's license, or a general repairer's license. 
(c)  The applicant shall maintain a business location within the limits of the City of Shelton and shall have storage space for minimum of seven (7) automobiles of standard size or in the alternative have available qualified space elsewhere for the storage of such vehicles. The storage area must be qualified in accordance with state statutes. Open areas between adjacent property lines or buildings shall be separated in some distinguishable manner. Whenever the premises of a proprietor approved hereunder is sold, the new owner shall comply with all regulations specified in this article. Wreckers shall be registered to the applicant or in the name of the registered business. In the event of a wrecker breakdown, a substitute wrecker may be used. 
(d)  The applicant shall annex to this application a certificate of insurance evidencing keeper's coverage of at least fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) and garage and liability coverage of at least one million dollars ($1,000,000.00). 
(e)  The applicant shall annex to his application a list of the applicant's employees who are authorized to operate the applicant's tow truck, noting the age of each operator (which shall be at least eighteen (18) years) and the operator number appearing on the Connecticut motor vehicle operator's permit on each such employee. The applicant shall further certify that each listed employee is of good moral character, is in good health, and is not subject to any disability of health or physique which would adversely affect the operation of a motor vehicle at all times. 
(f)  The application shall further certify that upon issuance of an approval to be on the "call list" that the applicant will respond promptly to all orders issued to the applicant during each period of assigned duty, and that the qualifications listed in subparagraphs (a) through (e) above will be maintained during the entire time that the applicant shall remain on the approved "call list." 
(Ord. No. 558, § 6, 10-13-88; Ord. No. 810, § 6, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 16-144. - Review of registration. 
    Registration shall be reviewed at least annually, and upon a finding by the chief of police that: 
(a)  Certification by the registered operator that all qualifications for issuance of the original registration are in full force and effect; 
(b)  Submission of a current list of employees with certification as prescribed in section 16-143; 
(c)  Submission of insurance certificates as prescribed in section 16-143; and 
(d)  That the proprietor is otherwise in compliance with the terms of this article. 
Said proprietor shall remain on the "call list." 
(Ord. No. 558, § 7, 10-13-88; Ord. No. 810, § 7, 4-12-07) 
Sec. 16-145. - Suspension and revocation. 
    The chief of police may for cause suspend or remove any authorized proprietor from the "call list". Cause shall include: 
(a)  Failure to maintain the qualifications prescribed by section 16-143; 
(b)  Failure to respond to an order of the police dispatcher; 
(c)  Towing of a motor vehicle abandoned or disabled under circumstances within the jurisdiction of the police authority without prior order of the police dispatcher; 
(d)  Failure to act in the interest of public safety or conduct inimical to public safety; 
(e)  Failure to obey a reasonable order of a police officer tending the scene of a motor vehicle accident; 
(f)  Failure of the proprietor to comply with any rules or regulations adopted by the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 558, § 11, 10-13-88; Ord. No. 810, § 11, 4-12-07) 
Chapter 17 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Sewer commission, § 5.3.4; department of public works, § 6.7. 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 3; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 4; garbage trash and refuse, Ch. 6; health and sanitation, Ch. 7; housing, Ch. 8; planning, Ch. 12; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 14; zoning, App. A; subdivisions, App. B. 
State Law reference- Power of city to lay out, construct, etc., sewer and drainage systems and sewage disposal plants, G.S. § 7-148(c)(6)(B)(i); power of city to contract for the furnishing of water, G.S. § 7-148(c)(4)(G); power of city to create, etc., all things in the nature of public works and improvements, G.S. § 7-148(c)(6)(A)(ii); power of city to regulate the laying, etc., of water pipes, drains, sewers, etc., in the streets and public places, G.S. § 7-148(c)(6)(B)(iii); power of city to regulate and prohibit the construction, etc., of sinks, cesspools, G.S. § 7-148(c)(7)(C); municipal waterworks systems, G.S. § 7-234 et seq.; municipal sewerage systems, G.S. § 7-245 et seq.; sewer districts, G.S. § 7-324 et seq.; water resources, G.S. § 25-1 et seq.; sewer revenue bonds, G.S. §§ 7-259-7-266. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 17-1-17-5. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER 

Sec. 17-6. - Agreements between city and Bridgeport Hydraulic Company for extension of water mains. 
    Any agreements entered into from time to time between the city and Bridgeport Hydraulic Company for the extension of water mains to serve customers within the city shall contain provisions whereby monies advanced by the city pursuant to such agreements shall be reimbursed or refunded to the city as new customers are connected, except that no reimbursement shall be required with respect to the proportionate cost of extending service for any municipal purpose, all as permitted by section 7-137c of the general statutes. 
(Ord. No. 340, 8-14-78) 
Sec. 17-7. - Water main extension assessments. 
(a)  Before the board of aldermen shall make an appropriation for the extension of any water main as permitted by section 7-137c of the general statutes, it shall hold a public hearing with regard to such proposed extension at which time any resident of the city may be heard with regard thereto. Notice of such hearing, which notice shall identify the approximate area of the proposed extension, shall be published in a newspaper having a circulation in the city not later than seven (7) days prior to the hearing. At such hearing the board of aldermen shall have available such cost estimates as it may then have with regard to the proposed cost of the extension. Within sixty (60) days after the conclusion of the public hearing the board of aldermen shall determine whether it intends to proceed with the extension and if it intends to proceed with the extension, it shall appropriate such funds in such manner as is permitted by the Charter of the city. 
(b)  Whenever the board of aldermen shall, pursuant to the Charter of the city, appropriate funds for the extension of water mains as permitted by section 7-137c of the general statutes, the owner of each property abutting such main shall reimburse the city for his proportionate share of the cost of the extension according to the following formula. 
(c)  The total cost of any extension shall be calculated and determined by the board of aldermen within one hundred twenty (120) days after the extension has been completed. The total cost shall include the cost of water mains, including materials, installation, pumping stations, service connections, curb, sidewalk and highway repairs, and the cost of the installation of gate valves and shut-offs, land acquisition and incidental expenses. 
(d)  The board of aldermen shall determine the proposed share of each property owner proportioned in such a way that the municipality shall be ultimately be free from any costs of the extension and expenses incidental thereto except where any portion of the water main or service is to be used for a municipal purpose, in which instance the municipality shall contribute a fair proportion of the expense representing such proportional municipal share. 
(e)  In a residence zone the proportionate share of each property owner abutting the main shall be determined by dividing the total cost of the extension as calculated by the board of aldermen, by the number of residential lots capable of being served by the water main and abutting the water main. The sum thus derived shall be the proportionate share. 
(f)  Such proportionate share shall be the proposed assessment for each property owner. The board of aldermen shall direct such proper city officials as it determines to prepare a list of the proposed assessments which list shall identify the property to be effected by the proposed assessment, and shall contain the name and address of the owners thereof as on file with the assessor of the city as of the date that the list is prepared. The list shall be filed with the town clerk. The board of aldermen shall establish a date for a public hearing which shall not be later than sixty (60) days following the determination of the proposed assessment and shall cause a notice of public hearing to be published in the newspaper having a circulation in the city at least once and not less than seven (7) days prior to the hearing date. A notice of the proposed assessment shall be mailed to each landowner of record abutting the water main and such notice shall indicate the date, place and time of the public hearing and advise that any person desiring may appear and be heard. The notice shall be mailed to the address on file with the assessor as of the date of mailing and shall be mailed United States mail, postage prepaid, not later than fourteen (14) days prior to the hearing. 
(g)  At such hearing the board of aldermen shall cause to be placed on the record the basis of the cost calculation that it has made and the method selected in determining the fair share of each property owner. 
(h)  Within thirty (30) days after the hearing the board of aldermen shall make such assessments as it finds to equal the fair proportionate share of each property owner in accordance with section 7-137c of the general statutes and shall cause a notice of the assessment containing the names and addresses of the property owners and the amount of the assessment and identifying the property in a newspaper having a substantial circulation in the city. 
(i)  The assessment shall be due and payable within sixty (60) days of the date of the action by the board of aldermen provided that the board of aldermen may permit the assessment to be paid in installments for a period not to exceed ten (10) years, provided that the property owner shall pay interest on the principal balance at the rate to be established by the board of aldermen which note shall be not less than the interest rate being paid by the city on any obligation incurred to finance the project. Notice of the assessment shall be recorded in the land records of the city. 
(j)  In the case of any land zoned residential or classified pursuant to sections 12-107a to 12-107e of the general statutes inclusive, as farm land, forest land or open spaced land on the last completed grand list of the city, which exceeds by more than one hundred (100) percent the size of the smallest lot permitted in the lowest density residential zone allowed under the zoning regulations, assessment of such excess land shall be deferred until such time as such excess land shall be built upon or a building permit issued therefor or until approval of a subdivision plan of such excess property by the planning and zoning commission, whichever event occurs first, at which time the assessment shall be made. In the event that such assessment is deferred, the clerk of the board of aldermen shall cause a caveat to be placed on the land records in form satisfactory to the board of aldermen and to the corporation counsel. 
(k)  In an industrial and commercial zone, the proportionate share of each property owner abutting the main shall be determined in each case on a case by case basis on a front foot or other equitable basis provided that if residential or agricultural property or property zoned for residential or agricultural use abuts lines of construction of water mains to be used for industrial or commercial purposes, or partly for commercial purposes, or partly for commercial or industrial purposes, and such property is not being used for such purposes, the proportionate share of the owners of such property shall be computed on a front foot or other equitable basis for a standard or minimum size main. 
(l)  In any case where need for a particular extension is in response to a community pollution problem as defined by section 22a-423 of the general statutes and a grant is received from the commissioner of environmental protection, the city may waive such reimbursement to the extent of any grant actually received. 
(m)  If a water main has been installed and an assessment has been made and thereafter the city receives reimbursements as a result of a tie-in by a particular property owner, the amount of such tie-in shall be applied to the payment of the assessment of each the property owner. In the event that any assessment has been paid in full at the time that a guarantee reimbursement or a tie-in reimbursement is received, the city shall pay a sum equal to the reimbursement or tie-in fee to the record owner of the property at the time that the tie-in is made or that the guarantee is made. 
(n)  All water mains shall be installed in existing streets or rights-of-way whenever possible. 
(o)  All mains shall have a tap brought to the edge of the right-of-way of the city abutting the land of all adjoining property owners so as to avoid disruption of the surface of the highway when and if a particular property owner determines to make use of the water service. 
(p)  Within sixty (60) days of an assessment made pursuant to this section and section 7-137c of the general statutes, the owner of any property assessed may appeal to the superior court pursuant to the provisions of section 7-137c of the general statutes. 
(q)  If the cost of the water main installation has been reduced because of the fact that any individual property owner or owners has executed a guarantee agreement with the utility, before calculating the total cost of the project for purposes of determining assessments, the board of aldermen shall add to the contract price all such credits. When the individual assessments have been determined, there shall be deducted from the assessments of those persons who have signed guarantee agreements, an amount equal to the credit which has been previously received by the city. In the event that any guarantee agreement is signed by a property owner, after payment has been made to the utility and the utility refunds a sum of money to the city, the sum of money derived from the guarantee of each particular property owner shall be applied to the assessment of that particular property owner. 
(r)  If as a result of a further extension of a waterline assessed under the provisions of this section, additional rebates are received because of the further extension, the rebates shall be prorated among those properties originally assessed and the sums credited against any outstanding assessment or paid to the then record owner if the assessment has been paid in full. 
(Ord. No. 473, 1-24-85; Ord. No. 478, §§ A, C, 3-4-85) 
Secs. 17-8-17-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 17-19. - Intent. 
    In order to ensure the proper removal and disposal of sewage and wastewaters within the City of Shelton and environs discharging into the public sewer system of Shelton; to ensure the proper operation and maintenance and the protection of the sewage works of the City of Shelton; and to provide for the keeping of adequate records and for the reasonable and proper supervision of the use and operation of such sewage works of the City of Shelton, these rules and regulations are enacted regulating and controlling the substances which may be discharged directly or indirectly into the public sewers and sewage works of the City of Shelton and regulating and providing for the construction and maintenance of inspection, protective and treatment devices and facilities. 
(Ord. No. 80, § 1, 4-22-68; Ord. No. 852, § 1, 7-8-10) 
Sec. 17-20. - Definitions. 
    Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in this article shall be as follows: 
    BOD (biochemical oxygen demand) shall mean the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five (5) days at twenty (20) degrees Celsius, expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/l). 
    Building drain shall mean that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five (5) feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the building wall. 
    Building sewer shall mean the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal, also called house connection. 
    Chlorine requirement shall mean the amount of chlorine, in milligrams per liter, which must be added to sewage to produce a specified residual chlorine content, or to meet the procedures set forth in "Standard methods." 
    City shall mean the City of Shelton. 
    Combined sewer shall mean a sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage. 
    Food preparation establishments (FPE) shall mean establishments that engage in cooking methods that have the potential to produce fats, oils, and grease, including: facilities that are regulated by the local health district and are classified as a Class III or Class IV food service establishment (FSE), as defined by the state health code; or are regulated by the Connecticut Department of Consumer Protection. These facilities include, but are not limited to, restaurants, hotel kitchens, hospitals, school kitchens, bars, factory cafeterias, clubs, prisons, butchers, and commercial bakeries. Residences and industrial food processing facilities shall not be regulated by this article. 
    Garbage shall mean solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage, and sale of produce. 
    Industrial wastes shall mean the liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing processes, trade, or business as distinct from sanitary sewage. 
    Natural outlet shall mean any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other body of surface or groundwater. 
    Person shall mean any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation, or group. 
    pH shall mean the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution. 
    Properly shredded garbage shall mean the residential wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispersion of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half-inch in any dimension. 
    Public sewer shall mean a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights, and is controlled by public authority. 
    Sanitary sewer shall mean a sewer which carries sewage and to which storm, surface, and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted. 
    Sewage shall mean a combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, together with such ground, surface and stormwaters as may be present. 
    Sewage treatment plant shall mean any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage. 
    Sewage works shall mean all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage. 
    Sewer shall mean a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage. 
    Sewer authority or authority shall mean sewer authority of the City of Shelton or their authorized agent or representative. 
    Shall is mandatory; may is permissive. 
    Slug shall mean any discharge of water, sewage, or industrial waste which, in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds for any period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than five (5) times the average twenty-four-hour concentration or flows during normal operation. 
    Standard methods shall mean the examination and analytical procedures set forth in the most recent edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water, Sewage, and Industrial Wastes," published jointly by the American Water Works Association and the Federation of Sewage and Industrial Wastes Associations. 
    Storm drain (sometimes termed "storm sewer") shall mean a sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial wastes, other than unpolluted cooling water. 
    Sewer commission administrative officer shall mean the sewer commission administrative officer of the City of Shelton or his authorized deputy, agent or representative. 
    Suspended solids shall mean solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids, and which are removable by laboratory filtering. 
    Watercourse shall mean a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
(Ord. No. 80, 4-22-68; Ord. No. 336, 7-10-78; Ord. No. 852, §§ 2.01-2.27, 7-8-10) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 17-21. - Powers and authority of the sewer commission administrative officer. 
(a)  The sewer commission administrative officer and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of this article. The sewer commission administrative officer, or his representative, shall have no authority to inquire into any processes, including metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining, ceramic, paper or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or waterways or facilities for waste treatment. 
(b)  While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in subsection (a) above, the sewer commission administrative officer, or duly authorized employees of the city, shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company and the company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the city employees and the city shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to its property by city employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions as required in section 17-84. 
(c)  The sewer commission administrative officer and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the city holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. 
(Ord. No. 80, §§ 5.01-5.03, 4-22-68; Ord. No. 852, §§ 5.01-5.03, 7-8-10) 
Sec. 17-22. - Protection from damage. 
    No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is a part of the sewage works. Any person violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under the charge of disorderly conduct. 
(Ord. No. 80, § 4.01, 4-22-68; Ord. No. 852, § 4.01, 7-8-10) 
Sec. 17-23. - Required use of public sewers. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the City of Shelton, or any area under the jurisdiction of said city, any sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of these regulations. 
(b)  Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended for the disposal of sewage. 
(c)  The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within the city and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sewer of the city, is hereby required at his expense to install suitable toilet facilities herein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this regulation within one hundred eighty (180) days after date of official notice to do so provided that said public sewer is within one hundred (100) feet of the property line. 
(Ord. No. 215, § 11.01, 4-8-74; Ord. No. 337, 7-10-78; Ord. No. 850, §§ 11.01-11.03, 7-8-10) 
Sec. 17-24. - Private sewage disposal. 
    Where a public sewer is not available under the provisions of section 17-23, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of the public health code of the State of Connecticut and in accordance with the regulations of the Lower Naugatuck Valley District, Public Health Department. 
(Ord. No. 215, § 11.02, 4-8-74; Ord. No. 337, 7-10-78; Ord. No. 850, § 12.01, 7-8-10) 
Sec. 17-25. - Building sewers and connections. 
(1)  No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenances thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the superintendent. 
(2)  The owner or his agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the city. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the superintendent. A permit and inspection fee for a building sewer permit shall be paid to the city at the time the application is filed. 
(3)  All costs and expense incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. 
(4)  A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building; except where one (1) building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, courtyard or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one (1) building sewer. 
(5)  Where outdoor grease traps are used, separate wastewater lines shall be provided to convey the sanitary wastewater directly to the public sanitary collection system. Wastewater from the kitchen and cleanup areas shall be conveyed to the grease trap then to the public sanitary collection system. In no case shall sanitary wastewater be allowed to enter a grease trap. 
(6)  The contractor shall be licensed by the city before installing or doing any work on building sewers and shall also hold a valid license appropriate to the work being done as required by the State of Connecticut Occupational Licensing Boards. The city license fee shall be ten dollars ($10.00) per year. The contractor shall be protected by and shall pay the premium on policies of insurance coverage for public liability insuring him against liability to persons outside his employ, in the minimum amounts of $250,000.00/$500,000.00; property damage $25,000.00/$50,000.00, said policies to be issued by an insurance company licensed in the State of Connecticut. Special coverage for blasting shall be provided when needed. All insurance policies shall designate the City of Shelton, the sewer authority and its agents as assureds. The contractor shall also carry workman's compensation insurance in the amount of statutory limits. Certificates of insurance shall be provided to the lower authority. 
(7)  All work performed under the provisions of these rules shall be subject to inspection by authorized representatives of the city. No work shall be backfilled or otherwise covered until inspected. The contractor shall schedule his work so that inspections can be made during the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., weekdays. Arrangements shall be made in advance with the superintendent when inspections are to be made outside the above hours and the contractor shall pay for any overtime inspection costs. It is the responsibility of the contractor to notify the superintendent when inspections are to be made. Inspections will be scheduled at the contractor's convenience, as far as possible consistent with inspections of work or other contractors. 
(8)  All applicable laws, regulations, building codes, public health codes, safety requirements and other rules pertaining to any part of the work of constructing connections to the city sewers shall be observed. 
(9)  If any excavation is to be made in a city street, all required permits shall be obtained. 
(10)  Work on building sewers shall proceed from the sewer toward the structure involved. 
(11)  Trenching shall proceed in accordance with good practice. The trench shall be of ample width at the bottom to accommodate the pipe to be placed. 
(12)  When sheeting is necessary to ensure proper installation and safety of personnel, the public, or property, the contractor shall furnish and place such sheeting in accordance with good practice. 
(13)  Where water is encountered in a trench sufficient sumps shall be constructed and adequate pumping equipment made available, so that the installation of any building sewer or appurtenance shall be done in the day. In no event shall water be allowed to enter the sewer or building sewer from the trench. 
(14)  If at any time during excavation the material being excavated is in the option of an inspector not suitable for backfill, such material shall be removed from the site. Unsatisfactory material shall include, but not be limited to, boulders, clay, muck and frozen ground. 
(15)  When the material at the base of a trench is unsuitable as a foundation for the building sewer pipe, such material shall be removed and replaced with crushed stone or gravel not containing pieces larger than one and one-half (11/2) inches in diameter. If an excavation is deeper than the desired depth, the trench shall be brought to grade with crushed stone or gravel not containing pieces larger than one and one-half (11/2) inches in diameter. 
(16)  Pipe materials as specified below are acceptable for construction of building sewers, subject to all requirements herein. Building sewers shall be not less than four (4) inches in diameter and shall be laid to a grade of not less than one-quarter (1/4) inch per foot. 
(17)  Sewers shall be laid in a straight line and to a uniform grade where possible. 
(18)  In accordance with State of Connecticut regulations, portions of sewers within seventy-five (75) feet of a well should be of extra-heavy cast iron, but no portion of any such sewer shall be located within twenty-five (25) feet of a well. 
(19)  Each sewer shall be first connected to the city sewer or the building sewer which has been constructed to the owner's curb line and then extended toward the structure to be served. 
(20)  All pipe must be cleaned before placing. 
(21)  Changes in alignment shall be made only with properly curved fittings. Fittings greater than 1/8 bends shall not be used. 
(22)  Cleanouts or manholes shall be installed at no greater than one hundred-foot intervals in long sewers. 
(23)  All joints shall be properly made to eliminate all sources of leakage. 
(24)  When connecting pipes of dissimilar size and/or materials, suitable adaptors made for the purpose and approved by the inspector shall be used. 
(a)  Pipe-Cast iron: Pipe shall be extra-heavy cast iron soil pipe conforming to ASTM A74 with leaded or equal joints. Suitable neoprene gaskets will be approved. 
(b)  Pipe-Vitrified clay: Vitrified clay sewer pipe and fittings shall be of bell and spigot type, nonglazed, first quality, sound, thoroughly and perfectly burned. 
Pipe shall meet all requirements of the National Clay Pipe Institute specification for extra-strength vitrified clay pipe. 
ASTM standards: Except where superceded by National Clay Pipe Institute specifications Designation ER-4-67, all vitrified sewer pipe shall meet requirements of specifications issued by the American Society for Testing and Materials, Designation C200, latest edition. 
Clay pipe compression joints: All vitrified clay sewer pipe shall have the compression-type joint conforming to the material and testing requirements of ASTM Standard C425, latest edition. All pipe joints shall be Type III and shall have a removable rubber gasket, which can be inspected in the field before installation by the contractor. 
(c)  Pipe-Asbestos-cement: Asbestos-cement pipe and fittings shall conform with ASTM Specifications C644, latest edition. All asbestos-cement pipe shall be Class 1500 or better. 
Asbestos-cement pipe joints: The rubber rings used to seal the joints of asbestos-cement pipe shall conform to ASTM Designation 1869, latest edition. Each length of pipe shall have a ball and spigot or shall have furnished with it a separate jointing sleeve or coupling with rubber rings compressed into place to make a watertight closure. 
The pipe shall be laid and the joints made in the manner set forth by the manufacturer. 
The contractor shall conform to any instructions or recommendations made by the manufacturer of the pipe as to any special precautions for handling, laying, bedding and jointing the pipe. 
(d)  Pipe-Polyvinyl chloride (PVC): Polyvinyl chloride sewer pipe and fittings shall conform with ASTM Tentative Specifications D-3033 (PSP) or D-3034 Type PSM, pipe shall be marked to indicate ASTM material specifications. 
Pipe shall be made of Grade I PVC Compound ASTM D-1784. 
Joints shall be the bell and spigot type. Joints shall be sealed with rubber "O" ring gaskets as recommended by the pipe manufacturers. 
The pipe shall be laid and joints made in the manner set forth by the manufacturer. 
(25)  Under no circumstances shall backfill be permitted around and over the building sewer pipe until the pipe, joints, alignment, elevations and workmanship have been inspected and approved by the inspector. 
(26)  Each installed building sewer shall be covered with hand-placed sand or gravel approved by the inspector, to a depth of at least one (1) foot over the pipe prior to backfilling the remainder of the trench. 
(27)  The contractor shall be responsible for the satisfactory compaction of the backfill material so as to avoid excessive future settlement. 
(28)  All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard, streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city. 
(29)  At the time of installing the building sewer it shall be the responsibility of the contractor to investigate the existing plumbing and disconnect all unauthorized connections. Roof drains, yard drains, cellar drains, cooling water, and all other sources of water other than sanitary sewage and authorized industrial waste cannot be accepted into city sanitary sewers and must be disposed of by other approved means. The contractor shall be prepared to demonstrate to the inspector that all such unauthorized connections have been diverted. 
(30)  Within ten (10) days following connection of each house or other structure to the city sewerage system, the existing septic tank, cesspool, and/or drywell shall be treated as herein provided. Contents of each tank shall be completely pumped out and disposed of in an approved manner. Each tank shall then be filled completely with soil, which shall be compacted while being placed so as to prevent voids in the fill material. 
(31)  When the building sewer will connect to a building having no provision for venting the plumbing system or to what, in the opinion of the inspector, is an inadequately vented system, a house trap with cleanouts and an air vent shall be installed in accordance with the State of Connecticut Basic Building Code. 
(32)  Failure of a contractor to comply with any of the rules and regulations shall be cause for revocation of any license issued by the city. 
(Ord. No. 215, § 12.01, 4-8-74; Ord. No. 850, §§ 13.01-13.32, 7-8-10) 
Sec. 17-26. - Private sewage systems-Planned interest community. 
(a)  Whenever application is made for the approval of the connection of a private sewer system in a planned interest community, as defined in P.A. 83-374, to the city system, the water pollution control authority shall make a determination as to whether or not any part of the private system has the potential capacity to serve other areas of the city other than that encompassed by the applying planned interest community. 
(b)  If the water pollution control authority determines that the system or any part thereof has the capacity to serve other areas, the water pollution control authority shall require, as a condition of approval, that the developer of, or the planned interest community, shall convey to the city so much of the system that is applicable together with such easements and rights-of-way as may be required in order to ensure future expansions to other areas and thereafter the city shall be responsible for the maintenance, and proper upkeep of the system. 
(c)  All easements shall contain a provision that by the acceptance thereof, the city shall, if it needs to exercise its rights under the easement, restore any disturbed area to such condition as existed immediately prior to the entry. 
(Ord. No. 461, §§ 1-3, 7-12-84) 
Sec. 17-27. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person found to be violating any provision of this article, except section 17-22, shall be served by the city with a written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. 
(b)  Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided for in subsection (a), shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and on conviction thereof shall be fined in the amount not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each violation. Each day in which any such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(c)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned the city by reason of such violation. 
(Ord. No. 80, §§ 6.01-6.03, 4-22-68; Ord. No. 766, §§ a)-c), 7-11-02; Ord. No. 852, §§ 6.01-6.03, 7-8-10) 
Secs. 17-28-17-40. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PUBLIC SANITARY SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS 

Sec. 17-41. - Connections generally. 
    It shall be the duty of the owner of the premises from which any connection is made with a public sewer in making and laying such connection with such public sewer to conform to the direction of the board of aldermen or the city engineer, in regard to the manner in which connection shall be made and the drain made and laid, and to keep the drain at all times in good repair. The sewer commission administrative officer shall have power, and it shall be his duty, under the direction of the board, to discontinue, stop up, and prevent from discharging into any public sewer, any private sewer or drain aforesaid which is not laid as hereinbefore provided, or which is not kept in good order and repair. And no person shall open, or cause to be opened, any drain or private sewer which shall have been stopped up or discontinued aforesaid without the consent or direction of the sewer commission administrative officer. 
(Comp. Ords. 1975, § 9.1(5); Ord. No. 334, 7-10-78) 
Sec. 17-42. - Permit required for connection to public sewer. 
    No person shall connect any private sewer or drain with any basin, culvert, or public sewer or drain laid for the purpose of surface or sub-soil drainage except by a special permit granted by the board of aldermen. No person shall conduct any sewer, drain or rain water leaders, or suffer the same to be conducted from the premises belonging to him or under his control, under or over the surface of the ground into any street where there is a public sewer without having the same properly connected with such public sewer. 
(Comp. Ords. 1975, § 9.1(1)) 
Sec. 17-43. - Excavations for connections. 
    Whenever any person shall, in pursuance of the provisions of the ordinances of the city, take up any portion of any pavement, or make any excavation in any street, paved or unpaved, or make any connections with any water mains, gas mains, steam supply pipes or public sewer, it shall be the duty of the persons taking up such pavement, or making such excavation or connection, and of each of them as soon thereafter as possible to restore such pavement, and to fill such excavation and to tamp or puddle the earth placed therein, so that the same shall not settle, and to put such street and pavement in as good condition in all respects as the same were in before such pavement was taken up or such excavation or connection made, all of which shall be done to the acceptance of the mayor. 
(Comp. Ords. 1975, § 9.1(11)) 
Sec. 17-44. - Discharge of fats, oils, and grease. 
(a)  Intent. 
(1)  In an effort to curb sanitary sewer overflows (SSOs) from grease accumulation in its public sanitary sewer system, the SWPCA adopted, at its public meeting on July 8, 2010, a fats, oils, and grease (FOG) program. Any food preparation establishment connected to the public sanitary sewer system involved in preparing or serving food will be subject to the conditions of this section and must come into compliance by July 1, 2011. The review of this section shall be completed by the Shelton Board of Alderman and the Shelton WPCA a minimum of once every ten (10) years from the date of adoption. 
(2)  The purpose of this section (also referred to herein as the "FOG Ordinance") is to protect the environment by preventing raw sewage overflows and backups into basements caused by grease hardening in sewer lines causing blockages. The objectives of this section are: 
a.  To prevent the introduction of excessive amounts of grease into the City of Shelton's public sanitary sewer system. 
b.  To prevent clogging or blockage of the City of Shelton's public sanitary sewer system due to grease buildup causing sewage to backup and flood streets, residences, and commercial buildings, resulting in potential liability to the city. 
c.  To implement a procedure to recover the cost incurred from cleaning and maintaining sewer lines due to improper grease removal. 
d.  To implement a procedure to recover costs for any liability incurred by the city for damage caused by grease blockages resulting in the sewage flooding streets, residences, or commercial buildings. 
e.  To issue discharge permits to food preparation establishments (FPEs). All requirements contained herein shall be met prior to issuance of a discharge permit. 
f.  To establish administrative procedures and reporting requirements. 
g.  To establish permit fees for the recovery of costs resulting from this FOG Ordinance. 
h.  To establish enforcement procedures for violations of any part or requirement of this section. 
(3)  Applicability. The provisions of this section shall apply to all existing FPEs and future FPEs located within the City of Shelton as defined in this section. 
(b)  Definitions. The following definitions shall apply to this section: 
    Automatic grease recovery unit (AGRU) shall mean an indoor grease trap (a trap may also be referred to as an interceptor) that separates grease from wastewater by active mechanical or electrical means. Such traps are typically compact under-the-sink units. See definition of Grease trap . 
    Best management practice (BMP) shall mean the practices and procedures of a facility designed to prevent or minimize environmental damage. BMPs include, but are not limited to, treatment requirements, operating procedures, practices to control spillage or leaks, grease disposal, or provide drainage from material storage. 
    Discharge permit shall mean a permit issued by the SWPCA authorizing the discharge of wastewater to the public sanitary sewer system from an FPE. 
    Fats, oils, and grease (FOG) shall mean any fats, oils, and grease generated from the food preparation or serving. All are sometimes referred to as "grease". 
    Food preparation establishments (FPE) shall mean establishments that engage in cooking methods that have the potential to produce fats, oils, and grease including: facilities that are regulated by the local health district and are classified as a Class III or Class IV food service establishment (FSE), as defined by the state health code; or are regulated by the Connecticut Department of Consumer Protection. These facilities include, but are not limited to, restaurants, hotel kitchens, hospitals, school kitchens, bars, factory cafeterias, clubs, prisons, butchers, and commercial bakeries. Residences and industrial food processing facilities shall not be regulated by this section. 
    Grease trap shall mean both AGRUs and outdoor grease traps. It shall not include indoor passive grease traps. 
    Grease disposal facility (GDF) shall mean a regional collection/transfer/disposal site approved in accordance with state regulations for the disposal of FOG. This means a Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) approved publicly/privately owned treatment works that is for the thickening and disposal of FOG by incineration or other methods. Pursuant to Section 22a-174-33 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies related to Title V source, an in-state regional incinerator must have an operating permit that lists FOG as a source of fuel. 
    Hauler shall mean any person that collects the contents of a grease trap and transports it to a grease disposal facility. A hauler may also provide other services to food preparation establishments related to trap maintenance. 
    Indoor trap shall mean an AGRU. See definition of Grease trap. 
    Minimum design capability shall mean the design features of a grease trap and its ability or capacity as described in this section to effectively intercept and retain grease from grease-laden wastewaters discharged into the public sanitary sewer system. 
    Nonrenderable shall mean fats, oils, and grease generated from the food preparation or serving that have come in contact with water and other materials that prevent this FOG from being rendered. 
    Office of the sewer authority (OSA) shall mean the SWPCA or persons authorized by the SWPCA to conduct activities related to this section including, but not limited to: approve discharge permits, approve variances, conduct facility inspections, and collect fees and fines. 
    Outdoor grease trap shall mean a structure or device designed to capture FOG and prevent FOG from entering the public sanitary sewer system. These devices are typically belowground units built as two (2) or three (3) chamber-baffled tanks. Traps shall have at least one (1) inspection hatch at grade per chamber to facilitate inspection, cleaning, and maintenance by a hauler. See definition of Grease trap. 
    Permittee shall mean the individual representing the FPE who is authorized by the issuance of a discharge permit to initiate, create, originate, or maintain a wastewater discharge from the FPE. The permittee shall be the same individual who holds the food service license for the facility. 
    Person shall mean any individual, firm, association, society, corporation, or group. 
    Public sanitary sewer system shall mean a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights and which is controlled by a public authority. Includes the main pipe, manholes, and other structures and equipment appurtenant thereto controlled and maintained by the SWPCA for the conveyance of sanitary sewage. 
    Renderable grease shall mean the fats, oils, and grease from food preparation or serving that has not come in contact with water that would prevent its use as source material for products such as animal feed, cosmetics, lubricants, and other products. 
    Shelton Water Pollution Control Authority (SWPCA) shall mean the SWPCA of the City of Shelton with all the powers, purposes and objectives as set forth in Connecticut General Statutes Chapter 103, Revision of 1958, and amendments thereto. 
    User shall mean any person, including those located outside the jurisdictional limits of the City of Shelton, who causes or permits the contribution or discharge of wastewater into sanitary sewers within the city's boundaries, including entities that contribute such wastewater from mobile sources, such as those who discharge hauled wastewater. 
(c)  Food preparation establishment permitting program. All FPEs discharging wastewater to the public sanitary sewer system are subject to the following requirements. 
(1)  Permitting: All FPE's permittees shall be required to apply for and obtain a discharge permit from the SWPCA. The SWPCA shall approve or deny all applications for discharge permits in accordance with the policies and regulations established in this section. The discharge permit shall be in addition to any other permits, registrations, or occupational licenses, which may be required by federal, state or local law. It shall be a violation of this section for any FPE identified by the SWPCA to discharge wastewater containing fats, oils, and grease to the public sanitary sewer system without a current discharge permit. 
(2)  [Complying with modifications:] Following the initial enactment of this FOG Ordinance, any modification to this FOG Ordinance shall become effective immediately and be complied with by January 1 of the year following enactment of such modification, but in no case shall a modification of the FOG Ordinance require compliance in less than sixty (60) days from adoption of such modification. 
(3)  Application form: The SWPCA shall provide an application form for a discharge permit to all FPEs. All existing FPEs shall submit a completed application form within thirty (30) days of (1) receipt of the form, or (2) prior to the expiration of their valid discharge permit. New FPEs shall obtain a discharge permit prior to issuance of a food service license. Each application form submitted shall include the following information. 
a.  Contact information. 
b.  A drawing in sufficient detail to show the location of all kitchen equipment, that produces or discharges wastewater including sinks, dishwashers, floor drains, grease traps, sanitary sewer connections and appurtenances in the user's premises. 
c.  Hours of facility operation. 
d.  For existing FPEs, documentation of all grease trap maintenance within the past year. 
e.  A signed statement by the permittee or by the duly authorized representative of the permittee as follows: 
I have personally examined and am familiar with the information submitted in this document and all attachments thereto, and I certify that, based on reasonable investigation, including my inquiry of those individuals responsible for obtaining the information, the submitted information is true, accurate, and complete to the best of my knowledge and belief. I understand that a false statement made in the submitted information may be punishable as a criminal offense, in accordance with Connecticut General Statutes Section 22a-6, pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes Section 53a-157b, and in accordance with any other applicable statute. 
(4)  Application procedure: Filing of a completed application form with fee will initiate the review process that consists of confirming the information supplied on the application and inspection of the facility to ensure compliance with this section. Prepermit inspections shall occur not more than forty-five (45) days from the date of original application or the date of the last inspection that the facility was found to be in noncompliance. A written report shall be supplied to the FPE detailing the compliance status and any required action. If more than two (2) inspections are required to bring a facility into compliance, an additional fee as provided for in subsection (f) and as on file in the office of the sewer administrator shall be charged for each additional inspection. A FOG discharge permit shall be issued to the permittee within fourteen (14) days of verification of compliance with this section. 
(5)  Discharge permit: Each discharge permit shall be effective for a two-year period and shall state the period for which it is valid. 
(6)  [Permit display:] The discharge permit must be displayed in a prominent location where staff can see it. 
(7)  [Permit transfer:] A discharge permit shall not be transferred or sold to a new owner of the FPE. A new owner of an FPE is required to apply to the OSA for a new FOG permit. 
(8)  [Permit renewal:] An application for renewal of a discharge permit and the fees as provided for in subsection (c) shall be submitted at least thirty (30) days prior to expiration of an existing discharge permit. Failure to maintain a valid discharge permit shall be a violation of this section. 
(9)  [Terms and conditions of permit:] The terms and conditions of the permit are subject to modification by the SWPCA during the term of the permit. If due to changes in this section, modifications to a facility are required in order to remain in compliance, the permittee shall be informed at least sixty (60) days prior to the compliance date of the new requirement or sixty (60) days prior to the expiration date of the existing permit. 
(10)  Entry: Each FPE shall allow the OSA, bearing proper identification, access at all reasonable times to all parts of the premises for the purpose of inspection, observation, records examination, measurements, sampling, or testing in accordance with the provisions of this section. The refusal of any FPE to allow the OSA official entry for purposes of inspection or performing such other duties as shall be required shall constitute a violation of this section. The SWPCA may pursue legal action as provided for in subsection (g) as may be advisable and reasonably necessary for the OSA to carry out his duties. 
(11)  Inspection: All FPEs shall be inspected as follows: 
a.  Prepermit inspections: Shall be conducted by the OSA to establish the current compliance status of an FPE and to determine any modifications that may be required to bring the FPE into compliance with this section. 
b.  Routine inspections: The OSA shall inspect the FPE on an unscheduled basis after a discharge permit has been issued to confirm compliance with the requirements of this section. All FPEs with a current discharge permit shall be inspected. Inspections shall include all equipment, food processing, cleanup and storage areas, and shall include any area that produces wastewater discharge to the grease trap. The OSA shall also inspect the grease trap maintenance logbook and file, other pertinent data to the grease trap and may check the level of the trap contents and/or take samples/measurements as necessary. The OSA shall record all observations in a written report. Any deficiencies as provided in subsection (g) of this section shall be noted. 
c.  Reinspections: The OSA will reinspect the FPE, which received a deficiency notice, a minimum of thirty (30) days after original inspection and will provide written notice of compliance or noncompliance as the case may be. In the event of continuing noncompliance, successive reinspections shall be scheduled and appropriate fees as on file in the office of the sewer administrator shall be charged to the noncomplying FPE. 
(12)  Violation reporting: A permittee shall immediately notify the OSA by telephone upon learning or having reason to believe that a discharge may cause a sewer blockage or adversely affect the public sanitary sewers and initiate corrective action to prevent further violations. 
(13)  [Report of violation:] The permittee shall report, in writing, such violation and corrective actions taken to the OSA within five (5) days of the permittee learning of such violation. Failure to report may result in a fine pursuant to subsection (f) as on file in the office of the sewer administrator. 
(d)  Wastewater discharge limitations. 
(1)  No user shall allow wastewater discharge concentration from a grease trap, or alternative pretreatment technology to exceed one hundred (100) milligrams per liter. All analyses shall be conducted according to the current method as listed in Title 40 CFR 136 or as approved in writing by the SWPCA. All costs associated with testing are the responsibility of the FPE. 
(2)  Where outdoor grease traps are used, separate wastewater lines shall be provided to convey the sanitary and kitchen wastewater outside the facility. Only wastewater from the kitchen and cleanup areas shall be directed to the grease trap. In no case shall sanitary wastewater be allowed to enter a grease trap. 
(3)  Wastewater having a temperature in excess one hundred forty (140) degrees Farenheit shall not be discharged into any AGRU. 
(4)  Any use of enzymes, solvents, emulsifiers, biological agents and similar material for maintaining or cleaning grease traps is prohibited. 
(5)  No food grinder or food pulper shall discharge into a grease trap. 
(6)  All wastewater flows connected to grease traps shall be screened to prevent solids from entering the grease trap. Screened solids shall be disposed of in accordance with applicable solid waste regulations. 
(e)  Outdoor grease trap requirements. 
(1)  Requirements: All FPEs are required to have an outdoor grease trap or variance. The requirements in this section are in addition to any applicable requirements of the Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) general permit for the discharge of wastewater associated with food preparation establishments, International Plumbing Code and the Plumbing and Drainage Institute (PDI) as adopted by the office of the state building inspector. 
(2)  New establishments: On or after the effective date of this section, FPEs, which are newly proposed or constructed, or existing facilities, which will be expanded or renovated to include an FPE, shall be required to install, operate and maintain an outdoor grease trap according to the requirements established in subsection (e). Establishments who receive a variance from the requirement for an outdoor grease trap shall comply with all the requirements of the variance. All variances shall be granted or revoked at the SWPCA's sole discretion. 
(3)  Existing establishments: All FPEs existing within the City of Shelton prior to the effective date of this section shall submit an application and obtain a permit to operate and maintain existing outdoor grease traps provided they meet the requirements of this section. Indoor passive grease traps shall be replaced with an outdoor grease trap. The requirements for outdoor grease traps shall meet the requirements as established in subsection (e)(5). 
(4)  [Notification of installation/modification:] On or after the effective date of this section, the OSA may require an existing FPE to obtain, within thirty (30) days of written notification by the SWPCA, an agreement for the installation of a new grease trap that complies with the requirements of this section or to modify any noncompliant plumbing or existing trap. The installation or modification of any equipment shall be completed within ninety (90) days of initial notification by the SWPCA when any of the following conditions exist: 
a.  The establishment is found to be contributing grease, in quantities to cause line stoppages, or increasing maintenance on the public sanitary sewer system. 
b.  The establishment does not have a grease trap. 
c.  The establishment has an undersized, irreparable, noncomplying, or defective grease trap. 
d.  Remodeling of a kitchen, which requires a plumbing permit to be issued by the City of Shelton Building Department. 
(5)  Outdoor grease trap: Outdoor grease traps shall be installed in all FPEs except where the SWPCA has approved a variance as described in subsection (e)(6). All new and existing outdoor grease traps shall meet the following criteria: 
a.  Trap design and location. Outdoor grease traps shall have a minimum of two (2) compartments and shall be capable of separation and retention of grease and storage of settled solids. Access manholes with a minimum diameter of twenty-four (24) inches shall be provided over each trap chamber and sanitary tee. The manhole shall also have readily removable covers to facilitate inspection, grease removal, and wastewater sampling activities. The invert elevation of the inlet shall be between three (3) and six (6) inches above the invert elevation of the outlet. 
b.  The trap shall be designed, constructed and installed for adequate load-bearing capacity. 
c.  Flow control devices shall be installed where flow through the trap may exceed the manufacturer's flow ratings. 
d.  Trap capacity. Minimum capacity of any one (1) unit shall be one thousand (1,000) gallons. 
e.  Trap sizing. All traps shall hold discharges equivalent to maximum flow over a twenty-four-hour period. Where sufficient capacity cannot be achieved with a single unit, installation of grease traps in series is required. The SWPCA shall approve the grease trap based on manufacturer's maximum flow capacity. The trap volume shall be based on one (1) of the following methods: 
1.  Fixed number of meals served. 
Facility Volume 1 Schools, per pupil 3 gallons per day Residential camps 2 , per person 15 gallons per day Hospital, nursing home, per bed 15 gallons per day  
1  Adopted from the Connecticut Health Code. 
2  Residential camps: Semipermanent, overnight accommodations. 
IV = MS x GM 
Where: IV = Interceptor volume (outdoor grease trap) MS = Number of meals served (maximum occupancy) GM = Gallons used per meal from table above  
2.  Varied number of meals served. 
Facility Volume 1 Churches, per person 5 gallons per meal Restaurants and bars 5 gallons per meal  
1  Adopted from the Connecticut Health Code. 
IV = MS x GM = (S x LF x H/2) x GM 
Where: IV = Interceptor volume (outdoor grease trap) MS = Number of meals served GM = Gallons per meal from table above S = Seating capacity LF = Loading factor = 1.25 meal/seat hour for interstate highways = 1.0 meal/seat hour for freeways, recreation areas and fixed number of meals = 0.8 meal/seat hour for main highways = 0.5 meal/seat hour for other highways and side streets H = Hours in operation  
f.  Pumping and maintenance. Each FPE shall be responsible for the cost of installing, inspecting, pumping, cleaning and maintaining its outdoor grease trap. Outdoor grease trap cleaning shall include complete removal of all contents, including scraping of excessive solids from the walls, floors, baffles and all pipe work. It shall be the responsibility of each FPE to inspect its outdoor grease trap during the pumping operation to ensure proper cleaning and that all fittings and fixtures are functioning properly. 
g.  Outdoor trap pumping frequency. Each FPE shall have its outdoor grease trap(s) pumped whenever twenty-five (25) percent of the operating depth of the outdoor grease trap is occupied by grease and settled solids or a minimum of once every three (3) months, whichever is more frequent. 
h.  Inspections. The OSA shall inspect grease traps as necessary to ensure compliance with this section as established in subsection (c)(11). 
i.  Disposal. Renderable grease shall not be disposed of in any sewer, septic tank, or grease trap. All renderable grease shall be stored in a separate container that is labeled, covered, leakproof, and stored out of reach of vermin and collected by a renderer/hauler. 
j.  Nonrenderable grease removed from outdoor grease traps shall be disposed of at a grease disposal facility permitted by the Connecticut DEP. 
k.  Recordkeeping. Each FPE shall maintain a logbook in which a record of all grease trap maintenance is entered, including the date and time of the maintenance, repairs, records of inspection and log of pumping activities. The file shall be available at all times for inspection and review by the OSA. All records shall be kept for a minimum of five (5) years. 
(6)  Variance procedure: Two (2) types of variances may be granted: 
a.  Program variances exempt those facilities from this FOG program who meet the definition of "food preparation establishment" but whose wastewater discharge contributes negligible FOG to the sanitary sewer system. 
  The FPE is an itinerant vendor, either truck or cart, with no fixed sewer connection. 
  The FPE does not cook, or wash dishes, pots, pans, or utensils at their facility. 
  The volume of wastewater generated at the facility meets the requirements of a de minimis discharge as provided in subsection (e)(10). 
b.  Equipment/BMP variances may be granted to facilities that demonstrate that installation of an outdoor trap is impractical or that adequate grease removal may be accomplished with a reduced frequency of grease trap cleaning. 
  Limited space prevents the installation of an outdoor grease trap. 
  The existing facility does not own the facility and does not have authority to install an outside trap at the rented facility. 
  Existing plumbing conditions combine kitchen and sanitary wastewater and separation of the wastes is not feasible. 
  The FPE can demonstrate sufficient operating depth remains after three-months' usage that a reduced pumping frequency will provide adequate protection for the public sanitary collection system. No less than one-year's pumping records must be submitted with the variance application to demonstrate the average FOG accumulation in the outdoor grease trap. 
  The facility operates seasonally. 
c.  Other unusual circumstances in which the FPE can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the OSA that the installation of an outdoor grease trap is not feasible and the proposed alternative will provide adequate protection of the public sanitary collection system from FOG. 
(7)  [Application for variance:] An FPE that meets the above criteria for variance may submit an application for variance with the FOG permit application and fee. Variances shall be granted for a period not to exceed two (2) years. Variance may be granted or denied at the sole discretion of the OSA. 
a.  The FPE shall request a variance in writing, and submit the application with the permit application. The variance application shall contain the following information: contact information; reason or circumstance that the variance is being requested, and as applicable, a drawing showing lot conditions and dimensions, including location of sewer main, water main, buildings, and lot boundaries demonstrating insufficient space for an outside trap; an existing plumbing drawing demonstrating difficulties separating kitchen and sanitary wastewater lines, a copy of the lease demonstrating insufficient authority of the FPE to install an outdoor trap at a rented facility. 
b.  When a variance has been approved, it shall be the responsibility of the FPE to report within thirty (30) days any changes in the operation of the FPE that cause a violation in the terms of the variance. 
(8)  Alternative grease removal devices: The OSA, at its sole discretion, may approve these types of devices depending on manufacturer's specifications and verified operations on a case-by-case basis. Alternative devices such as AGRUs shall be subject to written approval based on a demonstration prior to installation. 
a.  Indoor AGRU: AGRUs shall be prohibited for new FPEs, except for those establishments where inadequate space is available for the installation of an outdoor grease trap or at the discretion of the OSA. 
b.  AGRU design: All AGRUs shall be designed and installed in accordance with the manufacturer's specifications and sized to properly pretreat the measured or calculated flows for all connected fixtures or drains. Traps shall have a removable lid on the top surface to facilitate inspection, cleaning and maintenance. 
c.  Flow control device: AGRUs shall be equipped with a device to control the rate of flow through the unit and shall not exceed the manufacturer's rated capacity. 
d.  Cleaning and maintenance: Each FPE shall be solely responsible for the cost of the AGRU installation, cleaning, maintenance, and FOG disposal costs. The AGRU shall include a skimming device, automatic draw-off, or other mechanical means to automatically separate grease from the wastewater, using a timer or level controller. This AGRU shall be hardwired to the electrical circuit. The AGRU shall operate no less than once per day. 
(9)  Other approved unit: If the Permittee requests the use of a unit other than an outdoor grease trap or an AGRU, the permittee must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the OSA that the proposed unit can reliably meet the effluent limitations established in this section. Only after receiving approval from the OSA will the permittee be authorized to install the proposed unit. 
(10)  De minimis discharges: At the request of the permittee, the OSA may grant a variance of the treatment requirements of this section, if, in the judgment of the SWPCA, there is limited potential for grease in the discharge. This judgment shall be based on: the frequency of operation; the volume of flow; and the potential for grease discharge, based upon the menu; and similar items. Any change to the conditions of the variance must be reported to the SWPCA for review within thirty (30) days. 
(f)  Fees and billing. 
(1)  The fees provided for in this section are separate and distinct from all other fees chargeable by the SWPCA. All invoiced fees pursuant to this section shall become immediately due and owed upon receipt of invoice, and shall become delinquent if not fully paid within thirty (30) days after receipt. Any delinquent amount shall be subject to the late fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per month. 
(2)  Reinspection fines will fall under one (1) of three (3) different classifications: BMP violation, installation violation, and violation for unauthorized treatment equipment modification or operation. 
(3)  A copy of the SWPCA's current fees applicable to all applications, permits, reinspections, and notice of violation fines pursuant to this section are on file in the office of the sewer administrator. 
(g)  Administrative enforcement and abatement. 
(1)  Discharge permit enforcement: Enforcement actions against FPEs in violation of this section shall be according to the following process: 
(2)  Notice of violation: A notice of violation (NOV) shall be issued to an FPE for any one (1) or more of the following violations. 
a.  Failure to properly maintain the grease trap in accordance with the provisions of the section. 
b.  Failure to report changes in operations per subsection (e)(7). 
c.  Failure to report an unauthorized grease discharge per subsection (c)(12) and (13). 
d.  Failure to maintain grease records including documentation of pumping activities, keep copies of manifest forms or receipts on site at all times. 
e.  Failure to provide access for trap cleaning, inspection or monitoring activities. 
f.  Failure to obtain or renew a discharge permit in a timely manner. 
g.  Failure to store grease in a proper container or dispose of grease at an approved facility. 
h.  Any other failure to comply with the requirements of this section or conditions of any permit issued pursuant to this section. 
(3)  Notice of violation response: If the OSA records any deficiencies during an inspection, the OSA will provide a written notice to the FPE with instructions to correct the deficiency within thirty (30) days of such notice for BMP violations and ninety (90) days for installation violations and a tentative date for reinspection. 
(4)  Notice of violation fine: The SWPCA may enter into consent agreements, compliance agreements, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with any user, or other person responsible for noncompliance. Such documents will include specific actions to be taken to correct the noncompliance within a time period specified by the document. Such documents shall be judicially enforceable, including, but not limited to: 
a.  Required corrective actions including, but not limited to, submittal of records for trap maintenance, immediate pump-out of the trap, or establishment of an ongoing contract with a hauler. 
b.  Requirements for submittal of plans or upgrade of grease traps, including time frames for preparation of plans, acquisitions of necessary equipment, initiation of construction (including time for permit approval, where required), completion of construction, and date for achievement of final compliance with the provisions of the notice of violation fine and of this section. 
c.  Payment of the notice of violation fine. 
(5)  [Violation or failure to comply:] If an FPE violates or continues to violate the provisions set forth in this section or fails to initiate/complete corrective action in response to an NOV, the SWPCA may pursue one (1) or more of the following options: 
a.  Contract with a hauler to pump the grease trap and bill the charge to the FPE concerned. 
b.  Impose a notice of violation fine as per subsection (f) as on file in the office of the sewer administrator. 
c.  Refer to other appropriate enforcement agencies for further action, i.e., the heath department and the Connecticut DEP. 
d.  Refer the notice of violation to the health district recommending closure of the facility and/or denial of food service license renewal. 
(6)  Permit revocation: Any discharge permit issued under the provisions of this section is subject to be modified, suspended or revoked in whole or in part during its term for cause shown including, but not limited to, any one (1) of the following: 
a.  Falsification of any information submitted as part of the application for the discharge permit. 
b.  Failure to comply with the requirements or regulations concerning discharges to the SWPCA sanitary sewer system. 
c.  Failure to comply with the requirements or regulations concerning grease traps in this section. 
d.  Failure to pay required fees, or penalties in a timely manner. 
e.  Failure to attend required BMP training courses if required by SWPCA. 
f.  When necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare of the City of Shelton. 
(7)  [Appeals:] Any denial or revocation of a permit pursuant to this section may be appealed to the SWPCA. The permit applicant or permittee shall have fifteen (15) days from date of notification of the permit denial or revocation to submit a written request for a hearing before the SWPCA. Failure to file an appeal constitutes acceptance of the decision to deny or revoke the permit and any conditions thereof. The SWPCA shall conduct a public hearing and decide within sixty (60) days from receipt of appeal, whether or not to grant the permit. The decision of the SWPCA shall be final. 
(8)  Recovery of costs: When a discharge causes any obstruction, damage or any other impairment to the public sanitary sewer system or any expense of whatever character or nature to the SWPCA, the SWPCA shall assess the expenses incurred to clear the obstruction, repair damage to the system, and any other expenses or damage of any kind or nature suffered by the city as a result thereof. The SWPCA may file a claim with the user or other person that caused the obstruction, damage or other impairment for recovery of such cost including any collection costs. If the claim is ignored or denied, the SWPCA shall notify the city attorney to take such measures as shall be appropriate to recover any expense or to correct other damages suffered by the city. 
(9)  Remedies nonexclusive: The remedies for this section are not exclusive. The SWPCA may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against any person violating this section. 
(10)  Search warrant: The SWPCA, through the city's attorney, may seek to obtain a search warrant from the appropriate authority to gain access to an FPE's facility for the purposes of verification of compliance, inspection and monitoring as provided for under subsection (c)(10) if such lawful entry has previously been denied by the FPE. 
(11)  Citation to Superior Court: Notwithstanding any of the above, the SWPCA may cite any user to superior court for violation of any provision of this section. A violation of any condition or requirement of a discharge permit, or failure to obtain such a permit shall be deemed to be in violation of this section. 
(12)  Injunction and other relief: The mayor, through the city attorney, may file a petition in the name of the city in superior court or such other courts as may have jurisdiction seeking the issuance of an injunction, damages, or other applicable law or regulation. Suit may be brought to recover any and all damages suffered by the city as a result of any action or inaction of any person that causes or suffers damage to occur to the SWPCA's sanitary sewer system. 
(13)  Violations: Any person found to have violated any provision of this section, or any condition of a permit issued pursuant to this section, may be liable for civil fine not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) per violation. Each separate violation shall constitute a separate offense, and for continuing violations, each day's continuance of a violation shall constitute a separate and distinct violation. In addition to the penalties provided herein, the city may recover attorney's fees, court costs, court reporter's fees and other expenses of litigation by appropriate suit at law against the person found to have violated this section or the orders, rules, regulations, and permits issued hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 849, §§ 1-7, 7-8-10) 
Secs. 17-45-17-75. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PUBLIC SANITARY SEWERS DISCHARGE RESTRICTIONS 

Sec. 17-76. - Detrimental, unsanitary discharges prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall discharge into the public sewer system any waste from any manufacturing process or industrial process which may be detrimental to the proper operation of the treatment plant. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any human or animal excrement, garbage or objectionable waste. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any wastewater or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this article. 
(d)  Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section relating to and regulating the use of the sewer system, shall upon conviction, be fined in accordance with section 1-11. 
(Ord. No. 43, 9-14-64; Ord. No. 335, 7-10-78) 
Sec. 17-77. - Discharge of unpolluted waters to sanitary sewers prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer. 
(b)  Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the sewer authority. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, on approval of the sewer authority, to a storm sewer, combined sewer, or natural outlet. 
(Ord. No. 80, §§ 3.01, 3.02, 4-22-68; Ord. No. 852, §§ 3.01, 3.02, 7-8-10) 
Sec. 17-78. - Discharge of certain substances to sanitary sewers prohibited. 
    No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewers: 
(1)  Any gasoline, kerosene, alcohol, formaldehyde, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid, or gas, or any solid, liquid, or gas which by interaction with other substances may cause fire or explosion hazards. 
(2)  Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with the sewage works, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant. 
(3)  Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to the sewage works, and personnel of the sewage works. 
(4)  Solid or viscous substance in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders. 
(Ord. No. 80, § 3.03, 4-22-68; Ord. No. 852, § 3.03, 7-8-10) 
Sec. 17-79. - Restricted substances. 
    No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described substances, materials, waters, or wastes if it appears likely in the opinion of the sewer authority that such wastes can harm either the sewage works, have an adverse effect on the receiving stream, or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance. In forming an opinion as to the acceptability of those wastes, the authority will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant, and other pertinent factors. The substances prohibited are: 
(1)  Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than sixty-five (65) degrees Celsius. 
(2)  Any water or waste containing fats, wax, food related grease, or oils whether emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred (100) mg/l or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between zero (0) degrees and sixty-five (65) degrees Celsius. 
(3)  Any residential garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths (3/4) horsepower or greater shall be subject to the review and approval of the authority. Grinding of garbage from food preparation establishments is prohibited. 
(4)  Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, iron-pickling wastes, or concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not. 
(5)  Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, cyanides, nickel, lead, tin, silver, mercury, and similar objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes exerting an excessive chlorine requirement. 
(6)  Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste, or odor-producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be established by the authority as necessary, after treatment of the composite sewage, to meet the requirements of the state, federal, or other public agencies. 
(7)  Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the authority in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations. 
(8)  Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5. 
(9)  Materials which exert or cause: 
a.  Concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to, Fullers earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride, and sodium sulfate) in excess of three hundred fifty (350) mg/l. 
b.  Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions). 
c.  A BOD or chemical oxygen demand in excess of three hundred (300) mg/l, or a chlorine requirement in excess of fifteen (15) mg/l, or in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment plant. 
d.  Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting "slugs" as defined herein. 
(10)  Any industrial waste having an average daily flow greater than two (2) percent of the average daily sewage flow of the City of Shelton. 
(11)  Waters or waste containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters. 
(12)  Privy, septic tank or cesspool wastes. 
(Ord. No. 80, § 3.04, 4-22-68; Ord. No. 336, 7-10-78; Ord. No. 852, § 3.04, 7-8-10) 
Sec. 17-80. - Action of water pollution control authority upon discharge of deleterious effect upon sewage works. 
    If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in section 17-79 of this article, and which, in the judgment of the sewer authority may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the sewer authority may: 
(a)  Reject the wastes; 
(b)  Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers; 
(c)  Require control over the quantities and rates or discharge; and/or 
(d)  Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the wastes. 
(Ord. No. 80, § 3.05, 4-22-68; Ord. No. 336, 7-10-78; Ord. No. 852, § 3.05, 7-8-10) 
Sec. 17-81. - Pretreatment equipment subject to approval. 
    If the sewer authority permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the authority and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances, and laws. 
(Ord. No. 80, § 3.05, 4-22-68; Ord. No. 852, § 3.05, 7-8-10) 
Sec. 17-82. - Interceptors. 
    Interceptors for treatment of petroleum-based grease and oil and road sand shall be provided when, in the opinion of the authority, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing petroleum-based grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the authority and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. 
(Ord. No. 80, § 3.06, 4-22-68; Ord. No. 852, § 3.06, 7-8-10) 
Sec. 17-83. - Maintenance of preliminary treatment facilities. 
    Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense. 
(Ord. No. 80, § 3.07, 4-22-68; Ord. No. 852, § 3.07, 7-8-10) 
Sec. 17-84. - Control manhole. 
    When required by the authority, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole or manholes together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the control manholes to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the wastes. Control manholes shall be located and built in a manner acceptable to the authority. If measuring devices, meters, and other appurtenances are to be permanently installed they shall be of a type acceptable to the authority. All sampling, measuring and other procedures must be acceptable to and approved by the authority. Control manholes, access facilities and all related equipment shall be installed by the person discharging the waste at his expense, and shall be maintained by him at his expense so as to be in safe condition, accessible and in proper operating condition at all times. Plans for the installation of the control manholes, access facilities and related equipment shall be approved by the authority prior to the beginning of construction. 
(Ord. No. 80, § 3.08, 4-22-68; Ord. No. 852, § 3.08, 7-8-10) 
Sec. 17-85. - Measurements, tests and analyses. 
(a)  All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this division shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of "Standard Methods" and shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples taken at said control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb, and property. 
(b)  All industries discharging into a public sewer shall perform such monitoring of their discharge as the sewer authority and/or other duty authorized employees of the city may reasonably require, including purchase, installation, use and maintenance of monitoring equipment, keeping records and reporting results of such monitoring to the sewer authority. Such records shall be made available upon request by the sewer authority to other agencies having jurisdiction over discharges to the receiving waters. 
(Ord. No. 80, § 3.09, 4-22-68; Ord. No. 336, 7-10-78; Ord. No. 852, § 3.09, 7-8-10) 
Sec. 17-86. - Special agreements with industrial concerns. 
(a)  No statement contained in this article shall be construed as prohibiting any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any person whereby a waste of unusual strength or character may be admitted to the sewage disposal works, either before or after pretreatment, provided that there is no impairment of the functioning of the sewage disposal works by reason of the admission of such wastes, and no extra costs are incurred by the city without recompense by the person. 
(b)  Providing that such agreements do not contravene any requirements of existing federal laws and are compatible with any user charge and industrial cost recovery system in effect. 
(Ord. No. 80, § 3.10, 4-22-68; Ord. No. 336, 7-10-78; Ord. No. 852, § 3.10, 7-8-10) 
Sec. 17-87. - Discharge by industry requires state, city approval. 
    Prior to discharge or permission to discharge into the City of Shelton sewers, the applicant industry must obtain written approval from the State of Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection, in the form of a permit, allowing the proposed discharged and must, if required by the DEP, or the City of Shelton, install suitable pretreatment facilities and operate and maintain such facilities in a manner which will ensure a continuous and satisfactory effluent. Details of any proposed pretreatment facilities must be submitted to the sewer authority for review and approval prior to construction. 
(Ord. No. 336, 7-10-78; Ord. No. 852, § 3.11, 7-8-10) 
Sec. 17-88. - State permit required for large domestic discharges. 
    Any new discharge from a single source of domestic wastewater in excess of five thousand (5,000) gallons per day, or cooling waters, must be authorized by a permit from the State of Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection, Director of Water Compliance and Hazardous Substances. 
(Ord. No. 336, 7-10-78; Ord. No. 852, § 3.12, 7-8-10) 
Sec. 17-89. - Dumping septic tank effluent at city sewer plant. 
(a)  The sewer commission administrative officer shall establish regulations relating to the dumping of septic tank effluent at the city sewer plant. 
(b)  These regulations shall be filed with the city clerk on or before October 1, 1972, and shall become effective on that date, subject to approval of the board of aldermen. 
(c)  No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited septic effluent at the city sewer plant which material does not originate within the city. 
(d)  The water pollution control authority shall set the fees for depositing septic effluent at the city sewer plant. Dumping hours shall be established by the superintendent of the city sewer plant. All sums collected shall be receipted by the superintendent or his designated representative at the plant. All such sums shall be deposited with the finance department on a weekly basis. 
(e)  The sewer commission administrative officer or his designated representative, is authorized to refuse to accept any material which in his judgment is detrimental to the operation of the plant. 
(f)  Any person violating any provision of this section or of the regulations adopted pursuant thereto, shall be fined not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) per violation. 
(Ord. No. 135, §§ 1-7, 9-14-72; Ord. No. 562, 1-2-89) 
Secs. 17-90-17-105. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - RATES AND CHARGES 

Sec. 17-106. - Tax collector designated as collector of sewerage system connection and use charges. 
    Pursuant to section 7-258 of the general statutes, the tax collector of the city is hereby designated as collector of sewerage system connection and use charges and he is hereby empowered to take all steps authorized under chapter 103 of the general statutes in the name of the city to collect such charges in any civil action. 
(Ord. No. 52, 7-12-65) 
Sec. 17-107. - Sewer assessment funds to be deposited in general fund. 
    During the fiscal year 1984-1985, all monies collected from sewer assessments for projects which were originally financed by the issue of bond or notes shall be deposited in the general fund of the city. 
(Ord. No. 476, § B, 2-14-85) 
Sec. 17-108. - Revolving sewer construction fund. 
(a)  Pursuant to section 7.10e of the Charter, there is hereby created a revolving sewer construction fund which shall be comprised of such funds as the board of aldermen shall appropriate during each fiscal year for capital construction. The board of aldermen shall appropriate for each fiscal year at least an amount equal to the sewer assessments that are estimated to be received during the fiscal year under consideration. 
(b)  Amounts that are in the revolving sewer fund, on the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives, will remain in the revolving sewer fund as reconstituted under this section. 
(Ord. No. 476, §§ C, D, 2-14-85) 
Sec. 17-109. - Sewer benefit assessment regulations. 
(a)  Costs to be recovered. Benefit assessments to be levied on the lands and buildings, and the owners thereof, subject thereto within each sewer district will be determined on the basis of recovering: 
(1)  Sixty-six and two-thirds (66 2/3 ) percent of all costs incidental to the design and construction of the lateral sewers, and one hundred (100) percent of the costs of design and construction of substreet service connections thereto serving such sewer district; 
(2)  Such portions of all costs incidental to the design and construction of the appurtenant sewerage facilities serving such sewer district as the sewer commission shall determine; plus 
(3)  The product of six hundred dollars ($600.00) multiplied by the number of subgrade residential buildings (as defined in subsection (f) situated within such sewer district. 
(b)  Lands, buildings and owners subject to benefit assessments. The lands and buildings, and the owners thereof, subject to benefit within each sewer district shall be all of the lands and buildings situated within such sewer district, and the owners thereof. 
(c)  Method. 
(1)  The total costs to be recovered with respect to each sewer district, less the costs incidental to the design and construction of the individual substreet service connections to the lateral sewers, will be divided into four (4) parts as follows: 
a.  Costs to be recovered on the basis of front footage (hereinafter "total front footage charges"), twenty-five (25) percent. 
b.  Costs to be recovered on the basis of land area (hereinafter "total land area charges"), twenty-five (25) percent. 
c.  Costs to be recovered on the basis of the number of units (hereinafter "total unit charges"), twenty-five (25) percent. 
d.  Costs to be recovered on the basis of property value assessment (hereinafter "total property value assessment charges") twenty-five (25) percent. 
(2)  The total frontage charges for such sewer district will be divided by the total assessable front footage (determined as hereinafter provided) of lands situated within such sewer district; the quotient being the benefit assessment per assessable front foot for such sewer district. 
(3)  The total land area charges for such sewer district will be divided by the total assessable square footage (determined as hereinafter provided) of lands situated within such sewer district the quotient being the benefit assessment per assessable square foot for such sewer district. 
(4)  The total costs incidental to the design and construction of the individual substreet service connections to the lateral sewers serving such sewer district will be divided by the total number of such service connections installed within such sewer district; the quotient being the benefit assessment per service connection for such sewer district. 
(5)  The total unit charges for such sewer district will be divided by the assessable units (determined as hereinafter provided) of the lands situated within such sewer district; the quotient being the benefit assessment per assessable units for such sewer district. 
(6)  The total property value assessment charges for such sewer district will be divided by the assessable property value (determined as hereinafter provided) of the lands situated within such sewer district; the quotient being the benefit assessment per assessable property value for such district. 
(7)  The benefit assessment to be levied on each piece or parcel of land, the buildings thereon and the owner or owners thereof situated within such sewer district will be the sum of: 
a.  The product of the assessable front footage of such land multiplied by the benefit assessment per assessable front foot for such sewer district; plus 
b.  The product of the assessable square footage of such land multiplied by the benefit assessment per assessable square foot for such sewer district; plus 
c.  The product of the number of substreet service connections to lateral sewers serving such land multiplied by the benefit assessment per service connection for such sewer district. 
d.  The product of the assessable units of such land multiplied by the benefit assessment per assessable unit for such sewer district; plus 
e.  The product of the assessable property value of such land multiplied by the benefit assessment per assessable property value for such sewer district. 
(d)  Assessable front footage. Subject to reasonable allowances by the water pollution control authority for particular situations, the assessable front footage of each piece or parcel of land will be determined as follows: 
(1)  For each piece or parcel of land whose side lines are unparallel to the extent that the width of the piece of land measured along the remotest line parallel to the front line that can be drawn within the bounds of such piece or parcel of land (or if such line is more than one hundred fifty (150) feet distant, perpendicularly from such front line, along a line parallel to the front line and one hundred fifty (150) feet distant, perpendicularly from it differs from the width of the piece or parcel of land measured along its front line by more than ten (10) percent of such front line width, the assessable front footage of such piece or parcel of land will be the width of the piece or parcel of land measured along its front line adjusted in accordance with the following procedure: 
a.  If the front line is longer than the rear line or the line one hundred fifty (150) feet distant, parallel to the front line the adjusted front footage shall be the sum of the length of the rear line (or the line one hundred fifty (150) feet distant parallel to the front line) and two-thirds of the difference in length of the front line and the rear line (or the line one hundred fifty (150) feet distant, parallel to the front line.) 
b.  If the front line is shorter than the rear line (or the line one hundred fifty (150) feet distant, parallel to the front line), the adjusted front footage shall be the sum of the length of the front line and one-third of the difference in length of the rear line (or line one hundred fifty (150) feet distant, parallel to the front line) and the front line. 
(2)  For each other piece or parcel of land, the assessable front footage will be the width of the piece or parcel of land measured along its front line. 
(3)  Double frontage parcels. A piece or parcel of land which abuts street lines on two (2) noncontiguous bounds will be deemed to have two (2) front lines for purposes of determining assessable front footage only if such piece or parcel of land may be divided into usable lots fronting on both streets in conformity with the zoning ordinance of the city. 
(4)  Corner parcels. The assessable front footage of a piece or parcel of land which abuts street lines on two (2) or more contiguous bounds is not deemed to have two (2) front lines under subsection (d)(3) of this section for purposes of determining assessable front footage will be the length of the shortest abutting street line (adjusted in accordance with subsection (d)(1) of this section, when the conditions described therein are met, if it is assumed that the shortest abutting street line is the front line of such piece or parcel of land) plus the number of feet, if any, by which the longest abutting street line exceeds three hundred (300) feet. When two (2) abutting contiguous street lines are connected by a short-radius curve, one-half of the are length of that curve will be deemed a part of the length of each of the contiguous street lines. 
(e)  Assessable square footage. Subject to reasonable allowances by the water pollution control authority for particular situations, the assessable front footage of each piece or parcel of land will be determined as follows: 
(1)  Residence districts. The assessable square footage of each piece or parcel of land situated within any residence district under the zoning ordinance of the city will be the area of that portion of the piece or parcel of land lying between its front line and a line drawn parallel to the front line and two hundred (200) feet distant, perpendicularly, from it. 
(2)  Commercial districts and industrial districts. The assessable square footage of each piece or parcel of land situated within any commercial district, or any industrial district under the zoning ordinance of the city will be the area of that portion of the piece or parcel of land lying between its front line and a line drawn parallel to the front line and four hundred (400) feet distant, perpendicularly, from it. 
When any point on the principal building situated on a piece or parcel of land described in subsection (e)(1) or (e)(2) of this section is not located within the area prescribed by such subsection for determining assessable square footage, the assessable square footage of the piece or parcel of land will be the area of that portion of the piece or parcel of land lying between its front line and a line drawn parallel to the front line and distant, perpendicularly, from it a distance equal to the greatest perpendicular distance between the front line and any point on such principal building. 
(f)  Subgrade residential buildings. When the invert grade of the sewer serving an existing one-family residence is at an elevation such that the principal living level of the residence cannot be served by a gravity-flow connection, the benefit assessment to be levied on the piece or parcel of land upon which the residence is situated, on the residence and other buildings thereon and the owner or owners thereof, determined in accordance with subsection (c)(3) of this section, will be reduced in the amount of six hundred dollars ($600.00). 
(g)  Assessable units. Subject to reasonable allowances by the commission for particular situations, the assessable unit(s) of each piece or parcel of land will be determined as follows: See sections 17-112 and 17-113, pertaining to sewage use charge policy, (Ordinance No. 266), adopted March 8, 1976, as amended November 1, 1986. 
(h)  Assessable property value. Subject to reasonable allowances by the commission for particular situations, the assessable property value of each piece or parcel of land will be determined by the method of value assessment the city uses in the calculation of property value for purposes of municipal tax liability. 
(Ord. No. 217, §§ 9.01-9.06, 4-8-74; Ord. No. 576, 3-8-90) 
Sec. 17-110. - Deferred assessment of sewer cost. 
(a)  Generally. The following procedure is established for deferring costs of trunk, main or lateral sewers to such time or times as an extension of such trunk, main or lateral sewers shall be built and assessed to serve one (1) or more other areas. 
(b)  Sewer districts. In making assessments upon property benefited, the water pollution control authority may divide the total territory to be drained by a sewer system into areas and may assess the property benefited in each area separately, those areas receiving the more immediate benefits to be assessed first and the less congested areas at such time or times thereafter as shall be determined by the authority. 
(c)  Deferral of costs to other districts. Whenever the water pollution control authority shall determine that the cost of a sewer will exceed the benefit to the area to be sewered immediately and directly, and when such excess cost is due to increased size or depth of such sewer or to other costs which are necessary or incidental in order that such sewer, or the sewer system of which it is a part, may be suitable for extension in the future to serve one (1) or more other areas which could naturally drain into such sewer or sewer system, the authority may elect to pay for such excess cost from the revolving sewer fund and defer the assessment of the excess cost until such time when the benefits shall be more immediate. If the authority shall elect to defer the assessment of costs of outlet benefits, the procedure shall be as determined by the authority, and properties which are located in any district on which outlet costs shall have been deferred shall not be included in newspaper publications or other notices required for the assessment of such sewer, and no special notices shall be sent to the owners of such properties. No caveat or lien shall be placed on the land records against any property located in the area on which outlet costs have been deferred until the construction of any extension of such sewer or sewer system, in the cost of which such deferred costs are to be included as a part of the assessment to be made against such property. Whenever the authority shall determine that the cost of any sewer for which a benefit assessment is to be made shall include a portion of the cost of a sewer previously built which was paid for by the authority from the revolving sewer fund, the authority shall determine the portion of the previously deferred costs of such sewer which will benefit properties served by the sewer being assessed and shall include such proportion of such deferred costs as a part of the cost of the sewer being assessed, subject, however, to the right of remonstrance, hearing and appeal. Whenever a sewer is to be built by developer or owner in any area or district in which costs have been deferred as hereinbefore provided, or whenever said sewer is built in advance of the availability of a sewer outlet, such deferred cost or such share of the cost of the future outlet sewer shall be paid by the developer or owner as determined by the authority. 
(d)  Sewers in rear lands or certain trunk sewers. Whenever a sewer is laid out and assessed by the water pollution control authority through undeveloped rear lands, or whenever a trunk sewer must be laid out and built through a street in which local sewer service may be rendered by said trunk sewer but in which, in the opinion of the authority there is no immediate need of local sewer service, and whenever the authority determines that at the time of completion of the sewer there would not be sufficient immediate benefit accruing to the lands, and that such benefits will not substantially accrue until there is a change in conditions of need, accessibility, in zoning restrictions, or in use, or in other conditions, the authority may defer the assessment and the collection of the same until the growth and development of the area warrants, or until use is made of the sewer by abutting property. 
(e)  Cemetery land. Whenever a sewer is laid out and assessed by the water pollution control authority through or adjacent to land held for cemetery purposes or in a highway abutting such land and whenever the water pollution control authority determines that at the time of completion of said sewer there would not be immediate benefit accurring to said land and that such benefits will not accrue until there is change in conditions or use, the authority may defer the collection and assessment of the same. 
(f)  Connections in deferred assessment areas. When an assessment for a sewer on any land has been deferred as provided in subsections (d) and (e) of this section connections from such land to the sewer shall not be permitted until: 
(1)  The water pollution control authority has determined that the conditions have altered due to change in accessibility, zoning, use or the establishment or dedication of streets or to the approval of subdivisions by a local planning body, or in some other manner sufficient for normal benefit to accrue to the land or any part thereof, and the authority has declared that the assessment on such is due and payable and given proper notice thereof; or 
(2)  A sanitary sewer connection charge has been paid by or for the owners of land which is to be served by the connection, which payment shall be in lieu of, and in amount equal to, the assessment on such land. 
(g)  Collection of deferred assessments. When an assessment is declared due and payable, it shall be collectible in the same manner and in the same amount as if it had been due and payable at the time of completion of the sewer. 
(h)  Amount of connection charge, deferred assessments. The amount of sanitary sewer connection charge to be paid in lieu of assessment shall be in amount equal to the final assessment rate of the original final assessment, applied to the frontage, or acreage, or unit, as the case may be, of the land, or such part of such land as, in the opinion of the water pollution control authority is benefited at the time of connection. 
(i)  Caveats and liens; deferred assessments. To notify an owner or prospective buyer of land upon which there is an assessment for a sewer laid, but deferred as provided herein, a caveat shall be filed within thirty (30) days of the date upon which the assessment is levied, and the benefits, though deferred, shall be a lien upon the land on account of which they were assessed which lien shall commence and attach to such land from the time of which the assessment is levied, but the same shall not remain a lien thereon for a longer period than three (3) months from the date of last publication of notice that the benefits assessed therefor, but deferred, are then due and payable, unless a certificate of lien is delivered for record. 
(j)  Nature of caveats. Such caveats shall indicate the nature and amount of the deferred assessment, that land so assessed, and the provisions for future payment, whether by later declaration by the water pollution control authority that assessments are due and payable, or by payment of a connection charge, in which case the caveat and lien will be released on such land or portion of which as payment in lieu of assessment has been made. 
(k)  Connections to sewers, built by developers. Whenever a sewer has not been assessed by the water pollution control authority, but has been built for the authority under a developer's permit-agreement passing land owned by others, which others might later request a house connection to the sewer, no connection shall be permitted by the authority unless the other owner first submits satisfactory written proof to the authority that he has paid the developer a normal and equitable share of the sewer construction costs, or the other owner first signs a form of agreement waiving the authority's usual sewer assessment procedures and pays a sanitary sewer connection charge, or the authority has passed an assessment covering the section in question. 
(l)  Reimbursement to developers. The water pollution control authority is empowered, at its discretion, to include in agreements with developers or others for the construction of sewers by and at the expense of such developers or owners provisions for reimbursement of the developers or owners from sanitary sewer connection charges collected, as provided herein, for the cost of sewers constructed by them in sections of highways on which lands owned by them do not abut, such reimbursements not to exceed the cost of construction within such sections of highways, and limiting the time within which such reimbursements may occur to such time as the authority may deem expedient for the particular case, but no reimbursement shall be made after ten (10) years from the date of incorporation of the particular sewer into the public system. Expiration of the time for reimbursement to the developer shall not release subsequent permittees from paying a connection charge to the authority. 
(m)  Connections to property not previously assessed. Whenever a sewer has been laid out and constructed by the water pollution control authority to serve a particular section of highway or a particular area, no connection will be permitted thereto for any property which has not been assessed therefor, or has not shared in an equitable manner in the expense thereof, unless prior to such connection, the owner of such property first enters into a special agreement, to be recorded in the land records and providing for advance payment by the owner of a sanitary sewer connection charge, and providing that the permission granted will not affect the power of the authority to make future benefit assessments therefor, against the property of the owner, in the same manner as if the permission to connect has never been granted by the authority, and agreeing to credit the connection charge payment toward any such future assessment with allowance of interest between the date of payment of the charge and the date of any future final assessment billed the owner. 
(Ord. No. 216, §§ 10.01-10.15, 4-8-74) 
Sec. 17-111. - Deferred sewer assessment payment for the elderly. 
(a)  Pursuant to section 7-253A of the general statutes, any property owner who is eligible for tax relief for elderly taxpayers under the provisions of sections 12-129b and 12-170a of the general statutes may apply to the water pollution control authority for approval of a plan of payment of such property owner's sewer assessment in a manner other than as provided under section 7-253 of the general statutes. 
(b)  The water pollution control authority may allow optional methods of payment of any sewer assessment by such eligible property owner including an option to pay only the annual interest charge on any deferred payments or outstanding balance of principal provided that any such optional method of payment shall require that the outstanding balance of principal deferred under such optional method of payment shall become due upon any transfer of title to the property or upon the death of such property owner. 
(c)  Any such optional method of payment shall be reviewed annually by the water pollution control authority. 
(d)  A report of each deferred assessment shall be filed with the board of aldermen and the tax collector upon approval and the result of any annual review shall also be filed with the board of aldermen and the tax collector. 
(Ord. No. 431, 6-10-82) 
Sec. 17-112. - Sewer use charges-Generally. 
(a)  General. 
(1)  A use charge shall be levied annually on all properties connected to the Shelton Municipal Sanitary Sewerage System in accordance with applicable state statute. 
(2)  The record owner of the property against which the use charge is levied shall be liable for the payment thereof. 
(3)  The use charge may be billed in multiple installments. Each installment must be paid within thirty (30) days of the due date. After thirty (30) days, any unpaid installment becomes a delinquent unpaid balance and an interest penalty will be added thereon and collected in accordance with applicable state statute. 
(4)  Any unpaid use charge will constitute a lien upon the real estate of the property owner until it and any penalty charge thereon is paid in full. If a lien is recorded on the real estate of the owner, a lien fee will be added to the unpaid balance and collected in accordance with applicable state statute. 
(5)  The use charge shall apply to all connected properties, without exception, including municipally owned and other tax exempt properties. The use charge shall recover all costs of operation and maintenance of the sewerage system. 
(b)  Purpose. The purpose of this article is to establish fair and effective charges for the use of the Shelton Sewer System pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes Section 7-255. 
(Ord. No. 266, 3-8-76; Ord. No. 851, §§ 1, 2, 7-8-10) 
Sec. 17-113. - Same-Unit basis. 
(a)  Unit basis. Consideration having been given to the many various parameters, and concerns involved in a sewer use charge system, the city finds that the unit method is a fair and reasonable charge method for the use of the wastewater system. 
(b)  Properties to be charged. All properties which are connected to the wastewater system shall be charged for the use of the wastewater system for that entire fiscal year. In the case of property which was not connected during the entire period, the use charge shall be prorated for the actual number of days within the stated period the property was connected. 
(c)  Description of unit method. Properties served by the wastewater system are hereby divided into units based upon the total number of units as of the beginning of each fiscal year for which the charge is being made. The basic unit is the one-family private house. 
Domestic Wastes 
(1)  The charge to users for discharge of domestic (sanitary) wastes to the sewer system shall be on the basis of equivalent dwelling units. The equivalent dwelling unit shall be an assumed single-family house with a statistical average discharge of two hundred ten (210) gallons per day to the sewer system. 
(2)  Each one-family dwelling shall be considered to be one (1) equivalent dwelling unit. Multifamily dwelling units and commercial establishments discharging domestic wastes will be charged based on equivalent dwelling units as set forth in the tables and formulas shown herein. 
Formula For Dwelling Unit 
(1)  The formula for domestic and commercial users: 
Recoverable Costs (minus costs for "excess" BOD/SS)* x % Residential and Commercial Flow = New Recoverable Costs Related to Residential and Commercial Users. 
Net Recoverable Costs (Total Est. Units = Rate/Unit) 
(2)  The formula for industrial users: 
Recoverable Costs (minus costs for "excess" BOD/SS)* x % Industrial Flow = Net Recoverable Costs. 
Net Recoverable Costs (Total Est. Units = Rate/Unit) 
*  (Reference section 17-123, Definitions) 
Cost of operation shall include, but not be limited to: operation and maintenance of sewage treatment plants; all costs associated with maintenance of the sanitary sewer system and treatment works; replacing equipment or parts thereof; and as further defined herein under Definitions [section 17-123]. 
To Be Considered 1 Dwelling Unit 
Single-family houses 
Multifamily houses, each unit 
Apartment houses, each unit 
Churches, rectory or convent 
Photographers 
Retail florist shop 
Garages (public parking) 
Warehouses (less than 10 employees) 
Fire station 
Swimming cabanas 
Factories/light industry (less than 10 employees) 
Barber shop 
Mercantile stores (less than 10 employees) 
Supermarket (less than 10 employees), no on-site meat or fish preparation 
Police station + 1/5 unit per call 
Office building (less than 10 employees) 
To Be Considered1/3Dwelling Units 
Rooming houses, each sleeping room 
To Be Considered2/3Dwelling Units 
Efficiency apartments and motels and hotels, each sleeping room 
To Be Considered 11/3Dwelling Units 
Doctor or dentist office 
Bakery 
Fish or meat market (less than 12 employees) 
Dog grooming and beauty parlor, each employee 
Halls and places of public assembly 
Billiard rooms 
Funeral home 
To Be Considered 12/3Dwelling Units 
Service stations 
Drive-in restaurants 
Drug stores 
To Be Considered 2 Dwelling Units 
Restaurant, bar, night club (less than 50 capacity) 
To Be Considered 31/3Dwelling Units 
Luncheonette (counter service only) 
Restaurant, bar, night club (50-100 capacity) 
Lodge (with bar license) 
Dealerships (automobile) 
To Be Considered 8 Dwelling Units 
Automatic car washes (per bay) 
Formulas For Other Users 
Factories with no showers (more than 10 employees): (# employees) (20) divided by 210 = # dwelling units 
Factories with showers (more than 10 employees): (# employees) (25) divided by 210 = # dwelling units 
Dry cleaners 
Self-service and professional laundries: (# washers) (150) divided by 210 = # dwelling units 
Bowling alleys: (# alleys) (75) divided by 210 = # dwelling units 
Drive-in theaters: (# car stalls) (5) divided by 210 = # dwelling units 
Movie houses: (# seats) (21/2) divided by 210 = # dwelling units 
Hospitals: (# beds) (200) divided by 210 = # dwelling units 
Nursing and rest homes: (# rooms) (100) divided by 210 = # dwelling units 
Elementary schools: (# pupils and staff) (15) divided by 210 = # dwelling units 
Jr. high and Sr. high schools: (# pupils and staff) (15) divided by 210 = dwelling units 
Residential schools: (# pupils) (100) divided by 210 = # dwelling units 
Office buildings, warehouses (more than 10 employees): (# employees) (20) divided by 210 = # dwelling units 
Mercantile stores, supermarkets (more than 10 employees): (# employees) (20) divided by 210 = # dwelling units 
Restaurant, bar, night club (more than 100 capacity): (Capacity) (7) divided by 210 = # dwelling units 
Fish or meat market (more than 12 employees): (# employees) (20) divided by 210 = # dwelling units 
Any uses, combination of uses and units not included in the above list will be preliminarily determined by the sewer commission administrative officer, and subject to the requirements of a public notice and public hearing as required. The final review and approval shall be made by the water pollution control authority. 
(d)  [Equivalents.] For purposes of this section and the computations required hereunder each residential and commercial unit shall be deemed to use two hundred ten (210) gallons of wastewater per day, including infiltration and inflow, and a rate of BOD and SS of two hundred (200) mg/l and two hundred (200) mg/l, respectively. 
(e)  Industrial uses. All industrial buildings or users shall be charged a sewer use charge based upon the unit method. Where applicable, said charges shall be computed as per the formula in subsection (c) for industrial users. In addition to the above user charge fee by the unit basis, all industrial buildings or users shall be charged a sewer use surcharge for wastes with BOD strengths over three hundred (300) mg/l and SS strengths over three hundred (300) mg/l. These figures will be made available through the self reporting certification statement. 
Formula For Excess Strength Wastes 
BOD: Five-day BOD (lbs/yr) x Rate per pound BOD ($-/lb) = BOD surcharge (In excess of 300 mg/l) 
SS: Suspended solids (lbs/yr) x Rate per pound SS ($-/lb) = SS surcharge (In excess of 300 mg/l) 
(Ord. No. 266, 3-8-76; Ord. No. 513, 1-8-87; Ord. No. 851, § 3, 7-8-10) 
Sec. 17-114. - Unlawful discharge. 
    It shall be unlawful, except as herein provided, for any user to discharge sewage, industrial waste or other waste into the sewers or sewage works of the treatment system, or any sewer connected therein, unless such user shall pay to the City of Shelton its user charge (UC) as hereinafter provided. 
(Ord. No. 851, § 4, 7-8-10) 
Sec. 17-115. - User class determination and reporting. 
(a)  Annually, the user, except residential users, shall make an evaluation of its waste discharge in accordance with the requirements of this regulation and determine its user classification status. Final determination shall be subject to the sewer commission administrative officer. 
(b)  The annual class determination shall be submitted to the sewer administrator by April 20 of each year, on forms to be supplied by the City of Shelton, and shall be based on the user's operation and usage for the prior calendar year. 
(c)  Small residential and nonresidential commercial/industrial users, after the sewer administrator has verified their user class status shall not be required to file certification reports. 
(Ord. No. 851, § 5, 7-8-10) 
Sec. 17-116. - Measurement of wastes. 
(a)  Each large (reference section 17-123, Definitions) commercial/industrial user shall submit annual certified statements to the sewer administrator's office on forms supplied by same, certifying the quantities and concentrations of its sewage, industrial wastes and other wastes discharged into the sewers and sewage works of the City of Shelton. The quantity of flow reported shall be the quantity for that year of billing. Such reports shall be filed within twenty (20) days of the close of the reporting period. Copies of other pertinent corroborative documents shall be submitted with the certified statement. 
    A separate, certified statement must be filed for each facility. The total quantities and concentrations of sewage, industrial wastes and other wastes to be measured and certified by the user shall be: 
(1)  Flow in gallons (Gal). 
(2)  Five-day BOD in milligrams per liter (mg/l). 
(3)  Suspended solids in milligrams per liter (mg/l). 
Should inspection by the sewer commission administrative officer reveal that any statement or quantities or other information filed as a user does not accurately represent actual conditions, the director shall adjust the quantities accordingly. 
(b)  Unless otherwise provided, all measurements, tests, sampling and analysis required herein shall be in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the American Waterworks Association and the Water Pollution Control Federation. 
(Ord. No. 851, § 6, 7-8-10) 
Sec. 17-117. - Reporting, billing and collection. 
(a)  Calculating the user surcharge. The user charge of each large commercial/industrial or tax exempt user shall be calculated by the user by multiplying the quantities of wastes reported by the user in its current certified statement by the respective billing rates as established by the city and appropriately adjusted yearly to provide for sufficient revenue to offset the cost of maintaining the system for the particular year in question. 
(b)  Billing. The billing frequency shall be not more than once per month nor less than once per year. All such bills shall be due and payable thirty (30) days after the date thereof. The city reserves the right to bill delinquent users based on estimated quantities. 
(c)  Collections. Sewer use charges shall be collected in accordance with the regulations and procedures as promulgated by the Shelton Board of Aldermen/Water Pollution Control Authority and turned over periodically to the city finance director and deposited in a special account, separate from other town founds, designated the "Wastewater Operating Fund." This fund shall be used for operation, maintenance, administration, and replacement of the treatment works and for payment of principle and interest on bonds and notes of the city issued for construction of sewerage facilities. 
(d)  Penalties, interest, liens. Interest and penalties may be charged as provided by the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut. Sewer user charges, together with interest and penalties thereon, shall constitute a lien upon the property, and such lien may be foreclosed and such charges may be collected in the manner provided by the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut. 
(Ord. No. 851, § 7, 7-8-10) 
Sec. 17-118. - User appeal procedure. 
    Any person, firm or corporation who disputes the amount billed, its user classification, or any other matter relating thereto shall set forth the nature of his objection or claim in writing which objection shall be sent by certified mail or hand-delivered to the office of the water pollution control authority. The water pollution control authority shall consider the complaint at its next regularly scheduled meeting and if the matter is not resolved in favor of the complainant, shall set the matter down for a hearing at its next regularly scheduled meeting thereafter. At said hearing the complainant shall be entitled to be heard, represented by counsel and present such evidence as it desires. Any person aggrieved by the subsequent decision of the water pollution control authority may take such appeal, if any, as is provided in the Connecticut General Statutes. 
(Ord. No. 851, § 8, 7-8-10) 
Sec. 17-119. - Invalidity. 
    The invalidity of any portion of this regulation shall not affect the remainder thereof, and this regulation may be amended at such time or times pursuant to statute, as the water pollution control authority/board of alderman in its judgment considers necessary. 
(Ord. No. 851, § 9, 7-8-10) 
Sec. 17-120. - Bridgeport Hydraulic Company. 
    Wherever reference is made to the water department herein, it shall mean the Bridgeport Hydraulic Water Company, its successors and assigns. 
(Ord. No. 851, § 10, 7-8-10) 
Sec. 17-121. - Annual audit. 
    The "Wastewater Operating Fund" shall be audited annually at the end of each fiscal year. 
(Ord. No. 851, § 11, 7-8-10) 
Sec. 17-122. - Cost of service study. 
    The sewer administrator will ensure that a cost of service study shall be performed not less than every two (2) years. 
(Ord. No. 851, § 12, 7-8-10) 
Sec. 17-123. - Definitions. 
    [The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
    BOD (biochemical oxygen demand). The quantity of dissolved oxygen required for biochemical oxidation of decomposable matter under aerobic conditions in a period of five (5) days at a temperature of twenty (20) degrees Celsius. 
    Domestic user. Owner of any single-family, multifamily, small commercial/industrial or tax-exempt user. 
    Employee. Any and every person employed for approximately an eight-hour period of time each workday. 
    Food preparation establishments ("FPE"). FPE shall mean establishments that engage in cooking methods that have the potential to produce fats, oils, and grease, including: facilities that are regulated by the local health district and are classified as a Class III or Class IV food service establishment (FSE), as defined by the state health code; or are regulated by the Connecticut Department of Consumer Protection. These facilities include, but are not limited to, restaurants, hotel kitchens, hospitals, school kitchens, bars, factory cafeterias, clubs, prisons, butchers, and commercial bakeries. Residences and industrial food processing facilities shall not be regulated by this division. 
    Large commercial/industrial user. A nonresidential user as identified in the standard Industrial Classification Manual 1972, Office of Management and Budget, engaged in commercial or industrial activities which discharges any waste exceeding any of the following: A flow of twenty-five thousand (25,000) gallons per day, a BOD of three hundred (300) mg/l or suspended solids of three hundred (300) mg/l, or discharges wastes containing toxic, hazardous, or injurious materials as defined in Appendix A or a combination of any of the preceding. 
    Operation and maintenance costs. Those funds dedicated for use of offsetting costs incurred for treatment and disposal of sewage and upgrading and replacement costs of such treatment works. 
    Replacement. Those expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment, accessories, or appurtenances during the useful life of the treatment works necessary to maintain the capacity and performance for which such works are designed and constructed. The phrase "operation and maintenance" includes replacement. 
    Sanitary wastes. Water-carried human wastes from sanitary convenience such as toilets, washbowls, bathtubs, and residential laundry facilities. 
    Sewer user charge. The operations, maintenance and replacement costs incurred by the sanitary department to collect, treat and dispose of the sanitary wastes, process wastes, industrial wastes and other wastes of the user. The user charge or any user shall be directly proportional to its use of the city's sewage treatment collection and disposal services when compared to the total operations, maintenance and replacement costs incurred. 
    Suspended solids (SS). Solids which either float on the surface of or are in suspension in the waste discharge and which are removable by laboratory filtering. 
    Toxic wastes. Wastes from industrial and commercial sources which are toxic, hazardous or injurious to the sewage treatment process and which are identified in Appendix A. 
    Treatment works. Any devices and systems used in the storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature, including intercepting sewers, outfall sewers, sewage collection systems, pumping, power, and other equipment and their appurtenances; extensions, improvements, remodeling, additions, and alterations thereof; and any works, including site acquisition of the land that will be an integral part of the treatment process or is used for ultimate disposal of residues resulting from such treatment. In addition, treatment works means any other method or system for preventing, abating, reducing, storing, treating, separating, or disposing of municipal waste, including stormwater runoff, or industrial waste, including waste in combined stormwater and sanitary sewer system. 
(Ord. No. 851, § 13, 7-8-10) 
Sec. 17-124. - Financial requirements. 
    The user charge system shall generate sufficient revenue to offset the cost of all treatment works' operation and maintenance provided by the City of Shelton. In the event that collections do not finance the expenditures of the sewer user charge fund, the board of aldermen shall appropriate an amount sufficient to meet the financial requirements. 
(Ord. No. 851, § 14, 7-8-10) 
Sec. 17-125. - Cost recovery for industrial waste treatment. 
(a)  Applicability. All industries discharging industrial wastes as defined under section 17-20 shall be subject to the equitable cost recovery program. 
(b)  Recovery of capital costs. The plant effluent from each industry shall be the basic parameter for the capital cost recovery program. Each plant effluent shall be compared to the design loadings on a percentage basis and applied toward the city's responsibility of the total eligible system cost. 
(c)  Average design loadings. The average design loadings of the city's system are as follows: 
(1)  Wastewater treatment plant. 
a.  Design flow: 2.75 million gallons per day. 
b.  Design B.O.D. loading: 5,905 pounds per day. 
c.  Design suspended solids loading: 7,030 pounds per day. 
(2)  Laurel Heights sanitary sewer. 
a.  Design flow: 0.70 million gallons per day. 
(3)  Laurel Heights pump station. 
a.  Design flow: 0.70 million gallons per day. 
(4)  Route 8 upper pump station. 
a.  Design flow: 2.33 million gallons per day. 
(5)  Route 8 lower pump station. 
a.  Design flow: 1.81 million gallons per day. 
(6)  Route 8 Industrial Area Sanitary Sewer. 
a.  Design flow: 2.74 million gallons per day. 
(d)  The capital costs as a percentage of total construction costs. 
(1)  Wastewater treatment plant: 50.70%. 
a.  Design flow: 14.41% 
b.  Design B.O.D. loading: 20.78% 
c.  Design suspended solids loading: 15.51% 
(2)  Laurel Heights sanitary sewer: 16.48%. 
(3)  Laurel Heights pump station: 1.80%. 
(4)  Route 8 upper pump station: 6.37%. 
(5)  Route 8 lower pump station: 6.78%. 
(6)  Route 8 industrial area sanitary sewer: 17.87%. 
(e)  Formulae. The city responsibility (CR%) all ineligible costs plus ten (10) percent of the total eligible system cost (CR%). The following formulae shall be used to determine each industry's share of that portion of the system utilized: 
(1)  Wastewater treatment plant. 
a.  Based on industrial flow: Total system cost × CR% × 14.41% × industry flow as a % = flow responsibility. 
b.  Based on B.O.D. loading: Total system cost × CR% × 20.78% industry B.O.D. loading as a % = B.O.D. responsibility. 
c.  Based on suspended solids loading: Total system cost × CR% × 15.51% × industry suspended solids loading as a % = suspended solids responsibility. 
(2)  Laurel Heights sanitary sewer. Total system cost × CR% 16.48% × industry flow as a % = Laurel Heights sanitary sewer responsibility. 
(3)  Laurel Heights pump station. Total system cost × CR% × 1.80% × industry flow as a % = Laurel Heights pump station responsibility. 
(4)  Route 8 upper pump station. Total system cost × CR% × 6.37% × industry flow as a % = upper pump station responsibility. 
(5)  Route 8 lower pump station. Total system cost × CR% × 6.78% × industry flow as a % = lower pump station responsibility. 
(6)  Route 8 industrial area sanitary sewer. Total system cost × CR% × 17.87% × industry flow as a % = Route 8 industrial area sanitary sewer responsibility. 
(f)  Payment of capital costs. Each assessment shall reflect the total responsibility for the industrial user and shall be payable in annual increments for a period not exceeding twenty (20) years. Payment shall be the total due except where the total due is in excess of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). Assessments in excess of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) may be paid annually in amounts not less than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) until the assessed amount is paid. The last payment may be in an amount less than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). Each industry shall be subject to reassessment should its processes be substantially revised. 
(g)  Recovery of operating and maintenance costs. The plant effluent from each industry shall be the basic parameter for the operating and maintenance cost recovery program. Each plant effluent will be compared to the actual treatment plant loadings on a percentage basis and applied towards the operating and maintenance budget. The operating and maintenance budget shall be based on the city's cost of operation, maintenance, repair, replacement and testing, including any component required to be added to the system. The city shall additionally create a reasonable reserve for emergency capital expenditure. City agrees that all charges shall be based upon actual cost and reasonable reserve requirements. The operating and maintenance budget as a percentage of treatment plant loadings is as follows: 
(1)  Amount attributed to flow: 42.6%. 
(2)  Amount attributed to B.O.D. loading: 34.9%. 
(3)  Amount attributed to suspended solids loading: 22.5%. 
The following formula shall be used to determine each industry's share: 
Based on industrial flow. Total budget × 42.6% × industry flow as a % = flow responsibility. 
Based on B.O.D. loading. Total budget × 34.9% × industry B.O.D. loading as a % = B.O.D. responsibility. 
Based on suspended solids loading. Total budget × 22.5% × industry suspended solids loading as a % = suspended solids responsibility. 
(h)  Industrial waste monitoring. Each industry having industrial wastes as defined under section 17-20 shall submit a monthly report to the administrative officer of the sewer commission. 
(i)  Payment of operating and maintenance costs. Each industry shall be assessed no more than once annually, the assessment shall reflect the yearly average use of the system by industrial users and shall be payable in quarterly or monthly installments at the option of the city. 
(Ord. No. 240, §§ 15.01-15.09, 2-10-75) 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 851, adopted July 8, 2010, concerning the sewage use charge policy, contained provisions which required the redesignated of § 17-114 as § 17-125, in order to maintain the informational integrity of the ordinance. 
APPENDIX A 
TOXIC SUBSTANCES 
(Appendix to the Sewage Use Charge Ordinance) 
    The following are the materials designated as toxic, hazardous or injurious for the purpose of the regulation. This list shall be inclusive of the state DEP listing of toxic and hazardous materials, as amended periodically, as well as those listed herein. 
Toxic Wastes or Chemicals 
  Cadmium 
  Chromium (Total) 
  Chromium (Hexavalent) 
  Copper 
  Cyanide (Total) 
  Cyanide (Readily released at 150°F (65.5°C) & pH = 4.5) 
  Iron 
  Lead 
  Mercury 
  Nickel 
  Zinc 
Hazardous or Injurious Wastes 
    Any discharge of wastes or waters into a sewer which terminates in, or is a part of, the sewage system of the City of Shelton, must not contain the following: 
a.  Fats, food-related oils or greases in excess of 100 mg/l. 
b.  Liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their nature or quantity are sufficient to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the sewage system or to the operation of the water reclamation plants. 
c.  Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases or substances which either singly or by interaction with other wastes are sufficient to create a public nuisance or hazard to life, to cause injury or to prevent entry into the sewers for their maintenance and repair. 
d.  Water or wastes containing toxic substances in quantities which are sufficient to interfere with the biological process of the water reclamation plants or with the disposal of sludge in an environmentally acceptable and economical manner. 
e.  Residential garbage that has not been ground or comminuted to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely in suspension under conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half (1/2) inch (1.3 centimeters) in any dimension. Grinding of garbage from food preparation establishments is prohibited. 
f.  Radioactive wastes unless they comply with the Atomic Energy Commission Act of 1954 (68 Stat. 919 as amended and Part 20, Sub-Part D, Waste Disposal, Section 20.303 of the regulations issued by the Nuclear Regulatory Agency or amendments thereto). 
g.  Solid or viscous wastes which cause obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage system or water reclamation plants, such as grease, uncomminuted garbage, animal guts or tissues, paunch manure, bone, hair, hides, fleshings, entrails, feathers, sand, cinders, ashes, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grain, waste paper, wood, plastic gas, tar, asphalt residues, residues from refining or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, gasoline, naphtha, and similar substances. 
h.  Liquids or vapors having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty (150) degrees Fahrenheit (sixty-five and one-half (65.5) degrees Celsius) at the point of entrance into a public sewer. 
i.  Waters or waste containing substances which are not amendable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment process employed or are amendable to treatment only to such degree that the water reclamation plant's effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters, or jurisdiction over the disposal of sludges generated by such treatment processes. 
j.  Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye waste and vegetable tanning solutions). 
(Ord. No. 851, 7-8-10) 
Secs. 17-126-17-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - STORMWATER 
DIVISION 1. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT/OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 17-131. - Purpose and authority. 
    In accordance with the provisions of Connecticut General Statutes Chapters 98, 124, 126, 440, 444, and 446h, as amended, the City of Shelton hereby adopts the following stormwater management ordinance for the following purposes: Increased development without proper consideration of stormwater impacts can be a significant source of pollution to Long Island Sound, its tributaries, and other waters of the state. The state's water resources are valuable natural, economic, recreational, cultural and aesthetic resources. The protection and preservation of these waters is in the public interest and is essential to the health, welfare and safety of the citizens of the state. It is, therefore, the purpose of this division to protect and preserve the waters within Shelton from nonpoint sources of pollution through the proper management of stormwater flows and minimization of inputs of suspended solids, pathogens, toxic contaminants, nitrogen and floatable debris to these flows. 
(Ord. No. 854, § 1, 9-9-10) 
Sec. 17-132. - Definitions. 
    [The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
    Aquifer. A geologic formation, group of formations or part of a formation that contains sufficient saturated, permeable materials to yield significant quantities of water to wells and springs. 
    BMPs (best management practices). Techniques or structural devices that are effective practical ways of preventing or reducing the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to receiving waters or stormwater conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating procedures and maintenance requirements. 
    First inch of rain. The first inch of rainfall during a single event. The initial runoff from the first inch of rain contains higher pollutant concentrations than the subsequent runoff, due to initial washing off of dry weather deposits in significantly higher concentrations than those washed off later in a storm. This effect is particularly pronounced with initial heavy rainfalls. 
    Groundwater. Water found beneath the ground surface that completely fills the open spaces between particles of sediment and within rock formations. 
    Impervious surface. Material or structure on, above or below the ground that does not allow precipitation or surface water to penetrate directly into the soil. 
    Sediment. Solid material, either mineral or organic, that is in suspension, is transported, or has been moved from its site or origin by erosion. 
    Site. A single parcel, together with any adjacent waters, which is the subject of an application for zoning approval, subdivision approval, coastal site plan review, or an inland wetlands permit. 
    Site stormwater management plan. A document approved at the site design (application) phase that outlines the measures and practices used to control stormwater runoff at a site. The document shall include an operation maintenance manual with schedules. 
    Trash hood. Feature in a catch basin which traps debris such as litter and keeps it from being discharged from the catch basin. 
    Urban stormwater runoff. Precipitation that falls onto the surfaces of roofs, streets, parking lots, roads and the grounds of developed areas. Urban precipitation is not absorbed by the ground or retained in its surface, but collects and runs off, carrying a wide variety of pollutants such as oil-based contaminants, heavy metals (copper and lead), nutrients and bacteria. 
(Ord. No. 854, § 2, 9-9-10) 
Sec. 17-133. - Application thresholds for requiring stormwater management plans. 
    A stormwater management plan shall be included as a part of any application for zoning approval, subdivision approval, coastal site plan review, or an inland wetlands permit where the application: 
(1)  Pertains to a development or construction project disturbing one (1) or more acres of total land area on a site; 
(2)  Pertains to any site with one (1) acre or more of impervious cover; 
(3)  Proposes new residential development of five (5) or more units; 
(4)  Pertains to any new industrial or commercial project. 
(Ord. No. 854, § 3, 9-9-10) 
Sec. 17-134. - Stormwater management plan content. 
    Where a stormwater management plan is required, such plan shall provide, at a minimum, the following information: 
(1)  Soil characteristics of the site. 
(2)  Location of the closest surface water bodies and wetlands to the site, and the depth to any groundwater or aquifer areas on or adjacent to the site. In the case of tidal waters, provide the mean high water and high tide elevations. 
(3)  Location and description of all proposed stormwater control BMPs for both construction activities and post-construction long-term stormwater control. 
(4)  An operation and maintenance manual and schedules for any trash hoods, catch basins, or other BMP devices used to treat runoff, plus a BMP inspection plan with maintenance report forms. 
(5)  Calculations of stormwater runoff rates, suspended solids removal rates, and soil infiltration rates before and after completion of the activity proposed in the application. 
(6)  A hydrologic study of predevelopment site conditions. Hydrology studies shall be conducted at a level of detail commensurate with the probable impact of the proposed activity. 
(7)  An executive summary of the plan. 
(8)  An as-built record drawing of the on-site collection system and post-construction BMPs. 
    The stormwater management plan shall be sealed/endorsed by a professional engineer registered in the State of Connecticut. 
(Ord. No. 854, § 4, 9-9-10) 
Sec. 17-135. - Stormwater management plan goals. 
    Stormwater systems shall be designed for the following goals and objectives: 
(1)  Prevent flooding of on-site or off-site properties. 
(2)  Feed and recharge inland wetlands, surface and subsurface waters. 
(3)  Minimize pollutant loads in stormwater runoff into inland wetlands, surface and subsurface waters. 
(4)  Maintain the hydrology of existing subwatersheds including wetlands and watercourses. 
(5)  All on-site stormwater facilities shall be properly maintained by the owner such that they do not become nuisances. 
(6)  All stormwater management systems and runoff control structures located on private property shall be accessible at all times for inspection by city forces. 
(Ord. No. 854, § 5, 9-9-10) 
Sec. 17-136. - Design standards. 
    The stormwater management plan shall be consistent with the following design criteria. If an application is also subject to the requirements of an aquifer protection overlay zone or any other requirements for nonpoint source pollution control, the more stringent requirements shall control. 
(1)  Direct channeling of untreated surface water runoff into adjacent ground and surface waters shall be discouraged. 
(2)  No adverse increase in urban stormwater runoff from the site shall result from the proposed activity. 
(3)  Design and planning for site development shall provide for minimal disturbance of predevelopment natural hydrologic conditions, and shall reproduce such conditions after completion of the proposed activity, to the maximum extent feasible. 
(4)  Pollutants shall be controlled at their source to the maximum extent feasible in order to contain and minimize contamination. 
(5)  Stormwater management systems shall be designed and maintained to manage site runoff in order to eliminate surface and groundwater pollution, prevent flooding and, where required, control peak discharges and provide pollution treatment. 
(6)  Stormwater management systems shall be designed to collect, retain and treat the first inch of rain on-site, so as to trap floating material, oil and litter. BMP techniques to achieve treatment of the first inch of rainfall include oil and grit separators, and trash hoods. 
(7)  On-site storage of stormwater shall be employed to the maximum extent feasible. On-site storage methods include, but are not limited to, landscaped depressions, grass swales, infiltration trenches and retention or detention basins. 
(8)  Post-development runoff rates and volumes shall not exceed predevelopment rates and volumes where required. Stormwater runoff rates and volumes shall be controlled by slowing runoff velocities and encouraging infiltration. BMP methods for controlling runoff and encouraging infiltration include the minimization of impervious surfaces, minimization of curbing and collection, the use of grass or vegetative filter zones, landscape depressions, slotted curb spacers, perforated pipes for conveying stormwater, establishment of buffers from streams, wetlands and waterbodies, and any combination of methods, where appropriate. 
(9)  Stormwater treatment systems shall be employed where necessary to ensure that the average annual loadings of total suspended solids (TSS) following the completion of the proposed activity at the site are no greater than such loadings prior to the proposed activity. BMP methods for stormwater treatment include infiltration through vegetative strips, grass swales and detention basins. 
(10)  All stormwater BMPs shall be designed in a manner to minimize the need for maintenance and reduce the chances of failure. Design guidelines are outlined in the most recent version of the Connecticut Stormwater Quality Manual. 
(Ord. No. 854, § 6, 9-9-10) 
Sec. 17-137. - Requirements for site plan revisions/modifications. 
    In cases where an application for a site plan revision or modification is submitted to planning and zoning or inland wetlands, the following requirements shall apply: 
(1)  Any site plan application that proposes a major expansion of the development footprint, i.e., the expansion of surface parking or the increase of impervious surface, shall require the submission of a stormwater management plan for the new construction proposed for the site. 
(2)  Any site plan application that proposes a modification or expansion shall require the submission of an operation and maintenance manual with a maintenance schedule for the entire stormwater collection system on the site, in the event that no such document was submitted to and approved by the city when the original development was constructed. 
(3)  A site plan application that proposes a modification or expansion may require the applicant/property owner to retrofit the existing stormwater collection system with catch basin hoods. 
(4)  The requirements of section 17-137 shall apply to any development approved or constructed prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this division derived. 
(Ord. No. 854, § 7, 9-9-10) 
Sec. 17-138. - Stormwater system operation and maintenance. 
    The operation and maintenance of a private stormwater management or collection system is the sole responsibility of the property owner. The requirements and responsibilities detailed in this section applies to all sites and existing developments, whether commercial, industrial or residential. Private stormwater management and collection systems constructed before the effective date of this division are subject to these operation and maintenance regulations. 
(a)  Routine maintenance. 
(1)  All stormwater BMPs shall be maintained according to the measures outlined in the most recent version of the Connecticut Stormwater Quality Manual and as detailed in the stormwater management plan for the approved development. 
(2)  All stormwater BMPs shall be maintained by the property owner of any development constructed prior to the effective date of this division, whether or not there is an operations and maintenance manual for the existing stormwater collection system. 
(3)  The person(s) or organization(s) responsible for maintenance shall be designated in the stormwater management plan. Options include: 
a.  Property owner. 
b.  Homeowners' association, provided that provisions for financing necessary maintenance are included in deed restrictions or other contractual agreements. 
c.  The City of Shelton through an executed maintenance agreement. 
(4)  Maintenance agreements shall specify responsibility for financing maintenance. 
(b)  Nonroutine maintenance. 
(1)  Nonroutine maintenance includes maintenance activities that are expensive but infrequent, such as pond dredging or major repairs to stormwater structures. 
(2)  Nonroutine maintenance shall be performed on an as-needed basis based on information gathered during regular inspections. 
(c)  Annual O&M certification 
(1)  The property owner is required to obtain an annual certification from a registered professional engineer (P.E.) that maintenance is being performed on structural best management practices (BMPs) and the on-site stormwater collection system. The annual certification must be submitted to the city with the appropriate maintenance report forms. 
(d)  Failure to maintain. 
(1)  If routine or nonroutine maintenance activities are not completed in a timely manner or as specified in the approved stormwater management plan or operation and maintenance manual, the City of Shelton may complete the necessary maintenance at the owner's/operator's expense. 
(2)  The city reserves the right to require the owner of any development constructed before the effective date of the ordinance from which this division derived to prepare an operation and maintenance manual for a private stormwater management system that is not properly maintained and/or causes a nuisance. 
(e)  Inspections. 
(1)  The person(s) or organization(s) responsible for maintenance of a commercial, industrial or residential development shall inspect stormwater BMPs on a regular basis as outlined in the operation and maintenance plan. If there is no operation and maintenance plan, the stormwater collection system shall be inspected at least once per calendar year, preferably on or about April 15. All sidewalks and parking lots shall be swept clean of all accumulated sand or grit applied for winter traction purposes at or about the same time. 
(2)  Authorized representatives of the City of Shelton may enter a property at reasonable times to conduct on-site inspections of stormwater BMPs and maintenance activities being performed on those BMPs. 
(3)  For BMPs maintained by the property owner or homeowners' association, inspection and maintenance reports shall be filed with the office of the city engineer as provided for in the plan. 
(Ord. No. 854, § 8, 9-9-10) 
Sec. 17-139. - Violations deemed a public nuisance. 
    Any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of section 17-138 of this division, or is a threat to public health, safety and welfare and is declared and deemed a nuisance, may be summarily abated or restored at the violator's expense and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken. 
    Any person or entity permitting such condition to exist in violation of section 17-138 or who permits a declared deemed nuisance to exist, may be fined a penalty not to exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each violation which may be enforced pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes Section 7-148-10a. The persons authorized to issue such citations are the city engineer, the assistant city engineer or the director of public works. 
(Ord. No. 854, § 9, 9-9-10) 
Sec. 17-140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ILLEGAL DISCHARGES AND ILLICIT CONNECTIONS TO THE PUBLIC STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM 

Sec. 17-141. - Purpose/intent. 
    The purpose of this division is to provide for the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the City of Shelton through the regulation of nonstormwater discharges to the storm drainage system to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal and state law. This division establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) in order to comply with requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process. The objectives of this division are: 
(1)  To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) by stormwater discharges by any user. 
(2)  To prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system. 
(3)  To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this division. 
(Ord. No. 855, § 1, 9-9-10) 
Sec. 17-142. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this division, the following shall mean: 
    Authorized enforcement agency. Employees or designees of the director of the municipal agency designated to enforce this division. 
    Best management practices (BMPs). Schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to stormwater, receiving waters, or stormwater conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage. 
    Clean Water Act. The federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
    Construction activity. Activities subject to NPDES construction permits. Currently these include construction projects resulting in land disturbance of one (1) acre or more. Such activities include, but are not limited to, clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition. 
    Hazardous materials. Any material, including any substance, waste, or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed. 
    Illegal discharge. Any direct or indirect nonstormwater discharge to the storm drain system, except as exempted in section 17-147 of this division. 
    Illicit connections. An illicit connection is defined as either of the following: any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illegal discharge to enter the storm drain system, including, but not limited to, any conveyances which allow any nonstormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain system and any connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency, or any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use to the storm drain system which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency. 
    Industrial activity. Activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as defined in 40 CFR, Section 122.26(b)(14). 
    National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Stormwater Discharge Permit. A permit issued by EPA (or by a state under authority delegated pursuant to 33 U.S.C. § 1342(b)) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general areawide basis. 
    Nonstormwater discharge. Any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
    Person. Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm, corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner or as the owner's agent. 
    Pollutant. Anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; nonhazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects, ordinances, and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind. 
    Premises. Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
    Storm drainage system. Publicly owned facilities by which stormwater is collected and/or conveyed, including, but not limited to, any roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and human-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures. 
    Stormwater. Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation. 
    Stormwater pollution prevention plan. A document which describes the best management practices and activities to be implemented by a person or business to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a site and the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to stormwater, stormwater conveyance systems, and/or receiving waters to the maximum extent practicable. 
    Wastewater. Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated stormwater, discharged from a facility. 
(Ord. No. 855, § 2, 9-9-10) 
Sec. 17-143. - Applicability. 
    This division shall apply to all water entering the storm drainage system generated on any developed and undeveloped lands unless explicitly exempted by an authorized enforcement agency. 
(Ord. No. 855, § 3, 9-9-10) 
Sec. 17-144. - Responsibility for administration. 
    The director of public works shall be responsible for administration, implementation and enforcement of the provisions of this division. Any and all powers granted to or imposed upon said director hereunder may be delegated, in whole or in part, by said director, in writing, to such employees or officials of the City of Shelton as said director may determine from time to time. Any such designation shall be made in writing and a copy thereof shall be filed with the city town clerk, with the office of the mayor and with the clerk of the board of aldermen. Said designations shall be updated if the individuals change and, in any event, a current list shall be filed with each of the above entities in January of each year. 
(Ord. No. 855, § 4, 9-9-10) 
Sec. 17-145. - Severability. 
    The provisions of this division are hereby declared to be severable. If any provision, clause, sentence, or paragraph of this division or the application thereof to any person, establishment, or circumstances shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or application of this division. 
(Ord. No. 855, § 5, 9-9-10) 
Sec. 17-146. - Ultimate responsibility. 
    The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this division are minimum standards; therefore this division does not intend nor imply that compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination, pollution, nor unauthorized discharge of pollutants. 
(Ord. No. 855, § 6, 9-9-10) 
Sec. 17-147. - Discharge prohibitions. 
(a)  Prohibition of illegal discharges. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the municipal storm drain system or watercourses any materials, including, but not limited to, pollutants or waters containing any pollutants that cause or contribute to a violation of applicable water quality standards, other than stormwater. The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illegal discharge to the storm drain system is prohibited except as described as follows: 
(1)  The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions established by this division: water line flushing or other potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream flows, rising groundwater, groundwater infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped groundwater, foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs, noncommercial washing of vehicles, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows, swimming pools (if dechlorinated, typically less than one (1) PPM chlorine), firefighting activities, and any other water source not containing pollutants. 
(2)  Discharges specified in writing by the authorized enforcement agency as being necessary to protect public health and safety. 
(3)  Dye testing is an allowable discharge, but requires a verbal notification to the authorized enforcement agency prior to the time of the test. 
(4)  The prohibition shall not apply to any nonstormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the Federal Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the storm drain system. 
(b)  Prohibition of illicit connections. 
(1)  The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit connections to the storm drain system is prohibited. 
(2)  This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
(3)  A person is considered to be in violation of this division if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the MS4, or allows such a connection to continue. 
(Ord. No. 855, § 7, 9-9-10) 
Sec. 17-148. - Suspension of MS4 access. 
(a)  Suspension due to illegal discharges in emergency situations. The director of public works or his designee may, without prior notice, suspend MS4 discharge access to a person when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or to the MS4 or Waters of the United States. If the violator fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency, the authorized enforcement agency may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the MS4 or Waters of the United States, or to minimize danger to persons. 
(b)  Suspension due to the detection of illegal discharge. Any person discharging to the MS4 in violation of this division may have their MS4 access terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an illegal discharge. The director of public works or his designee will notify a violator of the proposed termination of its MS4 access and shall specify a reasonable time for abatement. The violator may petition the authorized enforcement agency for a reconsideration and hearing. A person commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4 access to premises terminated pursuant to this section, without the prior approval of the authorized enforcement agency. 
(Ord. No. 855, § 8, 9-9-10) 
Sec. 17-149. - Industrial or construction activity discharges. 
    Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the director of public works or his designee prior to the allowing of discharges to the MS4. 
(Ord. No. 855, § 9, 9-9-10) 
Sec. 17-150. - Monitoring of damages. 
(a)  Applicability. This section applies to all facilities that have stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity, including construction activity. 
(b)  Access to facilities. 
(1)  The director of public works or his designee shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities subject to regulation under this division as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this division. If a discharger has security measures in force, which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the discharger shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of the authorized enforcement agency. 
(2)  Facility operators shall allow the director of public works or his designee ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, examination and copying of records that must be kept under the conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater, and the performance of any additional duties as defined by state and federal law. 
(3)  The director of public works or his designee shall have the right to set up on any permitted facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the authorized enforcement agency to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the facility's stormwater discharge. 
(4)  The director of public works or his designee has the right to require the discharger to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the discharger at its own expense. All devices used to measure stormwater flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy. 
(5)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the operator at the written or oral request of the director of public works or his designee and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the operator. 
(6)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the director of public works or his designee access to a permitted facility is a violation of a stormwater discharge permit and of this division. A person who is the operator of a facility with an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater associated with industrial activity commits an offense if the person denies the authorized enforcement agency reasonable access to the permitted facility for the purpose of conducting any activity authorized or required by this division. 
(7)  If the director of public works or his designee has been refused access to any part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and he/she is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this division, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this division or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, and welfare of the community, then the authorized enforcement agency may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 855, § 10, 9-9-10) 
Sec. 17-151. - Requirement to prevent, control, and reduce stormwater pollutants by the use of best management. 
    The City of Shelton will adopt requirements identifying best management practices for any activity, operation, or facility which may cause or contribute to pollution or contamination of stormwater, the storm drain system, or waters of the U.S. The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment shall provide, at their own expense, reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the municipal storm drain system or watercourses through the use of these structural and nonstructural BMPs. Further, any person responsible for a property or premises, which is, or may be, the source of an illicit discharge, may be required to implement, at said person's expense, additional structural and nonstructural BMPs to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system. Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid NPDES permit authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with industrial activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed compliant with the provisions of this section. These BMPs shall be part of a stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPP) as necessary for compliance with requirements of the NPDES permit. 
(Ord. No. 855, § 11, 9-9-10) 
Sec. 17-152. - Notification of spills. 
    Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility or operation, has information of any known or suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in illegal discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the storm drain system, or water of the U.S., said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release. In the event of such a release of hazardous materials said person shall immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of nonhazardous materials, said person shall notify the authorized enforcement agency in person or by phone or facsimile no later than the next business day. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the City of Shelton, director of public works within three (3) business days of the phone notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three (3) years. 
(Ord. No. 855, § 12, 9-9-10) 
Sec. 17-153. - Enforcement. 
(1)  Notice of violation. Whenever the director of public works or his designee finds that a person has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this division, the authorized enforcement agency may order compliance by written notice of violation to the responsible person. Such notice may require without limitation: 
(a)  The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting; 
(b)  The elimination of illicit connections or discharges; 
(c)  That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist; 
(d)  The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; and 
(e)  Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs; and 
(f)  The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs. 
(2)  [Notice of deadline.] If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall further advise that, should the violator fail to remediate or restore within the established deadline, the work will be done by a designated governmental agency or a contractor and the expense thereof shall be charged to the violator. 
(Ord. No. 855, § 13, 9-9-10) 
Sec. 17-154. - Appeal of notice of violation. 
    Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of the director of public works or his designee. Said appeal may be taken to the housing board of appeals, which is hereby designated as the agency to hear all appeals permitted under this division. The decision of the housing board of appeals shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 855, § 14, 9-9-10) 
Sec. 17-155. - Enforcement measures after appeal. 
    If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within thirty (30) days of the decision of the municipal authority upholding the decision of the authorized enforcement agency, then representatives of the authorized enforcement agency shall enter upon the subject private property and are authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the government agency or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above. 
(Ord. No. 855, § 15, 9-9-10) 
Sec. 17-156. - Cost of abatement of the violation. 
    Within thirty (30) days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. The property owner may file a written protest objecting to the amount of the assessment within fifteen (15) days. If the amount due is not paid within a timely manner as determined by the decision of the municipal authority or by the expiration of the time in which to file an appeal, the charges shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the city by reason of such violation. 
(Ord. No. 855, § 16, 9-9-10) 
Sec. 17-157. - Injunctive relief. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this division. If a person has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this division, the Director of Public Works or his designee may petition for a preliminary or permanent injunction restraining the person from activities which would create further violations or compelling the person to perform abatement or remediation of the violation. 
(Ord. No. 855, § 17, 9-9-10) 
Sec. 17-158. - Compensatory actions. 
    In lieu of enforcement proceedings, penalties, and remedies authorized by this division, the authorized enforcement agency may impose upon a violator alternative compensatory actions, such as storm drain stenciling, attendance at compliance workshops, or watercourse cleanups. 
(Ord. No. 855, § 18, 9-9-10) 
Sec. 17-159. - Violations deemed a public nuisance. 
    In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this division is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at the violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken. 
(Ord. No. 855, § 19, 9-9-10) 
Sec. 17-160. - Penalties. 
    Any person or entity which knowingly violates a provision of this division, after the effective date thereof, or any person who unknowingly violates this division, and continues to violate the division after notice of a violation shall be liable to criminal prosecution to the fullest extent of the law and shall be subject to a criminal penalty of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per violation per day. The director of public works, on behalf of the city, may recover all attorneys' fees, court costs and other expenses associated with the enforcement of this division, including sampling and monitoring expenses. 
(Ord. No. 855, § 20, 9-9-10) 
Sec. 17-161. - Remedies not exclusive. 
    The remedies listed in this division are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law and it is within the discretion of the authorized enforcement agency to seek cumulative remedies. 
(Ord. No. 855, § 21, 9-9-10) 
APPENDIX A - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein are the zoning regulations of the city as adopted by the city's planning and zoning commission on January 3, 1977, as amended. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation and material in brackets [ ] has been added for clarity. 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 3; housing, Ch. 8; parks and recreation, Ch. 11; planning, Ch. 12; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 14; utilities, Ch. 17; subdivisions, App. B. 

CHAPTER I. - APPLICABILITY, ADMINISTRATION AND DEFINITIONS 

Section 1. - Applicability. 
    1.1. Applicability: Within the City of Shelton, no land, building or other structure shall be used and no building or other structure shall be constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, extended, moved or structurally altered except in conformity with these regulations. No lot or land shall be subdivided, sold, encumbered or transferred so as to make a lot nonconforming or more nonconforming, to reduce any setback, yard, court, open space or off-street parking and loading spaces to less than is required by these regulations or to make any nonconforming setback, yard, court, open space or off-street parking and loading spaces more nonconforming. 
Section 2. - Certificate of zoning compliance process. 
    2.1. General: The certificate of zoning compliance is issued by the planning and zoning commission as the final step in a process which includes, where appropriate, the issuance of a building permit and the completion of all necessary action prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. In certain special instances, a temporary certificate of zoning compliance may be issued as an interim step in this process. 
    2.2. Application for Certificate of Zoning Compliance: The application for certificate of zoning compliance must be completed by the applicant and reviewed by the zoning enforcement officer. Upon determination by the zoning enforcement officer that the information on the application conforms with the zoning regulations, permission to obtain a building permit is granted by the zoning enforcement officer. Within fourteen (14) days of that permission, the planning and zoning commission will either approve the application or contact the applicant concerning any necessary changes or alterations. No land, building, or other structure or part thereof, or use thereof, shall be occupied, changed in use, constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, extended, moved or structurally altered until such application for a certificate of zoning compliance shall have been approved by the planning and zoning commission. No such application, however, is required for a farm or truck garden use when no building or other structure is proposed. All construction activity under an approved application shall be initiated within six (6) months of date of approval and completed within two (2) years or the application shall be deemed void. The planning and zoning commission may grant one (1) extension for an additional period not to exceed one (1) year. 
    2.3. Certificate of Zoning Compliance: Following completion of any construction or modifications in accordance with the approved application for certificate of zoning compliance, and prior to the issuance of any certificate of occupancy, the zoning enforcement officer shall inspect the property to insure conformity with these regulations and the application. Following the inspection, the zoning enforcement officer shall file a report with the planning and zoning commission. At the next duly convened regular meeting of the planning and zoning commission following receipt of said report, the planning and zoning commission shall take final action on the issuance of the certificate of zoning compliance. 
    2.4. Temporary Certificate of Zoning Compliance: In accordance with any rules and procedures established by the planning and zoning commission, the zoning enforcement officer is authorized to issue a temporary certificate of zoning compliance, having a duration of not more than six (6) months, for the temporary use of land, buildings and other structures in the process of completion in conformity with these regulations and for which an application for a certificate of zoning compliance has been approved by the planning and zoning commission. 
    2.5. Approved Application: Unless otherwise specifically provided in these regulations, nothing in these regulations shall require any change in the use of any land, buildings, or other structures, or part thereof, or any plans or construction for which an application for a certificate of zoning compliance or a certificate of zoning compliance shall have been approved or issued pursuant to law, and any building permit shall have been issued, the construction of which shall be lawfully in progress on the effective date of these regulations or amendment hereto, provided that construction shall be promptly and diligently prosecuted as provided in paragraph 2.5.1. 
2.5.1. Time limit: An approved application for a certificate of zoning compliance that authorizes plans, construction or a use which does not conform to any amendment of these regulations made effective subsequent to the approval of such application shall become null and void unless the use authorized thereby shall at least have the construction authorized thereby, diligently prosecuted and the ground story of any building be completed within one (1) year from such effective date and the entire building completed within two (2) years from such effective date. The planning and zoning commission may grant one (1) extension for an additional period not to exceed one (1) year after the original two-year period. 
    2.6. Conflict with Amendments: Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 2.5, no application for a certificate of zoning compliance shall be approved by the planning and zoning commission authorizing plans, construction or a use which do not conform to any proposed amendment of these regulations if the first notice of a hearing on such amendment has been published in a newspaper as required by the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut. If, however, the proposed amendment has not been adopted and made effective within sixty-five (65) days from the date of such first published notice, the application for a certificate of zoning compliance shall be promptly approved by the planning and zoning commission provided that all applicable requirements of these regulations have been met. 
Section 3. - Administration and enforcement. 
    3.1. Zoning Enforcement Officer: There shall be a zoning enforcement officer who shall be appointed in accordance with the City of Shelton's Charter and Personnel Merit System. The zoning enforcement officer shall report to the chairman of the planning and zoning commission or his designee for his regular duties, and to the director of inspection and compliance for administrative purposes. The zoning enforcement officer shall have the responsibility and authority to enforce the provisions of these regulations in accordance with administrative rules and procedures established by the planning and zoning commission. 
    3.2. Application for Certificate of Zoning Compliance: Application for a certificate of zoning compliance shall be submitted to the zoning enforcement officer prior to construction, reconstruction, extension, enlargement, moving or structural alteration of any building or other structure and prior to the use or occupancy of any land, building or other structure. The application shall be accompanied by a plan drawing or drawings in duplicate, drawn to scale, and showing the following: 
3.2.1. The area of the lot and the dimensions of all lot lines; 
3.2.2. The setbacks, dimensions, height, use, floor area and ground coverage of all buildings and other structures, whether existing or proposed; 
3.2.3. The location, area and dimensions of off-street parking and loading spaces, any construction required in connection therewith and the means of access to such spaces, except that this requirement shall not apply to a dwelling for one (1) or two (2) families; 
3.2.4. The location, area and dimensions of any outside storage areas, site development and landscaping features that are subject to the provisions of these regulations, except that this requirement shall not apply to a dwelling for one (1) or two (2) families; 
3.2.5. The location of any existing or proposed private sewage disposal system, and requisite approval by the Valley Health District (VHD), as required; and 
3.2.6. Such additional information as may be necessary to determine compliance with these regulations. 
In addition the application shall be accompanied by other data, statements, plans and drawings necessary to determine compliance with these regulations. 
    3.3. Site Plans: In addition to the requirement of paragraph 3.2 and only on 23.1 or 31 or when asked for, a site plan shall be submitted with the application for a certificate of zoning compliance. 
A site plan, incorporating all of the information required to be shown on the plan drawing specified in paragraph 3.2, may be substituted for such plan drawing. 
    3.4. Fees: Each application for a certificate of zoning compliance shall be accompanied by an application fee of ten dollars ($10.00) paid to the City of Shelton. 
    3.5. Building Permit and Sewage Disposal: Notwithstanding the provisions of section 2, no building permit shall be issued as required under the Building Code of the City of Shelton until an application for a certificate of zoning compliance shall have been approved. In addition, where a proposed use of land, buildings, and other structures or a proposed building or other structure involves the installation, extension, relocation or reconstruction of a private sewage disposal system, no application for a certificate of zoning compliance shall be approved until the private sewage disposal system has been approved by the director of the Valley Health District or his authorized agent. 
    3.6. Inspections: The zoning enforcement officer is authorized to inspect any land, building or other structure as necessary to determine compliance with these regulations. No certificate of zoning compliance shall be issued until the zoning enforcement officer has inspected the land, buildings or other structure involved and has filed a report with the planning and zoning commission stating that the use and/or buildings and other structures conform to these regulations and to the approved application for zoning compliance. Within ten (10) days after any notification by an applicant that the premises are ready for use or occupancy, the zoning enforcement officer shall inspect the premises and file a report with the planning and zoning commission. Upon receipt of report, the planning and zoning commission shall take final action on the certificate of zoning compliance. 
No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until the certificate of zoning compliance shall have been approved. 
    3.7. Orders: The zoning enforcement officer is authorized to issue a stop work order if, in his judgment, the use of land, buildings and other structures or the construction, reconstruction, enlargement, extension, moving or structural alteration of a building or other structure are not being carried out in compliance with these regulations and the approved application for certificate of zoning compliance; he shall withdraw such order when he determines that there is appropriate compliance. The zoning enforcement officer shall also issue or withdraw such order when requested by the planning and zoning commission. The zoning enforcement officer, when authorized by the planning and zoning commission, may order abatement of any violation of these regulations. 
    3.8. Site Plans, Special Exceptions and Variances: Any maps, plans, documents, statements and stipulations submitted to and approved by the planning and zoning commission and the board of zoning appeals as appropriate in connection with a site plan approval, special exception application, variance application, application for certificate of zoning compliance or other action of such commission under these regulations, and any conditions of such approval of an application for a certificate of zoning compliance and issuance of a certificate of zoning compliance. 
    3.9. Records: The zoning enforcement officer shall keep records of all applications, certificates of zoning compliance, fees, identifiable under these regulations, stop work orders and notices of violation served by him and the action taken thereon. 
    3.10. Administrative Rules: The planning and zoning commission may, by resolution, establish rules and procedures necessary to administer and enforce these regulations. 
Section 4. - Zoning board of appeals. 
    4.1. [ Powers and Duties: ] The zoning board of appeals shall have all of the powers and duties prescribed by these regulations and the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut, and may adopt rules and procedures necessary to exercise its authority. 
    4.2. Application Fees: Pursuant to Section 8-1C of the Zoning Statutes, that the schedule of application fees for the zoning board of appeals shall be: 
    Residential\$160.00 
    Commercial\360.00 
(Ord. No. 672, 5-12-94; Ord. No. 793, 9-8-05) 
Section 5. - Definitions. 
    5.1. General: The words used in these regulations shall have the meaning commonly attributed to them. Doubts as to their precise meaning shall be determined by the commission in accordance with the purpose and intent of these regulations. Certain words used in these regulations, however, are defined and explained in paragraphs which follow: 
    5.2. Amusement Center: The term "amusement center" shall include any location or establishment which houses three (3) or more mechanical and/or electronic amusement devices. 
5.2.1. Mechanical and/or electronic amusement device: Any machine or device which, upon the insertion of a coin, slug or token or upon payment of a charge, is operated to register a score or tally of any kind or permits a certain amount of "play" for entertainment or score and which shall include, but not be strictly limited to, such devices as pinball or pingame machines, shuffleboard devices, video and TV-like devices and electronic games. 
    5.3. Dwelling: A "dwelling" is a building containing one (1) or more dwelling units. One (1) or more buildings may be considered to be a dwelling if designed for occupancy, and so occupied, by only one (1) family. 
    5.4. Dwelling Unit: A "dwelling unit" is a building or a part of a building designed for occupancy, and so occupied, by one (1) family. Accommodations occupied for transient lodging in a hotel or motel shall not be considered to be a dwelling unit. 
5.4.1. One-bedroom dwelling unit: A "one-bedroom dwelling unit" is a dwelling unit in a dwelling containing four (4) or more dwelling units and having only one (1) room exclusive of one (1) bedroom, exclusive of bathroom, kitchen, laundry, pantry, foyer, communicating corridors or closets and exclusive of any dining alcove with less than seventy (70) square feet of floor area. 
    5.5. Family: A "family" is a person or a group of related persons, plus guests and domestic servants thereof, or a group of not more than six (6) persons who need not be so related, who are living as a single housekeeping unit maintaining a common household. A roomer or boarder to whom rooms are let and/or board is furnished as permitted by these regulations shall not be considered a member of a family for the purpose of this definition. 
    5.6. Floor Area, Dwellings: In determining compliance with minimum floor area requirements for dwellings and dwelling units and compliance with maximum floor area requirements for an office in a dwelling unit or a customary home occupation in a dwelling unit, only finished livable floor area having a ceiling height of at least seven (7) feet, two (2) inches shall be counted and shall exclude garages, terraces, outside vestibules, bay windows, any basement rooms the full walls of which are not aboveground level, utility rooms for heating apparatus, attics, open porches, enclosed porches not heated by a central heating system for the dwelling, and hallways and other space designed for common use by occupants of two (2) or more dwelling units. Measurements of floor area for any dwelling or dwelling unit shall be taken from the inside surfaces of exterior walls or partitions enclosing the floor area. In computing minimum floor area of a split level dwelling, the upper two (2) levels shall contain the required minimum floor area. Any floor other than a ground floor must have access thereto by a permanent inside stairway to be included in computing floor area. 
    5.7. Floor Area, Maximum: In computing the total floor area of all buildings and other structures on any lot to determine compliance with maximum floor area provisions of paragraph 24.5 and Schedule B, measurements of floor area shall be taken to the outside surfaces of exterior walls enclosing the floor area. 
    5.8. Height: The height of a building or other structure shall be measured from the average ground level within ten (10) feet of the building or other structure to the level of the highest main roof. The provisions of these regulations pertaining to maximum height shall not apply to spires, towers, silos, chimneys and flagpoles, also such features as tanks, elevator heating, ventilation, air-conditioning and similar equipment when located on the roof of a building and not occupying more than twenty (20) percent of the area of the roof. 
    5.9. Junk Yard: The term "junk yard" shall be construed to include any "junk yard," "motor vehicle junk business" and "motor vehicle junk yard," as defined in the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut. The term shall also include any place of storage or deposit, whether in connection with a business or not, for one (1) or more used motor vehicles which are either no longer intended or in condition for legal use on the public highways and shall also include any place of storage or deposit of used parts of motor vehicles and old metals, iron, glass, paper, cordage and other waste materials which on any lot have an aggregate bulk equal to one (1) automobile. In residence districts the term shall also include both the outside storage of unregistered motor vehicles for periods longer than thirty (30) days and the outside storage or deposit of parts or bodies of motor vehicles, each in such a manner as to be visible from any street or any other lot. 
    5.10. Kennel: The term "kennel" shall have the same meaning as defined in the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut, as amended from time to time. 
5.10.1. Commercial kennel: The term "commercial kennel" shall have the same meaning as defined in the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut, as amended from time to time. 
    5.11. Lot: A "lot" is defined as: (1) a parcel of land meeting the requirements of these regulations; (2) a parcel of land which is owned separately from any adjoining lot or lots as evidenced by deed or deeds recorded in the land records of the City of Shelton; or (3) a building lot shown on a subdivision map approved by the planning and zoning commission. 
    5.12. Lot, Corner: A "corner lot" is a lot having lot lines formed by the intersection of two (2) streets, whether public or private, and where the interior angle of such intersection is less than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees. A lot fronting on a curved street shall also be considered a corner lot if the central angle of the curve is less than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees. 
    5.13. Lot, Interior: An "interior lot" is a lot which has less than the required minimum frontage on a street as required by Schedule B of these regulations, but which complies with the provisions of section 24, paragraph 24.11. 
    5.14. Lot Area and Shape: In determining compliance with minimum lot area and shape requirements of these regulations, land subject to easements for drainage facilities and underground public utilities may be included, but no street or highway, easement of vehicular access, private right-of-way for vehicles or easement for above ground public utility transmission lines may be included. Area consisting of ponds, lakes or marsh shall not be used for compliance with more than twenty-five (25) percent of the minimum lot area requirement. Land in a residence district shall not be used to satisfy a lot area requirement in any other district. Land in two (2) or more zoning districts may be used to satisfy a minimum lot area requirement, provided that the requirement of the district requiring the largest lot area is met, but no land in a residence district shall be used to satisfy a lot area requirement in any other district. 
    5.15. Off-Street Parking and Loading Space: See paragraph 42.2 of section 42. 
    5.16. Property Line, Rear: A "rear property line" is any property line which is parallel to or within forty-five (45) degrees of being parallel to a street line, except for a lot line that is itself a street line, and except that in the case of a corner lot, only one (1) lot line shall be considered a rear property line. 
    5.17. Property Line, Side: A "side property line" is any property line which is not a rear property line or a street line. 
    5.18. Signs: See paragraph 44.2 of section 44. 
    5.19. Story: A "story" is that portion of a building between the surface or any floor and the surface of the floor, ceiling or roof next above. Attics not used for human occupancy shall not be considered a story. When the ceiling of a basement is five (5) feet or more above the average ground level within ten (10) feet of the building, the basement shall be considered a "story". 
    5.20. Street: A "street" shall mean any city or state highway, except limited-access state highway, or any street shown on a subdivision map approved by the planning and zoning commission and filed in the land records of the City of Shelton. In determining compliance with minimum frontage on a street for a lot located in industrial districts or light industrial park districts, a street shall also mean a private street, right-of-way or easement of vehicular access, fifty (50) feet or more in width, approved by the planning and zoning commission and shown on a map filed in the land records of the City of Shelton. 
    5.21. Street Line: The term "street line" shall mean the right-of-way easement or taking line or any public or private street, except limited-access state highway, or of any easement of vehicular access or private right-of-way twenty-five (25) feet or more in width. 
    5.22. Street, Width: The "width" of a street shall mean the distance between the right-of-way easement or taking line of any public or private street, easement of vehicular access or private right-of-way. 
    5.23. Trailer: The term "trailer" shall include mobile home and shall also include any vehicle which is used, or suitable for use, as a dwelling, and which is, or may be, mounted on wheels and which is, or may be, propelled either by its own power or by another power-driven vehicle to which it may be attached. 
    5.24. Trailer Park: The term "trailer park" shall mean any lot or adjoining lots where land is rented, leased or made available for occupancy by two (2) or more trailers. 
    5.25. Swimming Pool: A swimming pool, aboveground or belowground with a gross water surface area of greater than eighty (80) square feet shall, for the purposes of these regulations, be considered a structure and an accessory use, and shall be subject to the setback standards of Schedule B of the respective zone in which said swimming pool is located. A zoning certificate of compliance shall be required prior to the establishment of the above-mentioned use. 
    5.26. Limited business office: A "Limited business office" is an activity, other than a professional office, conducted for gain and primarily rendering services to customers and clients not on the premises, but to which the public is sometimes invited or expected to visit in the conduct of the activity. The term may include, but is not limited to, real estate offices, accounting offices, insurance offices, travel agencies, stock brokerage firms, employee placement services, data processing firms and other similar service occupations. 
Sections 6-20. - Reserved. 
CHAPTER II. - DISTRICT REQUIREMENTS 

Section 21. - Districts. 
    21.1. Districts: For the purpose of these regulations, the City of Shelton is hereby divided into the following classes of districts: 
District Map 
Code Residence R-1 district R-1 Residence R-1A district R-1A Residence R-2 district R-2 Residence R-3 district R-3 Residence R-4 district R-4 Residence R-5 district R-5 Commercial CA-1 district CA-1 Commercial CA-2 district CA-2 Commercial CA-3 district CA-3 Commercial CB-1 district CB-1 Commercial CB-2 district CB-2 Industrial IA-1 district IA-1 Industrial IA-2 district IA-2 Industrial IA-3 district IA-3 Industrial IB-1 district IB-1 Industrial IB-2 district IB-2 Light industrial park LIP Special development area SDA Planned development district PDD Planned residence district PRD  
    21.2. Special Development Area: The special development area is a class of district in addition to and overlapping one (1) or more of the other districts. 
    21.3. Planned Development District: A planned development district is a class of district established in accordance with section 34 and located within a special development area. 
    21.4. Planned Residence District: A planned residence district is a class of district established in accordance with section 35 and located within a residence R-1 district. 
Section 22. - Building zone map. 
    22.1. Map: The boundaries of the districts specified in section 21 are hereby established as shown on a map entitled "Building Zone Map of the City of Shelton, Connecticut," dated October 25, 1976, including any special maps and boundary descriptions supplementary thereto and any amendments thereof, which map is hereby declared to be a part of these regulations. 
    22.2. Interpretation of Map: Where a question arises as to exact boundaries of a district, the boundary shall be determined by the planning and zoning commission upon due notice and public hearing, as required for adoption of these regulations. 
    22.3. Extension of Use: Where the boundary of a district divides a lot, the existence of which lot is evidenced by deed or deeds recorded in the land records of the City of Shelton on the effective date of these regulations or on the effective date of any amendment of these regulations establishing such boundary, the planning and zoning commission, in accordance with the procedures of section 33, may grant a special exception to authorize a use of land, buildings and other structures permitted in one (1) district to be extended a distance of not more than thirty (30) feet into another district where such use would otherwise be prohibited under these regulations. 
Section 23. - Permitted uses. 
    23.1. Schedule A: "Schedule A, Permitted Uses" is hereby declared to be a part of these regulations. Land, buildings and other structures in any district shall be used for one (1) or more of the uses specified in Schedule A as permitted in the district. Uses listed in Schedule A are permitted or prohibited in accordance with the following designation and procedure: 
"P" means a use permitted in the district as a matter of right; 
"S" means a use permitted in the district, subject to submission and approval of a site plan in accordance with the provisions of section 31; 
"E" means a use permitted in the district, subject to the securing of a special exception from the zoning commission in accordance with section 33; 
"G" means a use permitted in the district, subject to the securing of a temporary special exception from the zoning commission in accordance with section 32; 
"X" means a use prohibited in the district; and 
"r" means that reference should also be made to a similar use elsewhere in Schedule A. 
    23.2. Prohibited Uses: Land, buildings and other structures shall be used for one (1) or more of the uses specified as permitted in Schedule A, and no other. Any use not specified in Schedule A as permitted is prohibited. To further assist in the interpretation of Schedule A, the following uses, the listing of which is not intended to be exhaustive, are specifically prohibited: 
23.2.1. Trailer parks and the use or occupancy of a trailer as a dwelling, except in accordance with the limitations of paragraph 41.10 of these regulations. 
23.2.2. Junk yards; bulk storage of cement; concrete mixing plants; and bulk storage of petroleum products in tanks having a capacity in excess of ten thousand (10,000) gallons. 
23.2.3. The manufacture, use, storage and/or disposal of hazardous materials and hazardous waste products. 
    23.3. Off-Street Parking and Loading: Off-street parking and loading spaces shall be provided for any use of land, buildings and other structures in accordance with section 42. 
    23.4. Performance Standards: The use of land, buildings and other structures shall conform to the performance standards specified in section 43. 
SCHEDULE A-PERMITTED USES 
DISTRICT CODES PERMITTED USES R-1A R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 R-5 CA-1 CA-2 CA-3 CB-1 CB-2 1A-1 1A-2 1A-3 1B-1 1B-2 LIP 1. A single detached dwelling for one (1) family and not more than one (1) such dwelling per lot. P P P P P P P P P P P P X X X X X 1A. Single family residential developments consisting of not more than six (6) single detached dwellings for one (1) family. X E X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X 2. Dwellings containing two (2) or three (3) dwelling units, and not more than one (1) such dwelling per lot, subject to the additional lot area requirements of SCHEDULE B and the requirement that each dwelling unit be served by public water supply. X X X X P P X X P X X X X X X X X 2A. Dwellings containing four (4) or more dwelling units, subject to the additional lot area requirements of SCHEDULE B. X X X X S S X X S X X X X X X X X 3. Multi-family residential developments consisting of one (1) or more dwellings containing not less than four (4) nor more than twelve (12) dwelling units. X E E E Sr Sr X X Sr X X X X X X X X 4. A professional office in a dwelling unit, subject to the additional standards of section 45. P P P P P P P P P P P P Xr Xr P P Xr 5. A business office or a customary home occupation in a dwelling unit, subject to the additional standards of section 45. P P P P P P P P P P P P Xr Xr P P Xr 6. The letting of rooms and or furnishing of board in a dwelling unit, subject to the additional standards of section 45. P P P P P P P P P P P P Xr Xr P P Xr 6A. Nursery schools and or child day care centers, which shall have any necessary approvals from the State of Connecticut, and subject to the following conditions when such use is conducted in a dwelling unit: E E E E E E P P P X X X X X X X X a. The person or persons conducting such use shall reside in the dwelling unit, and there shall be no more than two (2) nonresident persons engaged in the conduct of such use. b. The use shall not impair the residential character of the premises. c. The floor area used for the conduct of the use shall not exceed one-third of the floor area of the dwelling unit. 7. Buildings, uses and facilities of the City of Shelton. P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P 8. Buildings, uses and facilities of the State of Connecticut and Federal Government. E E E E E E S S S P P S E E P P E 9. Farms, truck gardens, forestry and the keeping of livestock and poultry, provided that no livestock or poultry shall be kept on a lot of less than two (2) acres and any building in which livestock or poultry are kept is located not less than fifty (50) feet from any property or street line, except that an aggregate of not more than twenty (20) chickens or similar poultry may be kept on a smaller lot if kept in a building or enclosure located not less than thirty (30) feet from any property or street line. P P P P P P P P P S P P X X P P X 10. Stands for the display and sale of farm and truck garden produce grown on the premises, provided that such stand does not exceed three hundred (300) feet from any property or street line. P P P P P P Sr Sr Sr Sr Pr S X X P P X 11. Commercial nurseries, including greenhouses incidental thereto, provided that any building in connection therewith is located not less than one hundred (100) feet from any property or street line and that there is no sale of products on the premises other than those grown on the premises. P P P P P P Sr Sr Sr Sr Pr S X X P P X 12. Commercial nurseries and greenhouses. X X X X X X S S S S P Xr Xr Xr Xr Xr X 13A. The following uses when conducted by a nonprofit corporation and not as a business or for profit churches and places of worship and accessory parish halls. P P P P P P Pr Pr Pr Sr Pr Er Er Er Er Er Er 13B. The following uses when conducted by a nonprofit corporation and not as a business or for profit: schools; colleges; universities; general hospitals; cemeteries; educational; religious; philanthropic; scientific; literary; historical and charitable institutions; and agricultural and horticultural societies. E E E E E E Sr Sr Sr Sr Pr Er X X Er Er X 14. Churches and places of worship; parish halls; schools; colleges; universities; educational; literary, historical and charitable institutions; and agricultural and horticultural societies. Xr Xr Xr Xr Xr Xr S S S S P E X X E E X 15. The following uses when not conducted as a business or for profit: membership clubs; lodges; community houses; recreation facilities; nature preserves; and wildlife sanctuaries. E E E E E E Sr Sr Sr Sr Pr X X X X X X 16. Membership clubs; lodges; and community houses. Xr Xr Xr Xr Xr Xr S S S S P X X X X X X 17. A summer camp or a golf, tennis, swimming or similar club, whether conducted as a business or for profit or not, subject to the following conditions: E E E E E E S S S S P X X X X X X a. The camp or club shall be located on a lot of at least five (5) acres, and no building shall be located within less than seventy-five (75) feet of any street line or within less than one hundred fifty (150) feet of any property line. b. The furnishing of meals, refreshments, beverages and entertainment shall be only incidental to the conduct of the camp or club, and there shall be no furnishing of rooms except for accommodations for employees of the camp or club. 18. Livery boarding stables and riding schools subject to the following conditions: E E E E E E S S S S S S S S S S X a. Each use shall require a lot of not less than five (5) acres, respectively. b. Any building in which livestock are kept shall be located not less than one hundred fifty (150) feet from any property or street line. c. The number of livestock kept in conjunction with the livery and boarding stables and riding schools shall be subject to the approval of the planning and zoning commission. 18.1. Commercial kennels and kennels, subject to the following conditions: X X X X X X X E E E E E E E E E X a. Each use shall require a lot of not less than five (5) acres, respectively. b. Dogs shall be kept in buildings, enclosures or runways located not less than three hundred (300) feet from the property or street line. c. All dogs shall be confined in a closed building except during day-light hours. 19. Hospitals, convalescent homes and sanitaria owned and/or licensed by the State of Connecticut, subject to the following conditions: E E E E E E S S S S P X X X X X X a. The use shall not include facilities for the insane, alcoholics or drug addicts, except when such facilities are owned by and located upon property of the State of Connecticut. b. When the use is not served by public water supply and or sanitary sewers, the use shall be located on a lot containing not less than seven thousand (7,000) square feet for each patient accommodation. c. When the use is served by both public water supply and sanitary sewers, the use shall be located on a lot containing not less than three thousand (3,000) square feet for each patient accommodation. 20. Public utility substations and telephone equipment buildings provided that there is no outside service yard or outside storage of supplies. E E E E E E Sr Sr Sr Sr Pr Sr E E Pr Pr E 21. Public utility substations, telephone equipment buildings and maintenance and service facilities. Xr Xr Xr Xr Xr Xr S S S S P S E E P P E 22. Public utility water supply reservoirs, wells, towers, treatment facilities and pump stations. E E E E E E S S S S P S E E P P E 23. Public utility plants. X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X P X 24. Stores and other buildings and structures where goods are sold or service is rendered primarily at retail. X X X X X X S S S S P Xr Xr Xr Xr Xr Xr 25. Stores and other buildings and structures where goods are sold or service is rendered at retail, when accessory and subordinate to a permitted use on the same premises. X X X X X X Sr Sr Sr Sr Pr S E E P P E 26a. Business and professional offices. X X X X X X S S S S P Xr Xr Xr Xr Xr Xr 26b. Professional offices. E E E S S S S S S S P Xr Xr Xr Xr Xr Xr 26c. Professional offices and limited business offices occupying not more than four thousand (4,000) square feet of total floor area. X X X S S S S S S S P S S S Xr Xr Xr 27. Office buildings for business and professional establishments, provided that not more than twenty (20) percent of the net rentable space, up to a maximum of five thousand (5,000) square feet in any one (1) building, is occupied by those establishments rendering services to customers and clients on the premises. X X X X X X Sr Sr Sr Sr Pr S S S P P S 28. Banks and other financial institutions. X X X X X X S S S S P E E E E E X 29. Undertakers establishments. X X X X X X S S S S P X X X X X X 30. Indoor theaters and assembly halls. X X X X X X S S S S P X X X X X X 31. Self-service cleaning establishments or cleaning agency, including clothes pressing and cleaning with non-inflammable liquids; laundry agency or self-service laundry not using steam. X X X X X X S S S Sr Pr Xr Xr Xr Xr Xr Xr 32. Laundry, cleaning and dyeing plants, not for retail. X X X X X X Xr Xr Xr S P S S S P P S 33. Hotels and motels. X X X X X X X X S S P X X E X X X 34. Restaurants and other food service establishments. X X X X X X Xr Xr Xr S P X Xr Xr Xr Xr X 35. Restaurants and other food service establishments where customers are served only when seated at tables or counters and at least three-quarters of the customer seats are located within an enclosed building, where food is served on porcelain dishes and by waiters and/or waitresses. Such may include a food takeout service incidental to the primary permitted use but shall not include establishments where customers are served primarily at food take-out counters. X X X X X X S S S Sr Pr X S S P P X 36. Motor vehicle service stations; motor vehicle repair garages including automobile, truck, trailer and farm equipment repairing, painting and upholstering; establishments for motor vehicle washing; and establishments for the sale of new or used automobiles, trucks, trailers or farm equipment or the rental thereof. X X X X X X X Xr X S P Xr Xr Xr P P Xr 37. Motor vehicle service stations having a limited repairer's license issued by the State of Connecticut. X X X X X X X S X Sr Pr Xr Xr Xr Pr Pr Xr 38. Motor vehicle repair garages including automobile, truck, trailer and farm equipment repairing when clearly accessory and subsidiary to a permitted use on the same premises. X X X X X X X Xr X Sr Pr S S S Pr Pr S 39A. Bowling alleys and billiard or pool halls. X X X X X X S S S S P X X X X X X 39B. Indoor amusement centers. X X X X X X X X X E E X X X X X X 39C. Indoor amusement centers and game rooms when clearly a subordinate secondary use as an adjunct to a directly related and permitted principal use on the same premises, owned and operated as an integral part of the principal use, accessible solely from within the principal use area and occupying not more than five (5) percent of the total floor area allocated to said principal use. X X X X X X E E E E E E E E E E X 40. Veterinary hospitals. X X X X X X S S X S P X X X X X X 41. Medical and dental clinics. X X X X X X S S S S P X X X X X X 42. Warehousing and wholesale businesses. X X X X X X Xr Xr Xr S P X X X P P X 43. Storage of a reasonable quantity of retail merchandise and supplies necessary for the operation of a permitted use being conducted on the same premises. X X X X X X S S S Sr Pr S S S Pr Pr X 44. Commercial storage, sale and distribution of fuel and bottled gas, excluding tanks for petroleum products having a capacity in excess of ten thousand (10,000) gallons. X X X X X X X X X S P X X X P P X 45. Building contractors businesses and storage yards. X X X X X X X X X S P X X X P P X 46. Lumber and building materials businesses and terminals. X X X X X X X X X S P X P P P P X 47. Freight and materials, trucking businesses and terminals. X X X X X X X X X S P Xr X X P P S 47A. Bus passenger terminals. X X X X X X X X X S P Xr S S P P S 48. Freight and materials, trucking businesses when accessory and subordinate to a permitted use on the same premises. X X X X X X X X X Sr Pr S S S Pr Pr S 49. Commercial boat houses, landings, docks, and marinas. X X X X X X S S S S P X P P P P X 50. Research laboratories. X X X X X X Xr Xr Xr S P S S S P P S 51. Research laboratories, provided there is no manufacture, processing or assembling of goods except as incidental to research. X X X X X X S S S Sr Pr Sr Sr Sr Pr Pr S 52. The manufacture, processing or assembling of goods, excluding the processing of asphalt and earth materials. X X X X X X Xr Xr Xr Xr Xr S S S P P S 53. The manufacture, processing or assembling of goods when accessory and subordinate to a permitted use being conducted on the same premises and when located within an enclosed building. X X X X X X S S S S P Sr Sr Sr Pr Pr S 54. Plants for the processing and distribution of milk and edible dairy products and the packaging and distribution of beverages. X X X X X X X X X S P Sr Sr Sr Pr Pr X 55. Printing and publishing establishments. X X X X X X Xr Xr Xr S P S S S P P S 56. Printing and publishing establishments occupying not more than five thousand (5,000) square feet of floor area. X X X X X X S S S Sr Pr Sr S S Pr Pr S 57. Painting, woodworking, sheet metal, blacksmith, welding, tire recapping, and machine shops when occupying not more than five thousand (5,000) square feet of floor area. X X X X X X X X X S P Sr Sr Sr Pr Pr Pr 58. Painting, woodworking, sheet metal, blacksmith, welding, tire recapping and machine shops. X X X X X X X X X Xr Xr S S S P P S 59. Excavation, grading and removal of earth materials, as provided in section 32. G G G G G G G G G G G G G G G G G 60. Signs, as provided in section 21. P P P P P P P P P S P S S S P P S 61. Off-street parking and loading facilities. Xr Xr Xr Xr Xr Xr S S S S P S S S P P S 62. Accessory uses customary with and incidental to any aforesaid permitted use, subject to the securing of a special exception or submission and approval of a site plan if required for such permitted use and subject to the following additional standards and conditions applicable in residence districts: P P P P P P P P P S P S S S P P S a. The accessory use shall be located on the same lot with the permitted use to which it is accessory. b. Accessory uses may include off-street parking spaces and private garages, except that no unregistered motor vehicle or parts of motor vehicles shall be maintained on any lot unless located in an enclosed building. c. Except in connection with a permitted farm, truck garden or commercial nursery, there shall be no more than one (1) commercial vehicle parked or stored on any lot, and such vehicle shall not exceed one and one-half (11/2) tons capacity. d. No land in a residence district shall be used for vehicular access to a use permitted only in a commercial, industrial or light industrial park district.  
NOTE: For information concerning permitted uses in special development areas and planned development districts, see section 34. 
Section 24. - Area, location and bulk standards. 
    24.1. Schedule B: "Schedule B, Standards" is hereby declared to be a part of these regulations. 
    24.2. Lot Area, Shape and Frontage: Each lot, except permitted interior lots, shall have the minimum area as specified in Schedule B. Each lot to be used for a dwelling containing two (2) or more dwelling units shall have the minimum area per family specified in Schedule B. Each lot shall be of such shape that a square with a minimum dimension specified in Schedule B will fit on the lot, and in residence districts, except on permitted interior lots, some portion of such square shall lie within the area required for setback from a street line. Each lot except permitted interior lots, shall have the frontage on a street specified in Schedule B. Interior lots shall be permitted only residence R-1, R-2 and R-3 districts. 
    24.3. Height: No building or other structure shall exceed the number of stories and/or the maximum height, whichever is less, as specified in Schedule B. 
    24.4. Setbacks: No building or other structure shall be located less than the minimum setback distances from any street line, rear property line, other property line or residence district boundary line as specified in Schedule B, except as follows: 
24.4.1. Signs: Permitted signs, as specified in section 44, may extend within lesser distances of a property or street line. 
24.4.2. Projections: Pilasters, belt courses, sills, cornices, marquees, canopies, eaves and similar architectural features may project two (2) feet into the area required for setback from a property or street line. 
24.4.3. Additional setbacks: In any residence district, any portion of a building or other structure exceeding thirty (30) feet in height shall be set back from a property or street line by two (2) additional feet for each foot or fraction thereof by which such portion exceeds thirty (30) feet in height. 
24.4.4. Narrow streets: The required setback from a street line of a street having a width of less than fifty (50) feet shall be increased by one-half of the difference between fifty (50) feet and the actual width of the street. 
24.4.5. Railroads and pierheads: In commercial, industrial, and light industrial park districts, no setback is required from a railroad right-of-way or an established pierhead line along the Housatonic River. 
24.4.6. Guard houses: In commercial, industrial and light industrial park districts, a building not exceeding three hundred (300) square feet in floor area and a height of fifteen (15) feet and used solely as a guard house, gatehouse or security building may extend to within ten (10) feet of any street line. 
24.4.7. Commercial CA-3 district: On any lot in the commercial CA-3 district no setback is required from a property line, provided that access to a public street by means of an alley or other right-of-way not less than twelve (12) feet in width is provided to any portion of the lot not used for buildings and other structures. Any building or other structure, however, set back from a property line other than a street line shall not extend within less than twelve (12) feet of such property line, except that adjoining property owners may, by mutual agreement, recorded in the land records of the Town of Shelton, agree to reduce such setback by up to six (6) feet on each side of such line. 
24.4.8. Other commercial districts: Adjoining property owners in any commercial CA-2, CB-1 or CB-2 district may by mutual agreement, recorded in the land records of the Town of Shelton, agree to eliminate the required setback from a common property line or to reduce the required setback from the common property line by up to six (6) feet on each side of such line. Such reduction or elimination of the required setback is permitted, provided that access to a public street by means of an alley or other right-of-way not less than twelve (12) feet in width is provided to any portion of the lot not used for buildings and other structures. 
24.4.9. Accessory buildings in residence districts: In residence districts an unattached accessory building or structure, not exceeding twelve (12) feet in height and two hundred fifty (250) square feet in floor area may extend to within five (5) feet of any property line, but shall not extend within less than sixty (60) feet of any street line. 
24.4.10. Fences, walls and terraces: The required setback distances shall not apply to fences or walls six (6) feet or less in height or to necessary retaining walls or to unroofed terraces, but no fence, wall or terrace shall be located within the right-of-way easement or taking line of any street. 
24.4.11. Corner lots: On corner lots in residence R-4 and R-5 districts, the minimum required structure setback distance from the longer street line may be reduced by up to ten (10) feet. 
24.4.12. Setbacks for nonconforming lot frontage: On any lawfully existing, nonconforming lot having less than the required minimum lot frontage set forth in Schedule B, each required minimum setback from a side line shall be not less than twenty (20) percent of the lot frontage, but in no case less than ten (10) feet. 
    24.5. Coverage and Bulk: The aggregate lot coverage of all buildings and other structures on any lot shall not exceed the percentage of the lot area as specified in Schedule B. The total floor area of all buildings and other structures on any lot, excluding basements, shall not exceed the percentage of the lot area as specified in Schedule B. 
    24.6. Minimum Floor Area for Dwelling: Each one-story dwelling shall have a minimum floor area on the ground floor as specified in Schedule B. Each split-level dwelling shall have a minimum floor area on all floors as specified in Schedule B. Each dwelling with two (2) or more stories shall have a minimum floor area on the ground floor and a total minimum floor area as specified in Schedule B. Each dwelling containing two (2) or more dwelling units shall also have a minimum floor area for each dwelling unit as specified in Schedule B. 
    24.7. Outside Storage: Outside storage (including storage and display of merchandise, supplies, machinery and other materials and the outside manufacture, processing or assembling of goods, but excluding areas for parking of registered motor vehicles in daily use), shall be limited as follows: 
24.7.1. In commercial districts, outside storage areas shall not extend into the area required for setback from a street line or residence district boundary line. 
24.7.2. In industrial IA-1 districts and light industrial park districts, outside storage areas shall not extend into the area required for setback from a property line, street line or residence district boundary line, shall not exceed fifteen (15) percent of the lot area and shall be enclosed (except for necessary access drives) by buildings and/or by fences, walls, embankments or evergreen shrubs or trees so as to screen the storage area from view from any other lot or from any street. The enclosing buildings, fences, walls, embankments or evergreen shrubs or trees shall either be of a height sufficient to screen completely the storage area or shall have a height of eight (8) feet, whichever is less, and shall be of a density as to be not less than seventy-five (75) percent effective in screening such view, except that when evergreen shrubs or trees are used, such height and density shall be achieved within five (5) years after establishment of the outside storage area. 
24.7.3. In industrial IA-2, IA-3 and IB-1 districts, outside storage areas shall not extend into the area required for setback from a property line, street line or residence district boundary line. The aggregate lot coverage of all buildings, other structures and outside storage area shall not exceed sixty (60) percent of the area of the lot. 
24.7.4. In industrial IB-2 districts, outside storage areas shall not extend into the area required for setback from a residence district boundary line. 
    24.8. Site Development and Landscaping: Site development and landscaping shall be established in commercial districts, industrial districts and light industrial park districts as follows: 
24.8.1. Off-street parking and loading: All off-street parking and loading spaces shall conform to the standards of section 42. 
24.8.2. Driveways: There shall be no more than two (2) driveways entering any lot from any one (1) street, except that there may be one (1) additional driveway for each additional three hundred (300) feet of lot frontage in excess of three hundred (300) feet. Driveways shall not exceed thirty (30) feet in width at the street line, unless a greater width is required by city ordinance or by the State of Connecticut. 
24.8.3. Commercial districts: In commercial districts no part of the area required for setback from a residence district boundary line shall be used for off-street parking or loading. A strip of land, not less than twelve (12) feet in width, along and adjacent to any residence district boundary line shall be suitably landscaped with trees and/or shrubs and with lawns. 
24.8.4. Industrial and LIP districts: In industrial districts and light industrial park districts, no part of the area required for setback from a residence district boundary line shall be used for driveways or off-street parking or loading. In other than industrial IB-2 districts, no part of the area required for setback from a street line shall be used for off-street loading and no more than fifty (50) percent of such area shall be used for driveways and/or off-street parking. In other than industrial IB-2 districts, the area required for setback from a street line shall be suitably landscaped with trees and/or shrubs, lawns, washed gravel or ornamental brick or stone pavement except for sidewalks and permitted driveways and off-street parking spaces. Along and adjacent to any residence district boundary line a strip of land not less than fifty (50) feet in width in any light industrial park district of industrial IA-1 district and not less than thirty (30) feet in width in any other industrial district shall be left in its natural state if already wooded or shall be landscaped with evergreen trees planted to grow into a dense overgreen buffer strip within five (5) years. 
    24.9. Courts and Windows: In addition to the setback requirements specified in Schedule B, the windows of rooms used for human occupancy in a dwelling containing two (2) or more dwelling units shall open onto yards, setback areas, courts or other open spaces. The least horizontal dimension of any court between opposing walls shall be not less than twice the average height of such opposing walls. In the case of a court formed by walls on three (3) sides and open on the fourth side, the distance between the open end and the opposite wall shall not exceed the distance between the other two (2) walls, unless such latter distance is greater than fifty (50) feet. On any lot, no window in one (1) dwelling unit shall face the window of another dwelling unit at a distance of less than twenty-five (25) feet. On any lot, no dwelling shall be nearer to another dwelling than the average height of such dwellings. 
    24.10. Length of Dwelling: No building containing two (2) or more dwelling units shall have a length in excess of one hundred fifty (150) feet measured in a straight line through the building, but such length may be exceeded up to a maximum length of three hundred (300) feet, provided that for within each one hundred (100) feet of length, or fraction thereof, the facades extending the length of the building are offset by a distance equal to not less than one-half of the width of the building. 
    24.11. Interior Lots: Interior lots, not having the minimum frontage on a street normally required, shall be permitted in the residence R-1, R-2 and R-3 districts, provided that the planning and zoning commission determines that the development of interior lots is in the best interests of the City of Shelton that it will allow proper and orderly utilization of land for residential purposes and that such interior lots comply with the provisions of this paragraph and other applicable, municipal ordinances and regulations. Interior lots shall be subject to the following additional requirements: 
24.11.1. Access and frontage: Each interior lot shall have frontage on and access to a city street by means of an unobstructed, legal, exclusive accessway held in the same ownership as the interior lot. Said accessway shall have a minimum width and frontage of at least thirty (30) feet and, if the area of the interior lot is equal to or greater than two (2) times the minimum lot area specified in paragraph 24.11.2 for the district in which it is located, said accessway minimum width and street frontage shall be not less than fifty (50) feet. No more than two (2) abutting accessways shall be separated from another accessway or pair of contiguous accessways by not less than one (1) minimum required lot frontage for a standard lot in said district. 
24.11.2. Lot area: The area of each interior lot, exclusive of its accessway, shall be not less than one and one-half (1.5) times the minimum lot area specified in Schedule B for the district in which it is located. The limits of the accessway shall be shown on any record map by a dashed line. The property lines of an interior lot which commence at the termination of its accessway shall diverge from each other at an angle of not less than sixty (60) degrees. The calculated lot area, excluding the area contained in the accessway, shall be designated on any record map. 
24.11.3. Driveway: Within the lines of the accessway there shall be constructed a private driveway with a minimum eighteen-foot wide, gravelled or paved travelway, adequate in thickness to accommodate fire and other similar emergency apparatus. That portion of the driveway from the edge of the street pavement to a distance of twenty (20) feet inside the street line, and any portion of the driveway having a grade in excess of six (6) percent shall be paved. The private driveway serving a single interior lot may be reduced in width to not less than twelve (12) feet, provided the driveway is widened to not less than twenty (20) feet for a distance of forty (40) feet at such intervals as are necessary so that no portion of the twelve-foot wide driveway shall exceed a length of one hundred fifty (150) feet. Where two (2) accessways are contiguous, one (1) driveway not less than eighteen (18) feet wide and adequate in thickness to accommodate fire and other similar emergency apparatus may be provided within the combined width of two (2) contiguous accessways to serve both such interior lots. Said driveway serving two (2) interior lots shall be paved for the entire length of the accessway at the time of the establishment of said interior lots. Where a gravel surface driveway is provided, it shall have a minimum depth of eight (8) inches after compaction. Paved driveways shall consist of dense graded bituminous concrete not less than two (2) inches in depth after rolling, placed on a gravel base having a minimum depth of six (6) inches after compaction. 
24.11.4. Setbacks: On any interior lot, no building or other structures, except permitted accessory buildings, shall extend within less than forty (40) feet from any property line. 
24.11.5. Number of interior lots: In any subdivision, the maximum number of interior lots shall not exceed fifteen (15) percent of the total lots in the subdivision or two (2) lots, which number is greater. In situations where a subdivision is to be developed in sections, the maximum number of interior lots shall be calculated on the basis of the overall subdivision and the commission may, at its discretion, limit the proportion of interior lots in any one (1) section in such a manner as to not exceed the total number specified above. 
24.11.6. Other: The commission may limit the width of any driveway to a maximum of twenty (20) feet at the street line and may require planted screening, fences or such improvements as may be necessary for safety purposes and/or the protection of neighborhood appearance. 
SCHEDULE B-STANDARDS 
DISTRICT CODES STANDARDS R-1A R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 R-5 CA-1 CA-2 CA-3 1. Minimum lot area (in sq. ft.). 120,000 40,000 20,000 12,000 7,500 5,000 80,000 15,000 6,000 2. Minimum lot area per d.u. (in sq. ft.). 120,000 10,000 7,500 7,500 5,000 3,600 80,000 15,000 3,600 2a. Minimum lot area per one-bedroom d.u. (in sq. ft.). N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. 2,400 3. Minimum dimension of square on the lot. 300' 150' 125' 75' 60' 50' 200' 80' 50' 4. Minimum lot frontage. 270' 135' 115' 75' 60' 50' 175' 80' 50' 5. Maximum number of stories for a building. 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 none 6. Maximum height of a building or structure. 40' 40' 40' 40' 40' 40' 40' 40' 40' 7. Minimum setback from streetline. 50' 40' 40' 30' 25' 25' 50' 40' none 8. Minimum setback from rear property line. 50' 30' 30' 30' 25' 25' 50' 40' 12' 9. Minimum setback from side or other property line. 50' 30' 20' 15' 8' 8' 20' 12' none 10. Minimum setback from Residence District boundary line. none none none none none none 50' 40' 20' 11. Maximum lot coverage as percent of lot area. 5% 15% 15% 20% 25% 30% 25% 25% 75% 12. Maximum floor area as percent of lot area. 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 50% 50% 50% 150% 13. Minimum floor area on ground floor for one-story dwelling (in sq. ft.). 1,100 1,100 1,100 900 900 900 900 900 900 14. Minimum total floor area on all floors for split-level dwelling (in sq. ft.). 1,100 1,100 1,100 1,000 1,000 1,000 1,000 1,000 1,000 15. Minimum floor area for two or more story dwelling (in sq. ft.). Ground Floor 900 900 900 800 800 800 800 800 800 Total Floor Area 1,350 1,350 1,350 1,100 1,100 1,100 1,100 1,100 1,100 16. Minimum floor area for each dwelling unit (in sq. ft.). 550 550 550 550 550 550 550 550 550  
N.A. means Not Applicable 
SCHEDULE B-STANDARDS 
DISTRICT CODES STANDARDS CB-1 CB-2 IA-1 IA-2 IA-3 IB-1 IB-2 LIP 1. Minimum lot area (in sq. ft.). 40,000 15,000 120,000 80,000 40,000 80,000 20,000 80,000 2. Minimum lot area per d.u. (in sq. ft.). 40,000 15,000 120,000 80,000 40,000 80,000 20,000 80,000 2a. Minimum lot area per one-bedroom d.u. (in sq. ft.). N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. 3. Minimum dimension of square on the lot. 150' 80' 250' 200' 150' 200' 100' 200' 4. Minimum lot frontage. 135' 80' 225' 175' 135' 175' 90' 175' 5. Maximum number of stories for a building. 3 3 3 none none none none 3 6. Maximum height of a building or structure. 40' 40' 40' 60' 60' 60' 60' 40' 7. Minimum setback from streetline. 50' 40' 75' 50' 25' 50' 25' 75' 8. Minimum setback from rear property line. 20' 20' 50' 25' 25' 25' 12' 25' 9. Minimum setback from side or other property line. 20' 12' 50' 25' 25' 25' 12' 25' 10. Minimum setback from Residence District boundary line. 50' 40' 75' 50' 50' 50' 25' 75' 11. Maximum lot coverage as percent of lot area. 25% 35% 15% 40% 40% 40% 75% 50% 12. Maximum floor area as percent of lot area. 50% 50% 30% 80% 80% 80% 150% 50% 13. Minimum floor area on ground floor for one-story dwelling (in sq. ft.). 900 900 900 900 900 900 900 900 14. Minimum total floor area on all floors for split-level dwelling (in sq. ft.). 1,000 1,000 1,000 1,000 1,000 1,000 1,000 1,000 15. Minimum floor area for two or more story dwelling (in sq. ft.). Ground Floor 800 800 800 800 800 800 800 800 Total Floor Area 1,100 1,100 1,100 1,100 1,100 1,100 1,100 1,100 16. Minimum floor area for each dwelling unit (in sq. ft.). 550 550 550 550 550 550 550 550  
N.A. means Not Applicable 
Sections 25-30. - Reserved. 
CHAPTER III. - SITE PLANS AND SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS 

Section 31. - Site plans. 
    31.1. General: The following regulations shall apply to the submission and approval of site plans for the establishment of certain uses of land, buildings, and other structures as specified in Schedule A. 
    31.2. Application: The site plan, submitted to the zoning enforcement officer with an application for a certificate of zoning compliance, shall be accompanied by the following: 
31.2.1. Statement of use: A written statement describing the proposed use in sufficient detail to determine compliance with the permitted use provisions of section 23 and the performance standards of section 43; four (4) copies shall be submitted. 
31.2.2. Site plan: A site plan, drawn to a scale of not less than one hundred (100) feet to the inch, showing existing and proposed contours, property lines, buildings, structures, signs, outdoor illumination, streets, driveways, off-street parking and loading spaces, outside storage areas, watercourses, storm drainage, sewage disposal facilities, and landscaping (including trees and/or shrubs, lawn, other landscaped areas and natural terrain not to be disturbed); four (4) copies shall be submitted. 
31.2.3. Architectural plans: Preliminary architectural plans of all proposed buildings, structures and signs, including general exterior elevations, perspective drawings and generalized floor plans and including drawings for proposed signs; four (4) copies shall be submitted. 
31.2.4. Other: The planning and zoning commission may request the submission of such additional information that it deems necessary in order to act on the site plan. 
    31.3. Procedure: Upon receipt, the zoning enforcement officer shall transmit copies of the site plan submission and the application for a certificate of zoning compliance to the planning and zoning commission. Within sixty-five (65) days after receipt of copies of a complete site plan submission and the application by the planning and zoning commission, it shall either approve, approve subject to modifications or disapprove the site plan. The applicant may consent in writing to any extension of the time for action. The grounds for approval, approval subject to modifications or disapproval of a site plan shall be stated by the planning and zoning commission in its records and a copy thereof shall be transmitted to the zoning enforcement officer. Failure of such commission so to act within the sixty-five-day period shall be considered as an approval, and a certificate to that effect shall be issued upon written demand by the applicant received by such commission within thirty (30) days after expiration of the sixty-five-day period for action. Such failure, however, shall not relieve the applicant from required conformance to all of the applicable provisions of these regulations, other than submission and approval of a site plan. 
    31.4. Standards: The application shall be approved if it conforms to the following standards: 
31.4.1. General: The proposed use, buildings and other structures, including outside storage areas, site development and landscaping and off-street parking and loading shall conform to all of the requirements of these regulations. 
31.4.2. Access: Provisions shall be made for vehicular access to the lot in such a manner as to avoid undue hazards to traffic and undue traffic congestion on any public highway. 
31.4.3. Neighborhood: The site plan and architectural plans shall be of a character as to harmonize with the neighborhood, to accomplish a transition in character values and to preserve and enhance the appearance and beauty of the community. 
    31.5. Planned Residence Districts: Site plans for single-family dwellings not on individual lots and for dwellings containing two (2) or more dwelling units in planned residence districts shall conform to the following additional standards: 
31.5.1. Dwellings: Each dwelling shall contain not more than eight (8) dwelling units. The shortest distance between any two (2) dwellings shall be not less than the height of the taller dwelling, but in any case not less than twenty-five (25) feet. The commission may modify this separation requirement if the design of the residential development is benefitted by closer spacing. 
31.5.2. Utilities: Unless otherwise approved by the commission, all utilities in the residential development shall be located underground. Each such dwelling and all dwelling units shall be served by public water supply and dwellings containing two (2) or more dwelling units shall be served by the public sanitary sewer system. 
31.5.3. Buffer area: Adjacent to each property line of such residential development other than a street line, there shall be provided a greenbelt having a minimum width of twenty (20) feet, planted with trees and shrubs of appropriate species at least fifty (50) percent of which shall be evergreens. Any new plantings shall have a minimum height of five (5) feet. Suitable existing trees and shrubs may be preserved and/or supplemented by new plantings to form the required greenbelt. No building or other structure shall extend within less than fifty (50) feet of any street line or other property line. 
31.5.4. Outdoor living space: Each dwelling unit shall be provided with a private, exclusive outdoor living space of at least one hundred fifty (150) square feet, in the form of a patio, deck, terrace, balcony, open air or screened-in-porch. 
31.5.5. Recreation: Designated recreation areas for the use of all residents shall be provided at the ratio of two hundred (200) square feet per dwelling unit. Said areas shall be suitably prepared, protected and equipped with appropriate facilities such as tennis courts, shuffleboard, paddle tennis and/or swimming facilities, subject to the approval of the commission. 
31.5.6. Parking: Two (2) off-street parking spaces shall be provided for each dwelling unit, with at least fifty (50) percent of said spaces located within enclosed garages. All spaces shall be located within two hundred (200) feet of the intended users. Additional visitor parking shall be provided at appropriate locations at the ratio of one (1) space for each three (3) dwelling units. No surface parking area shall extend within less than fifteen (15) feet of any building or property line. 
31.5.7. Landscaping: The entire area of the lot not used for buildings, driveways, and parking areas shall be suitably landscaped with lawn and with trees and/or shrubs or shall be left as undisturbed natural terrain. Parking areas shall contain evenly distributed landscaped areas protected by solid curbing ever sixth space in a row of parking spaces. Fences, walls, earth berms and/or closely planted evergreens, trees, hedges or shrubs shall be used to screen parking areas to a height of four (4) feet, from streets, adjoining properties, recreation areas or maintenance areas as required. 
31.5.8. Bond: The applicant shall, as a condition of approval, post a performance bond with surety satisfactory to the planning and zoning commission and in amount sufficient, as approved by the planning and zoning commission to insure completion of streets, driveways, parking areas, sidewalks, drainage, sewer systems, landscaping and other essential site improvements in accordance with the application as approved. 
    31.6. Professional Offices in Residence Districts: Site plans for professional office use of existing residential structures in the R-3, R-4 and R-5 districts shall conform to the following additional standards: 
31.6.1. Definition: For purposes of this section, a "professional office" is an office maintained by a physician, surgeon or other practitioner of the healing arts, a dentist, podiatrist, lawyer, clergyman, professional engineer or land surveyor, landscape architect, artist, teacher or musician, and shall include such other persons as may be engaged in support of the office in a nonprofessional capacity. 
31.6.2. Location: The structure in which the professional office is located shall be on a lot which has frontage on one (1) of the following thoroughfares of the City of Shelton: 
Coram Avenue, between Hillside Avenue and Shelton Avenue. 
31.6.3. Utilities: Each structure in which the professional office is located must be connected to the city sanitary sewer system. 
31.6.4. Parking: There shall be not less than one (1) off-street parking space for each three hundred (300) square feet of floor area of the structure, and located on a lot not more than three hundred (300) feet in a direct line from the building. The commission may, at its own discretion, accept a certain number of "stacked" or "doubled-up" parking spaces when on-site space is limited and frequent parking turnover is not required. The commission reserves the right to request such additional spaces as it deems necessary to satisfy the needs of the office tenants and clients. 
31.6.5. Architectural compatibility: Any exterior alterations, permitted signs, changes and additions to existing residential structures for professional office use shall retain a basic residential design and scale and shall be architecturally compatible with the surrounding neighborhood. 
31.6.6. Other: The commission may impose such other controls and restrictions as it deems necessary to protect adjacent properties and assure compatibility with the surrounding residential neighborhood. 
Section 32. - Earth materials removal. 
    32.1. General: On any lot, there shall be no excavation, grading or removal of topsoil, clay, sand, gravel, rock or other natural material, or the slashing of trees, or filling of land by blasting or by use of power-assisted machinery or equipment, except as authorized under paragraph 32.2, or as authorized under an application for a temporary special exception approved by the planning and zoning commission under the provisions of this section. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this section shall be subject to penalties in accordance with the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut. 
    32.2. Exemptions: The provision of this section and the requirement to obtain approval of an application for a temporary special exception shall not apply to the following cases, when such excavation, grading or removal or slashing of trees is conducted and completed in such manner as to cause no danger to the public health or safety, including stagnant water, soil erosion, water pollution or excessive drainage runoff: 
32.2.1. Necessary excavation, grading or removal, in direct connection with the lawful construction on the lot of buildings, foundations, roads, driveways, storm drainage, utility services, fences, walls, swimming pools, or other bona fide construction project and for which any required application for a certificate of zoning compliance has been approved; 
32.2.2. Necessary excavation, grading or removal in connection with improvements on the lot solely for farming or landscaping purposes, such as the construction of ponds, draining of wet land, improvement of water courses, burying of stones or refuse, regarding of difficult contours and the excavation of earth for use on the lot and not for sale; 
32.2.3. Necessary excavation, grading or removal in connection with the construction of improvements and the changing of contours in an approved subdivision in accordance with construction plans and contour plans approved by the planning and zoning commission under the subdivision regulations of the City of Shelton, provided that on any lot no material is excavated or removed to an elevation less than two (2) feet above the centerline grade of the street on which the lot has frontage, which elevation is to be measured at the required setback line from the street; and 
32.2.4. Provided that the excavation, grading or removal authorized under paragraphs 32.2.1 and 32.2.2 shall be deemed to permit the excavation, grading or removal of only the quantity of material which is necessary to make the lot more suitable for the proposed use, and provided further that excavation, grading or removal authorized under paragraphs 32.2.1 and 32.2.2 in connection with a project for which an application for a certificate of zoning compliance has been approved, shall be contingent upon completion of such project within two (2) years after commencement, and in the event of failure to complete such project, as evidenced by failure to obtain a certificate of zoning compliance for such project, that such excavation, grading or removal shall be deemed a violation of these regulations unless an application for a temporary special exception for the excavation, grading or removal has been approved by the commission in accordance with this section. 
    32.3. Application: Application for a temporary special exception under this section shall be submitted in writing to the planning and zoning commission, together with an application fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). The application shall be accompanied by maps and plans, prepared by and bearing the seal of a land surveyor or engineer licensed as such by the State Board of Registration for Professional Engineers and Land Surveyors of the State of Connecticut, showing the following: 
32.3.1. The location and exterior limits of the area to be excavated or graded, property lines and streets adjoining the lot and the names of owners of property adjoining the lot; 
32.3.2. Existing contour lines on the lot to be excavated or graded, drawn to a scale of 1 inch = 40 feet and with a contour interval not exceeding two (2) feet; 
32.3.3. Proposed contour lines within the area to be excavated or graded, drawn to a scale of 1 inch = 40 feet and with a contour interval not exceeding two (2) feet; 
32.3.4. Existing and proposed drainage on the lot and existing rivers, streams, water courses, ponds and swamps on or within two hundred (200) feet of the lot; 
32.3.5. Proposed vehicular access to the lot and any proposed work [on] roadways; 
32.3.6. The location on the lot of any wooded areas, rock outcrops and existing and proposed buildings and structures; and 
32.3.7. An estimate of the number of cubic yards of material to be excavated, graded or removed. 
    32.4. Procedure: Within sixty (60) days after receipt of a complete temporary special exception application, the planning and zoning commission shall hold a public hearing of the application. Within sixty-five (65) days after the public hearing, the planning and zoning commission shall approve the application, approve it subject to modifications, or disapprove the application. The applicant may consent in writing to any extension of the time for action on the application. The planning and zoning commission may request the applicant to submit additional information. Notice of a public hearing shall be published in a newspaper having a substantial circulation in the city at least twice, at intervals of not less than two (2) days, the first not more than fifteen (15) days nor less than ten (10) days, and the last not less than two (2) days before such hearing. The grounds for disapproval of an application shall be stated by the commission in its records. Failure to submit additional information requested by the commission shall be grounds for disapproval of the application. 
    32.5. Standards and Conditions: The excavation, grading or removal authorized under this section shall conform to the following standards and conditions, and before approving a temporary special exception the planning and zoning commission shall find that the following standards and conditions will be met: 
32.5.1. The excavation, grading or removal shall be carried out in accordance with the maps and plans as approved by the planning and zoning commission and within the exterior limits shown thereon; 
32.5.2. The excavation, grading or removal shall not result in sharp declivities, pits or depressions, soil erosion, drainage or sewerage problems or conditions which would impair the reasonable reuse and development of the lot for purposes permitted under these regulations as a matter of right in the district where the lot is located; 
32.5.3. At all stages of the work, proper drainage shall be provided to avoid stagnant water, soil erosion problems, excessive runoff, silting of streams and damage to public property, streets or drainage facilities; 
32.5.4. Truck access to the lot and the work area shall be so arranged as to minimize traffic hazards on streets and to avoid nuisance to residents of the neighborhood; 
32.5.5. If required by the planning and zoning commission, that the area to be excavated or a portion thereof, shall be enclosed within a fence of such type, height and location as the planning and zoning commission may specify; 
32.5.6. No excavation, grading or removal which is below the elevation of any abutting street or property line shall occur within fifty (50) feet of such line, except that excavation, grading or removal below the elevation of an abutting property line may be permitted if written approval from the adjoining owner is received by the commission; 
32.5.7. No processing machinery shall be erected or maintained on the lot; 
32.5.8. The work shall be limited to the hours and days of the week that may be specified by the commission; 
32.5.9. Proper measures shall be taken to minimize nuisance from nose [noise], dust, vibration and flying debris; 
32.5.10. Upon completion of the work authorized, the area of excavated or otherwise disturbed ground shall be prepared or restored as follows: 
a.  Such area shall be evenly graded to slopes not exceeding one (1) foot of rise for two (2) feet of horizontal distance or to such lesser slope necessary for soil stability, safety and reasonable reuse and development of the lot; in addition, the area shall be evenly graded with sufficient slopes to assure adequate drainage of the area, so that stagnant pools of water will be avoided; 
b.  Adequate drainways of gradual slope shall be provided to assure drainage; 
c.  There shall be no excavation, grading or removal below an elevation of three (3) feet above any ledge; 
d.  All debris and all loose boulders shall be buried or removed from the lot; and 
e.  The top layer of any arable topsoil, to a depth of six (6) inches, shall be retained on the lot and replaced over the entire area with any large stones removed, and the area shall then be seeded with a perennial grass and maintained until the ground shall be completely stabilized with a dense cover of grass and there exists no danger of erosion, but this provision shall not apply to the area of ponds nor to exposed areas of ledge existing prior to the work. 
32.5.11. The applicant shall obtain and maintain liability insurance with a limit of not less than three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) as to personal injury and one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) as to property damage and shall furnish a certificate of insurance to the commission, and in the event of cancellation of such insurance, the temporary special exception application shall terminate; 
32.5.12. The applicant shall file with the planning and zoning commission a cash, savings account or surety bond, in form and with surety acceptable to the city, and in an amount recommended by the street commissioner and/or city engineer and approved by the planning and zoning commission to insure the faithful performance of the work in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
32.5.13. The commission and zoning enforcement officer, or their authorized agents, shall at all times have reasonable access to the lot for the purpose of inspection and determination of compliance with this section; the commission may require the applicant to submit periodic reports, prepared by and bearing the seal of a land surveyor or engineer, showing the status and progress of the work. 
    32.6. Time Limit: Each application for a temporary special exception granted under this section shall be valid for a period of two (2) years or for such shorter period requested by the applicant or fixed by the commission. Upon application made at least fourteen (14) days before the expiration of a temporary special exception application, the commission may extend the time period for periods of not more than one (1) year, provided that there exists no violation of the terms of the current temporary special exception application. 
    32.7. Inspection Fee: At the time of issuance of a certificate of zoning compliance authorized by a temporary special exception application approved uner [under] this section, the applicant shall pay to the City of Shelton an inspection fee equal to two dollars ($2.00) for each one thousand (1,000) cubic yards of material, or fraction thereof, to be excavated, graded or removed. 
    32.8. Existing Operations: Any existing operation, involving the excavation or grading, or removal from any lot, of any earth, loam, topsoil, sand, gravel, clay or stone and authorized by a permit issued under the zoning regulations, in effect previous to these regulations, may continue for the term of such permit and subject to all of the requirements of such permit, but upon expiration of such permit the existing operation shall cease unless an application for temporary special exception therefore is approved under this section. 
    32.9. Return of Bond: Upon completion of the excavation, grading or removal in accordance with the terms of an approved application and after any area of the lot required to be seeded has grown in a second growing season a dense cover of grass as required under this section, the applicant may apply to the mayor for return of the bond filed as provided in this section. The bond may be released by the mayor only after the planning and zoning commission, street commissioner and city engineer have certified in writing that all of the requirements of this section have been met. 
    32.10. City Operations: The planning and zoning commission may waive or modify the required application fee and requirement of [paragraph] 32.3, the procedure set forth in paragraph 32.4, the bond requirements of paragraph 32.5.12 and the inspection fee required in paragraph 32.7 in connection with the excavation or grading, or removal from any lot of any earth, loam, topsoil, sand, gravel, clay, or stone when the excavation, grading or removal on such lot is conducted solely by or on behalf of the City of Shelton for the municipal purposes of the city. The excavation, grading or removal, however, shall meet all of the standards and conditions of paragraphs 32.5.1 through 32.5.10. 
Section 33. - Special exceptions. 
    33.1. General: In accordance with the procedures, standards and conditions hereinafter specified, the planning and zoning commission may grant special exceptions for the establishment of one (1) or more of uses for which a special exception must be secured from the commission as specified in "Schedule A, Permitted Uses." All requirements of this section are in addition to other requirements applicable in the district in which the special exception use is to be located. 
    33.2. Application: Application for a special exception shall be submitted in writing to the zoning enforcement officer, shall be accompanied by an application for a certificate of zoning compliance and shall also be accompanied by the following: 
33.2.1. Statement of use: A written statement describing the proposed use in sufficient detail to determine compliance with the permitted use provisions of section 23 and the performance standards of section 43; four (4) copies shall be submitted. 
33.2.2. Site plan: A site plan, drawn to a scale of not less than one hundred (100) feet to the inch, showing existing and proposed contours, property lines, buildings, structures, signs, outdoor illumination, streets, driveways, off-street parking and loading spaces, outside storage areas, watercourses, storm drainage, sewage disposal facilities, water supply facilities, and landscaping (including trees and/or shrubs, lawn, other landscaped areas and natural terrain not to be disturbed); four (4) copies shall be submitted. 
33.2.3. Architectural plans: Preliminary architectural plans of all proposed buildings, structures and signs, including general exterior elevations, perspective drawings and generalized floor plans and including drawings for proposed signs; four (4) copies shall be submitted. 
33.2.4. Other: The planning and zoning commission may request the submission of such additional information that it deems necessary in order to act on the application. 
33.2.5. Fees: Any application fee deposit of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00), any portion of which that is unused for necessary legal notice, stenographic reports and other required expenses shall be returned to the applicant. 
    33.3. Procedure: Upon receipt, the zoning enforcement officer shall transmit the special exception application and application for a certificate of zoning compliance to the planning and zoning commission; he shall also transmit a copy of the special exception application to the planning and zoning commission. Within sixty (60) days after receipt of a complete special exception application by the planning and zoning commission, it shall hold a public hearing on the application. Notice of a public hearing shall be published in a newspaper having a substantial circulation in the city at least twice at intervals of not less than two (2) days, the first not more than fifteen (15), nor less than ten (10) days, and the last not less than two (2) days before the public hearing. After the public hearing, the planning and zoning commission shall either approve, approve subject to modifications or disapprove the application. Failure of the planning and zoning commission to so act on any complete application within ninety (90) days after receipt shall be considered an approval, and a certificate to that effect shall be issued with an approved application for a certificate of zoning compliance by the planning and zoning commission upon written demand by the applicant received within thirty (30) days after the expiration of the ninety-day period for action. The applicant may consent in writing to any extension of the time for hearing or action on the application. 
    33.4. General Considerations: In addition to any additional standards for particular uses that may be hereinafter specified, the zoning commission shall consider the following before acting on any special exception application: 
33.4.1. The size and intensity of the proposed use; 
33.4.2. The effect of the proposed use on any adopted comprehensive plan of development for the city; 
33.4.3. The capacity of adjacent and feeder streets to accommodate peak traffic loads and any hazards created by the use; 
33.4.4. The effect upon property values and taxable values in the neighborhood, taking into account the topography of the lot and the character, location and height of proposed buildings, walls, stacks, fences, grades and landscaping; 
33.4.5. The number, location and arrangement of off-street parking spaces and the vehicular access to the lot; 
33.4.6. Fire and police protection needs; and 
33.4.7. Water supply, sewage disposal facilities and drainage and erosion problems. 
    33.5. Approval: Subsequent to the public hearing the planning and zoning commission may approve the application or approve it subject to modifications, granting the special exception and approving the application for a certificate of zoning compliance. In approving the application for a special exception or approving it subject to modifications, the planning and zoning commission shall make a finding that all applicable requirements of this section have been met in addition to other requirements applicable in the district in which the special exception will be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of these regulations. The grounds for disapproval of a special exception application shall be stated by the planning and zoning commission in its records. 
    33.6. Multifamily Residential Development: Applications for multifamily residential developments consisting of one (1) or more dwelling units, plus customary accessory recreational, maintenance and similar facilities incidental to and in support of such residential developments shall conform to the following additional standards: 
33.6.1. Lot, area and shape: Each such multifamily residential development shall be located on a lot having a minimum area of four (4) acres with a minimum lot frontage of one hundred fifty (150) feet on a street, which lot shall also be of such shape that a square with two hundred fifty (250) feet on each side will fit on the lot. 
33.6.2. Dwelling unit density: Dwelling unit density shall not exceed that permitted under Schedule B, Standards, or such lesser density as may be proposed by the applicant and approved by the commission. For purposes of computing allowable density, the minimum required lot area shall exclude the area of ponds, marshes and other wetlands and areas with a natural slope in excess of twenty-five (25) percent. In the residence R-1 district, at least fifty (50) percent of the minimum required lot area shall consist of land with a natural slope of not greater than fifteen (15) percent slope or less that occur within the required fifty-foot property line and street line setback area. 
33.6.3. Dwellings: Each dwelling shall contain not less than four (4) nor more than twelve (12) dwelling units, except that the commission may permit a limited number of units, not exceeding twenty (20) percent of the total dwelling units to be located in dwellings containing two (2) or three (3) dwelling units. In the residence R-1 district, each dwelling shall contain not more than four (4) dwelling units, except that the commission may permit a limited number of dwellings, not exceeding twenty (20) percent of the total number of dwellings, to contain five (5) dwelling units in order to accommodate features of building design and/or site planning. The shortest distance between any two (2) dwellings shall be not less than the height of the taller dwelling, but in any case not less than twenty-five (25) feet. The commission may modify this separation requirement if the design of the residential development is benefitted by the closer spacing. 
33.6.4. Utilities: Unless otherwise approved by the commission, all utilities in the residential development shall be located underground. Each such dwelling and all dwelling units shall be served by public water supply and sanitary sewer system. 
33.6.5. Setbacks and natural areas: No building or other structure shall extend within less than fifty (50) feet of any street or other property line. Not more than twenty (20) percent of the required setback areas shall consist of off-street parking areas and access drives. At least seventy (70) percent of the required setback areas shall be preserved in their natural state and in the residence R-1 district one (1) or more areas totaling not less than twenty-five (25) percent of the remaining area of the site shall be preserved in its natural state, except for necessary pruning and thinning of said areas. Said areas shall be reasonably protected from encroachment and damage during construction by snowfencing or other appropriate measures. Notwithstanding the above, the Commission may permit limited encroachment into and/or disturbance of said natural areas for grading or other purposes providing adequate provisions are made for restoration and replanting with substantial trees, shrubs and other approved plant materials. Adjacent to each property line of such residential development other than a street line, there shall be provided a greenbelt having a minimum width of fifteen (15) feet, planted with trees and shrubs of appropriate species, at least fifty (50) percent of which shall have a minimum height of five (5) feet at planting. Suitable existing trees and shrubs may be preserved and/or supplemented by new plantings to form the required greenbelt. 
33.6.6. Outdoor living space: Each dwelling unit shall be provided with a private, exclusive outdoor living space of at least one hundred fifty (150) square feet, in the form of a patio, deck, terrace, balcony, open air or screened-in porch. For each dwelling unit specifically designed for and intended to be occupied by one (1) or more elderly persons of sixty-two (62) years of age or older, the commission may permit a reduction in such outdoor living space to not less than ninety (90) square feet. 
33.6.7. Recreation: Designated and suitably prepared active and/or passive recreation areas for the use of all residents shall be provided at the ratio of two hundred (200) square feet per dwelling unit. For developments involving fifty (50) or more dwelling units, said areas shall be equipped with appropriate facilities such as tennis courts, shuffleboard, paddle tennis and/or swimming facilities, subject to the approval of the commission. 
33.6.8. Parking: Two (2) off-street parking spaces shall be provided for each dwelling unit, with at least fifty (50) percent of said spaces located within enclosed garages. All spaces shall be located within two hundred (200) feet of the intended users. Additional visitor parking shall be provided at appropriate locations at the ratio of one (1) space for each three (3) dwelling units. Notwithstanding the above, however, the commission may permit a reduction in the total number of off-street parking spaces intended to serve dwelling units specifically designed for and intended for occupancy by one (1) or more elderly persons of sixty-two (62) years of age or older to one (1) off-street parking space for each unit, none of which need be located within enclosed garages. No surface parking area shall extend within less than fifteen (15) feet of any building or property line. 
33.6.9. Landscaping: The entire area of the lot not used for buildings, driveways and parking areas shall be suitably landscaped with lawns and with trees and/or shrubs or shall be left as undisturbed natural terrain. Parking areas shall contain evenly distributed landscaped areas protected by solid curbing every sixth space in a row of parking spaces. Fences, walls, earth berms and/or closely planted evergreens, trees, hedges, or shrubs shall be used to screen parking areas to a height of four (4) feet, from streets, adjoining properties, recreation areas or maintenance area, as required. 
33.6.10. Neighborhood: The site plan and architectural plans shall be of a character as to harmonize with the neighborhood, to accomplish a transition in character between areas of unlike character, to protect property values and to preserve and enhance the appearance and beauty of the community. 
33.6.11. Bond: The applicant shall, as a condition of approval, post a performance bond with surety satisfactory to the planning and zoning commission and in amount sufficient, as approved by the planning and zoning commission to insure completion of streets, driveways, parking areas, sidewalks, drainage, sewer systems, landscaping and other essential site improvements in accordance with the application as approved. 
    33.7. Indoor Amusement Centers: Applications for indoor amusement centers shall also conform to the following special standards: 
33.7.1. Minimum size: An indoor amusement center shall contain not less than three thousand (3,000) square feet of open floor area contained on one (1) floor within a single building. 
33.7.2. Limitation on electric and electronic games and devices: Not more than fifty (50) percent of the open floor area shall be devoted to games and/or entertainment devices and equipment that are electrically or electronically controlled. In measuring such area, a minimum width of two (2) feet shall be allocated per each game machine designed for use by one (1) player, and three and one-half (31/2) feet where the game machine is designated for use by two (2) players. The depth of space in front of the game machine shall be at least five (5) feet and there shall be a minimum aisle width beyond this five (5) feet of an additional three (3) feet. 
33.7.3. Hours of operation: Indoor amusement centers shall only operate between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight. 
33.7.4. Movies, motion pictures and photographic displays: No movies, motion pictures or photographic displays or devices, whether set in motion by the insertion of coins, slugs, tokens or by any other means whatsoever shall be permitted in any indoor amusement center. 
33.7.5. Parking: Adequately lighted and visible off-street parking shall be provided in the amount of one (1) off-street parking space per two (2) players, based upon the maximum possible number of players of all games of all types on the premises. Provisions shall be made for periodic policing to prevent loitering and at least once per day litter shall be cleaned up and removed from said areas. 
33.7.6. Supervision: All separate rooms and alcoves and all portions of the center shall be arranged so that there is a management attendant within the room or such that management attendants outside the room can easily see and supervise the interior of all rooms. Readily visible signs, with location size and text approved by the commission, shall be installed to indicate that the use of the machines by persons under sixteen (16) years of age shall not be permitted during normal school hours. 
33.7.7. Discretionary refusal: The commission may refuse to grant a special exception for an indoor amusement center if there is reasonable cause to believe that the location of the facility and the operation of the center at that location will have a detrimental effect upon any church, school, charitable institution, hospital, place of public assembly or established business area. Any location within one thousand (1,000) feet of any of the aforesaid shall be deemed to have a potential detrimental effect on same. 
    33.8. Hotels and Motels: Applications for hotels and motels within the Industrial IA-3 district shall also conform to the following special standards: 
33.8.1. Lot area and shape: The use shall be located on a lot having a minimum area of four (4) acres, which lot shall also be of such shape that a square having a minimum dimension of two hundred fifty (250) feet on each side will fit on the lot. 
33.8.2. Setbacks: No building or other structure shall extend within less than forty (40) feet of any street line, or property line. 
33.8.3. Sanitation: Each hotel or motel shall be connected to the city sanitary sewer system and shall be served by public water. 
33.8.4. Parking: In addition to the hotel and motel parking requirement of paragraph 42.5.10 plus the restaurant requirement of paragraph 42.5.11, one (1) additional paved parking space shall be provided for each seventy-five (75) feet of gross "function" area, and located on a lot distant not more than three hundred (300) feet in a direct line from the building. Additional employee parking shall also be provided at the rate of one (1) space for each two (2) employees in excess of ten (10) employees during the largest daily work shift period. 
33.8.5. Proximity to Route 8 Expressway: The principal driveway entrance to the lot shall be from a city or state highway and at a point on and measured along such highway within three thousand one hundred (3,100) feet of a point of entrance or exit to the Route 8 Expressway. 
33.8.6. Other uses: Restaurants and other supporting uses, permitted in IA-3 districts, may be included in the required minimum four-acre lot area provided said uses are included within the principal hotel or motel structure. Automotive service uses are not considered to be accessory or supportive uses. 
33.8.7. Bond: The applicant shall, as a condition of approval, post a performance bond with surety satisfactory to the planning and zoning commission and in amount sufficient, as approved by the commission, to insure completion of streets, driveways, parking area, sidewalks, drainage, sewer systems, landscaping and other essential site improvements in accordance with the application as approved. 
    33.9. Professional Offices: Applications for professional offices in residence districts shall also conform to the following additional standards: 
33.9.1. Definition: A professional office for purpose of this section is an office maintained by a physician, surgeon or other practitioner of the healing arts, a dentist, podiatrist, lawyer, clergyman, architect, professional engineer or land surveyor, landscape architect, artist, teacher or musician, and shall include such other persons as may be engaged in support of the office in a nonprofessional capacity. 
33.9.2. Lot area and shape: A professional office shall be located on a lot having a minimum area of sixty thousand (60,000) square feet with a minimum lot frontage of one hundred fifty (150) feet on a street, which lot shall be of such shape that a square with one hundred fifty (150) feet on each side will fit on the lot. 
33.9.3. Location: The lot on which the professional office is located shall adjoin Leavenworth Road-Howe Avenue-River Road, currently designated as Connecticut Route #110. 
33.9.4. Building area, height: The maximum area of the ground floor of all buildings on the lot shall be three thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet, not more than three thousand (3,000) square feet of which shall be in one (1) building; the building height shall not exceed two (2) stories and necessary roof structures. 
33.9.5. Number of buildings: There shall be no more than one (1) building on the lot unless there are already two (2) buildings on it at the time application is made for the special exception; in any event there shall be no more than two (2) buildings on the lot. 
33.9.6. Setbacks: No building or other structure shall extend within less than forty (40) feet of any street line or fifty (50) feet of any property line except for any existing structure which may continue as a nonconforming structure. 
33.9.7. Utilities: Each building shall be served by public water and shall be connected to the city sanitary sewer system or shall have a system for on-site sewage disposal approved by the Valley Regional Health District. 
33.9.8. Parking: There shall be at least one (1) off-street parking space for each three hundred (300) square feet of floor area of all buildings on the lot, and located on the same lot with the buildings. The commission reserves the right to request such additional spaces as it deems necessary to satisfy the needs of the intended office tenants and clients. 
33.9.9. Number of employees: There shall be no more than one (1) employee for each two hundred (200) square feet of floor area in the building or buildings on the lot. 
33.9.10. Architectural and aesthetic compatibility: The design, layout appearance and location of all proposed structures, additions to structures and permitted signs shall be architecturally and aesthetically compatible with the surrounding residential neighborhood. 
33.9.11. Buffer area: Adjacent to each property line there shall be a greenbelt having a minimum width of twenty (20) feet landscaped to provide effective buffering from adjoining properties, to the satisfaction of the commission. 
33.9.12. Exterior lighting: All exterior lighting, when required, shall be located and arranged so as not to cause off-site glare and shall be compatible with the surrounding neighborhood. 
33.9.13. Other: The commission may impose such other controls and restrictions as it deems necessary to protect adjacent properties and assure compatibility with the surrounding residential neighborhood. 
    33.10. Conditional Approval: Approval of an application for a special exception under this section shall constitute approval conditional upon completion of the proposed development, in accordance with plans as approved, within a period of two (2) years after approval is given. Approval of the application shall become null and void in the event of failure to complete the proposed development within the two-year period. One (1) extension of such period for an additional period not to exceed one (1) year may be granted by the planning and zoning commission after public hearing for good cause shown. All special exceptions may be granted subject to appropriate conditions and safeguards necessary to conserve the public health, safety, convenience, welfare and property values in the neighborhood. 
    33.11. Single-Family Residential Developments: Applications for single-family residential developments consisting of not more than six (6) single detached dwellings for one (1) family shall conform to the following additional standards: 
33.11.1. Lot area and shape: Each such single-family residential development shall be located on a lot having a minimum area of six (6) acres with a minimum lot frontage of one hundred fifty (150) feet on a street, which lot shall also be of such shape that a square with two hundred fifty (250) feet on each side will fit on the lot. 
33.11.2. Development density: Each such lot shall contain an area of not less than sixty thousand (60,000) square feet for each dwelling, and for purposes of computing the allowable number of dwellings, the area of ponds, marshes and other wetlands and areas with a natural slope in excess of forty (40) percent shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the required lot area. 
33.11.3. Utilities: All dwellings shall be served by public water supply and the public sanitary sewer system, when such are available in reasonable proximity to the lot. The commission may, at its discretion, permit individual or combined on-site systems, only when approved by the Valley Health District and other regulatory agency. 
33.11.4. Setbacks: All dwellings and other structures shall be setback not less than fifty (50) feet from any property line or street line and such required setback area shall be preserved in its natural state, except for permitted grading and access drives. 
33.11.5. Parking: A minimum of two (2) off-street parking spaces shall be provided for and located at each dwelling, at least one (1) of which shall be located within an enclosed garage. Appropriate visitor parking shall be provided. Not more than four (4) parking spaces shall be centralized at any one (1) location. Other than private, passenger vehicles in everyday use, any open parking and/or storage of campers, mobile homes, boats and trailers or any other recreational vehicles shall be located to the rear of the rear building line of the principle [principal] structure and screened from view of adjoining dwellings, unless otherwise approved by the commission. 
33.11.6. Private access drives: Such single-family residential development may be served by a private, paved access drive having a minimum width of twenty (20) feet and adequate in thickness to accommodate fire and other similar, emergency apparatus. Pavement shall consist of dense graded bituminous concrete not less than two and one-half (21/2) inches in depth after rolling, placed on a gravel base having a minimum depth of eight (8) inches after compaction. Vertical and horizontal geometry shall be subject to the approval of the commission. The maximum gradient shall not exceed twelve (12) percent, except that under unique circumstances involving exceptionally difficult topography, the commission may permit limited portions of said access drive to have a gradient of up to fourteen (14) percent. 
33.11.7. Bond: The applicant shall, as a condition of approval, post a performance bond with surety satisfactory to the commission and in amount sufficient, as approved by the commission, to assure completion of the common elements, including access drives, parking areas, sidewalks, storm drainage, utility services, general site landscaping and other essential site improvements, in accordance with the application as approved. 
Section 34. - Planned development districts. 
    34.1. Purpose: Planned development districts may be established by the commission within a special development area delineated on the zoning map and in accordance with the procedures hereinafter specified. The provisions of this section are designed to permit modification of the strict application of the standards and provisions of these regulations to accomplish the purposes set forth below. A planned development district may be established by the commission when found necessary and appropriate for the following purposes: 
34.1.1. To permit tracts of land to be developed, redeveloped and improved as a harmonious design unit of stable character, consistent with the character of the town and the long range improvement of the neighborhood and consistent with any comprehensive plan of development adopted by the commission for the special development area, when such tracts are of sufficient size to accommodate such design units and when another zoning district could not be appropriately established to accomplish such purposes. 
34.1.2. To permit the use of land, buildings and other structures for purposes that would be beneficial to and consistent with the character of the town and the long range improvement of the neighborhood and consistent with any comprehensive plan of development adopted by the commission for the special development area, when such uses are located on tracts of sufficient size to accommodate harmonious design of buildings, structures and facilities in connection with the use and when another zoning district could not be appropriately established to accomplish such purposes. 
    34.2. Size: The tract of land for which application is made for the establishment of a planned development district must contain an area of not less than sixty thousand (60,000) square feet. 
    34.3. Building Height: Buildings and other structures shall not exceed a height of sixty (60) feet, except that the commission may permit a greater height if (i) such building or other structure shall be located within an area which is primarily devoted to or zoned for industrial and commercial development, (ii) such greater height shall result in the preservation of more open space on the tract than would otherwise be available, and (iii) topography of the tract on which such building or structure is located, the location thereof on such tract, and the nature thereof are appropriate to accommodate such greater height. 
    34.4. Informal consideration: The commission recommends that, prior to the submission of a formal application for approval of a planned development district, the applicant review with the commission and its staff in a preliminary and informal manner any proposal for a planned development district. The commission recommends that the preliminary plans meet the requirements of a basic development plan under paragraph 34.5.2 and that four (4) copies be submitted. The commission or its staff may request that the applicant submit such additional information as may lead to a rendering of a nonbinding opinion by the commission. 
    34.5. Petition: A petition for the establishment of a planned development district shall be submitted to the commission in writing, shall be signed by the owner or owners of all parcels within the proposed district and shall be accompanied by the following: 
34.5.1. Statement: A written statement specifying in detail the particular provisions of these regulations which are proposed to be modified and the special or additional provisions which are proposed to be applicable to the use of land, buildings and other structures, the location and bulk of buildings and other structures and the area, shape, and frontage of lots within the district; ten (10) copies shall be submitted. 
34.5.2. Basic development plans: A basic development plan for the proposed development, including property maps, site plans, architectural plans and other drawings as relevant in sufficient detail to show the existing conditions and improvements proposed to be erected on the site, the open spaces to be provided, the nature and location of the proposed use or uses, the relationship of the proposed development to surrounding properties and other pertinent information. Six (6) blue line or black line prints shall be submitted. Plans where applicable shall be prepared and certified by an architect and/or professional civil engineer licensed to practice in the State of Connecticut and shall include the following information: 
34.5.2a. Location and size of property, including a boundary map with an accuracy meeting or exceeding standards for a "Class A-2 Transit Survey" as defined by the Connecticut Technical Council, Inc., which map is to show the precise boundaries of the proposed district, as well as existing zoning boundaries and the boundaries of any officially designated wetland areas; 
34.5.2b. Present and proposed land uses and the acreage of each use, as well as existing and future land uses in the surrounding area; 
34.5.2c. Present and proposed buildings and structures including use, dimensions and locations of each; 
34.5.2d. Proposed vehicular and pedestrian circulation patterns including locations and dimensions of private and public streets and common drives, pedestrian walkways, malls and other public and private paths; 
34.5.2e. Location of proposed off-street parking facilities with dimensions, including location, size and number of parking spaces, access drives and walkways; 
34.5.2f. Proposed open area such as parks, lawn areas, and recreational facilities; 
34.5.2g. Existing and proposed landscaping treatment, including major tree areas, water bodies and related treatment of open space areas, screening, and existing and proposed topography; 
34.5.2h. Utility information including water supply, sewage disposal, storm drainage, including capacity of water courses and the additional flow being produced, electrical service and exterior lighting; 
34.5.2i. A location map showing the site's situation within the town's circulation system and all streets and intersections within one thousand (1,000) feet of the site; 
34.5.2j. Preliminary architectural plans including generalized floor plans, exterior elevations, perspective drawings and descriptive information on types of building materials and exterior finishes; 
34.5.2k. Any additional information which the commission may reasonably require or the applicant may wish to submit, including such items as a traffic study, storm drainage and flooding report; soils and geology map, marketability study, project model, covenants and/or easements related to public access rights, legal information related to disposition, ownership and maintenance of community facilities and open space, bonding to insure completion of essential site improvements and community elements, and schedules of development phases. 
34.5.3. Fee: A petition fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) at time of application, plus an additional fee of ten cents ($0.10) for each thousand of estimated cost of buildings, structures and/or improvements, at submission of detailed development plans. 
    34.6. Procedures: After receipt of a complete petition for the establishment of a planned development district, the commission shall review the petition and during his review may hold meetings with the petitioner and request additional information; the commission shall hold a public hearing on a petition in the same manner and with the same notice as required for amendment of these regulations. The commission may request the following information for presentation prior to or at the public hearing: 
a.  Evidence from the sewer authority that sewers are available to the project for tie-in and that the sewer lines, sewage treatment plant and related appurtenances have the capacity for the projected volumes; 
b.  A statement from the Valley Regional Health District on the adequacy of solid waste disposal and, if no public sewers are available, the adequacy of private sewage disposal systems; 
c.  A statement from the police commission that the proposal will not cause any undue traffic hazards; 
d.  A statement from the fire marshal that the proposal meets fire safety standards and concerning the firefighting feasibility of the proposed plan; 
e.  A statement from the town engineer in reference to the adequacy of the basic drainage, public street design and the design of elements to be served by the public works department of the town; 
f.  A statement from any other municipal department or advisory committee whose opinion is deemed appropriate by the commission. 
After the public hearing, the Commission may disapprove or give approval to the Basic Development Plans or approval subject to modifications, only after the Commission makes the findings set forth under Paragraph 34.8 below, in addition to other findings necessary for amendment of these Regulations. Approval of the Basic Development Plans shall not constitute final approval of the Planned Development District and shall simply authorize the submission of Detailed Development Plans setting forth in detail the specifics of the proposed development and showing and modifications specified by the Commission. If the Detailed Development Plans are approved by the Commission, the Planned Development District shall be considered established and these Zoning Regulations and Zoning Map shall be considered to be modified to permit the establishment of the development as approved. The approved Planned Development District shall be shown on the Zoning Map with a reference to the records of the Commission where the approved standards and plans may be seen. If the petition is approved, the Commission shall give notice of such approval in the same manner as required for the amendment of these Regulations. 
    34.7. Detailed Development Plans: Detailed development plans shall be submitted in conformance with and including all the information required by the approved basic development plans. Such detailed development plans may be submitted in stages, provided that such stages encompass not less than the minimum required tract size and include all those public amenities and features used as a public protection for the surrounding area. Such stages shall be capable of complete and self-sufficient existence without the completion of the remaining stages; six (6) copies of all detailed plans shall be submitted and shall include at least the following: 
a.  Site plan, containing detailed layout information related to all site plan proposals contained in the Basic Development Plans, plus an additional, schematic layout of building, drives and parking areas at a scale of 1: = 100': 
b.  Building plans, encompassing the architectural information developed in the basic development plans; 
c.  Landscaping plans, presenting in detail the landscaping treatments and open space proposals contained in the basic development plans; 
d.  Engineering plans, presenting the detail designs and information supporting all the engineering elements of the basic development plans. 
Approval of the detailed development plans shall be noted on said plans, which shall then be signed by the chairman of the planning and zoning commission, with the date of approval indicated on the plans. A complete copy of the approved, signed plans shall be recorded in the office of the Shelton City-Town Clerk. 
    34.8. Findings Required: The commission may adopt the planned development district thereby amending these regulations and the zoning map, only after the commission makes the following findings in addition to other findings necessary for the amendment of these regulations: 
a.  The planned development district and the standards and basic development plans applicable therein will accomplish the purpose set forth in paragraph 34.1; 
b.  Another zoning district could not be appropriately established to accomplish such purposes; 
c.  The planned development district and the standards and basic development plans applicable therein will be consistent with any comprehensive plan of development adopted by the commission for the special development area; 
d.  The planned development district encompasses a tract of land of not less than sixty thousand (60,000) square feet; 
e.  The petitioner has provided, where appropriate, for the continued maintenance of the development in general, including those open space and recreational areas not dedicated for general public use; 
f.  The streets and drives will be suitable and adequate to accommodate anticipated traffic and projected development intensity will not generate traffic in such amounts as to overload the street system in the area; 
g.  The existing and proposed utility services are adequate for the proposed development and the utilities and drainage have been so arranged as to not overburden the capacity of the facilities connected therewith. 
    34.9. Bonds: The petitioner shall file with the commission a performance bond, in form, amount and surety approved by the commission, to guarantee the faithful performance of the site improvements work to be undertaken within the public rights-of-way, unless said improvements are bonded under the provision of the Shelton Subdivision Regulations, and including driveway connections, sanitary sewer and water supply facilities, storm drainage and pollution control facilities, landscaping and other essential site improvements. 
    34.10. Certificate for Zoning Compliance: Prior to the issuance of any certificate of zoning compliance to permit any occupancy of the development before final acceptance, the developer shall file with the commission a performance bond, in form, amount and surety approved by the commission, to guarantee the provision of all facilities common to the entire development, including but not limited to private roads, buffer strips, walkways, recreational facilities, club houses and other common areas. Said bond shall be constituted upon completion of said common facilities within one (1) year of the date of approval of the first such certificate of zoning compliance, except that the commission may extend the time of completion for an additional period not to exceed one (1) year after public hearing for good cause shown. 
    34.11. Additional Limitations: Adoption of a planned development district by the commission shall constitute authorization to establish the uses, buildings, structures and site development in accordance with the standards and detailed development plans adopted by the commission for the district and in accordance with detailed specifications approved by the commission. The development authorized by the commission shall be completed within five (5) years from the effective date of the district, except that the commission may extend the time for completion for one year periods after public hearing for good cause demonstrated to the satisfaction of the commission; otherwise the commission shall be deemed authorized by the owner or owners of land within the district to amend these regulations and the zoning map, deleting the planned development district and establishing for such land the provisions of another zoning district. 
Section 35. - Planned residence district (P.R.D.) 
    35.1. General: The planned residence district (P.R.D.) is a class of district in addition to an overlapping the residence R-1A and R-1 districts. P.R.D.'s may be established from time to time by the commission and delineated on the building zone map upon petition by the owner of property and after due notice and public hearing as required by law for amendment of these regulations. 
    35.2. Purpose: The P.R.D. is made part of the comprehensive plan of zoning for the purpose of authorizing residential development that is consolidated or grouped in such a manner as to preserve significant open space and conservation areas, encourage provision of central water supply and sewage disposal systems and provide for a choice in dwelling types within the city. Such residential development may consist of single family dwellings or multiple dwellings or combinations thereof. It is recognized that there are large tracts of land within the residence R-1 district characterized by conservation and open space resources, appropriate soil conditions, with proximity to central water supply and sewage disposal facilities and with suitable location and access within the city, which are capable of accommodating such consolidated residential development. The procedures and standards hereinafter specified are necessary in order to delineate P.R.D.'s that will be in accord with the comprehensive plan of zoning. 
    35.3. Informal Consideration: The commission recommends that, prior to the submission of a formal petition, the petitioners review with the commission and its staff, in a preliminary and informal manner, any proposal for a P.R.D. The commission recommends that preliminary plans include appropriate existing conditions information as well as tentative proposals for street layout, development areas and open space reservations. The commission, at its discretion, may or may not render a nonbinding opinion. 
    35.4. Petition: A petition requesting an amendment of the building zone map for the purpose of establishing a P.R.D. within the residence R-1A or R-1 district, may be filed with the commission in accordance with the provisions of section 51 and this section. The petition shall be signed by the owner or owners of all properties within the proposed P.R.D. and shall be accompanied by six (6) copies of each of the following: 
35.4.1. Boundary: A map and a metes and bounds description of the boundary of the proposed P.R.D. as specified in paragraph 51.1.2. 
35.4.2. Existing condition map: A map or maps of the entire area of the proposed P.R.D. at a scale of not less than one hundred (100) feet to the inch, showing no less than the following: 
a.  Existing contours at a maximum interval of two (2) feet; 
b.  Existing natural soils, confirmed by field samples and tests, in accordance with the classifications of the National Cooperative Soils Survey of the Soil Conservation Service of the U.S. Department of Agriculture; and 
c.  Large trees, wooded areas, ledge outcroppings, significant open space and conservation features, historic sites, trails, existing buildings and other structures and wetlands and watercourses as defined in Public Act Number 155 of 1972 and Public Act Number 73-571 respectively, of the Connecticut General Assembly. 
35.4.3. Preliminary conventional subdivision: A preliminary subdivision plan of all land within the proposed P.R.D., meeting all of the requirements of the subdivision regulations of the City of Shelton including provisions for open space and showing a conventional layout of lots for single-family dwellings in accordance with the appropriate residence R-1A or R-1 district standards, as applicable to the subject P.R.D. 
35.4.4. Consolidated land use plan: A consolidated land use plan for land within the proposed P.R.D., at a scale of not less than one hundred (100) feet to the inch, showing the following: 
a.  Those areas of the P.R.D. proposed to be used for individual lots for single-family dwellings specifying the maximum number of such lots; 
b.  Those areas of the P.R.D. proposed to be used for detached single-family dwellings not on individual lots and a specific maximum number of such dwellings by the number of bedrooms in each; 
c.  Those areas of the P.R.D. proposed to be used for multiple dwellings consisting of two (2) or more dwelling units and a specific maximum number of such dwelling units by the number of bedrooms in each; 
d.  Those areas of the P.R.D. proposed to be reserved as open space; and 
e.  A tentative layout of streets proposed to serve the plan. 
35.4.5. Engineering report: A report, prepared by a licensed engineer evaluating storm drainage facilities, sewage disposal and water supply and specifying the manner in which they will be provided, as well as an evaluation of any significant constraints with respect to soils, flooding and erosion, topography or other physical circumstances. 
    35.5. Standards and Criteria: The standards and criteria hereinafter set forth are applicable to the establishment of a P.R.D. and are in addition to those factors normally considered by the commission in the delineation of any zoning district; 
35.5.1. Area of P.R.D.: The P.R.D. shall encompass no less than twenty (20) acres of substantially vacant land. A lesser area may be considered by the commission if the P.R.D. adjoins another P.R.D. or if the proposed open space reservation within the P.R.D. consists of ten (10) acres or more or will be adjunct to existing permanently reserved open space outside the P.R.D. 
35.5.2. Development density: The established density-base of the P.R.D. shall be the number of individual lots for single-family dwellings shown on the preliminary conventional subdivision plan submitted under paragraph 35.4.3 and determined by the commission to represent a reasonable subdivision of land within the P.R.D. The maximum dwelling and dwelling unit shall not exceed the density which the water supply and sewage disposal facilities are capable of supporting and shall not exceed the following, whichever is less: 
a.  For P.R.D. consisting entirely of individual lots for single-family dwellings served only by public water supply, one and one times the established density base of the P.R.D. 
b.  For P.R.D. consisting entirely of individual lots for single-family dwellings served by both public water supply and municipal sanitary sewers, one and two (1.2) times the established density base of the P.R.D. 
c.  For P.R.D. consisting of single-and two-family dwellings not on individual lots and served by both public water and municipal sanitary sewers, one and three (1.3) times the established density base of the P.R.D. 
d.  For P.R.D. consisting entirely of multiple dwellings containing three (3) or more dwelling units which units contain three (3) or more bedrooms, two (2) times the established density base of the P.R.D. 
e.  For P.R.D. consisting entirely of multiple dwellings containing three (3) or more dwelling units, which units contain one (1) or two (2) bedrooms, three and one-half (3.5) [times the] established density base of the P.R.D. 
f.  For a P.R.D. consisting of any combination of the above, the sum of the proportionate parts shall not exceed the established density base as calculated according to the following formula where (a) through (e) refer to the number of each of the dwelling unit types enumerated above: 
Established Density Base = a/1.1 + b/1.2 + c/1.3 + d/2.0 + e/3.5 
35.5.3. Water supply: Each building lot and all dwellings shall be served by public water supply. In unusual circumstances where extension of public water supply to one (1) or more remote or isolated single-family lots is deemed infeasible or impractical, the commission may require those lots to be deducted from the established density base and permit them and the dwellings thereon to be served by an adequate onsite source, subject to the approval of the Valley Regional Health District. 
35.5.4. Sewage disposal: Where practicable, the P.R.D. shall be served by extension of the Shelton municipal sanitary sewer system. At minimum, all dwellings containing two (2) or more dwelling units shall be served by said sanitary sewer system. 
35.5.5. Open space: The P.R.D. shall result in the permanent reservation of significant and desirable land for open space and conservation purposes with reasonable access, shape, dimension, character and location. Notwithstanding the potential development density allowable under [paragraph] 35.5.2 above, the minimum area of permanently reserved open space shall be not less than fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet times the established density base as determined under paragraph 35.5.2. In lieu of fee conveyance of said open space, the commission may require the conveyance of development rights to the city to preclude any possible future development of said open space. 
    35.6. Procedures: When the commission is satisfied that a complete petition has been filed, the commission shall hold a public hearing in the same manner and with the same notice as required for amendment of these regulations, shall decide thereon and shall give notice of its decision as required by law. If the proposed P.R.D. is adopted by the commission and made part of the building zone map, such adoption shall incorporate within the P.R.D., as specific restrictions, the following: 
35.6.1. The consolidated land use plan, for the purpose of identifying and specifying areas to be used for individual lots for single-family dwellings, areas to be used for single and multiple dwellings consisting of two (2) or more dwelling units and areas of reserved open space; 
35.6.2. The maximum number of individual lots for single-family dwellings, the maximum number of single-family dwellings not on individual lots and the maximum number of multiple dwelling units by number of bedrooms in said multiple dwellings. The total resulting dwelling units shall not exceed the maximum dwelling unit density as determined under paragraph 35.5.2; 
35.6.3. The minimum area of permanently reserved open space specified in paragraph 35.5.5. 
    35.7. Development Plan and Standards: After adoption of any P.R.D. by the commission, the commission is authorized to approve plans for the development of such P.R.D. or some portion thereof, in accordance with the standards hereinafter specified, provided such approval shall be effective after the effective date of the P.R.D. 
35.7.1. Lots for single-family dwellings: Individual lots for single-family dwellings may be established by subdivision of land in accordance with the standards and procedures of the subdivision regulations of the City of Shelton. 
a.  Lots served by public water supply only shall contain an area of not less than thirty thousand (30,000) square feet, shall have a frontage of one hundred ten (110) feet or more on a street, shall be of such shape that a square with one hundred thirty (130) feet on each side will fit on the lot with some portion of such square extending to or within the required setback area, and shall provide for a minimum setback of twenty (20) feet from any line other than a street or rear property line. 
b.  Lots served by both public water supply and municipal sanitary sewers shall contain an area of not less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet, shall have a frontage of ninety (90) feet or more on a street, shall be of such shape that a square with one hundred ten (110) feet on each side will fit on the lot with some portion of such square extending to or within the required street setback area, and shall provide for a minimum setback of twenty (20) feet from any line other than a street or rear property line. 
35.7.2. Single-family and multiple dwellings: Other single-family dwellings not on individual lots and multiple dwellings consisting of two (2) or more dwelling units may be approved by the commission subject to administrative approval of a site plan therefor in accordance with section 31. 
35.7.3. Open space: In connection with approvals under paragraph 35.7.1 and/or 35.7.2, at least the proportionate portion of the total minimum required area of open space specified under paragraph 35.5.5 shall be permanently reserved, with provision made for the retention and preservation of the land by means of ownership, operation and maintenance suitable to support the open space as approved by the commission. 
35.7.4. Consolidated land use plan: The individual lots for single dwellings, other single-family dwellings not on individual lots, multiple dwellings and the reserved open space land shall be located in the areas specified on the consolidated land use plan adopted by the commission as part of the P.R.D. under paragraph 35.6.1. 
Sections 36-40. - Reserved. 
CHAPTER IV. - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 

Section 41. - Nonconformity. 
    41.1. General: Any use of land, buildings and other structures and any building or other structure, lawfully existing on the effective date of these regulations or any amendment hereto, and which does not conform to one (1) or more of the provisions of these regulations, may be continued in accordance with the following provisions hereinafter specified. 
    41.2. Enlargement: No nonconforming use, building or structure shall be enlarged and no nonconforming use of land, buildings or other structures shall be extended to include any land, building or other structure, or portion thereof, which is not subject to such nonconformity. Any nonconforming use of a building or other structure, or portion thereof, however, may be extended to include any portion of the building or structure manifestly designed for such use. 
    41.3. Change in Use: No nonconforming use, building or other structure, if once changed to conform with these regulations, shall thereafter be changed so as to be nonconforming again. No nonconforming use, building or other structure, if once changed to more nearly conform with these regulations, shall thereafter be changed so as to be less conforming again. 
    41.4. New Use: No nonconforming use of land, buildings and other structures shall be changed to another use unless such new use is substantially the same in nature and purpose as the original nonconforming use or is a conforming use. 
    41.5. Discontinuance: No nonconforming use of land, buildings or other structures which shall have been discontinued for a continuous period of one (1) year and thereafter be resumed or be replaced by any other nonconforming use. 
    41.6. Repair: Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit work on any nonconforming building or structure when required by law to protect the public health or safety, provided that such work does not increase the nonconformity. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit work on ordinary repair and maintenance of a nonconforming building or structure or replacement of existing materials with similar materials. 
    41.7. Casualty: Nothing in these regulations shall prevent the restoration or reconstruction of a building or other structure damaged or destroyed by fire or other casualty, provided that such restoration does not extend the nonconformity and is commenced with eight (8) months after the date of the fire or other casualty and is completed within two (2) years after such date, which periods may be extended by the zoning board of appeals for good cause shown. 
    41.8. Title: No change of title, possession or right of possession shall be deemed to affect the right to continue a nonconforming use, building or other structure. 
    41.9. Lots: Nothing in these regulations shall prevent the construction, enlargement, extension or structural alteration of a building or other structure on or the use of a lot, as defined in section 5, which does not conform to the area, shape and frontage requirements of these regulations, subject to the following standards and conditions: 
41.9.1. The use, building or other structure shall conform to all other requirements of these regulations. 
41.9.2. The use shall not be a use for which a special exception is required in Schedule A. 
41.9.3. The lot shall have a frontage of twenty (20) feet or more on a street as defined in paragraph 5.17 or on a street approved by the board of aldermen under the provisions of an ordinance entitled "An Ordinance Regulating the Issuance of Building Permits for the Erection of Buildings or Structures on Unaccepted Highways or Streets." 
41.9.4. If used for a dwelling, the lot shall contain the minimum area required per dwelling unit, but the lot may be used for a single detached dwelling for one (1) family, provided that the lot has a minimum area of five thousand (5,000) square feet and is served by sanitary sewers or has a minimum area of ten thousand (10,000) square feet if not served by sanitary sewers. 
    41.10. Trailers and Trailer Parks: Any trailer lawfully existing on the effective date of this paragraph and used or occupied as a dwelling may continue to be so used or occupied but may not be replaced by a new trailer, unless located in a trailer park that complies with the provisions of this paragraph and any applicable ordinances of the City of Shelton. Any trailer parks lawfully existing on the effective date of this paragraph are deemed to be nonconforming and may be continued only in compliance with all applicable ordinances of the City of Shelton and subject to the following provisions and requirements: 
41.10.1. Within sixty (60) days after the effective date of this paragraph, any person operating a trailer park shall submit to the planning and zoning commission a request for approval of the nonconforming status of said trailer park. Such request for approval shall include the following: 
a.  Name and address of applicant and name and address of property owner or other person, in interest, if other than applicant. 
b.  A plot plan drawn to scale, showing the size of the trailer park, roads within the park, size, shape and identification number of the prepared and usable trailer sites and supporting facilities. The plot plan shall include only those trailer sites which are deemed to be prepared and usable, abutting on an improved access road and served by an adequate, piped central water supply system. 
c.  A signed statement from the Lower Naugatuck Valley District Public Health Department or its successor, certifying that satisfactory provision has been made for water supply, sewage disposal and refuse collection for all prepared and usable trailer sites. 
d.  Proof of ownership, option or valid lease. 
e.  Fee of fifty dollars ($50.00). 
Upon the approval by the planning and zoning commission, the applicant shall submit for the commission's information related to the occupancy of each trailer site, by site identification number, including full name of trailer owner, make, model, size and year of trailer, state in which registered, date the lot number was rented, if within past twelve (12) months, and date trailer was removed from lot number, if within past twelve (12) months. 
Failure to comply with the requirements of this paragraph shall be deemed a violation of these regulations and the trailer park shall be discontinued until the requirements are met. 
41.10.2. A person may submit to the planning and zoning commission an application to rearrange and/or expand an existing trailer park. In addition to the requirements set forth in [paragraph] 41.10.1 above, a detailed site plan shall be submitted in accordance with the following provisions, requirements and site development standards; said plan shall be prepared by a registered, professional engineer at a scale of not less than one (1) inch equal to forty (40) feet: 
a.  All proposed improvements and site requirements shall apply to the entire trailer park, including all existing trailer sites. 
b.  The density of the trailer park shall be such as to prevent overcrowding of the land and to provide light, ventilation and open areas for each trailer. Based upon the gross area of the park, the number of individual trailer sites shall not exceed eight (8) per gross acre. The minimum area of any trailer site shall be not less than three thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet with no dimension less than forty (40) feet. The maximum total number of trailer sites in any trailer park shall not exceed one hundred fifty (150) sites. 
c.  Each trailer site shall be defined by permanent corner displaying the lot number corresponding with any plot plan on file with the town clerk. 
d.  There shall be a minimum twenty (20) feet of clearance between each trailer. 
e.  All trailer sites shall have a minimum frontage of twenty-five (25) feet on a roadway of not less than twenty-four (24) feet in width. 
f.  At least two (2) paved, off-street parking spaces shall be provided per trailer site. 
g.  The park shall be graded and drained to insure adequate removal of surface and subsurface water. All roads in the park shall be paved, drained and maintained in good condition. 
h.  No trailer shall be located closer than fifty (50) feet from any street line and no closer than one hundred (100) feet from any other property line. 
i.  Along and adjacent to all property lines, a strip of land not less than fifty (50) feet in width shall be left in its natural state, if already wooded, or shall be landscaped with evergreen trees planted to grow into a dense, evergreen buffer strip within five (5) years. 
j.  The individual sites and the park shall comply with all other requirements of the State Building Code on Mobile Homes. 
41.10.3. A person may submit to the planning and zoning commission an application to relocate an existing trailer park to another site. Said application shall be processed as a special exception in accordance with the requirements and procedures set forth in section 33. In addition, the detailed site plan for the proposed park shall be prepared by a registered professional engineer drawn at a scale of not less than forty (40) feet to the inch, and conforming to all of the provisions, requirements and standards set forth in paragraph 41.10.2 above. 
    41.11. Sand and Gravel Removal: Any use involving the excavation, or removal from any lot, of earth, loam, topsoil, sand, gravel, clay or stone and lawfully existing on the effective date of this paragraph may be continued, provided that within one (1) year after such effective date, a temporary special exception for such excavation or removal shall have been secured from the planning and zoning commission in accordance with all of the requirements of section 32 of these regulations. Failure to comply with the requirements to secure a temporary special exception within the one-year period shall be deemed a violation of these regulations and the excavation or removal shall thereafter be discontinued. The one-year deadline, however, shall not become effective until the planning and zoning commission has published a notice of such deadline in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least sixty (60) days in advance of the end of the one-year period or in advance of a later date set forth in the notice. The provisions of this paragraph shall not apply to excavation or removal operations specified in paragraph 32.2, as excluded from the provisions of section 32. 
    41.12. Elimination or Modification: Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit the elimination of a nonconformity. Subject to the provisions of paragraph 41.4, any nonconforming use, building or other structure may be modified so as to be less nonconforming provided that all other requirements of these regulations are met. 
Section 42. - Off-street parking and loading. 
    42.1. General: All off-street parking spaces shall conform to the standards hereinafter specified. For any permitted use of premises hereafter established, parking spaces and loading spaces shall be provided off the street for any use of land, buildings and other structures in accordance with the standards hereinafter specified. Any use already existing shall conform to these standards to the extent that it conforms at the time of adoption of these regulations. Off-street parking and loading spaces required to be provided by this section shall be permanently maintained and made available for occupancy in connection with and for the full duration of the use of land, buildings and other structures for which such spaces are herein required, if any existing use of land, building or other structure is changed to a use requiring additional off-street parking and loading spaces to comply with this section, the additional spaces shall be provided for the new use in accordance with the standards hereinafter specified. Any existing use which does not conform to the standards of this section shall not be changed to a use which would need additional off-street parking and loading spaces to comply with the standards herein, unless off-street parking and loading spaces are provided for such new use as required by this section. 
    42.2. Definitions. For the purpose of this section, one (1) parking space shall constitute an area with such shape, vertical clearance, access and slope as to accommodate one (1) automobile having an overall length of eighteen (18) feet and shall contain an area of one hundred eighty (180) square feet, except that the minimum area may be reduced to one hundred sixty (160) square feet for spaces located in or on a building or structure; one (1) loading space shall constitute an area twelve (12) feet in width and thirty (30) feet in length with a vertical clearance of fifteen (15) feet with such shape, access and slope as to accommodate one (1) truck having an overall length of thirty (30) feet. 
    42.3. Design Standard: Except for parking spaces provided in connection with a dwelling containing one (1) or two (2) dwelling units, an office in a dwelling, rooms to let in a dwelling and motor vehicle service stations and repair garages, each parking space shall be provided with adequate area for approach, turning and exit of an automobile having an overall length of eighteen (18) feet without need to use any part of a public street right-of-way. Points of entrance and exit for driveways onto the street shall be located so as to minimize hazards to pedestrian and vehicular traffic in the street. No off-street loading space, including any truck loading bay, ramp or dock, shall be designed or arranged in a manner that trucks must use any part of a public street right-of-way to back into such space. In residence districts the aggregate lot coverage of all buildings, other structures and off-street parking and loading spaces, including driveways, shall not exceed sixty (60) percent of the area of the lot. 
    42.4. Construction: All off-street parking and loading spaces shall be suitably improved, graded, stabilized and maintained so as to cause no nuisance or danger from dust or from storm water flow onto any public street. Except for necessary driveway entrances and except for parking spaces provided in connection with a dwelling, an office in a dwelling and rooms to let in a dwelling, all off-street parking and loading spaces located within ten (10) feet of any street line shall be separated from such right-of-way by a concrete curb, a fence or a wall or by an embankment not less than twenty-four (24) inches in height and shall be provided with the curb, fence, wall barrier or embankment in such a manner that cars will not overhang the street line. 
    42.5. Parking Space Standards: It is the purpose and intent of this section to assure that off-street parking spaces are provided to accommodate the automobiles of all persons normally using or visiting a use building or other structure at any one (1) time. Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with the following minimum standards: 
42.5.1. Dwellings containing one (1) or two (2) dwelling units-One (1) space for each dwelling unit, and located on the same lot with the dwelling. 
42.5.2. Dwellings containing more than two (2) dwelling units-One and one-half (11/2) spaces for each dwelling unit, and located on the same lot with the dwelling. 
42.5.3. Churches, places of worship, theaters, assembly halls or stadium-One (1) space for each five (5) seats and located on a lot not more than five hundred (500) feet in a direct line from the building; if the building is located in a residence district such parking spaces shall be located on the same lot with the building. 
42.5.4. Hospitals, convalescent homes, sanitariums, homes for the aged, rest homes and similar facilities and rooms to let in a dwelling-One (1) space for each three (3) beds for patients or guests, plus one (1) additional space for each one and one-half (11/2) employees during the largest daily work shift, and located on the same lot with the building. 
42.5.5. Retail stores, business and professional offices, financial institutions and medical and dental clinics in other than commercial CA-3 districts-One (1) space for each one hundred fifty (150) square feet of ground floor area of the building and each three hundred (300) square feet of upper floor area, and located on a lot no more than three hundred (300) feet in a direct line from the building. 
42.5.6. Retail stores, business and professional offices, financial institutions and medical and dental clinics in commercial CA-3 districts-One (1) space for each two hundred (200) square feet of ground floor area of the building and each four hundred (400) square feet of upper floor area, and located on a lot not more than three hundred (300) feet in a direct line from the building. 
42.5.7. Motor vehicle service stations and repair garages and establishments for motor vehicle washing-Ten (10) spaces, and located on the same lot with the building. 
42.5.8 Undertaker's establishments-Fifteen (15) spaces, and located on a lot not more than three hundred (300) feet in a direct line from the building. 
42.5.9 Hotels and motels-One (1) space for each sleeping room, and located on the same lot with the building. 
42.5.10 Restaurants, taverns, bars, nightclubs and dance halls in other than commercial CA-3 districts-One (1) space for each seventy-five (75) square feet of patron floor area, and located on a lot not more than three hundred (300) feet in a direct line from the building. 
42.5.11 Restaurants, taverns, bars, nightclubs and dance halls in commercial CA-3 districts-One (1) space for each one hundred (100) square feet of patron floor area, and located on a lot not more than three hundred (300) feet in a direct line from the building. 
42.5.12 Warehouses, wholesale businesses, trucking terminals, contractor's businesses, research laboratories, office buildings and establishments for the manufacture, processing or assembling of goods in other than industrial IB-2 districts-One (1) space for each one and one-half (11/2) employees during the largest daily work shift period and located on a lot not more than five hundred (500) feet in a direct line from the building. 
42.5.13 Warehouses, wholesale businesses, trucking terminals, contractor's businesses, research laboratories, office buildings and establishments for the manufacture, processing or assembling of goods in industrial IB-2 districts-One (1) space for each four (4) employees during the largest daily work shift period and located on a lot not more than five hundred (500) feet in a direct line from the building. 
42.5.14 Bowling alleys-Five (5) spaces for each alley and located on a lot not more than three hundred (300) feet in a direct line from the building. 
42.5.15 Other uses-Sufficient parking spaces shall be provided in connection with any use not listed in paragraphs 42.5.1 through 42.5.15 to preserve the purpose and intent of this section. 
    42.6 Loading Space Standards: Each hospital, hotel, motel, retail store building, undertaker's establishment, restaurant, tavern, bar, nightclub, warehouse, wholesale business, trucking terminal, contractor's business, research laboratory and establishment for the manufacture, processing or assembling of goods, having a ground floor area in excess of four thousand (4,000) square feet, shall have one (1) off-street loading space for each forty thousand (40,000) square feet of gross floor area or fraction thereof, excluding basements. 
    42.7 Classification of Uses: Whenever two (2) or more classifications provided in paragraph 42.5 shall apply to a use of land, buildings or other structures, the standard requiring the larger number of parking spaces shall apply, but where separate parts of a building or structure are used for purposes requiring a different number of parking spaces, the number of required spaces shall be determined by adding the number of spaces required for each type of use. 
    42.8 Joint Use: Joint parking areas and loading spaces may be established by the owners of separate lots in order to provide the total number of off-street parking and loading spaces required. 
Section 43. - Performance standards. 
    43.1. General: The performance standards which follow shall apply to the use of land, buildings and other structures. 
    43.2. Dust, Dirt, Fly Ash and Smoke: No dust, dirt, fly ash or smoke shall be emitted into the air from any lot so as to endanger the public health and safety, to impair safety on or the value and reasonable use of any other lot or to constitute a critical source of air pollution. 
    43.3. Odors: No offensive odors shall be emitted into the air from any lot so as to impair the value and reasonable use of any other lot. 
    43.4. Gases and Fumes: No noxious, toxic or corrosive fumes or gases shall be emitted into the air from any lot so as to endanger the public health and safety or to impair safety on or the value and reasonable use of any other lot. 
    43.5. Wastes: No offensive wastes shall be discharged or dumped into any river, stream, water course, storm drain, pond, lake or swamp. 
    43.6. Danger: No material which is dangerous due to explosion, extreme fire hazard or radioactivity shall be used, stored, manufactured, processed or assembled except in accordance with applicable codes and regulations of the City of Shelton and State of Connecticut. 
    43.7. Noise: With the exception of time signals and noise necessarily involved in the construction or demolition of buildings and other structures, no noise which is objectionable due to volume, intermittence, beat frequency or shrillness shall be transmitted outside the lot where it originates. The following additional standards shall also apply in industrial IA-1 districts and light industrial park districts: 
43.7.1. Protection of residence districts: At no point on the boundary of any residence district during the hours from 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. shall any continuously radiating sound level, having its source in such districts, exceed the following decibels: 
Octave Band (Cycles per second) Maximum Sound Level (in decibels) 0 through 75 68 75 through 150 55 150 through 300 48 300 through 600 44 600 through 1200 40 1200 through 2400 36 2400 through 4800 32 4800 and up 30  
43.7.2. Protection of IA-1 and LIP districts: At no point within an industrial IA-1 district or light industrial park district during the hours from 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m., which point is nearer than one hundred twenty-five (125) from a property line or nearer than two hundred fifty (250) feet from a boundary of such districts, shall any continuously radiating sound level exceed the following decibels. 
43.7.3. Conflict: In the event of any conflict between the standards of paragraphs 43.7.1 and 43.7.2 during tests for noise level, the standards of paragraph 43.7.1 shall apply. 
43.7.4. Night operation: During the hours from 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. the noise level standards of paragraph 43.7.1 and 43.7.2 shall apply, less five (5) decibels. 
43.7.5. Periodic noise: For noise impulsive in character such as hammering or periodic in character such as hum, screech or continuous tone, the noise level standards of paragraphs 43.7.1 and 43.7.2 shall apply, less five (5) decibels. 
43.7.6. Period: For noise existing less than ten (10) percent of any one-hour period, the noise level standards of paragraphs 43.7.1 and 43.7.2 shall apply, plus five (5) decibels. 
43.7.7. Measurement: Noise levels shall be measured with a sound level or decibel meter and associated octave band analyzer that conform to current American Standards Association specifications. 
    43.8. Vibration: With the exception of vibration necessarily involved in the construction or demolition of buildings, no vibration shall be transmitted outside the lot where it originates so as to impair safety on or the value and reasonable use of any other lot. The following additional standards shall also apply in industrial IA-1 districts and light industrial park districts: 
43.8.1. IA-1 and LIP: At no point on the boundary of or within any residence district shall any vibration, transmitted from a lot in any industrial IA-1 district or light industrial park district, exceed .0002 inches at a frequency of fifteen (15) cycles per second or less, when measured by a seismograph of accepted standard manufacturer. 
    43.9. Glare: No offensive glare from lighting shall be transmitted so as to endanger public safety, or be transmitted into or within any residence district so as to impair the value and reasonable use of any lot other therein. 
    43.10. Radio Interference: No use of land, buildings or other structures on any lot shall create interference with radio or television reception on any other lot. 
    43.11. Continuing Standards: The performance standards set forth above shall be of continuing application. 
Section 44. - Signs. 
    44.1. General: No sign shall be established, constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, extended, moved or structurally altered until a certificate of zoning compliance therefor has been approved as for buildings and other structures. All signs shall conform to the provisions hereinafter specified. 
    44.2. Definitions: For the purpose of this section, the term "sign" shall include every sign, billboard, illustration, insignia, lettering, picture display, banner, pennant, flag or other device, however made, displayed, painted, supported or attached, intended for use for the purpose of advertisement, identification, publicity or notice, when located out-of-doors and visible from any street or from any lot other than the lot on which the sign is located. The term "sign" shall include continuous strip lighting and shall not include any flag, pennant or insignia of any governmental unit or nonprofit organization. 
    44.3. Standards for All Districts: Signs shall conform to the following standards applicable in all districts: 
44.3.1. Purpose: All signs shall pertain only to goods sold, services rendered and establishments, enterprises, activities, persons, organizations and facilities on the lot where the sign is located. 
44.3.2. Location: No sign shall be located within or hang over the right-of-way of any street, except that a sign attached to a building may project into such right-of-way. 
44.3.3. Projecting and hanging signs: No sign shall project over or hang over any sidewalk, driveway, walkway, roadway or accessway, except that signs attached to the wall of a building may thus project not more than fifteen (15) inches therefrom. 
44.3.4. Obstructions: No sign shall be located or maintained so as to be a hazard to traffic or pedestrians, to obstruct any door, window, ventilation system or fire escape or exit or to cause any other hazard to the public health or safety. 
44.3.5. Light and motion: No flashing, revolving or moving signs or continuous strip lighting shall be permitted. All lighting of signs in residence districts shall be indirect with the source of illumination not visible from any street or from any lot other than the lot on which the sign is located. 
    44.4. Residence Districts: In addition to the standards specified in paragraph 44.3, signs in residence districts shall conform to the following standards: 
44.4.1. Purpose: Signs in residence districts shall be limited to the following: 
a.  On premises which are for sale or for rent, not more than two (2) signs which shall advertise only the premises, provided that each such sign shall have an area not exceeding six (6) square feet. 
b.  On any lot containing a farm, church, place of worship, parish hall, cemetery, museum, school, college, university, membership club, charitable institution, hospital, recreation facilities, nature preserve, wildlife sanctuary, convalescent home, sanitarium, public utility or buildings, uses and facilities of the City of Shelton, State of Connecticut or Federal Government, one (1) sign not exceeding sixteen (16) square feet in area. 
c.  Two (2) signs not exceeding three (3) square feet in area identifying the occupant of the lot. 
d.  Warning and traffic signs with no advertising thereon and not exceeding three (3) square feet in area, located and intended primarily for warning and traffic control purposes. 
44.4.2. Location: No sign in any residence district shall extend within less than ten (10) feet of any street line or property line except signs permitted under paragraphs 44.4.1(c) and 44.4.1(d). No sign shall be located on any roof, and no sign attached to a building shall project above the top of the wall of the building. Signs attached to buildings may project into the area required for setbacks provided that the sign does not project more than fifteen (15) inches from the building. 
44.4.3. Height: No ground sign shall exceed of a height of eight (8) feet. 
    44.5. Other Districts: In addition to the standards specified in paragraph 44.3, signs in other than residence districts shall conform to the following standards: 
44.5.1. Setbacks: Signs shall observe all setbacks required for buildings and other structures except as follows: 
a.  Signs permitted in residence districts under paragraphs 44.4.1(c) and 44.4.1(d). 
b.  Signs attached to buildings may project into the area required for setbacks provided that the sign does not project more than fifteen (15) inches from the building. 
c.  On any lot, one (1) sign may extend to within ten (10) feet of any street line provided that the sign does not exceed forty (40) square feet in area and more than eight (8) feet in any dimension. 
44.5.2. Height and area: Any sign which is not attached to or mounted on a building shall not exceed a height of twenty (20) feet and shall not exceed an area of forty (40) square feet. Any sign attached to or mounted on a building shall not project above the highest point of the roof of the building or more than four (4) feet above the wall of the building, whichever is higher. Signs attached to a wall of a building plus signs mounted on the roof of a building and designed to be viewed from the same side of the building as such wall shall not have an aggregate area greater than ten (10) percent of the area of such wall. 
    44.6. Measurements: Any sign may be double facing, and only one (1) face shall be counted in determinating conformity to sign area limitations. All dimensions for signs shall be based on measurements to the outside edge of the sign excluding any structure necessary to support the sign. 
    44.7. Site Plans and Special Exceptions: Limitations on signs which may be imposed in connection with the approval of a site plan or the granting of a special exception under these regulations are in addition to the provisions of this section. 
Section 45. - Additional standards. 
    45.1. General: The requirements hereinafter specified sets forth standards for particular uses listed on Schedule A, Permitted Uses, as well as standards which are supplementary to or in addition to requirements set forth elsewhere in these regulations. 
    45.2 Professional Office: A professional office in a dwelling unit is an activity conducted for gain and to which the public is invited or expected to visit in the conduct of the activity. Such a professional office shall conform to the following conditions and is an additional use for which a certificate of zoning compliance is required: 
45.2.1. The professional person or persons conducting the office use shall reside in the dwelling unit and shall be a physician, surgeon or other practitioner of the healing arts, a dentist, podiatrist, lawyer, clergyman, architect, professional engineer or land surveyor, landscape architect, artist, teacher or musician; one (1) nonresident person may be engaged in support of the office in a nonprofessional capacity. 
45.2.2. The floor area used for conduct of the professional office shall not exceed an area equal to twenty-five (25) percent of the finished livable floor area of the dwelling unit, as defined for the purpose of such computation in paragraph 5.5, or four hundred (400) square feet, whichever is less; the actual location of such office may be within the finished livable floor area of the dwelling unit or in the basement of or other floor area attached to the dwelling unit, and accessible from such finished livable floor area of the dwelling unit or in the basement of or other floor area attached to the dwelling unit, and accessible from such finished livable floor area. 
45.2.3. The professional office shall not impair the residential character of the premises nor impair the reasonable use, enjoyment and value of other residential property in the neighborhood; there shall be no evidence of the professional office outside the dwelling unit, except permitted signs. 
45.2.4. The application for a certificate of zoning compliance shall be accompanied by a detailed description of the proposed use in accordance with any administrative rules and procedures established by the planning and zoning commission. Each certificate of zoning compliance shall have a duration as may be fixed by the commission, but in all cases shall automatically terminate when the applicant no longer resides in the dwelling unit. 
    45.3. Business Office and Customary Home Occupation: A business office for a customary home occupation conducted in a dwelling unit is an additional use for which a certificate of zoning compliance is required. A business office is an activity, other than a professional office, conducted for gain and to which the public is invited or expected to visit in the conduct of the activity. A customary home occupation is an activity conducted for gain and may include: (a) preparation and sale of domestic products customarily produced in the home, (b) home handicrafts, and (c) service occupations. Such uses shall conform to the following conditions: 
45.3.1. A person or persons conducting the business office or customary home occupation shall reside in the dwelling unit; one (1) nonresident person may be engaged in the conduct of the office or occupation. 
45.3.2. No finished consumer goods shall be acquired outside the dwelling unit for sale on the premises in connection with such business office or home occupation. 
45.3.3. The floor area used for conduct of the business office or home occupation shall not exceed an area equal to twenty-five (25) percent of the finished livable floor area of the dwelling unit, as defined for the purpose of such computation in paragraph 5.5, or four hundred (400) square feet, whichever is less; the actual location of such office may be within the finished livable floor area of the dwelling unit or in the basement of or other floor area attached to the dwelling unit, and accessible from such finished livable floor area. 
45.3.4. The business office or home occupation shall not impair the residential character of the premises nor impair the reasonable use, enjoyment and value of other residential property in the neighborhood, there shall be no evidence of the business office or home occupation outside the dwelling unit, except permitted signs. 
45.3.5. The application for a certificate of zoning compliance shall be accompanied by a detailed description of the proposed use, in accordance with any administrative rules and procedures established by the planning and zoning commission. Each certificate of zoning compliance shall have a duration as may be fixed by the planning and zoning commission, but in all cases shall automatically terminate when the applicant no longer resides in the dwelling unit. 
    45.4. Room and Board: The letting of rooms and/or furnishing of board in a dwelling unit is an additional use for which a certificate of zoning compliance is required. Such use shall conform to the following conditions: 
45.4.1. The person or persons letting the rooms and/or furnishing board shall reside in the dwelling unit. 
45.4.2. When rooms are let, the dwelling unit shall contain a minimum floor area of two hundred (200) square feet times the total number of occupants of the dwelling unit, including in such computation the number of persons to whom rooms are let plus the number of persons in the family residing in the dwelling unit; in no event shall rooms be let and/or board furnished to a total of more than four (4) persons. 
45.4.3. The letting of rooms shall not include the provision of cooking facilities in or for such rooms, but may include sharing of the cooking facilities of the dwelling unit. 
45.4.4. No accessory building shall be used for letting of rooms or furnishing of board. 
    45.5. Coastal Site Plan Review Requirements: No application for certificate of zoning compliance shall be approved for any building, use or structure situated fully or partially within the coastal boundary as defined by section 22a-94 of the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut and as delineated on the coastal boundary map for the City of Shelton until the coastal site plan review requirements and procedures set forth in sections 22a-105 through 22a-109 of the General Statutes have been satisfied. 
45.5.1. Exemptions: Pursuant to section 22a-109(b) of the General Statutes the following activities are exempt from coastal site plan review requirements: 
a.  Gardening, grazing and the harvesting crops; 
b.  Minor additions to or modification of existing buildings or detached accessory buildings, such as garages and utility sheds; 
c.  Construction of new or modification of existing structures incidental to the enjoyment and maintenance of residential property including but not limited to walks, terraces, driveways, swimming pools, tennis courts, docks, and detached accessory buildings; 
d.  Construction of new or modification of existing on-premise structures including fences, walls, pedestrian walks and terraces, underground utility connections, essential electric, gas, telephone, water an [and] sewer service lines, signs, and such other minor structures as will not substantially alter the natural character of coastal resources as defined by section 22a-93(7) of the General Statutes or restrict access along the public beach; 
e.  Construction of an individual single-family residential structure except when such structure is located on an island not connected to the mainland by an existing road, bridge, or causeway or except when such structure is in or within one hundred (100) feet of the following coastal resource areas as defined by section 22a-93(7) of the General Statutes: tidal wetlands, coastal bluffs and escarpments, beaches and dunes; 
f.  Activities conducted for the specific purpose of conserving or preserving soil, vegetation, water, fish shellfish, wildlife and other coastal land and water resources; 
g.  Interior modification to buildings; 
h.  Minor changes in use of a building, structure, or property adjacent to or abutting coastal waters. 
45.5.2. Application requirements: Except as exempted above, an application for approval of a coastal site plan shall be submitted to the commission on a form prescribed by the commission. Pursuant to sections 22a-105 and 22a-106 of the General Statutes, a coastal site plan shall include the following information; a plan showing the location and spatial relationship of coastal resources on the contiguous to the site; a description of the entire project with appropriate plans, indicating project location, design, timing and methods of construction; an assessment of the suitability of the project for the proposed site; an evaluation of the potential beneficial and adverse impacts of the project, and a description of proposed methods to mitigate adverse effects on coastal resources. In addition, the applicant shall demonstrate that the adverse impacts of the proposed activity are acceptable and that such activity is consistent with the coastal policies of section 22a-92 of the General Statutes. 
45.5.3. Statutory criteria: In addition to determining compliance with any other applicable standards, requirements or criteria set forth by these regulations the commission shall review coastal site plans for compliance with the following criteria established in section 22a-106 of the General Statutes: 
a.  Consistency of the proposed activity with the applicable coastal policies in section 22a-92 of the General Statutes; 
b.  The acceptability of potential adverse impacts of the proposed activity on coastal resources as defined in section 22a-93(15) of the General Statutes; 
c.  The acceptability of potential adverse impacts of the proposed activity on future water dependent development opportunities as defined in section 22a-93(17) of the General Statutes; and 
d.  The adequacy of any measures taken to mitigate the adverse impacts of the proposed activity on coastal resources and future water dependent development opportunities. 
45.5.4. Commission action: The commission shall approve, modify, condition, or deny the coastal site plan for the proposed activity on the basis of the criteria listed in section 22a-106 of the General Statutes to ensure that the proposed activity is consistent with the coastal policies in section 22a-92 of the General Statutes and that the potential adverse impacts of the proposed activity on both coastal resources and future water dependent development opportunities are acceptable. Pursuant to section 22a-106 of the General Statutes, the commission shall state in writing the findings and reasons for its action with respect to any coastal site plan approved, conditioned, modified or denied. Further, in approving any coastal site plan, the commission shall make a written finding that: (1) the proposed activity as approved is consistent with the coastal policies in section 22a-92 of the General Statutes, (2) the proposed activity incorporates as conditions or modifications all reasonable measures which would mitigate potential adverse impacts on both coastal resources and future water-dependent development activities, and (3) the potential adverse impacts of the proposed activity on coastal resources and future water-dependent development opportunities with any conditions or modifications imposed by the commission are acceptable. In accordance with sections 22a-105 through 22a-109 of the General Statutes, hearing notification requirements, time limits for making a decision and decision publication and notification requirements for coastal site plans shall be the same as that set forth in the General Statutes for the type of permit or approval being requested. 
45.5.5. Fees: Each application for coastal site plan review shall be accompanied by a fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) payable to the City of Shelton, Connecticut. 
45.5.6. Violations: In accordance with section 22a-108 of the General Statutes, any activity undertaken within the coastal boundary without the required coastal site plan review and approval shall be subject to enforcement remedies authorized in that section. 
Section 46. - Soil and erosion and sediment control. 
    46.1 Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions for specific terms shall apply. 
46.1.1 Certification means a signed written approval by the Shelton Planning and Zoning Commission or its designated agent that a soil erosion and sediment control plan complies with the applicable requirements of these regulations. 
46.1.2 Commission means the Planning and Zoning Commission of the City of Shelton, Connecticut. 
46.1.3 County Soil and Water Conservation District means the Fairfield County Soil and Water Conservation District established under subsection (a) of section 22a-315 of the General Statutes. 
46.1.4 Development means any construction or grading activities to improved or unimproved real estate. 
46.1.5 Disturbed area means an area where the ground cover is destroyed or removed leaving the land subject to accelerated erosion. 
46.1.6 Erosion means the detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by water, wind, ice or gravity. 
46.1.7 Grading means any excavating, grubbing, filling (including hydraulic fill) or stockpiling of earth materials or any combination. 
46.1.8 Inspection means the periodic review of sediment and erosion control measures shown on the certified plan. 
46.1.9 Sediment means solid material, either mineral or organic, that is in suspension, is transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by erosion. 
46.1.10 Soil means any unconsolidated mineral or organic material of any origin. 
46.1.11 Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plan means a scheme that minimizes soil erosion and sedimentation resulting from development and includes, but is not limited to, a map and narrative. 
    46.2 Activities requiring a certified erosion and sediment control plan: A soil erosion and sediment control plan shall be submitted with any application for development when the disturbed area of such development is cumulatively more than one-half acre. 
    46.3 Exemptions: A single family dwelling that is not a part of a subdivision of land shall be exempt from these soil erosion and sediment control regulations. 
    46.4 Erosion and sediment control plan. 
46.4.1 To be eligible for certification, a soil erosion and sediment control plan shall contain proper provisions to adequately control accelerated erosion and sedimentation and reduce the danger from storm water run-off on the proposed site based on the best available technology. Such principles, methods and practices necessary for certification are found in the Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control (1985) as amended. Alternative principles, methods and practices may be used with prior approval of the commission. 
46.4.2 Said plan shall contain, but not be limited to: 
A.  A narrative describing: 
1.  The development; 
2.  The schedule for grading and construction activities including: 
a.  Start and completion dates; 
b.  Sequence of grading and construction activities; 
c.  Sequence for installation and/or application of soil erosion and sediment control measures; 
d.  Sequence for final stabilization of the project site. 
3.  The design criteria for proposed soil erosion and sediment control measures and storm water management facilities. 
4.  The construction details for proposed soil erosion and sediment control measures and storm water management facilities. 
5.  The installation and/or application procedures for proposed soil erosion and sediment control measures and storm water management facilities. 
6.  The operations and maintenance program for proposed soil erosion and sediment control measures and storm water management facilities. 
B.  A site plan map at a sufficient scale to show: 
1.  The location of the proposed development and adjacent properties; 
2.  The existing and proposed topography including soil types, wetlands, water-courses and water bodies; 
3.  The existing structures on the project site, if any; 
4.  The proposed area alterations including cleared, excavated, filled or graded areas and proposed structures, utilities, roads and, if applicable, new property lines; 
5.  The location of and design details for all proposed soil erosion and sediment control measures and storm water management facilities; 
6.  The sequence of grading and construction activities; 
7.  The sequence for installation and/or application of soil erosion and sediment control measures; 
8.  The sequence for final stabilization of the development site. 
C.  Any further information deemed necessary and appropriate by the applicant or requested by the commission or its designated agent. 
    46.5 Minimum acceptable standards. 
46.5.1 Plans for soil erosion and sediment control shall be developed in accordance with these regulations using the principles as outlined in chapters 3 and 4 of the Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control (1985), as amended. Soil erosion and sediment control plans shall result in a development that: minimizes erosion and sedimentation during construction; is stabilized and protected from erosion when completed; and does not cause off-site erosion and/or sedimentation. 
46.5.2 The minimum standards for individual measures are those in the Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control (1985), as amended. The commission or the County Soil and Water Conservation District may grant exceptions when requested by the applicant if technically sound reasons are presented. 
46.5.3 The appropriate method from chapter 9 for the Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control (1985), as amended, shall be used in determining peak flow rates and volumes of run-off unless an alternative method is approved by the commission. 
    46.6 Issuance or denial of certification. 
46.6.1 The Shelton Planning and Zoning Commission or its designated agent shall either certify that the soil erosion and sediment control plan, as filed, complies with the requirements and objectives of this regulation or deny certification when the development proposal does not comply with these regulations. 
46.6.2 Nothing in these regulations shall be constructed as extending the time limits for the approval of any application under chapters 124, 124A or 126 of the General Statutes. 
46.6.3 Prior to certification, any plan submitted to the municipality may be reviewed by the County Soil and Water Conservation District which may make recommendations concerning such plan, provided such review shall be completed within thirty (30) days of the receipt of such plan. 
    46.7 Conditions relating to soil erosion and sediment control. 
46.7.1 The estimated costs of measures required to control soil erosion and sedimentation, as specified in the certified plan, that are a condition of certification of any modified site plan may be required to be covered in a performance bond or other assurance acceptable to the commission in accordance with the provisions specified under section 31 of the regulations. 
46.7.2 Site development shall not begin unless the soil erosion and sediment control plan is certified and those control measures and facilities in the plan scheduled for installation prior to site development are installed and functional. 
46.7.3 Planned soil erosion and sediment control measures and facilities shall be installed as scheduled according to the certified plan. 
46.7.4 All control measures and facilities shall be maintained in effective condition to ensure the compliance of the certified plan. 
    46.8 Inspection. 
46.8.1 Inspections shall be made by the commission or its designated agent during development to ensure compliance with the certified plan and that control measures and facilities are properly performed or installed and maintained. The commission may require the permittee to verify through progress reports that soil erosion and sediment control measures and facilities have been performed or installed according to the certified plan and are being operated and maintained. 
Sections 47-50. - Reserved. 
CHAPTER V. - AMENDMENTS, PENALTIES VALIDITY, ETC 

Section 51. - Amendments. 
    51.1. [Amended by Commission.] These regulations, including the building zone map which is a part hereof, may be amended by the commission on its own initiative or when initiated by a petition. Any amendment may be adopted only after due notice and public hearing as prescribed by the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut. Any petition for amendment shall be accompanied by the following: 
51.1.1. For petitions concerning the text of these regulations, fifteen (15) copies of the existing and proposed text shall be submitted. 
51.1.2. For petitions concerning the building zone map, two (2) copies of a map shall be submitted, drawn to a scale of not less than two hundred (200) feet to the inch, covering the area of the proposed change and all area in the city within five hundred (500) feet of the proposed change, and showing for such area the existing and proposed zoning district boundary lines, the existing property lines and the names of the current property owners as indicated in the Shelton assessor's records. 
51.1.3. A petition fee deposit of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) any portion of which that is unused for necessary legal notices, stenographic reports and other required expenses shall be returned to the petitioner. 
Section 52. - Penalties. 
    52.1. [Penalties.] Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of these regulations shall be subject to penalties in accordance with the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut. 
Section 53. - Validity. 
    53.1. [Validity.] If any section, paragraph or provision of these regulations shall be adjudged invalid, such adjudication shall not invalidate any other section, paragraph or provision of these regulations and such remainder shall be deemed valid and effective. 
Section 54. - Effective date and repeal. 
    54.1. [Effective Date.] These regulations, and any amendment or change hereto, shall be in full force and effect from the date established by the commission, in accordance with the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut. 
    54.2. [Repeal.] The zoning ordinance of the City of Shelton, adopted by the zoning commission on August 5, 1966, and all amendments thereto, are repealed coincident with the effective date of these regulations. The repeal of the above ordinance and all amendments thereto shall not affect the status of any personnel and shall not affect or impair any act done, offense committed or right accruing, accrued or acquired or any liability, penalty, forfeiture of punishment incurred prior to the time such repeal took effect, but the same may be enjoyed, asserted, enforced, prosecuted or inflicted as fully and to the same extent as if such repeal had not been effected. 
APPENDIX B - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
AN ORDINANCE PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF ACCEPTANCE OF ROADWAYS AND LAYOUT AND APPURTENANCES OF SUBDIVISIONS. 
    Be it ordained by the Board of Aldermen of the City of Shelton, that the following procedure be followed in the acceptance of any new street, highway or public way and any subdivision in the City of Shelton. 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is the subdivision ordinance for the city as adopted by the board of aldermen on May 10, 1954. Amendments to the original ordinance may be found by a parenthetical date following each amended section. Obvious misspellings have been corrected and material in brackets [ ] has been inserted for clarity. 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 3; housing, Ch. 8; planning, Ch. 12; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 14; utilities, Ch. 17; zoning, App. A. 

SEC. 1. - DECLARATION OF POLICY 
    It is declared to be the policy of the Board of Aldermen of the City of Shelton to consider land subdivision as a living part of the community and as part of a plan for the orderly development and growth of the City of Shelton rather than as a mere isolated aggregation of lots. In order that land subdivisions may be made in the best interests of the City and in accordance with this policy and in order that adequate provisions may be made for the proper arrangement and development of streets, for open spaces, for recreation, light and air, for the avoidance of undue density of population, for access of fire fighting apparatus to property, and for proper drainage and sewage facilities, these regulations are hereby adopted. 
SEC. 2. - DEFINITIONS 
(a)  Applicant shall include any person, firm or corporation, partnership or association who shall lay out any new street, highway or public way or any subdivision or part thereof as hereinafter defined, either for himself or for others. 
(b)  The Board shall mean the Board of Aldermen of the City of Shelton. 
(c)  Street, Highway or Public Way shall mean and include streets, avenues, boulevards, lanes and other ways. 
(d)  Dead End Street shall mean a street which has no outlet at one (1) end. 
(e)  Subdivision shall mean the division of any piece, parcel or tract of land, including land fronting on existing or accepted city streets or highways into three (3) or more lots, plots, sites or other divisions for the purpose of sale, exchange, gift, device or other transfer resulting in a change in ownership, whether immediate or future as building lots or for development purposes and shall include any resubdivision of any existing subdivision where the lots lines of two (2) or more lots as shown on any map filed for record in the Town Clerk's Office prior to the effective date of these regulations, will be altered thereby including also all changes in any street line, provided however that a division of land for agricultural purposes only, in parcels of ten (10) acres or more and not involving any new street or easement of access, shall be exempted from the provisions of this ordinance. 
(f)  Plan or Plat shall mean the plan or drawing submitted to the Board and shall include all plans or drawing when more than one (1) covering the same subdivision is submitted. 
(g)  Preliminary subdivision plan shall mean the preliminary drawing or drawings indicating the proposed plan and layout of the subdivision to be submitted to the Board for its consideration. 
(h)  Record subdivision plan shall mean the final map, drawing or drawings on which the applicant's plan of subdivision is presented to the Board for approval and which if approved, will be submitted to the Town Clerk for recording. 
(i)  Print shall include a blueprint, photostat, lithoprint, or other copy which reproduces exactly the data on the original drawing from which it is made. 
(j)  These regulations shall mean the provisions of this ordinance of the City of Shelton as the same are contained herein or any amendments thereto. 
SEC. 3. - PROCEDURE 
(a)  Applications for approval of any subdivision shall be made to the City Clerk in writing at least seven days prior to a regular meeting of the Board upon such forms as said Board may prescribe and shall be accompanied by such plans, statements and data as are herein prescribed. Such applications shall be made in duplicate by the owner of the land to be subdivided or his lawful agent. If the subdivision is proposed by a developer who is not the owner of the land to be subdivided, but who will, upon its approval by the board, either acquire title to or deal with the subdivided land, such applications may be made jointly by the owner and the proposed developer of the land. 
(b)  A record subdivision plan or a preliminary plan shall accompany said application and shall have been prepared by a land surveyor, licensed as such by the State Board of Registration for Professional Engineers and Land Surveyors of the State of Connecticut. Although not required, it is recommended that the plan submitted to the Board with the application for the approval of any subdivision be in preliminary form, since experience has indicated that the Board may require alterations or changes in the proposed subdivision which may be made more readily and economically by the developers if presented in this form. All subdivision plans where in preliminary or record form shall be prepared and submitted in accordance with these regulations. 
(c)  At the time of filing the application and plan, the City Clerk shall examine the same and ascertain that they comply with these regulations. 
SEC. 4. - GENERAL SUBDIVISION REQUIREMENTS 
(a)  Whenever any proposed subdivision abuts any highway which is under the jurisdiction or control of the Connecticut State Department the City Clerk shall within three (3) days after receipt of the preliminary map and application for approval transmit one copy thereof, together with all appurtenant data to the Highway Commissioner with a request that he submit to the Board any objections or recommendations relative to the proposed street intersections, locations, grades or drainage requirements he may desire to make. 
(b)  The Board shall approve, modify and approve or disapprove a subdivision plan, either preliminary or record, within sixty (60) days from the date of the Board meeting at which such map was first presented to it, unless such time is extended by mutual agreement between the Board and the applicant in writing. Upon approval or disapproval, such action shall be endorsed on the face of each copy of the preliminary plan by the City Clerk. If such map be disapproved the reasons therefor shall be stated in the written minutes of the Board. The City Clerk shall within five (5) days of the Board's action thereon notify the applicant by registered mail of the action taken and designate in writing such improvements as are within the Board's discretion and the extent thereof, which it will require, in addition to those imposed by the specific provisions of these regulations, before its approval will be given to the Record Subdivision Plan. 
(c)  The consideration of a Preliminary Plan by the Board and any approval which it may give to it in its submitted or modified form shall not constitute or require an approval of the proposed subdivision. Such approval may only be given by the Board upon the filing and approval of the Record Subdivision Plan prepared by the applicant and acted upon the Board as provided in these regulations. 
(d)  Following the approval of the Preliminary Subdivision Plan, the applicant shall proceed within one year from the date of such approval, to cause said subdivision to be accurately surveyed in accordance with said preliminary map as finally approved, and within said year shall cause to be prepared and presented to said Board a Record Subdivision Plan which shall in all respects comply with the provisions of these regulations. Failure to prepare and submit such Record Subdivision Map within one (1) year unless by mutual agreement in writing between the Board and said applicant, extending the period of time, shall automatically terminate all proceedings and the applicant shall be required to submit a new application and map as though the same was an entirely new proceeding. The Record Subdivision Plan shall be prepared in accordance with the requirements of Section 5. Before acting to approve or disapprove the Record Subdivision Plan, the Board shall afford the person submitting the same an opportunity to be heard thereon. Notice of the hearing shall be sent to the applicant by registered mail not less than five (5) days before the date thereof. 
(e)  All subdivisions shall comply with the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Shelton as adopted June 10, 1952 and any subsequent revision or amendments thereto. 
(f)  The arrangement of proposed streets shall in general provide for the continuation of existing streets without offsets and with widths in conformity with paragraph (g) herein. Where such straight continuations are not practical, continuations may be adjusted by reasonable curves or deflection angles, subject to the approval of the Board. 
(g)  No street shall be proposed which shall be less than fifty (50) feet in width between property lines, except that the Board may require greater widths where it is felt necessary. Existing streets less than fifty (50) feet in width shall be widened at the direction of the Board. Private streets, alleys and ways shall not be permitted except by permission of the Board. Streets shall be required to intersect one another at as near to a right angle as is practical, and no intersection shall be at an angle of less than sixty (60) degrees unless necessitated by topographic conditions. Whenever any proposed subdivisions shall adjoin another tract of acreage, streets that may logically be extended in the event of the future subdivision of such adjoining acreage shall be required to extend as a dead-end to the boundary of the acreage. If, within the proposed subdivision, the intersecting street nearest the boundary line is more than one hundred fifty (150) feet distant from said boundary line, the dead-end street shall be provided with a circular turning area at its terminus adjacent to such boundary line as required for dead-end streets in Section 4(i) herein. All proposed streets shall bear tentative names which shall not duplicate any other street name in the City of Shelton. The tentative names of all proposed streets shall be subject to the approval of the board. If any designation be in numbers, they shall be spelled out completely, using hyphens when necessary, in such forms as "Forty-Second Street" and the words "Street", or "Boulevard" as the case may be shall be spelled out in full. 
(h)  No reserved strips shall be approved in any subdivision. 
(i)  No dead-end street shall be permitted except when topographic or physical conditions make it impossible or it is not economically feasible in the opinion of the City Engineer, to extend it or connect it with another proposed or existing street. In any case a permanent dead-end may be permitted, provided such dead-end street shall not exceed in length the frontage of ten lots per side and shall have a circular turnaround at its terminus, with a radius of not less than fifty (50) feet. 
(j)  At street intersections, property line corners shall be rounded by an arc having a minimum radius of twenty-five (25) feet. 
(k)  The length of blocks shall not be less than four hundred (400) feet nor more than one thousand (1,000) feet, except when in the opinion of the board existing conditions justify a variation from this requirement. Minimum width of blocks shall generally be sufficient to permit two tiers of lots and not less than two hundred (200) feet in residential areas. The long side of blocks shall face the main or more important thoroughfare to reduce the number of intersections thereon. 
(l)  Pedestrian ways ten feet in width may be required through blocks over six hundred (600) feet in length, or to connect dead-end streets, to provide easier access to parks, schools, playgrounds, or other public or semi-public places. 
(m)  Permanent easements for drainage or utilities within blocks may be required at the discretion of the Board. 
(n)  Area of lots shall conform to the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Shelton as adopted June 10, 1952 and any subsequent revisions or amendments thereto. 
(o)  Insofar as practicable, the side lines of all lots shall be at right angles to the street on which the lot faces or radial to surveyed street lines. It shall be the discretion of the Board to refuse to permit town boundary lines to cross any lot and in the event of such refusal, said boundary line shall be made to constitute one of the lot lines. Said decision shall be made at the time the preliminary plan is submitted. 
(p)  All lots shall be numbered beginning with the numeral "1" and shall continue consecutively throughout the entire subdivision with no omissions or duplications. No fractions and no prefix or suffix such as "1A", "B2", or "CC" shall be used. Adjoining and adjacent subdivisions having the same subdivision name shall not duplicate the numbers, but shall continue the sequence or numbers used previously for the adjoining land. All lot numbers shall be conspicuous and centered in the approximate center of the lots. 
(q)  All proposed road grades and drainage structures shall have the written approval of the City Engineer prior to final approval of the Board. 
(r)  All proposed subdivisions shall have approval of the Health Department prior to final approval by the Board. 
(s)  Where, in the opinion of the Board, the City Engineer or the Health Department, there is any question of the ability of the existing ground conditions to allow adequate sewage disposal facilities over a period of years, seepage tests may be required to be made by a competent person and in a manner acceptable to the Board. 
SEC. 5. - PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISION PLAN REQUIREMENTS 
(a)  If a Preliminary Subdivision Plan shall be presented to the Board for consideration it shall be prepared by a registered land surveyor and shall be drawn to a scale of not less than one hundred (100) feet to the inch, and three (3) prints thereof shall be filed with the City Clerk. The size of the plan or plans shall be 25" × 36" outside measurements and all sheets must be drawn to the same scale. 
(b)  The Preliminary Subdivision Plan shall conform to and shall contain and show the following data: 
    (b-1) The proposed tract name or other designation by which such subdivision shall be known which shall not duplicate the name of any other previous subdivision in the City of Shelton. 
    (b-2) The location and approximate dimensions of all existing property lines, the approximate location and size of all permanent buildings and their present or proposed future usage, wooden areas, water courses, swamps, marshes, sanitary, storm or combined sewers, mean high water line and other existing features which may influence the layout. 
    (b-3) The locations, names and present widths and approximate locations of all existing streets abutting, adjoining or crossing the proposed subdivision together with all proposed new streets the approximate radii of all curves; the approximate dimensions of all lots and all proposed building lines within the limits of the subdivision and on the property immediately adjacent thereto, with the names of all adjoining property owners as nearly as the same may be ascertained. Approximate elevations shall be shown at the beginning and end of each street, at street intersections and at all points where necessary to give a clear idea of the relation of the proposed lot and street layout adjacent thereto. 
    (b-4) The name and address of the owner or owners of the land to be subdivided; the name and address of the developer if it be other than the owner of the premises and the name and address and seal of the Registered Land Surveyor who prepared such preliminary Subdivision Plan. The City Clerk shall endorse thereon the precise date when said Preliminary Subdivision Plan and application for approval was filed with him. 
    (b-5) The approximate widths and locations of all easements for drainage, sewerage or public utilities, public areas, parks or playgrounds, if any. 
    (b-6) The Zone or Zones in which the subdivision lies as established by the Zoning Ordinances of the City of Shelton as adopted June 10, 1952 and any subsequent revisions or amendments thereto. Any desired change in the zoning for which the owner proposes to petition the Board shall be set forth in the application for approval of the subdivision. 
    (b-7) Date, North Point and Scale. 
SEC. 6. - RECORD SUBDIVISION PLAN REQUIREMENTS 
(a)  Final or record subdivision plans shall be clearly and legibly drawn and shall be submitted on good quality white paper mounted on muslin or other approved cloth backing on sheets 25" × 36". When more than one (1) sheet is required, an index sheet 25" × 36" shall also be submitted showing the entire subdivision on one (1) sheet with lot numbers and street names shown. The plan shall preferably be drawn to a scale of forty (40) feet to the inch but in no case less than one hundred (100) feet to the inch. 
(b)  In addition to the cloth backed plan, there shall also be submitted two (2) prints on paper. 
(c)  The Record Subdivision Plan shall conform to and shall contain and show the following data: 
    (c-1) The title of the subdivision, north point, scale, date and the name of the owner or owners. 
    (c-2) The names of adjacent subdivision or owners of adjacent land. 
    (c-3) The boundaries of the subdivision with courses and distances marked thereon as determined by an accurate land survey, the error of closure of which must not exceed 1 to 5,000. The traverse sheets or a copy thereof showing the error of closure of the field survey, and the calculations for the final adjustment, if required, must be submitted to the City Engineer if requested by him. 
    (c-4) The length bearing or direction of all straight lines, deflection angles, radii, arcs and central angles of all curves along the property lines of each street; all duly balanced so as to be consistent throughout with the courses and distances of the boundary line. All dimensions shall be shown in feet and decimals of a foot. 
    (c-5) The names and widths of all streets. 
    (c-6) The lines of all easements or rights of way to which any lots are subject shall be denoted. The limits of easements or rights of way shall be definitely stated and clearly labeled and identified. 
    (c-7) The line of mean high tide in case the subdivision or any part thereof is adjacent to tidewater. 
    (c-8) The location of all monuments which are required to be set in accordance with the provisions of Section 8. 
    (c-9) Proposed finished elevation of all streets at the center of each intersection, and at each change of grade as well as rates of grade of all streets. Elevations must be referred to a permanent bench mark which is described on the plan. Where practical, U. S. C. and G. S. datum shall be used. 
    (c-10) Class of Zone or Zones in which property lies. 
    (c-11) A certification signed and scaled by the Land Surveyor making such survey and plan, who shall be duly registered in the State of Connecticut to make such surveys, that it is made from the actual land survey and is in conformance with the degree of accuracy designated. 
(d)  When new streets or improvements of an existing street are involved accompanying said Record Plan shall be complete profiles of each proposed street showing existing ground surface on the center line grades. Existing elevations on both street lines shall also be shown. Said profiles shall be at a scale of 1 inch 40 degrees horizontal and 4 inch 4 degrees vertical and two (2) prints thereof shall accompany the Recorded Plan. 
SEC. 7. - APPROVAL OF RECORD SUBDIVISION PLAN 
(a)  Upon the submission of the Record Subdivision Plan to the Board for final approval, said Board shall determine whether such plan corresponds substantially with the approved Preliminary Plan and meets all the requirements of these regulations. If the Board shall approve such Record Subdivision Plan, the act of such approval and the date thereof shall be noted on said Plan over the signature of the City Clerk. Said Record Subdivision Plan shall within thirty (30) days thereafter be filed for record in the office of the Town Clerk of Shelton. The fee for the filing of said map shall be paid by the applicant. 
(b)  No plan of a subdivision of land laid out wholly or partly within the limits of the City of Shelton shall be filed or recorded in the office of the Town Clerk of Shelton until the Board except as otherwise provided by statute shall have approved such plan and the fact of such approval is endorsed thereon as provided in the foregoing. 
    The provision of this section shall not apply to maps made by a licensed land surveyor for sole purpose of establishing boundaries of property already of record or where the same is merely intended as an outline survey showing only the exterior boundaries of such unmapped land as has not been divided. 
    The approval of filing for record of any Record Subdivision Plan shall not be deemed to constitute or to be evidenced by any acceptance by the public of any street or other open public space shown on such plan or map. Such acceptance shall be by formal resolution adopted by the Board, which resolution shall set forth the fact of such acceptance for public purposes, the width and approximate length of the streets, accepted together with the designation of the names by which such street shall thereafter be known. 
(c)  If the application and plan are disapproved, the Board shall return without endorsement the original plan as submitted by the applicant together with a statement of its reasons for such disapproval. One (1) print of said plan shall be retained for the records of the city. 
SEC. 8. - SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENT REQUIREMENTS 
(a)  Within two years after the approval of the Record Subdivision Plan, the applicant, owner or developer thereof shall complete the following minimum improvements unless an extension of time is granted by the Board. 
(b)  All proposed streets shall be laid cut, graded and constructed their entire length and full width from street line to street line in full accordance with the following specifications and these regulations and mode of procedure and any amendments thereto. The owner or owners shall engage the services of a competent engineer to lay out the lines and grades of said streets, boulevards, highways and public ways their entire width and length, in accordance with such approved lines and grades and shall construct a roadway at least thirty (30) feet wide centered between the street lines and having a crown of not more than eight (8) inches, as the City Engineer or his representative may direct. In no instance, except where unusual conditions may occur, shall be percentage of grade be less than one (1) percent or more than ten (10) percent. 
    If in the opinion of the City Engineer, or his duly appointed representative, these limits cause undue hardship, he may adjust the grade to fit existing ground conditions. All sod and other vegetable matter shall be excavated and all boulders or ledge shall be removed or broken off to a depth approved by the Street Commissioner and City Engineer or their representatives, and all excavations shall be made in conformity with the requirements of the subdivision plans, the slopes of earth cuts and fills shall be neat and true to the lines shown on the plans and not steeper than 1 on 2 or as ordered. The subgrade shall be brought to a uniform surface, the grade of which shall be checked and approved by the City Engineer or his representative prior to the surfacing. 
    Upon the prepared and approved subgrade of not less than 8" of compacted bank run gravel there shall be spread a layer of broken stone which shall compact upon completion to not more than 21/2". This stone shall meet the requirements of the A. A. S. H. O. Method T-104 for soundness and the results of A. A. S. H. O. Method T-96 shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent and shall conform to the requirements of commercial grading for 2' stone. (10-3-57) 
    The stone shall be spread by spreaders or stone boxes between the bituminous gutter and rolled and shaped to conform to the required cross section. The roller shall be three (3) wheeled and shall weigh not less than ten (10) tons. No spreading of stone by power graders will be permitted. (10-3-57) 
    Bituminous material shall be applied on the approved surface by an approved distributor at a temperature of not less than 325;deg; F. nor more than 350;deg; F. at the rate of between 13/4 to 2 gallons per square yard. The bituminous shall be in accordance with the C. H. D. specifications for 85-100 asphalt. (10-3-57) 
    The bituminous material shall be covered with one-half inch broken stone which shall meet the above recited requirements at the rate of 48#-54 = per square yard and rolled once over. The surface shall then be broomed to completely fill all voids and rolled to securely imbed the cover stone into the bituminous binder and obtain a smooth, hard and well compacted surface. (10-3-57) 
    Just before the seal coat, any surplus or loose one-half inch stone shall be removed. On this prepared surface, bituminous material, as above specified, shall be applied at the rate of 0.7 to 0.9 gallons per square yard. It shall immediately be covered with clean, dry three-eighths inch broken stone, which shall meet the above recited requirements at the rate of 20#-24# per square yard. The surface shall then be rolled and broomed until the three-eighths inch stone completely fills all the voids and a firm bond is obtained. Surplus 3/8 ' stone shall be removed and rolling continued until a compacted surface is obtained. (10-3-57) 
(c)  All necessary storm drains that are required by good construction practice and approved by the City Engineer and Street Commissioner shall be built at the sole expense of the applicant, owner or developer. Storm drains shall include all necessary pipe lines, manholes, catch basins and appurtenances sufficient and adequate to provide proper drainage. 
    All gutters shall be paved with a hot plant mixed bituminous concrete to conform with the cross section on file with the City Clerk. The gutter shall be constructed on a base course of at least 8' of back run gravel compacted to the required cross section. The gutter material shall have a compacted depth of at least three (3) inches and shall extend into the traveled portion of the roadway at least two (2) feet and shall conform to the cross section of the roadway. 
SEC. 9. - MONUMENTS 
(a)  Reinforced concrete monuments of 1:2:4 mix, four (4) inches square on the bottom and three (3) feet long shall be set at all intersections, and at all angles and points of curve or other critical points in the street lines as will enable a registered land surveyor to correctly stake out any lot in the subdivision. Each monument shall have a brass plug or iron rod at least 6 inches long in the top, and shall be set so that the marked center of the top shall be the point of reference. The tops of such monuments shall be set to the established grade. The monuments shall be set in place after all other street development is completed. The accuracy of location of such monuments shall be certified in writing by the land surveyor making the Record Subdivision Plan, before acceptance of the street by the City. 
SEC. 10. - BOND REQUIREMENTS 
(a)  To assure the completion of the improvements, to the extent required by these regulations or which may be required by the Board, including the setting of all monuments, the construction of all roads and the installation of all required drainage facilities within two (2) years of the date of the approval of the Record Subdivision Plan, and where required, the dedication of any land to the public use within two (2) years and three (3) months of such approval, the applicant shall within thirty (30) days of the approval of line and grades by the Board and prior to the filing of the Record Map, file with the City Clerk (A) a Surety Bond in favor of the City of Shelton executed by a Surety Company authorized to enter into such bonds under the laws of this State or (B) an equivalent amount of cash or (C) a certified check which shall be in such amount and in such form and contain such conditions as the Board shall require. The Bond or other security shall not be released until the Board, upon written statement by the City Engineer and the Street Commissioner, shall have determined that all of the Bond conditions have been fully satisfied and streets, boulevards, highways or public ways have been formally accepted as thoroughfares by the Shelton Board of Aldermen. There shall be a portion of said bond which shall not be released until one year after completion of any road. The amount of said portion of said bond shall be determined by the Board of Aldermen subject to the approval of the City Engineer. (10-3-57) 
SEC. 11. - FEES 
    A fee of ten dollars ($10.00) per lot, with a minimum fee of thirty dollars ($30.00) for each preliminary plan submitted for approval. (5-13-57) 
SEC. 12. - PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION 
(a)  Any person, firm, corporation, partnership or association who shall violate any of the provisions of these regulations, shall upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) or not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or be imprisoned in the County Jail for a period of not more than thirty (30) days, or both such fine and imprisonment, except that nothing herein contained shall be deemed to bar any legal or equitable action to restrain or enjoin any act in violation of these regulations. Any person, firm, or corporation found guilty of any such violation, who after notification in writing by the City Clerk, shall thereafter continue such violation shall be fined for not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each day of such continued violation, and the persons responsible for each continued violation be imprisoned for not more than thirty days. 
SEC. 13. - VALIDITY 
(a)  If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase in these regulations shall for any reason be held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a decree or decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decree or decision shall not affect or impair the validity of any other section or remaining portion of these regulations. 
(b)  All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with the provisions of these regulations herewith are hereby repealed. 
SEC. 14. - EFFECTIVE DATE 
(a)  This ordinance shall be in full force and effective from and after the date of approval by the Mayor of the City of Shelton. Adopted by the Board of Aldermen, May 10, 1954. 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - COMPILED ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of compiled ordinances of 1975 and 1977, which are included herein. Sections not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 
Comp. Ords. Section Section this Code 1975 1.1(1) 2-27 1.1(3) 2-28 1.1(4) 2-7 2.1(1) 2-51 2.1(2)-(6) 2-53-2-57 2.6 2-106-2-108 3.1(4) 14-2 3.1(6) 14-3 3.1(8) 14-6 3.1(9.1) 6-1 3.1(9.4) 6-4 3.1(9.5) 6-5 3.1(9.6)-(9.11) 6-6-6-11 3.1(9.13), (9.14) 6-13, 6-14 3.1(9.18)-(9.22) 6-15-6-19 3.1(9.23) 6-46 3.1(9.24) 6-21 3.1(9.25) 6-47, 6-48 3.1(9.28) 6-22 3.1(12), (13) 6-23, 6-24 3.1(14) 14-8 3.1(16), (17) 14-10, 14-11 3.1(20), (21) 14-12, 14-13 3.2 14-14 4.1(1)-(4) 7-2-7-5 4.1(11), (12) 7-6, 7-7 5.2(1) 4-2 7.2 15-1 8.1 9-1 9.1(1) 17-42 9.1(5) 17-41 9.1(11) 17-43 11.4 13-1 12.1(1)-(5) 16-1-16-5 12.1(6), (7) 16-38, 16-39 12.1(8) 16-6 12.1(9) 16-37 12.1(10) 16-36 12.1(11-16) 16-35 12.1(17)-(19) 16-7-16-9 12.1(20)-(22) 16-28-16-30 12.1(23), (24) 16-10, 16-11 16.1(1)-(11) 16-21-16-31 16.1(12) 16-33 16.1(13) 16-32 16.2(1, 2) 16-40 16.2(3), (4) 16-41, 16-42 16.2(5) 16-44 16.3 16-43 16.4 16-34 18-1 2-1 19.6 2-143 22.1(1) 3-1 3-32 22.1(4) 3-4 22.1(4, 5) 3-5 22.3(2), (3) 3-32, 3-33 31(9.5) 6-5 1977 8.1 9-1  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 
ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of ordinances adopted since 1977, which are included herein. Ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Ordinance 
Number Adoption 
  Date Section  Section 
this Code 10 11-13-61 3-31 43 9-14-64 17-76 44 9-14-64 3-30 52 7-12-65 17-106 80 4-22-68 17-20 1 17-19 3.01, 3.02 17-77 3.03, 3.04 17-78, 17-79 3.05 17-80, 17-81 3.06-3.10 17-82-17-86 4.10 17-22 5.01-5.03 17-21 6.01-6.03 17-27 85 9-9-68 3-2 102 8-25-69 12-91-12-94 104 9-8-69 2-109 105 9-29-69 a 15-4 108 3-9-70 a-c 2-110 110 6-8-70 1-5 12-16-12-20 120 7-1-72 I-IV 12-31-12-34 122 2-24-72 1 3-6 2 3-7 131 8-4-72 2-254 132 6-12-72 I-III 7-61-7-63 135 9-14-72 1-7 17-89 138 10-16-72 c-e 11-2 143 1-16-73 2-161 145 3-12-73 6-1 148-150 3-12-73 2-162-2-164 152 4-16-73 2-165 153 4-9-73 2-5 155-157 4-9-73 2-166-2-168 159, 160 4-9-73 2-169, 2-170 163 6-19-73 6-2, 6-3 6-12 166-168 7-9-73 2-171-2-173 168 9-10-73 11-36 169 7-9-73 2-174 170 7-9-73 2-177 171 7-9-73 2-176 172 7-9-73 2-175 173, 174 7-9-73 2-178, 2-179 175 8-13-73 2-162 176 8-13-73 2-165 181-183 8-13-73 2-180-2-182 187 9-10-73 13-2 188 9-10-73 11-37-11-39 189 10-16-73 2-183 191 10-16-73 13-2 194 10-16-73 2-184 195 10-16-73 1-5 12-51-12-55 197 11-13-73 2-81-2-84 202 1-14-74 2-185 203 1-14-74 1-8 3-34 205-208 2-11-74 2-186-2-189 210-212 2-11-74 2-190-2-192 215 4-8-74 11.01, 11.02 17-23, 17-24 12.01 17-25 216 4-8-74 10.01-10.15 17-110 217 4-8-74 9.01-9.06 17-109 218-221 6-10-74 2-193-2-196 223, 224 6-10-74 2-197, 2-198 225 6-13-74 2-199 226 8-12-74 4-35 234 1-13-75 4-34 237 1-13-75 2-200 238 2-10-75 14-9 240 2-10-75 15.01-15.09 17-114 242, 243 5-12-75 2-201, 2-202 245 6-9-75 1-5 12-71-12-75 246, 247 6-9-75 2-203, 2-204 250-254 8-11-75 2-205-2-209 255 8-11-77 2-210 256-260 8-11-75 2-211-2-215 261 10-14-75 2-216 264 2-9-76 2-217 266 3-8-76 17-112, 17-113 267 3-9-76 2-218 268 3-9-76 2-219, 2-220 269 3-9-76 2-30 270-272 3-9-76 2-221-2-223 273 4-12-76 13-31 13-33, 13-34 275 4-12-76 2-96, 2-97 276, 277 5-10-76 2-224, 2-225 278 6-14-76 2-226 284 12-13-76 4-1 288 2-14-77 2-3 290 3-14-77 3-26-3-29 291 3-14-77 2-161 292 4-11-77 2-227 293 5-9-77 3-27 296 7-11-77 2-228 297 7-11-77 2-185, 2-186 2-189-2-191 2-197, 2-198 2-205 2-207-2-210 2-212-2-215 298, 299 7-11-77 2-229, 2-230 300 7-11-77 1-5 13-21-13-25 301 8-8-77 2-231 302 8-8-77 1-3 9-41-9-43 3 9-50 5 9-44 6-8 9-51-9-53 9 9-45 10 9-47 11 9-54 12 9-56 13 9-48 14 9-55 15 9-46 16 9-61 17 9-58 18 9-49 9-59 20 9-57 21 9-62 22 9-60 23 9-63 304 9-12-77 1-1-1-6 2-351-2-356 1-7 2-358 1-8 2-357 306 1-9-78 2-232 308 1-14-78 2-183 309 4-10-78 2-29 310 5-8-78 1.01 8-1 1.02 8-2 1.03 8-3 2.01-2.51 8-4 3.01 8-7 3.02-3.11 8-21-8-30 Ch. IV 8-66 4.01-4.11 8-67-8-77 5.01-5.05 8-78-8-82 6.01 8-83 7.01, 7.02 8-90, 8-91 7.03 8-92, 8-93 7.04-7.12 8-94-8-102 8.01-8.06 8-84-8-89 8.08 8-77 Ch. IX 8-41 9.01 8-52 9.02-9.11 8-42-8-51 9.12 8-53 9.13 8-54, 8-55 9.14-9.16 8-56-8-58 10.01, 10.02 8-111 10.03 8-112 11.01-11.09 8-121-8-129 12.01 8-137 Ch. XIII 8-136 13.01-13.04 8-138-8-141 Ch. XIV 8-206 14.01-14.20 8-142-8-161 15.01, 15.02 8-162, 8-163 Ch. XVI 8-171 16.01-16.05 8-172-8-176 17.01-17.04 8-186-8-189 17.05 8-191 17.06 8-190 17.07-17.14 8-192-8-199 Ch. XX 8-211 21.01-21.07 8-216-8-222 Ch. XXII 8-223 23.01 8-8 23.03, 23.04 8-5, 8-6 311 5-7-78 1, 2 7-41, 7-42 5-8-78 3-7 7-43-7-47 314 5-8-78 2-6 315 5-8-78 2-41 318 5-8-78 2-52 322 5-8-78 14-5 323 5-8-78 6-1 324 5-8-78 6-46 325 5-8-78 14-1 326-328 6-12-78 2-233-2-235 329 6-12-78 2-194 330 6-12-78 2-229 334 7-10-78 17-41 335 7-10-78 17-76 336 7-10-78 17-20 17-79, 17-80 17-85-17-88 337 7-10-78 17-23, 17-24 339 8-14-78 1.1 5-1 2.0 5-2 3.1-3.6 5-3-5-8 4.1 5-24 4.2 5-21 4.3-1 5-22 4.3-5 5-23 4.4-1, 4.4-2 5-25, 5-26 5.1-5.1-4 5-41 5.2-3 5-42 5.3 5-43 340 8-14-78 17-6 341 8-14-78 2-204 343 8-14-78 13-32-13-35 38-14-78 13-31 344 9-11-78 14-9 347-349 9-11-78 2-236-2-238 350 7-11-78 2-239 353 10-16-78 2-110 355 10-16-78 2-174 356 10-16-78 2-176, 2-177 358 11-13-78 2-179 359, 360 11-13-78 2-240, 2-241 362 2-13-79 2-201 367 2-13-79 8-27 370 3-12-79 1-3 4-4 371 4-9-79 2-242 375 7-25-79 2-243 377 7-25-79 2-171 2-184 2-222, 2-223 2-229, 2-230 378 7-25-79 4-35 387 11-10-80 2-178 388 1-10-80 1, 2 2-29 1(a) 2-26 392 2-14-80 2-66-2-69 393 4-10-80 1-7 2-4 395 7-10-80 4 4-26 6 4-27 10, 11 4-28, 4-29 18 4-1 20 4-30, 4-31 27 4-32 401, 402 9-11-80 2-244, 2-245 404 11-13-80 2-246 406 11-13-80 16-29 408 3-21-81 2-247 409, 410 3-12-81 2-248, 2-249 411 4-9-81 1 7-26 2 7-28 3 7-27 412 7-9-81 14-9 413 7-9-81 2-166 415 9-10-81 2-6 418 9-10-81 2-131 420 10-8-81 14-4 421 11-24-81 1-7 9-81-9-87 8 9-89 9 9-88 10 9-90 422 12-10-81 3-3 423 12-10-81 2-142 424 1-14-82 2-250 428 3-11-82 1 9-83 2 9-82 3 9-84 5, 6 9-85, 9-86 431 6-10-82 17-111 432 7-8-82 16-66-16-73 437 11-10-82 14-7 439 3-10-83 2-131 440 3-10-83 2-31 2-301-2-305 2-311 2-323 1.01-1.23 2-306 2.0-2.2 2-307 3.0-3.5 2-308 4.0 2-309 5.0-5.8.2 2-310 6.0-6.7 2-311 7.0-7.9 2-312 8.0-8.5.1 2-313 9.0-9.7.1 2-314 10, 10.0.1 2-315 10.1-10.2 2-316 10.5-10.5.7 2-318 10.6-10.67 2-319 10.7, 10.8 2-320, 2-321 10.9, 10.9.1 2-322 10.10 2-323 10.11-10.11.2 2-324 10.12, 10.13 2-325, 2-326 10.14, 10.14.1 2-327 11.0-11.3 2-328 12.0-12.8 2-329 13.0, 13.1 2-330 442 4-14-83 1-3 9-17-9-19 3 9-21, 9-22 4 9-20 5, 6 9-23, 9-24 7 9-26 9 9-25 10 9-16 9-27 446 5-12-83 14-9 448 9-7-83 1-6 15-5 450 12-8-83 4-3 451 2-9-84 2-319 452 2-9-84 2-328 454 2-9-84 14-52, 14-53 14-61 a, b 14-51 c 14-51 14-54 e 14-60 g 14-55, 14-56 h 14-57 j 14-58 k 14-59 m 14-61 n 14-64 o, p 14-62, 14-63 457 5-10-84 16-45 459 6-14-84 2-251 461 7-12-84 1-3 17-26 462 7-12-84 2-252 463 8-9-84 2-4 465 8-9-84 14-9 466 8-9-84 2-258 467 9-13-84 3 12-53 468 9-13-84 2-253 471 1-10-85 2-199 472 1-10-85 2-313 473 1-24-85 17-7 474 2-14-85 4-33 475 2-14-85 13-32 476 2-14-85 B 17-107 C, D 17-108 477 3-14-85 13-2 478 3-4-85 A, C 17-7 479 5-9-85 2-121 481 8-8-85 4-33 482 9-12-85 2-141 484 10-10-85 15-2, 15-3 487 10-10-85 2-131 488 10-10-85 14-9 489 11-14-85 2-256 490 11-14-85 2-255 491 11-14-85 2-190 492 12-12-85 4-35 493  2-13-86 2-256 494  2-13-86 7-1 495  3-13-86 2-257 496  4-10-86 6-49 498  4-10-86 2-169 499  4-10-86 2-2 500  6-12-86 2-9 501  6-12-86 2-8 502  6-13-86 7-27 503  7-11-86 6-1 6-20 504  7-10-86 3-28 505  8-14-86 1, 2 2-306 3, 4 2-310 506  8-14-86 16-12 509 10- 9-86 1 2-107-2-110 2 2-110 510 11-13-86 16-12 511 12-11-86 2-259 513  1- 8-87 17-113 514  2-11-87 2-260 515  3-12-87 11-36-11-39 516  3-12-87 15-6 517  3-12-87 14-9 518  3-12-87 2-242 519  4- 9-87 12-1 520  4- 9-87 14-65, 14-66 521  4- 9-87 14-15 522  4- 9-87 2-261 523  4- 9-87 2-262 524  5-14-87 2-234 525  5-14-87 2-263 526  5-14-87 2-233 527  6-11-87 2-264 528  6-11-87 2-216 529  7- 9-87 2-265 530  7- 9-87 4-35 533  8-13-87 2-276 534  8-13-87 2-266 536 10- 8-87 2-267 539 12-10-87 2-200 543  2-11-88 2-279 544  3-10-88 2-268 548  5-12-88 1 16-101 2 16-107 3-7 16-102-16-106 549  5-12-88 2-112-2-113.3 550  5-26-88 2-269 552  7-14-88 2-204 (catchline) 553  7-14-88 2-270 554  8-11-88 2-285 557 10-13-88 1 7-26 2 7-27(a) 3-6 7-28-7-31 7 7-27(b) 8, 9 7-32, 7-33 558 10-13-88 1 16-121 2 16-141 3 16-122 4 16-142 5 16-123 6, 7 16-143, 16-144 8-10 16-124-16-126 11 16-145 12, 13 16-127, 16-128 559 10-13-88 1-14 6-1-6-14 560 11-10-88 2-271 561 11-10-88 2-272 562  1-12-89 17-89(d) 564  1-12-89 2-121 567  5-11-89 1 8-251(a) 2, 3 8-252, 8-253 4 8-251(b) 5, 6 8-254, 8-255 568  5-11-89 9-2 569  6- 8-89 8-9 570  9-14-89 2-256(3)-(7) 571 11- 9-89 10-7-10-54 572  1-11-90 2-6(a) 576  3- 8-90 17-109 9-1, 9-2 578  3- 8-90 1 9-16 2-7 9-31-9-36 8 9-20 9-11 9-17-9-19 12 9-21 13 9-37 14 9-22 579  4-12-90 2-273 580  6-14-90 2-328.1 581  7-12-90 4-35 585 10-11-90 1-12 6-61-6-72 586 11- 8-90 1-3 2-144 587 11- 8-90 2-177.1 588 11- 8-90 2-161-2-163, 2-171, 2-171.1, 2-172-2-177, 2-178, 2-260, 2-265, 2-269, 2-279-2-280 589 11- 8-90 2-281 590 11- 8-90 2-274 591 11- 8-90 2-275 592 11- 8-90 2-218 593 11- 8-90 2-161 594 11- 8-90 2-265 595 11- 8-90 2-178 596 11- 8-90 2-162 597 11- 8-90 2-163 598 11- 8-90 2-260(1)-(6) 599 11- 8-90 2-171 600 11- 8-90 2-269 601 11- 8-90 2-263 602 11- 8-90 2-276 603 11- 8-90 2-177 604 11- 8-90 2-176 605 11- 8-90 2-174 606 11- 8-90 2-243(1)-(6) 607 11- 8-90 2-277 608 11- 8-90 2-171.1 609 11- 8-90 2-278 610 11- 8-90 2-279 611 11- 8-90 2-280 612 11- 8-90 2-172 613 11- 8-90 2-173 614 11- 8-90 2-175 615  3-14-91 15-2.1 616  3-14-91 6-10(b) 617  3-14-91 2-178, 2-232 618  3-14-91 16-46 619  3-14-91 2-282 620  3-14-91 2-177.1, 2-274, 2-275, 2-281 621  5- 9-91 16-66-16-71.1, 16-72, 16-72.1, 16-73 622  5- 9-91 1-10 2-4.1 623  6-13-91 1-4 5-1-5-4 5.1-5.3 5-11-5-13 6 5-14 7 5-5 626  8- 8-91 2-257 627  8- 8-91 2-283 628 10-10-91 2-42 629 11-14-91 2-284 630 11-14-91 2-284 631 11-14-91 2-43 632 11-14-91 2-265 633  3-12-92 2-113.4 634  3-12-92 2-319.1 635  3-12-92 6-2 639  5-14-92       Rpld 2-248 640  5-14-92       Rpld 2-238 641  5-14-92       Rpld 2-245 642  5-14-92       Rpld 2-236 643  5-14-92       Rpld 2-244 644  5-14-92       Rpld 2-257 645  6-11-92 2-144(note) 646  6-11-92 2-114-2-114.3 647  7- 9-92 1-5 2-371-2-375 648  9-10-92 1-9       Rpld 6-61-6-72       Added 6-61-6-69 649  9-10-92 1-7 12-101-12-107 650 11-12-92 1-5 6-50 651 11-12-92 2-286 652  1-14-93 2-287 653  1-14-93 2-162 654  3-11-93 2-289 655  6-10-93 2-288 656  6-10-93 2-144 657 10-14-93 9-101, 9-102 658 10-14-93 4-33(3) 659 10-14-93 2-10 660  9-22-92 12-108 661  9-22-92 12-108 662  9-22-92 12-108 663  1-13-94 2-289 664  2-10-94 1, 2 12-56 665  2-10-94 2-11 666  2-10-94 15-7 667  2-10-94       Rpld 12-31-12-34 668  9- 9-93 2-301-2-305 1.00-1.17 2-306 2.0-2.2 2-307 3.0-3.8 2-308 4.0, 4.1 2-309 5.0-5.7 2-310 6.0-6.5 2-311 7.0-7.7 2-312 8.0-8.5 2-313 9.0-9.5 2-314 10.0-10.4 2-315 11.0-11.12 2-316 13.0-12.6 2-317 13.0-13.2 2-318 14.0 2-319       Rpld 2-301-2-331       Rnbd 2-328.1       as 2-320 669  4-14-94 2-134 670  5-12-94 9-111-9-119 671  5-12-94 1-5 2-371-2-375 672  5-12-94 App. A, § 4.2 673  5-12-94 2-310 674  6- 9-94 2-12 675  6- 9-94 2-13 676  7-14-94 Arts. I-V 7-26-7-30 677 10-13-94 2-13 678 10-13-94 2-12 679 11-10-94 7-44 7-47 680  2- 9-95 12-108 681  2- 9-95 2-317(a) 682  2- 9-95 7-44(a), (e) 7-47(b), (c) 683  2- 9-95       Added 10-4 684  4-13-95 1(a) 9-1(a) (b)       Rltd 9-1(h)       as 9-1(i) (c)       Added 9-1(h) 685  4-13-95 2-371-2-374 686  5-11-95 2-6(a) 687  5-11-95 16-34 689  6- 8-95 11-36-11-39 690  6- 8-95 3-34(a) 691  7-13-95       Added 3-41-3-46 692  2- 8-96 1-11.1 693  3-14-96 15-7 694  3-14-96       Added 15-8 695  4-11-96       Rpld 2-141, 2-142 697  5- 9-96       Added 2-14 698  5- 9-96 2-44(d) 699  5- 9-96       Rpld 16-35 701  6-13-96 1-8       Added 2-15 702  7-11-96       Added 14-16 703  7-11-96 9-102(d), (h)       Added 9-102(l)       Rltd 9-102(l)       as 9-102(m) 704  7-11-96 2-320 705  8- 8-96 2-289 708  3-13-97 12-108 709  3-13-97 1-3 4-5 710  3-13-97 11 4-29 711  3-13-97 2-16 712  5- 8-97 1-11.1 713  5- 8-97 1-7 4-41-4-47 714  8-14-97 3-41-3-46 715 10- 9-97 14-51-14-64 716 10- 9-97 7-8 717  3-12-98 2-6(a) 718  3-12-98 1-15       Added 9-121-9-135 719  4- 9-98       Added 2-289 720  4- 9-98       Rpld 2-171.1 
2-289 721  4- 9-98 1       Rpld 2-168 3-8       Added 2-145 722  2-26-98       Added 2-143(l) 723  5-14-98 4-35 724  5-14-98 1-3 2-134 725  6-11-98 3-28 726  6-11-98 1-12       Added 9-141-9-152 727 11-12-98       Added 2-115 1-9       Added 2-115.1-2-115.9 728 11-12-98 2-162 729 11-24-98       Added 2-187.1 730 12-10-98 1-5       Added 2-116 731  2-11-99 3-34(a) 733  3- 3-99       Added 2-162.1 734  3- 3-99 2-163 735  3- 3-99 2-115.2 736  6-10-99       Added 2-17 737  7- 8-99 1-4 2-371-2-374 738 10-14-99 2-131 739 10-14-99 (1)-(5) 2-121 741  6- 8-00       Added 2-44 742  6- 8-00 4-33 743  6- 8-00 (a)1.-3. 5-2   4. 5-3(b)   5., 6.       Added 5-4(6), (7)   7.(a) 5-12(5)   7.(b)       Added 5-12(7)   8. 5-13 (b)       Added 5-15-5-17 744  6- 8-00 16-29 745 10-12-00 8-173 746  3- 8-01       Added 3-35 747  3- 8-01 2-4 748  5-10-01 2-44 749  3- 8-01       Rpld 2-161-2-289 751  5-10-01       Added 13-3 752  5-10-01 1-4 2-371-2-374 753  6-14-01 12-16 754  6-14-01       Added 15-9 755  6-14-01       Added 7-9 756  8- 9-01 2-145 757  9-13-01 3-41 (a)-(e) 3-42-3-46 758  9-13-01 1-5 2-121 759 12-13-01       Added 2-116.1, 2-116.2 760  4-11-02 2-134 761  4-11-02 1-4       Added 10-61-10-64 762  4-11-02 1 2-26 2 2-29 764  5- 9-02       Added 13-26 765  5- 9-02 2-6(a) 766  7-11-02 a)-c) 17-27 767  7-11-02       Added 2-135 769  2-13-03       Added 11-51, 11-52       Rpld 2-16 770  2-13-03 14-63(b) 771  3-13-03 2-301-2-305 Arts. I-XIV 2-306-2-319 772  7- 3-03 2-112-2-113.4 773  9-11-03 7.4.2 2-312(f)(2) 774  4- 8-04 11.13       Added 2-316(n) 775  4- 8-04       Dltd 10-51-10-54 1-7       Added 10-51-10-57 776  4- 8-04 9-101, 9-102 778  5-13-04 11-36 779  6-10-04       Added 4-36 780  5-13-04 16-28 781  5-13-04 1-5 2-355 782  7- 8-04       Added 2-18 783  9- 9-04 4-36 784  9- 9-04       Rpld 2-51-2-57 785  9- 9-04       Added 2-51 786 10-14-04 1-7 10-51-10-57 787 11-10-04 7-42-7-44, 7-47 788  4-14-05 2-44 789  4-14-05 1, 2 2-134(a), (b) 790  4-14-05 2 2-121(b) 791  4-14-05 14-51-14-64 792  7-14-05       Dltd 16-101-16-107 1-8       Added 16-101-16-108 793  9- 8-05 App. A, § 4.2 794  9- 8-05 1-4       Added 12-111-12-114 797  4-13-06 9-101, 9-102 798  4-13-06       Added 15-10 799  8-10-06 11-51, 11-52 800  8-10-06 2 14-65 3 14-66 801  8-10-06 15-7 802  9-14-06       Dltd 2-115-2-115.9 1-8       Added 2-115-2-115.8 803  1-11-07       Dltd 7-41-7-47 1-10       Added 7-41-7-50 804  2- 8-07       Added 2-10.1 805  4-12-07 1-3(1) 9-41-9-43 3(2) 9-50 4 9-44(a) 5 9-44(b)-(d) 6-8 9-51-9-53 9 9-45 10 9-47 11 9-54 12 9-56 13 9-48 14 9-55 15 9-46 16 9-61 17 9-58 18 9-49 19 9-59 20 9-57 21 9-62 22 9-60 23 9-63 806  4-12-07 1.01 8-1 1.02 8-2 1.03 8-3 2.01-2.51 8-4 3.01 8-7 3.02-3.11 8-21-8-30 Ch. IV 8-66 4.01-4.11 8-67-8-77 5.01-5.05 8-78-8-82 6.01 8-83 7.01, 7.02 8-90, 8-91 7.03 8-92, 8-93 7.04-7.12 8-94-8-102 8.01-8.06 8-84-8-89 8.08 8-77 Ch. IX 8-41 9.01 8-52 9.02-9.11 8-42-8-51 9.12 8-53 9.13 8-54, 8-55 9.14-9.16 8-56-8-58 10.01, 10.02 8-111 10.03 8-112 11.01-11.09 8-121-8-129 12.01 8-137 Ch. XIII 8-136 13.01-13.04 8-138-8-141 Ch. XIV 8-206 14.01-14.20 8-142-8-161 15.01, 15.02 8-162, 8-163 Ch. XVI 8-171 16.01-16.05 8-172-8-176 17.01-17.04 8-186-8-189 17.05 8-191 17.06 8-190 17.07-17.14 8-192-8-199 Ch. XX 8-211 21.01-21.07 8-216-8-222 Ch. XXII 8-223 23.01 8-8 23.03, 23.04 8-5, 8-6 807  4-12-07 14-1 808  4-12-07 16 14-15 809  4-12-07 1-14 6-1-6-14 810  4-12-07 1 16-121 2 16-141 3 16-122 4 16-142 5 16-123 6, 7 16-143, 16-144 8-10 16-124-16-126 11 16-145 12, 13 16-127, 16-128 811  4-12-07 10-53, 10-54, 10-56(2), 10-57 812  4-12-07 1 9-16 2-7 9-31-9-36 8 9-20 9-11 9-17-9-19 12 9-21 13 9-37 14 9-22 9-1 813  4-12-07 16-66-16-73 814  4-12-07 1-9 6-61-6-69 815  4-12-07 I-VII 12-101-12-107 816  4-12-07 A.-I. 9-111-9-119 817  4-12-07 1-7 4-41-4-47 818  4-12-07 14-51-14-64 819  4-12-07 1-7 7-8 820  4-12-07 1-15 9-121-9-135 821  4-12-07 1-12 9-141-9-152 822  4-12-07 1-7 7-9 823  4-12-07 3-41-3-46 824  4-12-07 1-7 7-41-7-50 825  5-10-07       Added 2-116.3, 2-116.4 826  5-10-07       Added 4-35 827  6-12-07       Added 8-10 828  6-12-07 2-121 829  6-12-07 2-6(a), (e) 830  9-13-07 1-3       Added 16-27.1 831 10-11-07       Added 15-7.1 832 10-11-07 2-18 833 12-14-07 11-51, 11-52 834  3-13-08 14-3 835  2-14-08 11-1 836  3-13-08 2-134 837  9-11-08 11-1 838  9-11-08 14-3 839  2-11-09 2-18 840  3-12-09 A-E       Added 10-71-10-75 841  7- 9-09       Dltd 10-61-10-64 A-E       Added 10-61-10-65 844  7- 9-09 4-35 845  9-10-09       Dltd 3-41-3-46       Added 3-41-3-45 846  2-11-10 3-41-3-45 847  4- 8-10 1-4 5-1-5-4 5.1-5.3 5-11-5-13 5.4       Added 5-6 5.5-5.7 5-15-5-17 6 5-14 7 5-5 849  7- 8-10 1-7       Added 17-44 850  7- 8-10 11.01-11.03 17-23 12.01 17-24 13.01-13.32 17-25 851  7- 8-10 1, 2 17-112 3 17-113 4-14       Added 17-114-17-124, 
App. A       Rnbd 17-114       as 17-125 852  7- 8-10 1 17-19 2.01-2.27 17-20 3.01 17-77(a) 3.02 17-77(b) 3.03 17-78 3.04 17-79 3.05 17-80, 17-81 3.06-3.12 17-82-17-88 4.01 17-82 5.01-5.03 17-21 6.01-6.03 17-27 853  7- 8-10 2-18(c) 854  9- 9-10 1-9       Added 17-131-17-139 855  9- 9-10 1-21       Added 17-141-17-161 856 10-14-10 2 4-42 4 4-44 7 4-47(a) 857  2-10-11 8-10 858  5-12-11 9-111-9-119 859  6-28-11 6-1-6-15, 
6-61-6-69 861  2- 9-12 16-34 862  2- 9-12       Added 16-13 863  3- 8-12 2-134(a), (b) 864  4-12-12 9-111-9-119 865  4-12-12 4-4 866  8- 9-12       Dltd 6-1-6-15, 
6-61-6-69       Added 6-1-6-14, 
6-61-6-67 867  4-11-13 11-37 868  4-11-13 4-35 869  4-11-13 4-36 870  4-11-13 2-44(c) 871  4-11-13 2-115.3 872  4-11-13       Rpld 2-97 873  4-11-13       Rpld 2-96 874  4-11-13       Rpld 4-3 875  4-11-13       Rpld 4-34 876  2-13-14 2-145 877  3-13-14 14-9, 14-15, 14-51, 14-64, 14-65 878  3-13-14       Added Ch. 2, Art. III, Div. 13, § 2-116.11 879  4-10-14 6-5, 6-10, 6-12, 6-67 880  5- 8-14 Ch. 12, Art. II (Tit.) 12-16-12-19 881  8-14-14 2-112-2-113.4 882 10- 9-14 9-111-9-119 883 10- 9-14       Rpld Ch. 2, Art. III, Div. 4, §§ 2-81-2-84 884  2-11-15 2-121 885  2-11-15 2-18 886  2-11-15 3-28 887  2-11-15 3-41-3-45 889  4- 9-15 16-21 16-27.1 891 11-12-15 9-141-9-152 892 11-12-15 3-41-3-45 894 11-12-15 7-9 895 12-10-15 4-35 898  6- 9-16 2-134 899  6-28-16 9-141-9-152 900  7-14-16       Added Ch. 16, Art. II, Div. 3, §§ 16-81-16-87 901 12- 8-16 16-34 902  2-16-17       Added 14-3(b) 903  4-13-17 4-35 904  4-13-17 14-9(g) 906  6- 8-17       Added 16-14 907 10-12-17 7-9 908  2- 8-18       Rpld Ch. 2, Art., §§ 2-301-2-320       Added Ch. 2, Art., §§ 2-301-2-316  
STATUTORY REFERENCE TABLE 
This table gives the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the state law or related matters. 
G.S. 
Section  Section 
this Code 1-1 1-2 2-15(b) 1-136 12-94 4-124i-4-124p 12-16 4-176e-4-181a 2-45 4-183 2-45 7-9 Char., § 4.11 7-87 et seq. 13-3 7-89 Char., § 6.11 7-92 Ch. 13, Art. III 7-97 Ch. 13, Art. III 7-101A 12-75 7-127-a 2-106 7-127-b 2-111(a) 7-136 12-91 7-137c 17-6 17-7 7-148 Ch. 1 1-11 7-50 17-27 7-148-7-186 Ch. 1 7-148(c)(4)(A)(v) Ch. 14 7-148(c)(4)(B) Ch. 4 Ch. 11 7-148(c)(4)(F) Ch. 14 7-148(c)(4)(G) Ch. 17 7-148(c)(4)(H) Ch. 6 7-148(c)(5)(B) Ch. 2, Art. VI 7-148(c)(6)(A)(i) Ch. 11 7-148(c)(6)(A)(ii) Ch. 17 7-148(c)(6)(B)(i) Ch. 17 7-148(c)(6)(B)(iii) Ch. 17 7-148(c)(6)(B)(iv) Ch. 14 7-148(c)(6)(C)(i) Ch. 14 7-148(c)(6)(C)(ii) Ch. 14 7-148(c)(6)(C)(iii) Ch. 14 7-148(c)(6)(C)(iv) Ch. 14 7-148(c)(6)(C)(v) Ch. 14 7-148(c)(7)(A)(i) Ch. 8 7-148(c)(7)(A)(iv) 3-4 7-148(c)(7)(A)(viii)       Ch. 8, Art. II, Div. 2 7-148(c)(7)(B)(i) Ch. 16 7-148(c)(7)(B)(ii) Ch. 16 16-11 7-148(c)(7)(C) Ch. 17 7-148(c)(7)(E) 3-5 7-148(c)(7)(F) Ch. 14 7-148(c)(7)(F)(i) 10-1 7-148(c)(7)(H)(i) 16-6 7-148(c)(7)(H)(viii) Ch. 7, Art. III 7-148(c)(7)(H)(xv) 3-41 7-148(c)(8)(D) Ch. 7, Art. IV 7-148(c)(10)(A) 6-67 7-148(c)(10)(B) Ch. 2, Art. VII 7-148h 2-356 7-148aa 3-41 3-45 7-148-10a 17-139 7-151A 12-71 12-75 7-152c 6-67 9-101 9-102 7-163a 14-4 7-187-7-201 Ch. 1 7-194 Char., § 4.4 Ch. 1 7-202 et seq. Ch. 16, Art. II 16-40 7-203-7-207 Ch. 16, Art. II 7-234 et seq. Ch. 17 7-245 et seq. Ch. 17 7-253 17-111 7-253A 17-111 7-258 17-106 7-255 17-112 7-259-7-266 Ch. 17 7-274-7-294f Ch. 13, Art. II 7-282b 9-102 7-301-7.313e Ch. 4, Art. II 7-308 Ch. 4, Art. II 7-314-7-322a Ch. 4, Art. II 7-314a Ch. 4, Art. II 7-322a Ch. 4, Art. II 7-324 et seq. Ch. 17 7-421 Char., § 9.8 8-18-30a Ch. 12 8-19 Ch. 12 8-23 Ch. 12 8-24 Ch. 12 8-27 3-34 8-31a-8-37a 2-116 8-40 Ch. 8 8-44 Ch. 8 8-169 2-44(c) 8-169p 2-44(c) 8-169(o) et seq. 2-45(2) 8-208 Ch. 8 8-215 15-4 8-216 15-4 9-169(f) Char., § 2.9 10-19m et seq. 2-112 10-19m 2-113.3 10-19m-2 2-113 12-81(7)-(16) 15-1 12-81b 15-6(a) 12-81c 15-10 12-81f 15-2 12-107a-e 17-7 12-129 15-8 12-129b 15-7 17-111 12-129b et seq. 15-7 12-129n 15-7 12-170a 17-111 12-170aa 15-7 12-170aa et seq. 15-7 12-170v 15-7.1 12-170w(a) 15-7.1 12-409 9-147(a) 13a-1 et seq. Ch. 14 13a-149 14-4 14-1 16-13 14-1(46) 16-14 14-1(47) 15-10 16-14 14-80a 7-48 14-67w 9-111 14-150 16-107 14-150(d)-(f) 16-45 14-162 Ch. 16 14-253a       Ch. 16, Art. II, Div. 2 14-254       Ch. 16, Art. II, Div. 2 16-1 3-34 16-50L(e) 2-116.2 16-230 14-53 19-65a-19-65f 8-93 19-105-19-111 Char., § 6.8 19-386 8-48 8-77 19a-92 Ch. 9, Art. III 19a-109 6-83 19a-200-19a-230 Ch. 7 19a-341 7-1(b) 21-1-21-5 Ch. 9 21-9-21-14 Ch. 9 21-9 9-111 21-27-21-35 Ch. 9 21-30 9-144 21-36-21-38 Ch. 9 21-36 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. II Ch. 9, Art. II 9-1 21-37 Ch. 2, Art. II Ch. 9, Art. II 9-1 21-39-21-45 9-112 21-39-21-47 Ch. 9 9-115 9-119 21-40 9-112 9-113 21a-43 Ch. 9 21a-91-21a-120 Ch. 7 22-358 10-62 22-362 10-63 22-363 10-64 22-364 10-65 22a-6 17-44 22a-36-22a-45 12-51 22a-42a 12-55 22a-92       App. A, § 45.5.2       App. A, § 45.5.3.a.       App. A, § 45.5.4 22a-93(7)       App. A, § 45.5.1.d., e. 22a-93(15)       App. A, § 45.5.3.b. 22a-93(17)       App. A, § 45.5.3.c. 22a-94 App. A, § 45.5 22a-105 App. A, § 45.5 App. A, § 45.5.2 App. A, § 45.5.4 22a-106 App. A, § 45.5       App. A, §§ 45.5.2-45.5.4 22a-107-22a-109 App. A, § 45.5 App. A, § 45.5.4 22a-109b App. A, § 45.5.1 22a-174-33 17-44 22a-207 9-111 22a-220(f) 6-1 22a-220a 6-1 22a-220a(f) 6-1 22a-220a(i) 6-1 22a-226d(b) 6-1 22a-241b(c) 6-67 22a-250(a) 6-1 22a-315 App. A, § 46.1.3 22a-354 et seq. 12-56(a)(1) 22a-354p 12-56(b) 22a-354v 12-56(a)(3) 22a-423 17-7 25-1 et seq. Ch. 17 25-170(b) 2-116.3 27-103 9-144 29-34 9-113(7)f. 29-35 9-113(7)f. 29-36 9-113(7)f. 29-253 Ch. 3 29-260 3-42 30-1 10-53 30-14-30-62a 11-1 30-15-30-17 11-1 30-20 Ch. 9 30-21 11-1 30-22 11-1 30-26 11-1 30-36 11-1 30-38 11-1 30-39 11-1 30-41 11-1 30-43 11-1 30-52 11-1 30-55-30-59 11-1 30-74 11-1 30-86 11-1 30-91 11-1 47a-54a 8-47 49-73b 3-45 52-191 6-66 53a-3 10-53 53a-25 9-113(7) 53a-101 9-113(7)d. 53a-102 9-113(7)d. 53a-106 9-113(7)e. 53a-122 9-113(7)a. 53a-123 9-113(7)a. 53a-124 9-113(7)a. 53a-134 9-113(7)c. 53a-135 9-113(7)c. 53a-136 9-113(7)c. 53a-138 9-113(7)b. 53a-139 9-113(7)b. 53a-157b 17-44 53a-181 7-50 53a-181a 7-50 53a-182 7-50 Ch. 55b Char., § 7.18 Ch. 98 17-131 Ch. 103 17-44 Ch. 110 2-1 Ch. 111 Char., § 7.18 Ch. 124 17-131 App. A, § 46.6.2 Ch. 124A App. A, § 46.6.2 Ch. 126 17-131 App. A, § 46.6.2 Ch. 246 9-111 Ch. 333 8-4 Ch. 354 3-34 Ch. 403 9-111 Ch. 440 17-131 Ch. 444 17-131 Ch. 446h 17-131 Ch. 545 10-56  
