CODE OF ORDINANCES TOWN OF VERNON, CONNECTICUT 
____________ 
CONTAINING THE CHARTER, 
SPECIAL ACTS AND 
GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE TOWN 
____________ 
Published by Order of the Town Council 
____________ 
   
OFFICIALS AT CODIFICATION 
____________ 
John Drost 
Mayor 
____________ 
Michael J. Bouchard 	George W. Russell 
Timothy M. Foley 	Walter W. Simmers 
Vaughn E. Gerber 	John G. Talcott, III 
Douglas D. Grant 	Lena J. Therault 
M. Lisa Moody 	Steven L. Wakefield 
Francis J. Pitkat 	Michael A. Winkler 
Town Council 
 
____________ 
John M. Casey 
Town Attorney 
____________ 
Henry F. Butler 
Town Clerk  
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
____________ 
Daniel A. Champagne 
Mayor 
____________ 
Kimberly Appleyard 
Laura B. Bush 
Bill Campbell 
Julie Clay 
Virginia M. Gingras 
Anne C. Letendre 
Brian R. Motola 
Steven C. Peterson 
Pauline A. Schaefer 
Jim Tedford 
Steve Wakefield 
Michael Winkler 
Town Council 
____________ 
John D. Ward 
Town Administrator 
____________ 
Louis A. Spadaccini 
Town Attorney 
Martin B. Burke 
Mark K. Branse 
Assistant Town Attorneys 
____________ 
Bernice K. Dixon 
Town Clerk
Clerk of Council 
PREFACE 
This Code is a codification of the ordinances of the Town of Vernon, Connecticut of a general and permanent nature. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the ordinances adopted by the town council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this volume, the reader can locate any ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Numbering System 
The numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and municipal codes. Each section number consists of two component parts separated by a dash, the figure before the dash referring to the chapter number and the figure after the dash referring to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the first section of Chapter 12 is numbered 12-1 and the fifth section of Chapter 16 is 16-5. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter and at the same time new sections or even whole chapters can be inserted in their proper place simply by using the decimal system for amendments. By way of illustration: If new material consisting of three sections that would logically come between sections 4-1 and 4-2 is desired to be added, such new sections would be numbered 4-1.1, 4-1.2 and 4-1.3 respectively. New chapters may be included in the same manner. If the new material is to be included between Chapters 12 and 13, it will be designated as Chapter 12.5. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject, the next successive number being assigned to the article or divisions. 
Indices 
The indices have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within each index which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this Code to which the attention of the user is especially directed is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing for the Code. With this system, the Code will be kept up-to-date periodically. Upon the final passage of amendatory ordinances, they will be properly edited and the appropriate page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the Code, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Successfully keeping this Code up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the volume. As revised sheets are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
The publication of this Code was under the direct supervision of Jan Shekitka, Supervising Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Mr. Henry F. Butler, Town Clerk, and Mitchel E. Kallet, Town Attorney, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this Code. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the Town readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the Town's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the Town of Vernon, Connecticut. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the Town of Vernon, Connecticut. 
© Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the Town of Vernon, Connecticut. 1996. 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
ORDINANCE NO. 194 
An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a New Code for the Town of Vernon, Connecticut, Including the Former City of Rockville and the Vernon Fire District; Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances Not Included Therein; Providing a Penalty for the Violation Thereof; Providing for the Manner of Amending Such Code; and Providing When Such Code and this Ordinance Shall Become Effective 
Be It Ordained by the Town Council of the Town of Vernon, Connecticut, as Follows: 
Section 1.  The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances, Town of Vernon," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 14, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2.  All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before February 19, 1991, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein are repealed. 
Section 3.  The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4.  Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provisions of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
Each act of violation and each day upon which such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section whether or not such penalty is re-enacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the town may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief, and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5.  Additions or amendments to the Code, when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the town council to make the same a part of the Code, shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6.  Ordinances adopted after February 19, 1991, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7.  This ordinance shall become effective on the fifteenth day after publication following its final passage. 
This Ordinance shall be effective for a period of not more than ten (10) years from date of adoption. If the Town Council does not act to renew the Ordinance, the Ordinance is repealed. 
Introduced: 
January 21, 1992 
Advertised: 
February 5, 1992 
Public Hearing: 
February 18, 1992 
Council Action: 
February 18, 1992 
Advertised: 
February 21, 1992 
Effective Date: 
March 7, 1992 
RESOLUTION 
RENEWAL OF ORDINANCE #194 
ORDINANCE ADOPTS THE CODE OF ORDINANCES 
TOWN OF VERNON 
WHEREAS, Ordinance #194 "An Ordinance Adopting the Code of Ordinances for the Town of Vernon" became effective March 7, 1992, and 
WHEREAS, Ordinance #194 states in part "THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BE EFFECTIVE FOR A PERIOD OF NOT MORE THAN TEN (10) YEARS FROM THE DATE OF ADOPTION. IF THE TOWN COUNCIL DOES NOT ACT TO RENEW, THE ORDINANCE IS REPEALED," and 
WHEREAS, Ordinance #194 consolidated all of the previous ordinances and established effective dates prior to March 7, 1992 as March 7, 1992, and 
WHEREAS, All subsequent ordinances shall have effective dates consistent with their original adoption, and 
WHEREAS, The Town Council has deemed that it be in the best interest of the Town to renew the Town Code until such time as the Town Council decides that it wishes to review individually or in its entirety Ordinance #194 and the Code that it consolidates. 
THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED, That the Town Council, consistent with Ordinance #194 renews Ordinance #194 for a period of ten years. 
I, Joyce P. Mascena, duly appointed Town Clerk and Clerk of the Council, do hereby certify that the within and foregoing is a true copy of the Resolution adopted by the Vernon Town Council at its Regular Meeting held on March 5, 2002. 
	/s/ Joyce P. Mascena 
      Town Clerk and Clerk of the Town Council 
 	 
AN ORDINANCE RENEWING ALL PREVIOUS ORDINANCES OF THE TOWN OF VERNON 
ORDINANCE #288 
Be it Ordained by the Town of Vernon that: 
Section 1. By resolution of the Town Council of the Town of Vernon at its regular meeting held on March 5, 2002, the Council recognized that Ordinance No. 194 consolidated all of the previous Ordinances and established effective dates of Ordinances enacted prior to March 7, 1992 as March 7, 1992. 
Section 2. In said Resolution, the Town Council determined that it was in the best interest of the Town to renew the Code until such time as the Town Council decides that it wishes to review individually or in it entirety Ordinance No. 194 and the Code that it codifies. 
Section 3. The Town Council hereby renews Ordinance No. 194 for a period of ten (10) years, and all Ordinances adopted previous to this Ordinance for the period of ten (10) years from the effective date of this Ordinance, including all Ordinances which have been repealed by operation of law due to non renewal within 10 years of their effective dates. 
Section 4. This Ordinance shall be effective for a period of not more than ten (10) years from the date of its adoption, and if the Town Council does not act to renew within that time, this Ordinance is repealed. 
Section 5. This Ordinance is effective from its passage. 
Introduced: 
December 2, 2008 
Advertised: 
December 9, 2008 
Public Hearing: 
December 16, 2008 
Council Action: 
December 16, 2008 
Advertised: 
December 27, 2008 
Effective Date: 
January 11, 2009  
PART I - CHARTER AND SPECIAL ACTS  
SUBPART A. - CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the Charter of the Town of Vernon adopted on November 6, 1990. A uniform system of punctuation and capitalization has been used. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation and material in brackets [ ] has been added for clarity. 
 
CHAPTER I. - PREAMBLE 
The Town of Vernon was incorporated in 1808. In the course of time, rural Vernon acquired within its boundaries a flourishing manufacturing center. In recognition of its differing need and in a spirit of cooperation, the City of Rockville was incorporated within the Town of Vernon in 1889. Continuing to manifest the same spirit of cooperation in response to progress and attendant change, the Vernon Fire District was created in 1947. As the town grew further, the separate governmental bodies were consolidated into one in 1965 to form the present Town of Vernon. 
The ability to accommodate change in a reasoned manner and thus provide for the best interest of the town has long characterized the collective political efforts of Vernon's residents. Such ability shaped the content and form of the first Charter in 1965 as well as its revisions. It is the intent of this Charter that all boards, commissions, authorities and departments thus established shall enjoy full and unimpaired exercise of their duties and responsibilities. It is the further intent of this Charter that all town boards, commissions, authorities, and departments shall cooperate in all possible instances for the sound development and proper government of the Town of Vernon, and shall encourage voters to remain informed and participate in the sound development of their town.  
CHAPTER II. - CORPORATE POWERS 
 
Section 1. - General grant of powers. 
In addition to all powers now or hereafter granted to cities, towns and fire districts under the Constitution of the State of Connecticut and the Connecticut General Statues, Revision of 1958, as amended, the Town of Vernon shall have all powers specifically granted by this Charter and all powers fairly implied in or incident to the management of the property, government and affairs of the town, including the power to enter into contracts with the United States or any federal agency, the State of Connecticut or any political subdivision thereof for services and the use of facilities, the exercise of which is not expressly forbidden by the Constitution of the State of Connecticut and the Connecticut General Statutes, Revision of 1958, as amended. The enumeration of particular powers in this and any other chapter of this Charter shall not be construed as limiting this general grant of power but shall be considered as an addition thereto.  
Section 2. - Specific grants of power. 
The Town of Vernon shall have, in addition to all powers granted to cities, fire districts and towns under the Constitution of the State of Connecticut and the Connecticut General Statutes, Revision of 1958, as amended, all the specific powers set forth in section 7-194 of the Connecticut General Statutes, Revision of 1958, as amended, from time to time, such powers to be exercised by the town through the enactment and enforcement of ordinances, bylaws or otherwise.  
CHAPTER III. - ELECTION OF OFFICERS 
 
Section 1. - Applicability of general statutes. 
Except as specifically provided herein, the Connecticut General Statutes, Revision of 1958, as amended, relating to the making and registration of voters, the holding of sessions, for the purpose of making an enrollment of the electors who are entitled to vote in any primary, caucus or election, the conduct of elections, the counting of votes and the declaration of the result shall be applicable to all primary, regular or special elections held in accordance with the provisions of this Charter. The town council shall provide by ordinance for the manner of warning town elections and such additional regulations in respect to elections, not inconsistent with the Connecticut General Statutes, Revision of 1958, as amended, or this Charter, as may be necessary to accomplish the intent of this Charter.  
Section 2. - State and federal officers. 
Nomination and election of state and federal officers, state senators and representatives, judge of probate, two (2) registrars of voters and not more than thirty (30) justices of the peace to be determined by the town council by ordinance shall be conducted and the registrars of voters shall prepare lists of electors qualified to vote therefor, in the manner prescribed by the Constitution and the general and special laws of the State of Connecticut applicable to the Town of Vernon. 
(Ord. No. 209, § 1, 6-18-96)  
Section 3. - Basis of elections of the town officers. 
The election of all elected town officers shall be on an at-large basis. The town council by ordinance shall establish the number of polling places and/or voting districts within the Town of Vernon as may be deemed necessary from time to time.  
Section 4. - Nomination of candidates for town offices. 
Candidates for all elective position in the town shall be nominated (a) by political party endorsement or (b) by independent petition. 
The name of any elector of the town shall be placed on the voting machines at a town election as a candidate for any office to be filled, in whose behalf there shall have been filed with the town clerk (a) a certificate of candidacy as a party-endorsed candidate made in accordance with the provisions of the Connecticut General Statutes, Revision of 1958, as amended, or (b) a petition filed in accordance with the provisions of the Connecticut General Statutes, Revision of 1958, as amended.  
Section 5. - Determination of sufficiency of petitions. 
The town clerk shall, upon filing of any such petition, proceed forthwith to determine its sufficiency by comparing the name of the candidate and the signatures thereon with the latest official list of the registrars of voters and with petitions already filed for the same office. If the town clerk finds the petition insufficient, the town clerk shall notify the candidate in writing forthwith and no further proceedings shall be had thereon except in accordance with an order of a court of competent jurisdiction to which an appeal may be taken from the decision of the town clerk, provided nothing in this section shall be construed as preventing, in the case of petitions found to be insufficient, the obtaining of additional valid signatures and the refiling of the petitions for nomination within the time limits prescribed for the presentation of the original petition. Any such petition shall be recorded as of the time it is refiled.  
Section 6. - Election of nominees. 
No person shall be eligible for election to any town office who is not at the time of election a resident elector of the Town of Vernon, and any person ceasing to be a resident elector of said town shall thereupon cease to hold elective office in the town.  
Section 7. - Breaking a tie. 
When any regular or special municipal election conducted pursuant to the provisions of this Charter results in a tie, with the consent of the tied candidates, the tie may be broken by a single toss of a coin by a third party agreeable to the tied candidates. Otherwise, an adjourned election shall be held in accordance with the Connecticut General Statutes, Revision of 1958, as amended.  
Section 8. - Method of electing town officers. 
Town elections shall be held on the first Tuesday after the first Monday of November in odd-numbered years. There shall be elected from the town at large: 
(a)  One (1) mayor. 
(b)  Twelve (12) members of the town council. 
(c)  Three (3) members of the board of education, all for terms of two (2) years. 
(d)  Three (3) members of the board of education for terms of four (4) years. 
The candidate for the office of mayor receiving the greatest number of votes shall be declared elected. 
The twelve (12) candidates for the town council receiving the greatest number of votes shall be declared elected. The three (3) candidates for the board of education to serve two (2) year terms who receive the greatest number of votes shall be declared elected. The three (3) candidates for the board of education to serve four (4) year terms who receive the greatest number of votes shall be declared elected. These elected candidates shall take office on the Monday following the date of their elections.  
Section 9. - Filling vacancies. 
Unless otherwise provided by law, any vacancy in any elective town office from whatever cause arising shall be filled by appointment of the town council for the unexpired portion of the term or until the next biennial election, whichever shall be sooner; except that when a vacancy shall occur in the office of mayor within two hundred seventy (270) days after a biennial election, the successor shall be chosen by a special election. The town council shall fill a vacancy on the town council by appointing an elector of the Town of Vernon who is endorsed by the political party having endorsed the vacating member. In the event that the vacating member was elected without the endorsement of a political party, the council may then appoint any elector of the Town of Vernon. Vacancies which are the subject of this section shall be filled by seven (7) affirmative votes of the town council.  
Section 10. - Minority representation. 
At the town election no political party nor independent petition shall nominate, and no elector shall vote for, more than eight (8) candidates for the town council. No political party nor independent petition shall nominate, and no elector shall vote for, more than two (2) candidates for the board of education for terms of two (2) years. No political party nor independent petition shall nominate, and no elector shall vote for, more than two (2) candidates for the board of education for terms of four (4) years. All boards and commissions, including those advisory commissions created by the town council, and all appointments to fill vacancies on such boards and commissions shall conform to section 9-167a of the Connecticut General Statutes, Revision of 1958, as amended concerning minority representation.  
CHAPTER IV. - RECALL, INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM 
 
Section 1. - Recall of elective officers. 
Any elective officer of the town may be recalled and removed from public office by the electors of the town. Any elector may file with the town clerk a petition containing the name and title of the elective officer whose removal is sought and a statement of the grounds for removal. Said petition shall be signed in ink or indelible pencil by qualified electors of the town equal in number to at least twenty-five percent (25%) of the total number of electors who voted in the last municipal election in which such officer was elected, provided no recall petition may be filed against any officer until such officer has held office for six (6) months, and only one (1) verified recall petition may be filed against any one (1) incumbent during the term for which elected. Said petition shall be accompanied by a statement of the circulator as provided in section 7-9 of the Connecticut General Statutes, Revision of 1958, as amended. If the town clerk shall determine the petition and the affidavits to be sufficient in manner prescribed by law, a recall vote shall be taken within thirty (30) but not sooner than ten (10) days after the filing of the petition, the form of the question being as nearly as possible[:] "Shall (here insert the name and title of the elective officers whose recall is sought) be recalled?" If any elective officer whose recall is sought resigns before such recall vote is taken, a referendum shall not be held. The elected officer whose removal is sought shall not be removed from office unless fifty percent (50%) of the eligible voters entitled to vote on the question of recall have in fact voted and of those voting, two-thirds have in fact voted in favor of the recall.  
Section 2. - Initiative. 
The electors shall have the power to propose to the town council any lawful ordinance or other measure, limited to the powers and duties of the town council, as provided in this Charter, except an ordinance or other measure appointing or removing officials, specifying the compensation of [or] hours of work of officials and employees, appropriating money, authorizing the levy of taxes or fixing the tax rate. Any elector may file with the town clerk a petition containing a summary and a full writing of such ordinance or measure. Said petition shall be signed in ink or indelible pencil by qualified electors of the town equal in number to at least one percent (1%) of the registered voters at the last municipal election. Said petition shall be accompanied by a statement of the circulator as provided in section 7-9 of the Connecticut General Statutes, Revision of 1958, as amended. If the town clerk shall determine the petition and affidavits to be sufficient in the manner prescribed by law, said ordinance or measure shall be placed on the agenda for the next regular meeting of the town council and the town council shall permit at least one (1) of the electors whose signature appears on the petition to be heard on the proposed ordinance or measure. If the town council fails to adopt the proposed ordinance or measure within forty-five (45) days after the petition, as provided for herein, is filed, and if such petition shall be signed in ink or indelible pencil by qualified electors of the town equal in number to at least ten percent (10%) of the registered voters at the last municipal election, the electors may adopt or reject the same at an election held within ninety (90) days after such petition was originally filed. Unless at least twenty percent (20%) of the electors entitled to vote on the question shall have voted, such proposed ordinance or other measure shall not become effective and the result shall be construed as against adoption. No ordinance or other measure which shall have been adopted in accordance with the election provisions of this section shall be repealed or amended by the town council within two (2) years of its adoption, but such ordinance or other measure may be repealed or amended by petition and vote of the electors in accordance with the provisions of section 3 of this chapter.  
Section 3. - Power of referendum. 
The electors shall have the power to approve or reject at a referendum as herein provided any ordinance or other measure passed by the town council, except an ordinance or other measure appointing or removing officials, specifying the compensation or hours of work of officials and employees, appropriating money, authorizing the levy of taxes or fixing the tax rate. Ordinance or other measures submitted to the town council by initiative petition as provided in section 2 and passed by the town council without change shall be subject to a referendum in the same manner as other ordinances or measures. Within twenty (20) days after the publication of any ordinance or other measure which is subject to a referendum, a petition signed in ink or indelible pencil by qualified electors of the town equal in number to at least ten percent (10%) of the registered voters at the last municipal election may be filed with the town clerk requesting that any such ordinance or other measure be either repealed or submitted to a vote of the electors. Said petition shall be accompanied by a statement of the circulator as provided in section 7-9 of the Connecticut General Statutes, Revision of 1958, as amended. The town clerk shall determine the sufficiency of the petition and the affidavits in the manner prescribed by law. Sixty (60) days after the filing of the petition, if the town council fails to repeal such ordinance or other measure, the question of repeal shall be submitted to the electors of the town. Upon the filing of a sufficient petition, the ordinance or measure shall remain without effect until the electors vote on the question as above mentioned. A majority vote of the electors to repeal the ordinance or measure shall not become effective unless a total of at least twenty percent (20%) of the electors entitled to vote on the question shall have voted and at least fifteen percent (15%) of the electors entitled to vote shall have voted for the repeal. If the vote to repeal fails, the ordinance or measure as passed by the town council shall become effective.  
CHAPTER V. - THE TOWN COUNCIL 
 
Section 1. - Membership of the town council. 
There shall be a town council consisting of twelve (12) members, hereinafter referred to as the town council, the members of which shall serve without compensation except for the reimbursement of actual expenses incurred in the performance of official duties. No member of the town council shall hold any other elective or appointive office under the government of the Town of Vernon as set forth in this Charter.  
Section 2. - Presiding officer. 
The mayor shall attend and be the presiding officer of meetings of the town council. The mayor shall have full right of participation in its discussions but shall have no vote except in the case of a tie. Each newly elected town council at its first meeting, or as soon thereafter as practicable, shall elect from its own number a mayor pro tempore, who in the absence or disability of the mayor shall act as mayor, but this office shall not deprive such mayor pro tempore of a vote on any question.  
Section 3. - Record of proceedings. 
The clerk of the town council shall keep a public record of all proceedings of the council including all roll call votes.  
Section 4. - Procedure. 
At the first meeting of the town council following the town election, the town council shall fix the time and place of its regular meetings and shall provide a method for the calling of special meetings. It shall determine its own rules of procedure. All meetings of the town council for the transaction of business shall be open to the public and the votes shall be recorded as prescribed by section 1-21 of the Connecticut General Statutes, Revision of 1958, as amended from time to time. The town council, except as provided elsewhere in this Charter, shall act by a majority vote of its members who are present and voting. Seven (7) members thereof shall constitute a quorum. Passage of all ordinances shall require approval of no fewer than seven (7) members. 
All ordinances and resolutions shall be confined to one (1) subject, which subject shall be clearly stated in the title. The town council shall keep for public inspection a journal which shall be the official record of its proceedings. The record so kept shall be authenticated for each meeting by the signatures of the presiding officer thereof, or the clerk, or of both.  
Section 5. - General powers and duties. 
The legislative power of the town shall be vested exclusively in the town council, except as otherwise provided in this Charter. Subject to the power of initiative and the power of referendum reserved to the electors by this Charter, the said town council shall have the power to enact, amend or repeal ordinances not inconsistent with this Charter, the Constitution of the State of Connecticut and the Connecticut General Statutes, Revision of 1958, as amended. Each ordinance adopted by the town council shall provide that the ordinance will be effective for a period of not more than ten (10) years from the date of adoption. If the town council does not act to renew the ordinance, the ordinance is repealed. The town council may contract for services and use of facilities of the United States or any federal agency, the State of Connecticut and any political subdivision thereof, or may, by agreement, join with any such political subdivisions to provide services and facilities. The town council is authorized, in adopting ordinances, to incorporate any nationally recognized code, rules and regulations that have been printed in book form, or any code officially adopted by any administrative agency of the state, or any portion thereof, by reference thereto in such ordinance; provided, upon adoption of any such ordinance wherein such code, rules and regulations or portions thereof have been incorporated by reference, there shall be maintained three (3) copies of such code, rules and regulations in the office of the town clerk for examination by the public. Said town council, except as hereinafter provided, may fix the charges, if any, to be made for services by the town or for the execution of powers vested in the town as provided by Charter. Any statutory functions and/or powers of the selectmen not specifically delegated to other bodies shall be delegated to the town council.  
Section 6. - Public hearing on and publication of ordinances. 
At least one (1) public hearing shall be held by the town council before any ordinance shall be passed. Public notice of said hearing shall be given at least five (5) days in advance by publication in a newspaper having a circulation in the Town of Vernon and by posting a notice in a public place. Such hearing and notice shall not be necessary for any ordinance relating to the town council, its procedures, or its appointment or designation of officers. Every ordinance, after passage, shall be given a serial number and be recorded by the town clerk in a book to be kept for that purpose which shall be properly indexed. Within ten (10) days after passage, notice of the passage of an ordinance, described by title or subject matter together with such change in the proposed ordinance, shall be published in a newspaper having a circulation in the Town of Vernon. Every ordinance, unless it shall specify a later date, shall become effective on the 15th day after such publication following its final passage, except as otherwise provided in this Charter, provided an ordinance stated to be a public emergency measure and stating the facts constituting such public emergency shall become effective immediately after such posting and no public hearing or notice of public hearing shall be required for any public emergency measure.  
Section 7. - Investigations. 
The town council shall have the power to investigate any and all departments, offices, agencies, boards, commissions and authorities of the town and for such purposes shall have the power to issue subpoenas. At the request of the town council, any judge may issue a "capias" for the appearance of witnesses and the production of books and papers. Any party to the investigation, on request of any councilmember, may have witnesses subpoenaed on behalf of such party.  
Section 8. - Right of appeal. 
Any person aggrieved by a decision of the town council acting under the provisions of section 7 above shall have the right of appeal from such decision as provided by law.  
CHAPTER VI. - THE ANNUAL TOWN MEETING 
The annual town meeting for the consideration of the budget shall be held on the fourth Tuesday of April at such hour and at such place as the town council may determine. 
The annual town meeting shall be called to order by the mayor or, in his absence, the town clerk. A moderator shall be elected and all business conducted in the manner now or hereafter provided by chapter 90 of the Connecticut General Statutes, Revision of 1958, as amended, except as otherwise provided in this Charter. The town clerk shall serve as clerk of the annual town meeting, but in his absence an acting clerk may be designated by the meeting. 
The annual budget shall become effective only after it has been approved by a majority vote of those qualified voters present and voting at such meeting. Such vote may neither increase nor decrease the amount approved by the town council. Three (3) official copies of the annual budget as finally approved shall be filed with the town clerk.  
CHAPTER VII. - OTHER ELECTIVE BOARDS AND OFFICERS 
 
Section 1. - Relation of board of education to town government. 
The power, duties and functions of the nine (9) member Vernon Board of Education shall be as provided by the Connecticut General Statutes, Revision of 1958, as amended. Candidates for the board of education shall be nominated and elected in the manner provided in this Charter and the terms of office of the incumbents so as to conform with the elective procedures as set forth herein. 
No member of the board of education shall hold any other elected or appointed office under the government of the Town of Vernon, as set forth in this Charter. 
Those powers and duties of the board of finance with respect to the board of education budget and financial program shall be exercised by the town council. 
When inviting bids for services or commodities, the board of education may consider all departments of the town as suppliers of services and commodities and may invite the said departments to bid on the proposed services or commodities[;] and if the bids of the said departments are equal to or less than the bids of other qualified bidders, the board of education shall declare the said departments to be the successful bidders and shall enter into agreements for obtaining the said services or commodities from the Town of Vernon, with payment to be made from the board of education budget.  
Section 2. - Registrars of voters. 
There shall be two (2) registrars of voters as required by statute, whose qualifications, method of election, duties and terms of office shall be in accordance with the Connecticut General Statutes, Revision of 1958, as amended.  
CHAPTER VIII. - COMMISSIONS, BOARDS AND AUTHORITIES APPOINTED BY THE MAYOR 
 
Section 1. - The planning and zoning commission. 
There shall be a seven (7) member planning and zoning commission, the members of which shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of a majority of the town council for terms of three (3) years. No regular member who serves two (2) consecutive full terms shall be reappointed sooner than one (1) year following the completion of the second term. 
Said commission shall have all the powers and duties conferred and imposed upon both planning commissions and zoning commissions by chapters 124 and 126 of the Connecticut General Statutes, Revision of 1958, as amended.  
Section 2. - Zoning board of appeals. 
There shall be a five (5) member zoning board of appeals, the members of which shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of a majority of the town council for terms of five (5) years. No regular member who serves a full five (5) year term shall be reappointed sooner than one (1) year following completion of such term. Such board shall have all the powers and duties conferred or imposed by the Connecticut General Statutes, Revision of 1958, as amended on boards of zoning appeals.  
Section 3. - Water pollution control authority. 
There shall be a five (5) member water pollution control authority, the members of which shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of a majority of the town council for staggered three (3) year terms. All members may serve a maximum of two (2) consecutive full terms and may not be appointed sooner than one (1) year following completion of a maximum term. Except as otherwise provided in this charter, the water pollution control authority shall, with respect to water pollution control matters, have all the powers and duties as set forth in chapter 103 of the Connecticut General Statutes, Revision of 1958, as amended, and shall exercise its powers and duties throughout the Town of Vernon.  
Section 4. - Building code board of appeals. 
There shall be a five (5) member building code board of appeals, the members of which shall be appointed by the mayor with the [approval of] a majority of the town council for staggered terms of three (3) years. All members may serve a maximum of two (2) consecutive full terms and may not be appointed sooner than one (1) year following completion of a maximum term. With respect to building matters, said board shall have all the powers and duties conferred or imposed by the building code adopted by the town council by ordinance.  
Section 5. - Housing authority. 
There shall be a five (5) member housing authority, the members of which shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of a majority of the town council for terms of five (5) years. The housing authority shall be autonomous with respect to housing matters and shall have all the powers and duties, not inconsistent with this Charter, set forth in chapter 128 of the Connecticut General Statutes, Revision of 1958, as amended, and it shall exercise its powers and duties throughout the Town of Vernon. 
The town council may, by ordinance, revoke or revise the authority given to the housing authority under the provisions of this section.  
Section 6. - Alternate members of the planning and zoning commission, zoning board of appeals, building code board of appeals and inland wetlands regulatory commission. 
The mayor shall appoint, with the approval of a majority of the town council, three (3) alternate members to the planning and zoning commission, three (3) alternate members to the zoning board of appeals, three (3) alternate members to the building code board of appeals for terms of five (5) years, and two (2) alternate members to the inland wetlands regulatory commission for terms of three (3) years. The duties of such alternate members shall be those set out in the Connecticut General Statutes, Revision of 1958, as amended.  
Section 7. - Permanent municipal building committee. 
There shall be a seven (7) member permanent municipal building committee, the members of which shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of a majority of the town council for staggered three (3) year terms. All members may serve a maximum of two (2) consecutive full terms and may not be appointed sooner than one (1) year following completion of a maximum term. 
The town council may authorize the permanent municipal building committee to act as agent of the town to survey sites, recommend the acquisition of land, prepare sites and dispose of site buildings, engage architects and engineers and approve plans, procure bids and enter into contract[s] for construction, supervise construction, and accept the work. At least annually, said committee shall inspect, and report to the town council on, the condition of town buildings and structures. 
The town council may revoke or revise any authority given under the provisions of this section.  
Section 8. - Inland wetlands regulatory commission. 
There shall be a five (5) member inland wetlands regulatory commission, the members of which shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of a majority of the town council for staggered terms of three (3) years. Initially, two (2) members will be appointed for terms of three (3) years, two (2) members for terms of two (2) years, and one (1) member for a term of one (1) year. Thereafter, all terms shall be appointed for a period of three (3) years. All members may serve a maximum of two (2) consecutive full terms and may not be appointed sooner than one (1) year following completion of a maximum term. Said commission shall have all the powers and duties conferred and imposed upon inland wetlands regulatory agencies by sections 22a-36 through 22a-45 of the Connecticut General Statutes, Revision of 1958, as amended.  
Section 9. - Pension board. 
There shall be a three (3) member pension board, the members of which shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of a majority of the town council for terms of three (3) years. The pension board shall, with the advice and consent of the town council, be responsible for the administration of the Town of Vernon pension plan. The town council may, by ordinance, revoke or revise the authority given to the pension board under the provisions of this section.  
Section 10. - Cemetery commission. 
There shall be a five (5) member cemetery commission, the members of which shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of a majority of the town council for staggered terms of three (3) years. All members may serve a maximum of two (2) consecutive full terms and may not be appointed sooner than one (1) year following completion of a maximum term. The cemetery commission shall be responsible for the administration, care and operation of all town-owned cemeteries. The commission shall be authorized to receive, hold and disburse all cemetery funds for the Town of Vernon, in accordance with section 19a-296 of the Connecticut General Statutes, Revision of 1958, as needed, as to the disbursement of funds. 
The town council may, by ordinance, revoke or revise the authority given to the cemetery commission under the provisions of this section.  
Section 11. - Removal. 
A member, or alternate member, of any board, commission or authority, as set forth in this chapter, may be removed by the mayor, subject to approval by nine (9) members of the town council.  
CHAPTER IX. - OFFICERS AND BOARDS APPOINTED BY THE TOWN COUNCIL 
 
Section 1. - Town clerk. 
The town council, by seven (7) affirmative votes, shall appoint a town clerk. Such appointment shall be made from a list of the top three (3) candidates chosen exclusively on the basis of technical and administrative qualifications, character, education, training and experience as determined by competitive examinations and such other procedures as established by the town administrator and approved by the town council. Upon appointment such officer shall be included in the classified service and be subject to such rules and regulations as may be adopted pursuant to merit system provisions of chapter XIV of this Charter. The town clerk shall act as clerk of the town council or shall designate an assistant to so act, and shall have such other powers and duties as are prescribed in this Charter or by the town council. The town clerk shall appoint and remove, subject to such rules and regulations as may be adopted pursuant to merit system provisions of this Charter, all deputies, assistants or employees in this office. The town clerk shall receive a compensation fixed by the town council in accordance with the systematic pay plan adopted by the town council and all fees collected by the town clerk's office shall be paid into the town treasury.  
Section 2. - Town treasurer. 
The town council, by seven (7) affirmative votes at a meeting to be held not later than three (3) months after each alternate election, shall appoint a town treasurer to serve for a period of four (4) years from the date of appointment. The town treasurer shall have all the powers and duties imposed by law on town treasurers. The town treasurer shall receive a compensation fixed by the town council.  
Section 3. - Board of tax review. 
The town council, by seven (7) affirmative votes, shall appoint a board of tax review consisting of three (3) members who shall serve for terms of three (3) years. Said board shall have all the powers and duties conferred or imposed by the Connecticut General Statutes on boards of tax review.  
CHAPTER X. - THE MAYOR 
 
Section 1. - Election and qualifications. 
From among the electors of the town, a mayor shall be chosen each two (2) years by election at large. Such mayor shall serve for a term of two (2) years and until a successor shall be elected and qualified and shall take office. 
The mayor shall be the chief executive officer of the town and shall receive such compensation as shall be fixed by the town council. The mayor shall be recognized as the official head of the town for all ceremonial purposes and for military purposes.  
Section 2. - Powers and duties. 
The mayor shall be directly responsible for the administration of all departments, agencies and officers in charge of persons or boards appointed by the mayor under the provisions of this Charter and shall supervise and direct the same. The mayor shall see that all laws and ordinances governing the town are faithfully executed; shall make periodic reports to the town council and shall attend and participate in its meetings as provided in chapter V of this Charter; shall prepare and cause to be printed as soon as possible after the close of the fiscal year an annual town report; shall recommend to the town council such measures as deemed necessary or expedient; shall keep the town council fully advised as to the financial condition of the town; shall prepare and submit to the town council an annual budget for the town government; shall prepare and maintain an administrative code; and shall exercise such other powers and duties as may be required of the mayor by ordinance or resolution of the town council not inconsistent with this Charter. 
The town council shall not diminish by ordinance, vote, or otherwise the powers and duties of the mayor, except those powers imposed by the town council under the provisions of this section. The mayor shall have the authority and responsibility to sign all documents requiring the signature of the chief executive officer. In the mayor's absence the mayor pro tempore shall sign such documents.  
Section 3. - Appointing authority. 
Subject to the provisions of the merit system and other provisions established by this Charter, the mayor shall appoint and remove all department heads and other officers and employees of the town, except the officers and boards elected by the voters, appointed by the town council, appointed by the water pollution control authority, and appointed by the board of education. The mayor may, at any time, delegate to the town administrator the mayor's appointive and removal authority set forth in this section.  
CHAPTER XI. - ADMINISTRATIVE DEPARTMENTS AND OFFICERS RESPONSIBLE TO THE MAYOR 
 
Section 1. - Administrative departments. 
The administrative departments of the town shall include the following departments and such others as may be recommended by the mayor and approved by a majority of the town council: finance department, police department, fire department, public works department, building inspection department, planning department, environmental health department, social services department, parks and recreation department, engineering department, water pollution control department, data processing department and youth services department. Such departments, except as otherwise provided in this Charter, shall have the powers and duties prescribed by law and by ordinance of the town council.  
Section 2. - Administrative officers. 
(a)  The administrative officers of the town shall consist of the following: 
1.  Qualified officers outside the classified service. 
2.  Qualified officers within the classified service. 
3.  Other officers. 
(b)  Definitions: 
1.  Qualified officers are those administrative officers who must take competitive examinations before appointment. 
2.  Officers outside the classified service are those administrative officers who are not protected by the merit system provisions of this Charter. 
3.  Officers within the classified service are those administrative officers who are protected by the merit system provisions of this Charter. 
4.  Other officers are those administrative officers who are not full-time employees of the Town of Vernon, who do not have to take competitive examinations before appointment and who are not protected by the merit system provisions of this Charter.  
Section 3. - Qualified officers outside the classified service. 
(a)  Those included. Qualified officers outside the classified service shall include the following and such other officers as may be recommended by the mayor and approved by a majority of the town council: 
Town administrator. 
Finance officer. 
Police chief. 
Fire chief. 
Public works director. 
Director of water pollution control. 
Town planner. 
Director of social services. 
Director of parks and recreation. 
Town engineer. 
Director of data processing. 
Building official. 
Youth service director. 
(b)  Appointment. If no other method of appointment is set out in this Charter, subject to approval of a majority of the town council, the mayor shall appoint each of such officers from a list of the top three (3) candidates per position chosen exclusively on the basis of technical and administrative qualifications, character, education, training and experience as determined by competitive examinations and such other procedures as established by the town administration and approved by the town council. 
(c)  [Citizenship.] At the time of appointment, each such officer shall be a citizen of the United States, but no other requirement regarding residence or citizenship shall apply. 
(d)  Removal of the qualified officers outside the classified service. Power to remove the qualified officers outside the classified service shall rest solely with the mayor. 
The mayor may act to remove the qualified officers outside the classified service as follows: 
At least thirty (30) days before the proposed removal date the mayor shall notify each member of the town council by certified mail of intent to remove any qualified officer and said notification shall include a statement of the reasons for the proposed removal. The mayor at the same time shall serve on any qualified officer or to such officer's usual place of residence a copy of said notice with the reasons for the proposed removal. 
Within ten (10) days of receipt of said notice, such qualified officer, by written request to each member of the town council, may demand a public hearing on the proposed removal, such public hearing to be conducted by the town council which shall designate one of its elected members to preside. In the event a public hearing is called for, such qualified officer shall not be removed until such public hearing is held. 
The town council shall convene such hearing not earlier than five (5) days nor later than ten (10) days after receipt of the request for the hearing. At the discretion of the town council, said hearing may be recessed and continued as required, but the town council shall conclude the hearing and by majority vote either confirm or disapprove the removal action of the mayor within twenty (20) days after the day of first convening the hearing. 
During the period between the date of notice of intent to remove said qualified officer and the date of the hearing, the mayor shall have the right to suspend such officer. 
During the period of suspension or of removal proceedings, said qualified officer's salary shall continue. The action of the mayor and town council in removing any qualified officer shall be final. Upon suspension of any qualified officer, the mayor may appoint an acting substitute for such qualified officer to serve at the mayor's pleasure but for not more than one hundred twenty (120) days.  
Section 4. - Qualified officers within the classified service. 
(a)  Those included. Qualified officers within the classified service shall include the following and such other officers as may be recommended by the mayor and approved by a majority of the town council: 
Assistant town administrator. 
Assessor. 
Deputy assessor. 
Purchasing agent. 
Collector of revenue. 
Assistant collector of revenue. 
Captain of police. 
Deputy director of public works. 
Deputy health officer. 
Assistant director of water pollution control. 
Economic development coordinator. 
(b)  Appointment. Subject to approval by a majority of the town council, the mayor shall appoint each of such officers from a list of the top three (3) candidates per position chosen exclusively on the basis of technical and administrative qualifications, character, education, training and experience as determined by competitive examinations and such other procedures as established by the town administrator and approved by the town council. Upon appointment, each such officer shall be included in the classified service and be subject to such rules and regulations as may be adopted pursuant to the merit system provisions of chapter XIV of this Charter.  
Section 5. - Other officers. 
Those included: Subject to approval by the town council, the mayor shall appoint and may remove the following officers and such other officers as may be recommended by the mayor and approved by the majority of the town council: 
Town attorney. 
Civil preparedness director. 
Director of health.  
Section 6. - Town administrator. 
Duties. The town administrator shall be directly responsible to the mayor for the following duties and for such other duties as the mayor may assign: 
1.  Carry out administrative policies and rules adopted by the town council and mayor; 
2.  Supervise, coordinate and report on such programs, activities and operations of the town government as the mayor shall designate; 
3.  Perform research and administrative planning functions, and study, analyze and recommend to the mayor improvements in organization, procedures, and departmental operations which will contribute to greater efficiency and economy; 
4.  Assist in the preparation of the annual budget document and recommend to the mayor changes in departmental programs; 
5.  Assist the mayor in the presentation of the annual budget to the town council; 
6.  Under the direction of the mayor, administer the annual operating and capital budget; 
7.  Control town purchases and inventories; 
8.  Assist all elected and appointed boards, officers, authorities and commissions in the performance of their functions, as directed by the mayor; 
9.  Administer the merit system for classified employees, except as to appointments, discipline, suspension, or removal of employees; 
10.  Recommend personnel action to the mayor; 
11.  Sign all contracts for the purchase of materials, goods and services. 
The town administrator shall serve as director or head of any department or office or in any other position in the town government assigned by the mayor. The town council shall not diminish by ordinance, vote or otherwise the duties or delegated powers of the town administrator.  
Section 7. - Town attorney. 
The town attorney, who, at the time of appointment, shall be an attorney at law admitted to practice law in this state, shall have the following duties except as provided elsewhere in this Charter: 
1.  Shall appear for, and protect the rights of, the town in all actions, suits or proceedings brought by, or against, it or any of its departments, officers, agencies, boards, commissions, or authorities; 
2.  Shall be the legal advisor of the town council, the mayor, and all town officers, agencies, boards, commissions, or authorities in all matters affecting the town; 
3.  Shall, upon written request, furnish town officers, agencies, boards, commissions, or authorities with a written opinion on any question of law involving their respective powers and duties; 
4.  Shall, upon request, prepare or approve forms of contracts or other instruments to which the town is a party or in which it has an interest; 
5.  Shall, with the approval of the town council, have the power to appeal from orders, decisions and judgments; 
6.  Shall, subject to approval of the town council, have the power to compromise or settle any claim by, or against, the town.  
Section 8. - Civil preparedness director. 
The civil preparedness director shall plan and coordinate civil preparedness activities of the town and shall represent the town in civil preparedness matters.  
Section 9. - Finance department. 
(a)  [Composition.] The finance department shall consist of the finance officer, the treasurer, the collector of revenue, the assessor, the purchasing agent, and such other employees as the town council may determine. 
(b)  Functions. The finance department shall be responsible for the keeping of accounts and financial records, the assessment and collection of taxes, special assessments and other revenues, the control over expenditures and such other powers and duties as may be required by ordinance or resolution of the town council. Accounts shall be kept by the finance department showing the financial transactions for all departments and agencies of the town. Forms for such accounts shall be prescribed by the finance officer with the approval of the mayor. Financial reports shall be prepared for each quarter and for each fiscal year and for such other periods as may be required by the mayor. 
(c)  Finance officer; powers and duties. The finance officer shall be responsible for the efficiency, discipline, and good conduct of the department. Subject to the approval of the town council, the finance officer may perform the duties of treasurer and may perform the duties of any officer of the finance department and, with the exception of the assessor and the collector of revenue, may consolidate one (1) or more such offices under one (1) person. The finance officer shall assist in the preparation of the annual budget document and departmental estimates of receipts and expenditures. 
(d)  [Collector of revenue and assessor; powers and duties.] The collector of revenue and the assessor shall respectively have all the powers and duties conferred on collectors of revenue and assessors by the Connecticut General Statutes, Revision of 1958, as amended, and such other duties as may be assigned them by the town council or finance officer. 
(e)  Purchasing agent; powers and duties. The finance officer shall act as the purchasing agent until the town council shall determine otherwise. The purchasing agent shall purchase all supplies, materials, equipment and other commodities required by any department, agency, office, board or commission of the town, including the water pollution control authority, except the board of education and the probate court, upon requisition signed by the head of the department, office or agency or chairman of the board, commission, or authority, or responsible employees appointed by such official. 
Nothing herein contained shall be construed to prevent the purchasing agent from serving as the purchasing agent for the board of education and the probate court upon the written request of the chairman of the board of education or the judge of the probate court.  
Section 10. - Police department. 
(a)  [Composition.] The police department shall consist of a chief and such other employees as the town council shall determine. 
(b)  Functions. The police department shall be responsible for the preservation of the public peace, prevention of crime, apprehension of criminals, regulation of traffic, protection of the rights of persons and property and enforcement of the laws of the state and the ordinances of the town and all rules and regulations made in accordance therewith. All members of the department shall have the same powers and duties with respect to the service of criminal process and enforcement of criminal laws as are vested in police officers by the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut and all powers and duties imposed by law on constables except as otherwise provided by rules and regulations of the department. 
(c)  Police chief; powers and duties. The police chief shall assign all members of the department to their respective posts, shifts, details and duties. The police chief shall make rules and regulations concerning the operation of the department and for the care, custody and control of all property used by the department. Disobedience to the lawful orders, rules and regulations of the police chief shall be grounds for dismissal or for other appropriate disciplinary action.  
Section 11. - Fire department. 
The Town of Vernon Fire Department shall consist of the fire chief and such other officers and employees as authorized by the town council from time to time. It is the intent of this Charter that fire protection shall continue to be provided by the voluntary companies heretofore established or as otherwise established by ordinance. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the town council from providing for paid personnel. 
(a)  Functions. The fire department shall be responsible for the protection of life and property from fire and for the enforcement of all laws, ordinances and regulations relating to fire prevention and fire safety. In keeping with past standards of service, administration, personnel, and training all volunteer firefighters shall receive remuneration, allowances, or wages based on their rank and actual service in fire protection or firefighting. 
(b)  Fire chief; powers and duties. The fire chief shall submit such reports as the town council may require and shall submit all requests for appropriations through the mayor. The fire chief shall make rules and regulations concerning the operation of the department and the conduct of the officers and firemen thereof and in proposing such rules and regulations, the fire chief may take cognizance of or include such rules as the personnel of the department may recommend. The fire chief shall be responsible for the efficiency, discipline and good conduct of the department and for the care, custody and control of all property used by the department. Disobedience to the lawful orders, rules and regulations of the fire chief shall be grounds for dismissal or other appropriate disciplinary action.  
Section 12. - Public works department. 
(a)  Functions. The public works department shall have supervision and control of the maintenance of all town-owned structures, except such structures under the control of the water pollution control authority and the board of education. The department shall build, maintain and repair town streets, entrances and exists to all public property, highways and sidewalks. It shall be have control over garbage and refuse collection and the removal of trees within highways and public places. Any provision of this section notwithstanding, the public works department may maintain and care for water pollution control authority facilities or school buildings and grounds if requested by the water pollution control authority or the board of education and approved by the town council. Costs of such maintenance shall be charged against the budgets of the Water Pollution Control Authority or the Board of Education. 
(b)  [Directors.] The public works director shall organize the work of the entire department in such a manner as the director shall deem most economical and efficient and shall be responsible for the efficiency, discipline and good conduct of the department. The director shall execute and enforce all laws, ordinances, rules and regulations coming within the jurisdiction of the public works department.  
Section 13. - Planning department. 
The planning department shall consist of the town planner and such other employees as authorized by the town council from time to time. 
(a)  Functions. Assist and advise the mayor, the town administrator and all other town agencies and officers on the efficient use of land areas within the town, on the disposition and use of town-owned land, and on the location and character of proposed town improvements, installations and construction projects. 
(b)  Town planner; powers and duties. The town planner shall be responsible for the operation of the planning department and shall: 
Serve as technical advisor and administrative officer to the planning and zoning commission and shall assist such commission in the discharge of its statutory duties; 
Aid said planning and zoning commission in keeping up-to-date the various maps, regulations, ordinances, permits and approval forms and other items necessary to its efficient operation; 
Cooperate in the development of town capital improvement programs and capital budget recommendations; 
Undertake studies at the request of the mayor to evaluate long range departmental needs, programs and services and to prepare recommendations regarding town services, improvements, regulations and standards as will best serve the public interest and promote the sound development of the town.  
Section 14. - Environmental health department. 
The environmental health department shall consist of the director of health, the environmental health officer and such other employees as the town council may determine. 
(a)  Functions. The environmental health department shall be responsible for the preservation and promotion of the public health and shall perform such functions and shall have such powers and duties as are imposed by law on health officers and such other powers and duties as the town council may prescribe. 
(b)  Director of health; powers and duties. The director of health shall designate authorized agents to act for him in the performance of any of his duties and shall be responsible for the efficiency, discipline and good conduct of the department. The deputy health officer shall be in charge of the administration of the environmental health activities of the town and shall have power, with the consent of the director of health, to make all rules and regulations relating to the administration of the environmental health department not inconsistent with the Connecticut General Statutes, Revision of 1958, as amended, and with the ordinances of the town, and shall execute and enforce all laws, ordinances, rules and regulations with respect to the public health. 
(c)  [Cooperation with other health organizations.] Nothing contained in this section or elsewhere in this Charter shall prohibit or be construed to prohibit the Town of Vernon and specifically the environmental health department of the Town of Vernon from cooperating with other towns or political subdivisions of the state or private organizations in the formation and operation of district or regional public health organizations under conditions established by the state department of health services or by other individuals, groups, foundations or associations.  
Section 15. - Social services department. 
The social services department shall consist of the director of social services and such other employees as the town council may determine. 
(a)  Functions. The social services department shall have all the powers and duties relating to the poor, disabled and dependent persons vested by law in the selectmen of towns and such other powers and duties as the town council may prescribe. 
(b)  Director of social services; powers and duties. The director of social services shall be responsible for the efficiency, discipline and good conduct of the department. The director shall be in charge of the administration of public assistance activities of the town and shall have power to make all rules and regulations relating to the administration of the department not inconsistent with the Connecticut General Statutes, Revision of 1958, as amended, and with the ordinances of the town. The director shall execute and enforce all laws, ordinances, rules and regulations with respect to public assistance. 
(c)  [Cooperation with other groups.] Nothing contained in this section or elsewhere in this Charter shall prohibit or be construed to prohibit the Town of Vernon and specifically the social services department of the Town of Vernon from cooperating with other towns or political subdivisions of the state or private organizations in the formation and operation of district or regional general assistance administration under conditions established by the state department of income maintenance or by other individuals, groups, foundations or associations.  
Section 16. - Parks and recreation department. 
The parks and recreation department shall consist of the director of parks and recreation and such other employees as the town council may determine. 
(a)  Functions. The parks and recreation department shall be responsible for the supervision and control of all parks, recreation areas and facilities belonging to the town. Upon direction of the mayor or town administrator, maintenance operations on buildings and grounds may be performed by the public works department, provided the expense of such operations are charged to the budget of the parks and recreation department. 
(b)  The director of parks and recreation; powers and duties. The director of parks and recreation shall administer the recreation programs and shall have the authority to fill authorized positions in the department and shall be responsible for the efficiency, discipline and good conduct of personnel employed in the department. The director shall have supervision and control of all parks, recreation areas and facilities belonging to the town. To the fullest extent possible, the director shall coordinate programs and activities with those of the board of education and may cooperate with other governmental units, citizen groups, foundations and associations in the conduct of recreational programs and activities.  
Section 17. - Engineering department. 
The town engineering department shall consist of the town engineer, who shall be a professional engineer licensed in the State of Connecticut, and such other employees as authorized by the town council from time to time. 
(a)  Functions. To perform engineering activities for the Town of Vernon; to review subdivision maps, plans of development and proposed zone changes; to act as consulting agency for the engineering, construction and maintenance of town projects and facilities; to perform such other functions as the mayor and the town council shall direct. 
(b)  Town engineer; powers and duties. The town engineer shall be responsible for the efficiency, discipline and good conduct of the engineering department. The town engineer shall be in charge of the engineering activities of the Town of Vernon and shall have the authority to make all rules and regulations relating to the administration of the engineering department. 
The town engineer shall advise the public works department, the planning and zoning commission and other town officials on engineering matters relating to their departments and shall perform such other duties as the mayor and the town council may direct.  
Section 18. - Department of water pollution control. 
The department of water pollution control shall consist of the director of water pollution control, the assistant director of water pollution control and such other employees as the water pollution control authority may determine. The water pollution control authority shall appoint, subject to provisions of sections 3 and 4 of this chapter, the director and other employees of the department of water and pollution control. 
(a)  Functions. The department of water pollution control shall be responsible for the preparation of water service and water pollution control plans; the construction, operation and maintenance of the sewage and water system owned by the Town of Vernon; and the keeping of accounts and records pertaining to water and sewage matters. 
The department shall establish such procedures as are necessary relating to the collection and depositing in the town treasury of all money received for fees, permits, sewer user charges, assessments and other forms of income, and may, with the approval of the mayor, utilize the assistance of other town officers and departments. This will enable the department to monitor all functions falling under the purview of the divisions of the water pollution control authority. 
(b)  Director of water pollution control; powers and duties. The director of the department of water pollution control shall organize the work of the department in the most economical and efficient manner and shall be responsible for the efficiency, discipline and good conduct of the department. The director shall enforce all laws, ordinances, rules and regulations coming within the jurisdiction of the department of water pollution control.  
Section 19. - Data processing department. 
The data processing department shall consist of the director of data processing and such other employees as authorized by the town council. 
(a)  Functions. To perform all data processing activities for the Town of Vernon including, but not limited to, the board of education, the water pollution control authority and all elected or appointed boards and commissions; to develop and maintain all town data processing projects and facilities; to perform such other functions as the mayor and the town council shall direct. 
(b)  Director of data processing; powers and duties. The director of data processing shall be responsible for the efficiency, discipline and good conduct of the data processing department. The director shall be in charge of all the data processing activities of the Town of Vernon and shall have the authority to make all rules and regulations relating to the administration of the department.  
Section 20. - Building inspection department. 
The building inspection department shall consist of the building official and such other employees as authorized by the town council. 
(a)  Functions. To perform building inspection activities for the Town of Vernon including the board of education, the water pollution control authority and all elected or appointed boards and commissions; to enforce the building code of the Town of Vernon; to perform such other functions as the mayor and the town council shall direct. 
(b)  Building official; powers and duties. The building official shall be responsible for the efficiency, discipline and good conduct of the building inspection department. The building official shall have the authority to make all rules and regulations relating to the administration of the department. The building official shall be the enforcement officer for the Town of Vernon Planning and Zoning Commission.  
Section 21. - Youth services department. 
The youth services department shall consist of the youth services director and such other employees as the town council shall determine. 
(a)  Functions. The youth services department shall be responsible for the supervision and control of all activities and programs connected with the counseling of youths of the Town of Vernon to prevent delinquency and to improve social conditions. 
(b)  Youth services director; powers and duties. The youth services director shall be responsible for the efficiency, discipline and good conduct of the youth services department. The director shall be in charge of all programs and activities concerning youth services undertaken by the Town of Vernon through action of the town council. 
(c)  [Cooperation with other groups.] Nothing contained in this section or elsewhere in this Charter shall prohibit, or be construed to prohibit, the Town of Vernon, and specifically the youth services department, from cooperating with other towns or political subdivisions of the state or with private organizations, groups, foundations, associations or individuals in the formulation and administration of department programs and activities.  
CHAPTER XII. - FINANCE ADMINISTRATION 
 
Section 1. - Fiscal year. 
The fiscal year of the town is July 1 through June 30. The town council shall have power to fix the assessment date and the tax year.  
Section 2. - General form of budget presentation. 
The mayor shall require each department, office or agency of the town supported wholly or in part by town funds, or for which a specific town appropriation is made, including the board of education, to set forth, in narrative or such other form as the mayor may prescribe, a program or programs showing services, activities and work accomplished during the current year and to be accomplished during the ensuring year. Such description shall include separate accountings for any enterprise activities conducted by said departments, offices and agencies.  
Section 3. - Departmental estimates. 
The mayor shall compile preliminary estimates for the annual budget. The head of each department, office or agency of the town as described in section 2 of this chapter, including the board of education, not later than February 10, shall file with the mayor, on forms prescribed and provided by the mayor, a detailed estimate of the expenditures to be made by each department, office or agency and the revenue other than tax revenue to be collected thereby in the ensuing fiscal year and such other information as may be required by the town council or the mayor. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the enterprise activities or expenditure and revenue estimates of the water pollution control authority; provided, however, that said authority, not later than February 10, shall provide the mayor with an estimate of the amount of any appropriation from tax revenues to be made in support or subsidization of any enterprise activity in the ensuing fiscal year.  
Section 4. - Duties of the water pollution control authority and the town council on enterprise activity budgets. 
Not later than March 15, the water pollution control authority shall present to the town council a summary and line item budget for each enterprise activity under its jurisdiction, in a manner and format as prescribed for the mayor's budget in section 5 of this chapter. 
Not later than April 15, the town council shall advise the water pollution control authority of any recommendations which it may choose to make with respect to expenditures for enterprise activities under said authority's jurisdiction. Such recommendations may be made by line item. 
The water pollution control authority shall, not later than ten (10) days from the receipt of such recommendation, adopt a budget for each enterprise activity under its jurisdiction. In the event that any such adopted budget does not incorporate the recommendations of the town council provided for by this section and section 6 of this chapter, the authority shall state why such recommendations were not accepted. 
In the event that the recommendations of the town council are not incorporated in any budget adopted by the water pollution control authority, the town council, within fifteen (15) days by a two-thirds vote of its membership, may amend such budget to reflect in whole or in part any recommendation previously made under the provisions of this section and section 6 of this chapter. No expenditure affected by a council recommendation shall be made that would cause an expenditure for any enterprise activity that would be greater than that allowed by the greater of the council's recommendation or the budget of the prior year until the fifteen (15) days allowed for council action has passed.  
Section 5. - Duties of the mayor on the budget. 
Not later than March 15, the mayor shall present to the town council a budget consisting of: (a) a budget message outlining the financial policy of the town government and describing in connection therewith the important features of the budget plan indicating any major changes from the current year in financial policies, expenditures and revenues, together with the reasons for such changes, and containing a clear general summary of its contents; (b) estimates of revenue, presenting in parallel columns the itemized receipts collected in the last completed fiscal year, the receipts collected during the current fiscal year prior to the time of preparing the estimates, total receipts estimated to be collected during the current fiscal year, and estimates of the receipts, other than from the property tax, to be collected in the ensuing fiscal year; (c) itemized estimates of expenditures, presented in parallel columns the actual expenditures for each department, office, agency or activity for the last completed fiscal year and for the current fiscal year prior to the time of preparing the estimates, total expenditures as estimated for the current fiscal year, and the mayor's recommendations of the amounts to be appropriated for the ensuing fiscal year for all items, and such other information as may be required by the town council. The mayor shall present reasons for all recommendations. The water pollution control authority shall have the duties described in section 4 of this chapter. The mayor shall be provided the opportunity to review the water pollution control authority's expenditure and revenue estimates and may make recommendations regarding such estimates to the town council, and the board of education shall have the same duties and follow the same form and procedure with respect to the budget of the board of education as required by the mayor in section 3 of this chapter for other departmental estimates. As part of the budget the mayor shall present a program, previously considered and acted upon by the town planning commission in accordance with section 8-24 of the Connecticut General Statutes, Revision of 1958, as amended, concerning municipal improvements of proposed capital projects for the ensuing fiscal year and for five (5) years thereafter. Estimates of the costs of such projects shall be submitted by each department, office or agency annually in the form and manner prescribed by the mayor. The mayor shall recommend to the town council those projects to be undertaken during the ensuing fiscal year and the method of financing the same. The town council may by ordinance establish a capital improvement committee to advise and assist the mayor in preparing said program. Such committee shall be appointed by the mayor and shall have such duties and powers as the town council shall prescribe.  
Section 6. - Duties of the town council on the budget. 
The town council shall hold two (2) or more public hearings, the last of which shall be the annual town meeting, not later than April 30 at which any elector or taxpayer may have an opportunity to be heard regarding appropriations for the ensuing fiscal year. Following receipt of the estimates from the mayor, the water pollution control authority and the board of education, the town council shall cause sufficient copies of said estimates to be made available for general distribution in the office of the town clerk, and at least five (5) days prior to the aforementioned public hearings, the town council shall cause to be published in a newspaper having circulation in the town a notice of such public hearings and a summary of the said proposed budget and enterprise activity estimates showing anticipated revenues by major sources and proposed expenditures by functions or departments in the same columnar form as prescribed for budget estimates in section 5 of this chapter and shall also show the amount to be raised by taxation. Within ten (10) days after the final such public hearing, the town council shall approve a budget and shall cause such budget to be prepared and presented to electors and taxpayers at the annual town meeting for adoption. Within five (5) days of adoption of the annual budget by the annual town meeting, the town council shall fix the tax rate in mills which shall be levied on the taxable property in the town for the ensuing fiscal year. For the purposes of chapter 108 of the Connecticut General Statutes, Revision of 1958, as amended, the town council shall be deemed the budget making authority and the legislative body of the town and shall have all the powers and duties contained in said chapter 108 for the creation of a reserve fund for capital and nonrecurring expenditures.  
Section 7. - Execution of the budget. 
Prior to July 1, the town administrator shall advise each department, agency or office head of the appropriations approved for each unit. Within ten (10) days thereafter, any department, agency or office head, as requested by the town administrator, shall submit to the town administrator a work program for the full fiscal year with a suggested schedule of monthly appropriation allotments which shall not exceed in total the corresponding individual appropriation. The town administrator shall review and modify as necessary the proposed work program and suggested monthly allotment schedule and submit to the mayor the recommended program and allotment schedule for all appropriations for the budget year. Upon approval of the mayor, the town administrator shall advise each department, agency and office head of the approved program and allotment schedule. The town administrator shall file a copy of the allotments with the finance officer, who shall authorize all expenditures for the offices, departments and agencies to be made from the appropriations on the basis of approved allotments and not otherwise. An approved allotment may be revised during the budget year in the same manner as the original allotment was made. If at any time during the budget year the town administrator shall ascertain that the available income, plus balances, for the year will be less than the total appropriations, the town administrator shall reconsider the work programs and allotments of the several offices, departments and agencies and recommend to the mayor revised allotments so as to forestall the making of expenditures in excess of the said income.  
Section 8. - Emergency appropriations. 
Emergency appropriations not exceeding five percent (5%) of the current budget for operations and capital improvements in any one (1) fiscal year may be made upon the recommendation of the mayor and by a vote of not fewer than three-fourths of the town council present and constituting a quorum for the purpose of meeting a public emergency threatening the lives, health or property of citizens. A public hearing, at which any elector or taxpayer of the town shall have an opportunity to be heard, shall be held prior to making such appropriation. Notice of such hearing shall be given in a newspaper having circulation in the town not more than ten (10) nor less than five (5) days prior to such hearing. Such hearing and notice of hearing may be waived if the town council, by at least three-fourths of its present constituting a quorum, shall decide that a delay in making the emergency appropriation would jeopardize the lives, health or property of citizens. In the absence of an available unappropriated and unencumbered general cash balance to meeting such appropriation, additional means of financing shall be provided in such manner, consistent with the provisions of the Connecticut General Statutes, Revision of 1958, as amended, and of this Charter, as may be determined by the town council.  
Section 9. - Purchasing. 
Purchases for the Town of Vernon, except the water pollution control authority, the board of education and the probate court, shall be made under such rules and regulations as may be established by the town council. For any purchase of $25,000.00 or more, the Finance Officer or Town Administrator shall invite sealed bids unless the Town Council shall decide it to be against the best interests of the Town. The finance officer or town administrator shall give at least ten (10) days' public notice to potential bidders by publication at least once in a newspaper having circulation in the town and shall award the contract to the lowest responsible bidder thereon or may reject all such bids or proposals. All such sealed bids or proposals shall be opened publicly. Any purchase between $5,000.00 and $25,000.00 must be substantiated by at least three (3) written price quotations. 
( Ord. No. 305 , §§ 1, 2, 10-28-16)  
Section 10. - Accounting and financial control. 
(a)  No purchase shall be made by any department, board, commission or officer of the town, other than the board of education and the probate court, except through the finance department and such purchases shall be made under such rules and regulations as may be established by the town council or the water pollution control authority. The finance officer shall record the amount of authorized purchases and contracts for future purchases as encumbrances against the appropriation from which they are to be paid. 
(b)  No voucher claim or charge against the town including those of the board of education shall be paid until the same has been audited by the finance officer or his agent and approved by him for correctness and legality. Checks will be drawn and signed by the finance officer for the payment of approved claims which shall be valid only when countersigned by the town treasurer or town administrator. In the absence or inability to act of either the finance officer, town administrator or town treasurer with respect to the above duty, the mayor shall be authorized to substitute temporarily for either one of them, but not for any two (2) of them. 
(c)  The finance officer shall prescribe the time at which and the manner in which persons receiving money on account of the town shall pay the same to the town treasurer. 
(d)  The several departments, commissions, officers and boards of the town including the board of education and water pollution control authority shall not involve the town in any obligation to spend money for any purpose in excess of the amount appropriated therefor until the matter has been approved and voted by the town council and each order drawn upon the town treasurer shall state the department, commission, board or officer and the appropriation against which it is to be charged. The finance officer shall supply monthly reports showing the status of appropriation allotments to each organization unit head. When any department, commission, board or officer shall desire to secure a transfer of funds in its appropriation from funds within an account classification, before incurring any expenditure therefor, such department, commission board or officer shall make application to the finance officer, whose duty it shall be to examine into the matter, and upon approval of the finance officer such transfer may be made, but not otherwise. When any department, commission, board or officer shall desire to secure a transfer of funds in its appropriation from funds set apart for one specific purpose to another, with the exception of transfers within account classifications as referenced above, before incurring any expenditure therefor, such department, commission board or officer shall make application to the finance officer, whose duty it shall be to examine into the matter, and upon approval of the town council such transfer may be made, but not otherwise. 
(e)  Upon the request of the mayor, but only within the last three (3) months of the fiscal year, the town council may transfer any unencumbered appropriation, balance or portion thereof from one (1) department, commission, board or office to another. No transfer shall be made from any appropriations for debt service and other statutory charges until such time that all obligations have been met or provided for by encumbrance. 
(f)  Additional appropriations over and above the total budget or a new appropriation may be made from time to time by resolution of the town council upon recommendation of the mayor except that any appropriation or new appropriation in excess of 1/10 of 1% of the total budget shall not be approved unless a public hearing is held and the sum approved by a special town meeting held under the provisions as provided elsewhere in this Charter. 
(g)  Appropriations for construction or for other permanent improvements, from whatever source derived, shall not lapse until the purpose for which the appropriation was made shall have been accomplished or abandoned, provided any such project shall be deemed to have been abandoned if three (3) fiscal years shall elapse without any expenditure from or encumbrance of the appropriation therefor. Any portion of an annual appropriation remaining unexpended and unencumbered at the close of the budget year shall lapse. 
(h)  Every payment made in violation of the provisions of this Charter shall be deemed illegal and every official authorizing or making such payment or taking part therein and every person receiving such payment or taking part therein shall be jointly and severally liable to the town for the full amount so paid or received. If any officer or employee of the town shall knowingly incur any obligation or shall authorize or make any expenditure in violation of the provisions of this Charter or take any part therein, such action shall be cause for removal. 
(i)  With respect to enterprise activities under its jurisdiction, the water pollution control authority shall have and exercise all of the powers and duties conferred on the mayor and town council by this section. In the event that any provision of this chapter is in conflict with commonly accepted enterprise fund accounting practices, it shall cease to be effective to the extent necessary to eliminate any such conflict.  
Section 11. - Money collected by town officers and employees. 
Except as otherwise provided by ordinance, all money, from whatever source and for whatever purpose, collected by officers and employees of the town in their official capacities belong to the town and shall be paid to the town treasury.  
Section 12. - Borrowing. 
The town shall have the power to incur indebtedness by issuing its bonds or notes as provided by the Connecticut General Statutes, Revision of 1958, as amended, subject to the limitations thereof and the provisions of this section. The issuance of bonds and notes shall be authorized by ordinance and if any such bond issue or issuance of notes, except notes in anticipation of taxes to be paid within the fiscal year in which issued, and bonds or notes issued pursuant to the provisions of chapter 110 of the Connecticut General Statutes, Revision of 1958, as amended, entitled "Uniform Fiscal Year," shall exceed $10,000.00 in any fiscal year, said bond issue or issuance of notes shall be approved by a referendum vote.  
Section 13. - Annual audit. 
The town council, by seven (7) affirmative votes at a meeting to be held not later than three (3) months before the end of the fiscal year, shall designate an auditor or auditors to audit the books and accounts of the town in accordance with the provisions of chapter III of the Connecticut General Statutes, Revision of 1958, as amended.  
CHAPTER XIII. - TAXATION 
 
Section 1. - Taxing district. 
(a)  It is the intent of this Charter that, insofar as practicable, taxes in the Town of Vernon shall be levied in equitable proportion to benefits and services received. For the purpose of financing the costs of services which are of general benefit and for general government purposes, the Town of Vernon shall constitute one (1) taxing district. The town council shall define by ordinance those services which are of general benefit and for general government purposes and those which are of a special benefit nature. 
(b)  The costs of all services other than those of general benefit and for general government purposes and excepting those provided by the board of education shall be financed by user service charges, by connection fees, by special assessments against benefited properties or by a combination of these methods in a manner provided by ordinance or by the Connecticut General Statutes, Revision of 1958, as amended. 
(c)  The town council is hereby empowered to determine and have prepared lists of properties against which necessary special assessments, user charges or connection fees shall be charged to provide financial support for services which are of a special benefit nature; provided, however, that the water pollution control authority shall exercise the above responsibilities with respect to special benefits relating to sewer and water activities. 
(d)  The amortization of existing facilities for the disposal of sewage, rubbish and garbage and capital costs for construction of new such facilities shall be a general obligation of the town. 
(e)  Nothing in this section shall prohibit or be construed to prohibit the town council from levying a proper tax or charge to cover all costs of operation, maintenance, rehabilitation, construction or payment of debt principal and interest for services, facilities and improvements against any person or property within the Town of Vernon which is hereafter benefited by said services, facilities or improvements.  
Section 2. - Extension of services. 
(a)  Upon the extension of a sewer line past any property for which there exists at the time of such extension an adequate private sewerage system, the owner of said property may or may not, at his option, connect that property to the sewer line. If he chooses not to avail himself of the sewer extension, he shall not be required to do so as long as his private sewerage system is not a menace to the health and safety of the community. Any building which is erected and any subdivision which is developed in the town which can equitably be serviced by an existing sewer line or an extension thereof shall be required to be connected to same. The property owner shall be liable for any assessment or charge levied by the town council or the water pollution control authority in appropriate cases whether or not be chooses to connect his property to the sewer line. 
(b)  Residents of the town shall have the right to petition for the extension of any town service. The town council by ordinance may authorize such extension. This provision shall not impair the authority of the town council to authorize by ordinance the extension of services on its own initiative. 
Before authorizing the extension of services through the petition process, the town council after receiving petitions shall seek an opinion from the planning and zoning commission which shall have thirty (30) days in which to transmit its opinion, and the town council shall hold a public hearing in the manner specified by this Charter for all ordinances. The town council shall determine whether or when services petitioned for shall be extended. 
The town administrator shall prepare a suitable petition form, which shall be available in the town clerk's office. Completed petition forms shall define the area of town for which the extension of services is sought and the nature of the requested services. Forms shall include or be accompanied by the signature of a majority of property owners in the defined area and the authenticity of the signatures shall be sworn to by the person or persons filing the petition with the town clerk. 
The town clerk shall determine whether a majority of property owners in the defined area have signed the petition and shall communicate such finding, the petition form and signatures to the town council. 
(c)  Extensions of service shall be financed through an appropriate user service charge, connection fee or special assessment as provided by chapter 103 of the Connecticut General Statutes, Revision of 1958, as amended, or in such manner as may be provided by the town council.  
Section 3. - Tax bills. 
It shall be the duty of the collector of revenue to mail to each taxpayer, before the date when taxes are due and payable, a tax bill, the form of which shall be acceptable to the state commissioner of revenue services.  
Section 4. - Assessment and collection of taxes. 
Except as specifically provided in this chapter, the assessment of property for taxation and the collection of taxes shall be carried on as provided in the Connecticut General Statutes, Revision of 1958, as amended, or special laws of the State of Connecticut applicable to the Town of Vernon.  
CHAPTER XIV. - THE MERIT SYSTEM 
 
Section 1. - Merit system established. 
There shall be established a merit system which shall provide that all officers and employees in the classified service of the town, as described in section 2 below, shall be appointed on the basis of merit and in conformity with recognized principles of public personnel administration. For purposes of this chapter, an employee is a person who works at least twenty (20) hours per week on a regularly scheduled basis.  
Section 2. - The classified service. 
The classified service shall include appointees to all presently existing positions or those hereafter created except the following: Elective officers and persons appointed to fill vacancies in elective offices; members of boards and commissions; employees of the board of education; persons employed in a professional capacity to make or conduct a temporary and special inquiry, study or investigation; persons employed on a part-time basis; and persons employed for a temporary period not exceeding four (4) months and other persons specifically excepted in chapter XI, section 3 of this Charter. It shall be the duty of the town administrator to cause to be prepared a statement of the duties and responsibilities of each position in the classified service and of the minimum qualifications for appointment to such positions. These statements when approved by the mayor shall comprise the classification plan of the town which shall become effective upon approval by resolution of the town council and which may be amended upon recommendation of the mayor, by resolution of the town council. New or additional positions in the classified service may be created and changes in the duties and responsibilities of existing positions may be made by resolution of the town council upon the recommendation of the mayor.  
Section 3. - Personnel rules. 
The town administrator shall cause to have prepared a set of personnel rules, which shall provide, among other things, for the method of holding competitive examinations for entrance or promotion, the establishment and maintenance of lists of eligibles, administration of the classification plan, probationary periods of employment, hours of work, vacations, sick leaves and other leaves of absence, removals (subject to section 4 of this chapter), and such other rules as may be necessary to provide an adequate and systematic procedure for the handling of the personnel affairs of the town. Such rules and any amendments thereto shall become effective upon being approved by the town council upon recommendation of the mayor and being filed by the town administrator with the town clerk. They shall have the force of and effect of law. Copies of such rules and any amendments thereto shall be distributed to all members of the classified service.  
Section 4. - Exemptions from tenure provisions of the merit system. 
The tenure provisions of the merit system which provide that no employee in the classified service of the town may be terminated except for cause or because of reduction in force due to necessary economics, or because of abolition or consolidation of positions by reorganization, shall not be applicable to the officers listed in sections 3 and 5 of chapter XI of this Charter and such other department head positions the town council may create subject to other provisions of this Charter.  
Section 5. - Pay plan. 
(a)  The town administrator shall prepare for the mayor a standard, systematic schedule of pay for each class of position in the classified service. The mayor shall submit the pay plan to the town council with desired changes and such plan shall take effect when adopted by the town council or on the thirtieth day after it is submitted if prior thereto the town council has not disapproved it by resolution. 
(b)  The pay plan adopted by the town council shall include a minimum and maximum and such intermediate rates as may be deemed desirable for each class of position. Amendments to the pay schedule may be adopted by the town council, from time to time, upon recommendation of the mayor. In increasing or decreasing items in the town budget, the town council shall not increase or decrease any individual salary item but shall act solely with respect to classes of positions as established in the classification and pay plans. In no event shall the town council reduce the salary of a class below the minimum or raise it above the maximum salary established by the pay plan except by amendment to the pay plan.  
Section 6. - Retirement of town employees. 
The town council may provide by ordinance a system of retirement allowances for the town's regular full-time paid employees and for contributions by employees and the town of a fund from which such allowances shall be paid. The town may enter into contract with any insurance company authorized to do business in this state for the purpose of insuring the whole or any part of its retirement plan, may elect to participate in the Connecticut Municipal Employees' Retirement Fund, or elect to participate in the old-age and survivor insurance system under title II of the Social Security Act, in accordance with the provisions of part II of chapter 113 of the Connecticut General Statutes, Revision of 1958, as amended, or may elect any combination thereof. Nothing in this Charter shall diminish or eliminate or be construed to diminish or eliminate any rights or benefits granted to any person under any municipal retirement pension system.  
CHAPTER XV. - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
 
Section 1. - Transfer of powers. 
The powers which are conferred, and the duties which are imposed, upon any commission, board, department or office under the Connecticut General Statutes, Revision of 1958, as amended, or special acts concerning the town, or any ordinance or regulation in force at the time this Charter shall take effect, if such commission, board, department or office is abolished by this Charter, shall be thereafter exercised and discharged by the commission, board, department or office upon which are imposed corresponding or like functions, powers and duties under the provisions of the Charter.  
Section 2. - Existing laws and ordinances. 
All general laws, special acts or parts of special acts in their application to the Town of Vernon, City of Rockville and Vernon Fire District and all ordinances, bylaws, rules and regulations of the Town of Vernon, City of Rockville and Vernon Fire District shall continue in force and effect in their several areas except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of this Charter. All special acts or parts of special acts relating to the Town of Vernon, City of Rockville and Vernon Fire District inconsistent with the provisions of this Charter are repealed.  
Section 3. - Advisory boards and commissions. 
Nothing contained in this Charter shall prohibit or be construed to prohibit the creation or abolition of advisory boards and commissions by the town council. In each case of the creation of such advisory boards and commissions, the title of the board or commission shall include the word "advisory" and no such board shall be assigned or delegated either legislative, executive or administrative powers. The membership, term of office, qualifications of members, functions and purposes of such boards and commissions shall be set forth in the resolution or directive creating the board or commission and such resolution or directive shall be filed with the town clerk.  
Section 4. - Personal interest. 
In the event that any member of the town council, the board of education and any appointed boards, commissions or authorities or any officer or employee of the town shall have a substantial financial interest, direct or indirect, or by reason of ownership of stock in any corporation, in any contract or in the sale to the town or to a contractor supplying the town of any land or rights or interests in any land, material, supplies or services, such person shall disclose such interest and shall not take any action or participate in any vote in connection therewith. Any knowing violation of this section shall constitute malfeasance in office and any such person found guilty thereof shall thereby forfeit the office or position held. Any violation of this section with the knowledge, express or implied, of the person or corporation contracting with the town shall render the contract voidable by the mayor or the town council. 
Nothing stated herein shall bar members of the town council who are employed as teachers in the Town of Vernon, or whose spouses are so employed, from taking part in deliberations and votes regarding the board of education budget if at such time teacher compensation for the forthcoming year has been established and is not directly affected by such votes.  
Section 5. - Amendment. 
Amendments to this Charter consistent with the Constitution of the State of Connecticut and the Connecticut General Statutes, Revision of 1958, as amended, may be adopted by the electors of the town without recourse to the Connecticut General Assembly in the following manner. Such amendments shall be proposed in the form of ordinances either by the town council or by initiative petition; provided, that the town council shall not adopt an ordinance proposing an amendment to this Charter by less than seven (7) affirmative votes and that the number of signatures required on an initiative petition proposing an amendment to this Charter shall be at least ten percent (10%) of the total number of qualified electors of the town as determined by the last effective list of the registrars of voters. An amendment, however proposed, shall become effective as part of this Charter when ratified at a regular or special election by a majority of those voting thereon; provided, that at least twenty percent (20%) of the electors entitled to vote on the question shall have voted.  
Section 6. - Saving clause. 
If any section of this Charter shall be held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect the remainder of this Charter nor the context in which such section or part of such section so held invalid may appear, except to the extent that an entire section or part of a section may be inseparably connected in meaning and effect with the section or part of a section to which such holding shall directly apply.  
Section 7. - Effective date of charter provisions. 
Unless otherwise provided therein, any amendment or revision of this Charter shall become effective upon the adoption by the electors of the Town of Vernon.  
SUBPART B. - SPECIAL ACTS[2] 
Special Act No. 41 (1965). An Act validating the consolidation of Vernon, the Vernon Fire District and Rockville. 
Special Act No. 65 (1965). An Act authorizing the consolidated town to set the initial millage rate. 
Special Act No. 321 (1965). An Act reimbursing Vernon for the use of accommodations for the Courts of Common Pleas and Superior Courts. 
Special Act No. 63 (1967). An Act concerning the abatement of tapes assessed against the Trinity Evangelical Lutheran Church. 
Special Act No. 293 (1969). An Act concerning the creation and powers of the North Central Municipal Water District in Vernon. 
Special Act No. 82 (1973). An Act concerning the development of a park along the Hockanum River in Vernon. 
Special Act No. 41 (1981). An Act validating the recording of tax warrants. 
Special Act No. 24 (1983). An Act naming the connecting road between Bolton and Tunnel roads in Vernon after Whitney Ferguson III. 
Special Act No. 34 (1986). An Act authorizing school construction projects. 
Special Act No. 55 (1987). An Act authorizing school construction projects. 
Special Act No. 101 (1987). An Act authorizing the acquisition of property by the state. 
Special Act No. 56 (1988). An Act authorizing school construction projects. 
Special Act No. 54 (1989). An Act conveying the National General Armory and land to the town. 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Subpart B contains a chronological list of the special acts of the general assembly concerning the Town of Vernon. 
 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
 This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 
Adoption 
 Date 	Section 	 Section 
this Charter 
10-13-64 	Chs. 1—15 	Char., Subpt. A 
11- 6-90 	Chs. I—XV 	Char., Subpt. A 
 
  
Ordinance Number 	Date 	Section 	Disposition 
209 	 6-18-96 	1 	Ch. III, § 2 
305 
10-28-16 	1, 2 	Ch. XII, § 9 
  
PART II - CODE OF ORDINANCES  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances, Town of Vernon, Connecticut," and may be so cited.  
Sec. 1-2. - Rules of construction and definitions. 
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances, the following rules shall be observed, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
Charter. The word "Charter" shall mean the Charter of the Town of Vernon printed in Part I of this volume. 
Code. Reference to "this Code" or "the Code" shall mean the Code of Ordinances, Town of Vernon, Connecticut, as designated in section 1-1. 
Council. Reference to "the council" or "council" shall be construed to mean the town council of Vernon, Connecticut. 
County. The words "the county" or "this county" shall mean the County of Tolland, in the State of Connecticut. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department or officer of the town to do some act or make certain inspections it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department or officer to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act or make the required inspection unless the terms of the provision or section designates otherwise. 
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. 
Keeper and proprietor. The words "keeper" and "proprietor" shall mean and include persons, firms, associations, corporations, clubs and co-partnerships, whether acting by themselves or through a servant, agent or employee. 
Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons and things as well as to one (1) person and thing. 
Officers, employees. The title of any officer or employee used herein shall be construed as if the words "of the town" followed it, and shall include his duly authorized representative. 
Owner. The word "owner" applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant, or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
Person. The word "person" shall extend and be applied to communities, societies, associations, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals. 
Personal property. The term "personal property" shall include every species of property except real property, as herein defined. 
Property. The word "property" shall include real and personal property. 
Public place. The term "public place" shall include any and all streets, highways, boulevards, alleys or other publicly owned or controlled ways and any and all publicly owned or controlled parks, squares, spaces, grounds and buildings. 
Real property. The term "real property" shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Shall, may. "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive. 
State. The words "the state" or "this state" shall be construed to mean the State of Connecticut. 
State law, general law or general statutes. The terms "state law, general law or general statutes" shall refer to the General Statutes of Connecticut, Revision of 1958, as amended. 
Street. The word "street" shall be construed to embrace all accepted streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts and all other public ways. 
Tenant, occupant. The word "tenant" or "occupant" applied to a building or land, shall include any person holding a written or oral lease of, or who occupies, the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others. 
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
Time. All times prescribed in this Code shall be Eastern Standard Time, except that when daylight saving time is being observed in the State of Connecticut, such times shall be Eastern Daylight Time. 
Town. The words "the town" shall mean the Town of Vernon in the County of Tolland and the State of Connecticut. 
State Law reference— Rules of construction for terms used in the General Statutes, G.S. § 1-1.  
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections. 
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections including the catchlines are amended or reenacted.  
Sec. 1-4. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances. 
All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code of Ordinances which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code of Ordinances, may be numbered sequentially and shall make reference to the portion of this Code intended to be affected and shall be printed for inclusion herein. In the case of repealed chapters, articles, divisions, sections and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby.  
Sec. 1-5. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by town personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the town council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the town council during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into the unified Code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ to ____________ " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but, in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code.  
Sec. 1-6. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect, unless expressly stated. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed under the ordinance repealed.  
Sec. 1-7. - Severability of parts of Code. 
If any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining provisions of this Code.  
Sec. 1-8. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend, by additions or deletions, any part of this Code of Ordinances or any ordinance of the town, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever with intent that any provision of this Code or other ordinance of the town shall be misrepresented, or with intent to commit a fraud thereby.  
Sec. 1-9. - General penalty. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate or fail to comply with any provision of this Code, and where no specific penalty is provided therein, the violation of any provision of this Code shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00). Each day any such violation shall continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such. 
State Law reference— Penalties limited, G.S. § 7-148(c)(10)(A).  
Sec. 1-10. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)  Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the town, or any evidence of the town's indebtedness; 
(2)  Any appropriation ordinance or ordinance providing for the levy of taxes or for an annual budget; 
(3)  Any ordinance annexing territory to the town or excluding territory as a part of the town; 
(4)  Any ordinance granting any franchise, permit or other right; 
(5)  Any zoning ordinance or regulations; 
(6)  Any subdivision ordinance or regulations; 
(7)  Any ordinance creating a special services district; 
(8)  Any ordinance approving, authorizing or otherwise relating to any contract, agreement, lease, deed or other instrument; 
(9)  Any ordinance adopting a preliminary plan or development plan; 
(10)  Any temporary or special ordinance; 
and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length herein.  
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Corporate powers, Ch. II; administrative departments and officers responsible to the mayor, Ch. XI; finance administration, Ch. XII. 
Cross reference— Administration and enforcement of housing code, Ch. 6, Art. II, Div. 2; elections, Ch. 4; aquifer protection agency, § 10-2; taxation, Ch. 12. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 2-1. - Town seal. 
(a)  The seal of the town is changed by removing the mill scene from the center of the seal and replacing it with a scene of Fox Hill Tower using version A with date of version B. Copies of version A and version B of the town seal are on file in the town clerk's office. 
(b)  The seal, as changed, is as follows: 
  
VERNON TOWN SEAL 
(Ord. No. 35, 10-21-68) 
State Law reference— Town seal, G.S. § 7-101.  
Sec. 2-2. - Insurance exchange account. 
(a)  An insurance exchange account is hereby established in the town. 
(b)  Funds received from casualty losses in the town will be deposited into the insurance exchange account and checks shall be drawn from the account to the extent of monies received. 
(c)  Any excess unappropriated funds in the account at the end of the fiscal year shall revert to the general fund. 
(d)  Checks shall be drawn in the same manner as general fund checks. 
(Ord. No. 85, §§ 1—4, 6-3-74) 
Charter reference— Finance administration, Ch. XII.  
Sec. 2-3. - Ambulance corps to provide for emergency medical services delivery system. 
(a)  The town ambulance corps shall be the provider of the town's emergency medical services delivery system. 
(b)  The ambulance corps shall prepare and submit its governing bylaws and any future amendments thereto to the town council for its approval, which shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
(c)  The ambulance corps shall remain a volunteer organization. 
(d)  The town shall provide workers' compensation coverage and liability insurance for the ambulance corps. 
(e)  The ambulance corps' annual budget shall be approved by the town council and the revenues generated by the ambulance corps shall be deposited in the town's general fund. 
(f)  The ambulance corps' purchases shall be subject to the procedures set forth in the Charter which govern purchases by town agencies. 
(Ord. No. 162, §§ 1—6, 6-3-86) 
State Law reference— Authority to provide for ambulance service, G.S. § 7-148(c)(4)(D).  
Sec. 2-4. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Charter reform adopted November 6, 1990, repealed section 2-4 in its entirety, which pertained to competitive bidding requirements, and derived from Ord. No. 183, §§ 1, 2, adopted February 20, 1990.  
Sec. 2-5. - Hearing procedure for citation. 
(a)  The mayor shall appoint, subject to confirmation by the town council, a citation hearing officer to conduct the hearings authorized by ordinances of the town except those hearings specified in section 13-39. The citation hearing officer may not be an employee of the town and shall serve without compensation, but may be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in performing the duties of this office to the extent that funds have been made available by the town council. The citation hearing officer shall serve for a term of two (2) years unless removed for cause. 
(b)  Any person served such a citation may make payment of the fine within thirty (30) days of such service. Such payment shall be payable to the treasurer of the town and mailed to the zoning enforcement officer and shall be inadmissible in any proceeding, civil or criminal, to establish the conduct of such person making the payment. 
(c)  If the person cited fails to pay the fine within said thirty-day period, the zoning enforcement officer, or other officer charged with enforcement pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes section 7-152c, as amended, is authorized, at any time within twelve (12) months from the expiration of said thirty-day period, to enforce said citation by sending said person a notice informing him: 
(1)  Of the allegations against him and the amount of the fine(s) due; 
(2)  That he may contest his liability before the citation hearing officer by delivering in person or by mail written notice within ten (10) days of the date thereof; 
(3)  That if he does not demand a hearing, an assessment of fine and judgement shall be entered against him; and 
(4)  That such judgement may issue without further notice. 
(d)  If the person sent the notice required by subsection (c) above does not make full payment of the fine(s) and does not make written demand for a hearing before the citation hearing officer within ten (10) days of the notice provided for in subsection (c) above, he shall be deemed to have admitted liability, and the enforcement officer shall certify such person's failure to respond to the citation hearing officer. The citation hearing officer shall thereupon enter and assess the fine(s) provided for by this section. 
(e)  If a hearing is requested, it shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of Connecticut General Statutes, Rev. 1958, section 7-152c(e). 
(f)  The failure to pay the assessment of any fine(s) made by the citation hearing officer can result in a superior court judgment as provided by Connecticut General Statutes section 7-152c(f), subject to judicial review as provided in Connecticut General Statutes section 7-152c(g). 
(g)  This section shall be effective for not more than ten (10) years from the date of adoption, at which time, if the town council does not or has not acted to renew the section, this section shall be deemed repealed. 
(Ord. No. 215, § 1, 6-17-97; Ord. No. 218, § 1, 11-18-97; Ord. No. 274, § 1, 2-6-07)  
Secs. 2-6—2-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - SALE OF TOWN-OWNED REAL ESTATE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to sell real property, G.S. § 7-148(c)(3)(A). 
 
Sec. 2-26. - Short title. 
This article shall be known and may be cited as "An Ordinance Establishing the Procedure For the Sale of Town-Owned Real Estate." 
(Ord. No. 134, § A, 6-15-82; Ord. No. 196, § A, 3-3-92; Ord. No. 227, 4-4-00; Ord. No. 270, § 1, 7-11-06)  
Sec. 2-27. - Procedures. 
(a)  [Sales subject to section provision.] The sale of any parcel of town-owned real estate with an assessed value of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) or more, except hereafter noted, shall be subject to the stipulations of this article. 
(b)  [Comments and recommendations of town entities.] Any proposal to sell town-owned real estate, whether by the town or a prospective buyer, shall be forwarded, upon notification, to the following town entities for comments and recommendations to the town council within thirty (30) days of notice of formal notice to sell the town-owned real estate. 
(1)  The building official. 
(2)  The director of public works. 
(3)  Health officer. 
(4)  Conservation commission. 
(5)  Director of parks and recreation. 
(6)  Town assessor. 
(7)  Town planner. 
(8)  Water pollution control authority. 
(9)  Inland wetlands commission. 
(c)  [Notification of abutters.] Abutters of the town-owned real estate under consideration for sale, regardless of the amount of assessed value, shall be notified by the town clerk's office of the specific town council meeting date, time and place of which the proposed sale may be discussed notwithstanding anything to the contrary stated in this article. 
(d)  [Recommendation from mayor.] The mayor may make a recommendation to the town council regarding the sale of town-owned real estate. For the purpose of making such a recommendation, the mayor, may with the approval of the town council, appoint a three (3) member sub-committee of the council. 
(e)  [Referral to planning commission.] Should the town council consider taking action upon the proposed sale of town-owned real estate, the proposal shall be referred to the planning and zoning commission, with recommendations under the provisions of Connecticut General Statute 8-24. 
(f)  [Preparation of appraisal.] After compliance with the provisions of Connecticut General Statute 8-24, should the town council vote to dispose of town-owned real estate, the administrator shall contract with a qualified professional real estate appraiser for the preparation of an appraisal of the fair market value of the real estate under consideration. 
(g)  [Request for proposals, bids or public auction.] That the town council may vote to approve a minimum sale price for said property and may authorize the town administrator to list the property with qualified realtors or the town council may vote to authorize the town administrator to conduct a request for proposals. If the town council seeks to sell the real estate to the highest bidder then the town administrator shall seek sealed bids or hold a public auction and in either of the latter two cases, to give at least ten (10) days public notice to potential bidders by publication at least once in a newspaper having circulation in the Town of Vernon of the date, time, and place of the opening of sealed bids or the public auction and inspection for the purpose of said property. If the town council decides that it is in the best interest of the town to seek request for proposals in substitution of the highest bidder sale process, the town administrator shall seek a reuse plan from interested and qualified buyers as part of its request for proposal. 
(h)  [Sale of property.] After completion of either the highest bidder process or the request for proposal process, the town council may by a simple majority vote of its members present, subject to Connecticut General Statutes 8-24 authorize the sale of said property and shall refer the matter to the town attorney for the necessary documents to be executed by the purchaser and the mayor. 
(i)  [Price approved by town council.] In case of a public auction or the scaled bid process, no bid shall be valid at less than minimum sale price approved by the town council. 
(j)  [Sale by quit claim deed.] The sale of said property shall be accomplished by quit claim deed executed by the mayor. 
(k)  [Purchaser responsible for expenses.] Legal and transaction expenses incurred by the town in connection with the sale of town-owned real estate shall be borne by the purchaser and shall be included in the sale price. 
(Ord. No. 134, § B, 6-15-82; Ord. No. 196, § B, 3-3-92; Ord. No. 227, 4-4-00; Ord. No. 270, §§ 2—12, 7-11-06)  
Secs. 2-28—2-35. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PERSONNEL[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference— Personnel rules, Ch. XIV, § 3. 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to establish personnel regulations, G.S. § 7-148(c)(5). 
 
Sec. 2-36. - Psychiatric examination of police department candidates is required. 
All candidates for employment as policemen in the police department shall be examined by a psychiatrist, and a psychiatric report shall accompany each application for employment. 
(Ord. No. 81, 3-4-74) 
Charter reference— Police department, Ch. XI, § 10.  
Secs. 2-37—2-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - CODE OF ETHICS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-61. - Declaration of policy. 
The proper operation of democratic government requires that public officials and employees be independent, impartial and responsible to the people; that government decisions and policy be made in proper channels of the governmental structure; that public office not be used for personal gain; and that the public have confidence in the integrity of its government. In recognition of these goals, a code of ethics for all town officials, employees, individual(s), partnership(s), corporation(s) or other entities as defined hereinafter is adopted. The purpose of this article is to establish guidelines for ethical standards of conduct for all such officials, employees, individuals, partnerships, corporations or other entities by setting forth those acts or actions that are incompatible with the best interests of the town and by directing disclosure by such officials, employees, individuals, partnerships, corporations or other entities of private financial or other interests in matters affecting the town. 
(Ord. No. 173, § 1, 9-1-87)  
Sec. 2-62. - Applicability. 
The provisions of this article shall apply to all town officials and employees, whether elected or appointed, paid or unpaid, including individual(s), partnership(s), corporation(s) or other entities which have been or will be compensated by the town for acting as an agent or consultant for the town or any of its boards. The term "town officials", as used in this article, shall include members of the town council, members of the board of education, and all officials appointed by the town council, board of education, mayor or the town administrator. The term "town employees", as used in this article, shall include all employees of the town and board of education. 
(Ord. No. 173, § 7, 9-1-87)  
Sec. 2-63. - Conflict of interest. 
A person who is subject to this article has an interest which is in substantial conflict with proper discharge of his duties or employment in the public interest and of his responsibilities as prescribed in the laws of the state and the town if he has reason to believe or expect that he will derive a direct monetary gain or other benefit, or suffer a direct monetary loss or other detriment, as the case may be, by reason of his official activity. He does not have an interest which is in substantial conflict with the proper discharge of his duties in the public interest and of his responsibilities as prescribed by the laws of the state and the town if any benefit or detriment accrues to him as a member of a business, profession, occupation or group to no greater extent than any other member of such business, profession, occupation or group. For the purpose of this article a public officer or employee shall be deemed to have an interest in the affairs of his or her spouse. 
(Ord. No. 173, § 8, 9-1-87)  
Sec. 2-64. - Standards of conduct. 
(a)  Any official, employee, individual(s), partnership(s), corporation(s) or other entities, who has or may have a substantial or controlling financial or significant personal interest in any property or matter which is the subject of any pending or proposed proceeding before any town agency on which such person sits or by whom such person is employed, shall make known promptly such interest in any matter on which he may be called to act in his official capacity. He shall refrain from voting upon such transaction, contract or sale. 
(b)  No official, employee, individual(s), partnership(s), corporation(s) or other entities, shall accept, during the course of any twelve-month period, any individual gift over the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00) or any gifts which in the aggregate costs one hundred dollars ($100.00). The limits on gifts may be changed from time to time by resolution of the town council. Gifts, as used above, may take the form of service, loan, thing or promise from any person, firm or corporation which, to his knowledge, is interested in directly or indirectly, in any manner whatsoever, in business dealings with the town having any relationship or connection with such official or employees in the discharge of his duties. 
(c)  No official, employee, individual(s), partnership(s), corporation(s) or other entities, without proper legal authorization, shall disclose confidential information except as required under the freedom of information laws of the state, concerning the property, government or affairs of the town. No official, employee, individual(s), partnership(s), corporation(s) or other entities, shall use information acquired in the course of his public duties, to advance the financial or other private interest of himself or any other. 
(d)  No official, employee, individual(s), partnership(s), corporation(s) or other entities, shall request or permit the use of town-owned vehicles, equipment, materials or property for personal convenience or profit, except when such services are available to the public generally or are provided as municipal policy for the use of such official, employee, individual(s), partnership(s), corporation(s) or other entities, in the conduct of official business or such use as in connection with exchange of private equipment for use by the town. No official, employee, individual(s), partnership(s), corporation(s) or other entities, shall grant any special consideration, treatment, or advantage to any citizen beyond that which is available to every other citizen. 
(e)  No official, employee, individual(s), partnership(s), corporation(s) or other entities, shall for the period of one (1) year after the termination of service or employment with such municipality, appear before any board or agency of the town or in any matter in litigation in which the town is a party in interest, except on behalf of the town for compensation by any private interest to any case, proceeding or application in which he personally participated during the period of his service or employment or which was under his active consideration. 
(f)  To the extent that he knows thereof, all officials, employees, individual(s), partnership(s), corporation(s) or other entities of the town, whether paid or unpaid, who participate in the discussion or give official opinions to boards and commissions or to a town meeting on pending legislation, shall publicly disclose on the official record the nature and extent of any direct or indirect financial or other private interest he has in such legislation. 
(g)  No official, employee, individual(s), partnership(s), corporation(s) or other entities shall render or agree to render for compensation any service to any person or party other than the town, in connection with any cause, proceeding, application or other matter which is before any town agency over which he has direct control or involvement. This does not prohibit any town official, employee, individual(s), partnership(s), corporation(s) or other entities from appearing before any board or commission on such person's own behalf or as official spokesman for an organization of which he is a member, provided such appearance does not violate sections 8-11 and 8-21 and 22a-42 of the general statutes and Public Act 83-540 or any other provision of this article. 
(h)  No town official, employee, individual(s), partnership(s), corporation(s) or other entities who in their capacity as such officer or employee participates in the making of a contract or accepts a purchase order in which they have a private pecuniary interest, direct or indirect, shall bid upon nor enter into any contact or bid upon nor accept any purchase order from the town or board of education unless the town administrator for the town or superintendent of schools for the board of education waived the requirements of this section after determining that it is in the best interest of the town to do so. 
(i)  No employee shall engage in or accept private employment or render service, for private interest, when such employment or service is incompatible with the proper discharge of his official duties or would tend to impair his independence of judgment or action in the performance of his official duties, unless otherwise permitted by law and unless disclosure is made as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 173, § 9, 9-1-87; Ord. No. 175, 11-1-88)  
Sec. 2-65. - Exceptions. 
(a)  Nothing stated in this article shall bar members of the town council who are employed as teachers in the town, or whose spouses or other family members are so employed from taking part in deliberations and voting regarding the board of education budget if at such time teacher compensation for the forthcoming year has been established and is not directly affected by such votes. 
(b)  Nothing stated in this article shall bar members of the board of education or their employees from discharging its responsibilities according to applicable state education mandates, statutes, and regulations. Where conflicts exist between state law and this article, state law shall prevail. 
(c)  A commercially reasonable loan made in the ordinary course of business by an institution authorized by the laws of this state to engage in the making of such loans shall not be deemed to create an interest in violation of this article. 
(d)  The ownership of less than five (5) percent of the outstanding stock in a publicly held corporation shall not be considered a substantial financial or personal interest. 
(Ord. No. 173, § 10, 9-1-87)  
Sec. 2-66. - Advisory opinions. 
(a)  Where any public officer or employee, individual(s), partnership(s), corporation(s), or other entities has a doubt as to the applicability of any provision of this article to a particular situation, or as to the definition of terms used herein, he may apply to the board for an advisory opinion. The officer, employee, individual(s), partnership(s), corporation(s) or other entities shall have the opportunity to present his interpretation of the facts at issue and of the applicability of provisions of the article before such advisory opinion is made. 
(b)  Such opinion until amended or revoked shall be binding on the town, the town council, and the board of education in any subsequent actions concerning the public officer, employee, individual(s), partnership(s), corporation(s) or other entities who sought the opinion and acted on it in good faith, unless material facts were omitted or misstated in the request for the advisory opinion. 
(c)  Any advisory opinion prepared by the board shall be made public. However, the name of the person requesting the opinion and the names of all persons or business entities mentioned in the opinion shall be deemed confidential information and shall not be disclosed by the board unless the public officer, employee, individual(s), partnership(s), corporation(s) or other entities waives such confidentiality or where the board deems the public official to have failed to act in good faith in requesting the opinion or in conforming with the opinion or to have failed to act in conformance with the opinion. 
(Ord. No. 173, § 11, 9-1-87)  
Sec. 2-67. - Sanctions. 
Violations of any provisions of this article should raise conscientious questions for the official concerned as to whether voluntary resignation or other action is indicated to promote the best interest of the town. Violation may, upon determination by the council or the board of education, constitute a cause for censure, suspension, removal from office or other appropriate legal proceedings. In the case of suspension or removal from office the Town Charter provisions will be in force. If a commission member's status is to be changed, then it would be up to the mayor to proceed. 
(Ord. No. 173, § 13, 9-1-87)  
Sec. 2-68. - Procedure for handling complaints. 
(a)  The board of ethics will conduct its investigations as a fact-finding body, adhering to strict confidentiality in all matters concerned, and will render advisory opinions containing its findings and conclusions. 
(b)  Requests concerning complaints shall be received by the board of ethics only in compliance with section 2-97. 
(c)  Upon receipt of a complaint, the board shall determine whether said complaint falls within its jurisdiction within ten (10) working days. 
(d)  If the complaint does not fall within the jurisdiction of the board, the case will be dismissed and the complainant and the accused will be so notified in writing. 
(e)  If the board has any questions concerning jurisdiction, the complainant will be notified in writing to meet with the board to clarify the allegation in detail, with said meeting to take place within thirty (30) days of notification to the complainant. 
(f)  After meeting with the complainant, the board shall make a final determination as to jurisdiction. 
(g)  If the board determines it has jurisdiction, then within five (5) working days after such determination the accused shall be notified in writing of the alleged violation of the code of ethics and that he may elect to have all proceedings open according to the freedom of information act. Upon receipt of said notice, the party so notified shall have the right to file a response within ten (10) working days and may, within said time period, demand a hearing by the board. If a hearing is so requested, it shall be convened within twenty (20) working days after such request. If no request for a hearing is made, the board by a vote of at least three (3) members, shall determine within thirty (30) working days after the mailing of the notice of such complaint whether a hearing is required. In the event a hearing is held, the person against whom such complaint is filed, shall be notified in writing of the date, time and place of the hearing, within five (5) working days, as will the person who filed the complaint. In such hearing, the person against whom such complaint is filed shall have the right to counsel, to confrontation of all witnesses, to cross-examination and to present evidence on his or her behalf. All notices to the person about whom such complaint was made shall be mailed by certified mail. 
(h)  All hearings and investigatory meetings are subject to the provisions of the freedom of information act. 
(i)  All affected parties to be interviewed shall be notified that the meeting is being held in open or executive session, sworn in, and cautioned to observe confidentiality in the event of an executive session. 
(j)  The board, pursuant to general statutes section 7-148h, may issue subpoenas or subpoenas duces tecum, enforceable upon application to the Superior Court, to compel the attendance of persons at hearings and the production of books, documents, records and papers. 
(k)  If hearings or investigatory meetings are held in executive sessions, the accused shall be afforded the opportunity to be present during said executive sessions. 
(l)  The board shall issue a written decision with respect to violations of this article on each case within ten (10) working days in which it shall give facts and the rationale for the decision. 
(m)  Copies of the decisions shall be forwarded to the initiator of the request (town council or town administrator or mayor; board of education or superintendent of schools or complainant), and the subject of the complaint. 
(n)  The board of ethics shall maintain a record of all complaints filed. If, in the board's opinion, it perceives abuse in filing of baseless or frivolous complaints by an individual or organization, the board shall be empowered to apply sanctions against the complainant(s) according to policies it adopts as enacted by town council. 
(Ord. No. 173, § 14, 9-1-87)  
Sec. 2-69. - Report to council or board of education. 
The board shall report to the council or board of education, as jurisdictionally appropriate, its findings as to a violation of the code of ethics, together with recommendations as to disposition to be made. If there was a defined violation of this article, the council or board of education shall consider such findings and shall determine what disposition shall be made. If the council or board of education wishes to proceed on the recommendation of the board of ethics, it shall take the appropriate action as may be indicated in section 2-67. Upon written request of the accused, the council or board of education may elect to follow the general outline of section 2-68, however, the process shall take no longer than twenty (20) working days. A special exception may be granted to the time period at the discretion of the council or board of education. 
(Ord. No. 173, § 15, 9-1-87)  
Sec. 2-70. - General guidelines for town officials. 
(a)  The requirements set forth in this article shall constitute a code of ethics establishing reasonable standards and guidelines for the ethical conduct of town officers of the town. The purpose of these guidelines is to encourage town officials to actively participate and vote on as many issues as their conscience allows but still act in a consistent manner. If a town official finds that he or she is abstaining from voting frequently they should obtain an advisory recommendation from the ethics commission or consider resigning. 
(b)  Town officials of any commission or board who are officers, or directors of a nongovernmental civic group, social, charitable or a religious organization which is seeking financial or other legislative action from that body shall not vote on such matters. Regular members of any organization who are not actively involved in seeking that specific legislative aid may vote on any legislation and need not disclose they are members of that organization. 
(c)  Town officials of any commission or board who are officers, directors, or active in negotiations of a union that is affiliated with any union of town employees shall disclose that relationship and shall not vote in any matters that affect that union or conditions of employment of any union of town employees. 
(d)  Town officials of any commission or board who are employed in a profession or by a company which may be affected by legislation shall disclose that fact, but may vote on such legislation as long as they receive no direct compensation or benefit or will be affected in any way different from all individuals employed by that company or in that profession. 
(e)  Town officials who are members of any commission or board who are state legislators, or are active in promoting, lobbying for or drafting related legislation at the state level shall disclose that interest and may vote on such legislation at the town level. 
(Ord. No. 173, § 16, 9-1-87)  
Sec. 2-71. - Distribution of code of ethics. 
The town clerk shall cause a copy of this article to be distributed to every town officer and employee of the town within thirty (30) days after enactment of this article. This article shall be made known and available to individual(s), partnership(s), corporation(s), or other entities doing business with the town. Each public officer and employee elected, appointed or engaged thereafter shall be furnished a copy before entering upon the duties of this office or employment. 
(Ord. No. 173, § 17, 9-1-87)  
Secs. 2-72—2-90. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - BOARD OF ETHICS 
 
Sec. 2-91. - Created; purpose. 
There is hereby created a board of ethics for the purpose of rendering advisory opinions and making recommendations with respect to the drafting and adoption of amendments to this article. 
(Ord. No. 173, § 2, 9-1-87)  
Sec. 2-92. - Appointments. 
The board shall consist of five (5) regular members and two (2) alternate members, all of whom shall be electors of the town. No more than three (3) regular members and no more than one (1) alternate member shall be from one political party. The initial regular and all alternate members shall be appointed by the council upon recommendation by the mayor from a list compiled and submitted by any member of the public or town organization. The term shall be five (5) years except that of the initially appointed regular members, one (1) shall serve for one (1) year, one (1) for two (2) years, one (1) for three (3) years, one (1) for four (4) years and one (1) for five (5) years. The two (2) alternate members shall be appointed in the same manner for terms of five (5) years. The duties of such alternate members shall be to sit upon such board whenever a regular member is unavailable to do so; such sitting alternate member shall have all of the obligations and duties of a regular member. A member may resign at any time by written notice to the mayor and the town clerk. Any such resignation shall become effective upon date specified therein or, if no date is so specified therein, upon date of its submission. No regular or alternate member who serves a five-year full term shall be reappointed sooner than one (1) year following the completion of that term. 
(Ord. No. 173, § 3(a), 9-1-87)  
Sec. 2-93. - Vacancies. 
Vacancies on the board among its regular members shall be filled by the mayor from alternate members of the board. Vacancies on the board among its alternate members shall be filled by the council upon recommendation by the mayor from a list compiled and submitted by any member of the public or any town organization. 
(Ord. No. 173, § 3(b), 9-1-87)  
Sec. 2-94. - Removal. 
Any regular or alternate member of the board may be removed by the mayor subject to approval by nine (9) members of the town council. 
(Ord. No. 173, § 3(c), 9-1-87)  
Sec. 2-95. - Conflicts. 
No regular or alternate member of the board shall render or agree to render any service to any person or entity other than the town in connection with any cause, proceeding, application or other matter which is before any agency, board, department, panel, commission or other official entity of the town, nor shall such member serve as a member of any such agency, board, department, panel, commission or entity. 
(Ord. No. 173, § 3(d), 9-1-87)  
Sec. 2-96. - Organization and procedure. 
The board shall annually elect a chairperson and secretary from among its members. Pursuant to the provisions of the state freedom of information act, the board shall keep records of its meetings and shall hold meetings after proper notice at the call of the chairperson and at such other times as the board may determine. For the purpose of conducting a meeting or hearing five (5) members shall constitute a quorum. Any action taken by the board shall be by a majority vote of the members present and voting. At least once a year, the board shall meet for the purpose of reviewing this article and making any recommendations with respect to the drafting and adoption of amendments to this article. 
(Ord. No. 173, § 4, 9-1-87)  
Sec. 2-97. - Duties and powers. 
(a)  The board may make recommendations for amendments to this code of ethics for adoption by the town council. 
(b)  The following may submit written requests directly to the board of ethics regarding appropriate situations pursuant to this document: Mayor, town administrator, town council, superintendent of schools, board of education, or the public at large. The ethics board must respond to the submittal per section 2-67 and any opinions shall be directed to the agency or person requesting them. 
(c)  The board may also promulgate rules and regulations and hear complaints and render decisions. 
(Ord. No. 173, § 5, 9-1-87)  
Sec. 2-98. - Expenses and compensation. 
The members of the board shall serve without compensation for their services. In the performance of its duties and in the exercise of its powers, the board shall not incur any expense in excess of the funds appropriated by the council for such purpose. 
(Ord. No. 173, § 6, 9-1-87)  
Secs. 2-99—2-109. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND OTHER AGENCIES OF THE TOWN[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Urban homesteading agency, § 6-270 et seq.; planning and zoning commission designated aquifer protection agency, § 10-2; capital region planning agency, § 10-16 et seq.; capital improvement committee, § 10-61 et seq.; economic development commission, § 10-81 et seq.; conservation commission, § 10-91 et seq.; design review advisory committee, § 10-105 et seq.; municipal flood and erosion control board, § 10-121 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 2-110—2-119. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - HISTORIC PROPERTIES COMMISSION[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 263, §§ 1—7, adopted Jan. 17, 2006, repealed the former Div. 2, §§ 2-120—2-126, and enacted a new Div. 2 as set out herein. The former Div. 2 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 185, §§ 1—7, adopted March 20, 1990; Ord. No. 236, § 7, adopted April 17, 2001. 
 
Sec. 2-120. - Intent. 
It is the intent of this division to promote the educational, cultural, economic and general welfare of the Town of Vernon through the preservation and protection of historic properties within the town; and to preserve and protect its architectural and historical integrity. 
(Ord. No. 263, § 1, 1-17-06; Ord. No. 271, § 1, 11-21-06)  
Sec. 2-121. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this division is to carry out the provisions of Sections 7-147p through 7-147y of the Connecticut General Statutes concerning historic properties as amended, herein referred to as the Act. 
(Ord. No. 263, § 2, 1-17-06; Ord. No. 271, § 2, 11-21-06)  
Sec. 2-122. - Commission—Generally. 
(a)  Establishment. A historic properties commission is hereby established which shall have such powers and limitations and perform such functions as shall be prescribed under the General Statutes of Connecticut and as provided in this division. 
(b)  Composition. The commission shall consist of five (5) regular members and at least three (3) alternate members, all of whom shall be electors of the town holding no salaried town office. All shall serve without compensation. 
(c)  Terms. The terms of the original members of the commission shall be such that the term of at least one regular member and one alternate member shall expire each year. Their successors shall be appointed for terms respectively of five (5) years for regular members and three (3) years for alternate members, except that an appointment to fill a vacancy shall be for the duration of the unexpired term. The present commission is to remain in place. 
(d)  Officers. Within thirty (30) days after appointment of the original members of the commission, and annually thereafter, the regular members shall meet and elect officers as specified in the Act. Alternate members shall not participate in the vote for election of officers of the commission. 
(e)  Appointment. Members shall be appointed within thirty (30) days of the passage of this division. Appointments shall be made by the mayor with approval by the majority of the town council. 
(f)  Quorums. Three (3) members of the commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of its business or the performance of its functions and the concurring vote of a majority of those constituting a quorum shall be necessary for the adoption of any recommendation, motions, or other acts of the commission; except that the affirmative vote of at least three (3) members shall be necessary for the approval of a certificate of appropriateness. 
(g)  Designation of alternates. When a member of the commission is unavailable to act at a particular time due to absence, sickness, conflict of interest or other good reason, the chairman shall designate an alternate member to act in place of such member, choosing alternates in rotation so that they shall act as nearly equal a number of times as possible. 
(h)  Notice, hearings, and approvals. 
(1)  The historic properties commission shall hold a public hearing upon each application for the certificate of appropriateness unless the commission determines that such application involves items not subject to approval by the commission. The commission shall fix a reasonable time and place for such hearing. Notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be given by publication in the form of a legal advertisement appearing in a newspaper having a substantial circulation in the Town of Vernon not more than fifteen (15) days and not less than five (5) days before such hearing. 
(2)  Within not more than sixty-five (65) days after the filing of an application, the commission shall pass upon such application and shall give written notice of its decision to the applicant. Failure of the commission to act within said sixty-five (65) days shall constitute approval and no other evidence of approval shall be needed. 
(3)  Evidence of approval shall be by certificate of appropriateness issued by the commission. 
(4)  When a certificate of appropriateness has been denied, the commission shall place upon its records and in the notice to the applicant the reasons for its determination. 
(5)  All hearings and meetings of the commission at which decisions are made shall be open to the public. The commission shall keep a permanent record of its resolutions, transactions and determinations and of the vote of each member participating thereon. 
(i)  Commission action. In its deliberations, the commission shall act only for the purpose of controlling the erection, demolition or alternation of buildings, structures or parking, visible from the public right of way, which are incongruous with the historical or architectural aspects of the properties. 
(j)  Adoption of rules. The commission shall adopt rules of procedure which it deems necessary to carry out the intent of section 7-147p through 7-147y of the General Statutes and the intent expressed in section 2-120 above. The commission shall adopt guidelines not inconsistent with the provisions of [General Statutes] sections 7-147p through 7-147y, inclusive, to provide guidance to property owners as to factors to be considered in preparing an application for a certificate of appropriateness. Such guidelines shall not be such as to bind the historic properties commission to any uniform or necessarily traditional style throughout the properties, but shall look both to the protection of the old and to the interest and distinctiveness of this community. 
(Ord. No. 263, § 3, 1-17-06; Ord. No. 271, § 3, 11-21-06)  
Sec. 2-123. - Same—Duties. 
(a)  Relationship to other commissions. The commission and other town commissions and offices whose areas of concern may overlap or affect each other shall maintain liaison for information and coordination in matter with which the commission may be dealing. 
(b)  Annual report. The commission shall make an annual report of its activities to the town council. 
(c)  Cooperation and coordination. The commission may: 
(1)  Provide information to the property owners and others involving the preservation of the property; 
(2)  Initiate planning and zoning proposals; 
(3)  Cooperate with other regulatory agencies and civic organizations and groups interested in historic preservation; 
(4)  Render advice on sidewalk construction and repair, tree planting, street improvements and the erection or alteration of public buildings not otherwise under its control where they affect the historic property, and 
(5)  Furnish information and assistance in connection with any capital improvement program involving the historic property. 
(Ord. No. 263, § 4, 1-17-06; Ord. No. 271, § 4, 11-21-06)  
Sec. 2-124. - Citizen involvement. 
For the purpose of encouraging the responsiveness, securing the support, and drawing on the resources of the owners of historic properties and other interested residents of the area who are not members of the historic properties commission, and apart from the provision in the Act for formal appeals from the commission decisions by aggrieved parties, and other than the required public hearings by the commission upon: applications for certificates of appropriateness, the commission shall hold meetings with said owners and other interested residents when such person makes a written request to the commission for such meeting to discuss matters of policy or other matters that may be an issue between property owners and the commission. The commission shall call meetings so requested within sixty-five (65) days, shall not be bound by the meetings, but in formulating policy shall be responsive to the sentiments of the community insofar as its best judgment suggests and the powers and limitations derived from the General Statutes permit. 
(Ord. No. 263, § 5, 1-17-06; Ord. No. 271, § 5, 11-21-06)  
Sec. 2-125. - Enforcement. 
Regulations and orders of the commission issued, pursuant to the Act or to this division shall be enforced by the zoning enforcement official. 
(Ord. No. 263, § 6, 1-17-06; Ord. No. 271, § 6, 11-21-06)  
Sec. 2-126. - Designation of historic properties. 
(a)  Properties that are designated historic properties are to be described by recording in land records of Town of Vernon that gives a description of the property and the fact that it has been declared a historic property pursuant to the provisions of the Connecticut General Statutes Section 7-147p through 7-147y and the provisions of this division. 
(b)  The following property owned by the Town of Vernon known as Skinner-Hammond House is designated a historic property as follows: 
SKINNER-HAMMOND HOUSE, 765 HARTFORD TURNPIKE 
Beginning at an iron pin on the northerly side of Dart Road, so-called, which iron pin is at the Southwest corner of the premises here-in described and is 266.42 feet Easterly from a Connecticut Highway Department monument at the intersection of the Northerly side of Dart Road and the Easterly side of West Street, so-called; thence from said point of beginning N.5 12' 30" E., a distance of 116.63 feet to an iron pin; thence S. 88 22' 40' E., a distance of 165.69 feet to a Connecticut Highway Department bound on the Northerly side of Connecticut Highway Route #30; thence S. 55 36'55" W., a distance of 194.0 feet along the Northerly side of Connecticut Highway Route #30 to an iron pin; thence N. 84 47' 30" W., a distance of 130.0 feet along the Northerly side of Dart Road; so-called, to the point and place of beginning. 
THE THRALL FARM, 312 BOLTON ROAD 
Beginning at a point in the Northerly line of Bolton Road and in the Southwesterly comer of tract herein described, said point being about fifty-seven (57) feet Westerly from the Westerly line of the house on said property extended to the North line of Bolton Road and about two hundred eight-five (285) feet Easterly from Bamforth Road, the last two distances being measured in said Northerly line of Bolton Road; thence N 20° 50' E a distance of three hundred forty-two and six-tenths (342.6) feet to a point; thence S 56° 27' E a distance of two hundred eighty-five and three-tenths (285.3) feet to a steel pin; thence S 33° 33' W a distance of three hundred thirty-four and two-tenths (334.2) feet to a steel pin set in said Northerly line of Bolton Road; thence N 56° 27' W a distance of two hundred nine and nine-tenths (209.9) feet to point of beginning. Being bounded Westerly, Northerly and Easterly by land now or formerly of Maxwell M. Belding and Southerly by Bolton Road. 
Said premises contain approximately 1.90 acres and are described as Lot No. 1, as shown on a map entitled, "Part of the property of Maxwell M. Belding 'The Thrall Farm' Vernon, Conn. Nov., 1952 Revised: Jan. 1953 Revised: Apr. 1957 Scale: 1" = 100' Robert H. Chambers, C.E. Surveyor - Civil Engineer Rockville, Conn.", which map is on file in the Town Clerk's Office in said Rockville, reference to which is hereby made for further description. 
DR. CHARLES C. BEACH HOUSE, 507 BOLTON ROAD 
Beginning at a point marked by a one-inch pipe set in the general westerly line of Bolton Road, which point marks the southeasterly comer of the premises herein conveyed and the northeasterly comer of land now or formerly of Eleanor P. Rusher; thence in line of land of said Rusher S. 83° 40' 40" W. two hundred eighty-nine and twenty-six one-hundredths (289.26) feet to a bound stone; thence turning and running N. 12° 52' 40" W; along land now or formerly of Samuel B. Jones and William D. Lyon, a distance of five hundred (500) fee to a point marked by an iron pipe which is southerly eleven and seventy-eight one-hundredths (11.78) feet from an old bound stone; thence turning and running N. 84° 2' E. along land now or formerly of Alvin R. and Marguerite P. Reinhart et al, two hundred seventy and twenty-eight one-hundredths (270.28) feet to an iron pipe in the said westerly line of Bolton Road; thence turning and running in said westerly road line and along the course of an old stone wall S. 14° 8' E. two hundred twenty (220) feet to a point; thence continuing in said westerly road line and in part along an old stone wall S. 14° 30' E. two hundred eighty and fifty-six one-hundredths (280.56) feet to the point and place of beginning. 
Containing three and eighteen one-hundredths (3.18) acres of land. 
VERNON GRANGE NO. 52, 734 HARTFORD TURNPIKE 
First Piece: 
Beginning at an iron stake, which stake is situated at the northeast comer of land of Florence Williams, and at the northwest corner of that tract herein conveyed and in the southerly line of the state highway running from Vernon Center to Lanz's Comer, so-called, runs thence in the southerly line of said highway, northeasterly 8 rods, more or less, to an iron stake; thence southeasterly in line of other land of said Baker and at right angles to said southerly line of said highway, 10 rods, more or less, to iron stake; thence southwesterly still in line of said Baker, said line being parallel to the southerly line of said highway, 8 rods, more or less, to an iron stake; thence northwesterly in line of land of said Williams and in a line at right angles to said southerly line of said highway, 10 rods, more or less, to place of beginning, containing one-half acre of land, more or less. As said southerly line of said State Highway in description above is not positively ascertained, it is understood and agreed that the intent of this deed, regardless of stakes set supposedly in the southerly line of said highway, to convey all land between the stakes and all other land, if any, northeasterly of said stakes set approximately in line of said highway and the actual line of said highway. 
Second Piece: 
Beginning at a point in the northwesterly comer of land now or formerly of the Grantor herein and the northeasterly comer of the land herein conveyed in the southerly line of Connecticut Route No. 15 running from Vernon Center to Tolland, thence running southerly along land now or formerly of the Grantor herein and land of William and Helen Young, in part by each, a distance of four hundred (400) feet (said first mentioned point being twenty (20) feet south of the southerly edge of the concrete pavement), thence running southwesterly along land now or formerly of Bell, a distance of two hundred fifty (250) feet to an iron pipe; thence running northerly in a line making an interior angle with the last mentioned boundary 80° 39' along land of said Bell, a distance of four hundred forty and two-tenths (440.2) feet to a point marked by an iron pin in said southerly line of said highway (which point is twenty (20) feet south of the southerly edge of the concrete pavement); thence running easterly along said southerly line of highway, a distance of two hundred fifty (250) feet to point of beginning. 
Excepting therefrom that certain piece of parcel of land as described in a deed from the Grantor herein to G. Nelson Skinner, William Morgon Johnson. Wallace H. Thrall and Seymour Bron, Directors of Vernon Fire District, dated August 26, 1959 and recorded in Volume 115, Page 449 of the Vernon Land Records, and that certain piece or parcel of land as described in a deed from the Grantor herein to the Town of Vernon, dated September 30, 1974 and recorded in Volume 255, Page 236 of the Vernon Land Records. 
Together with the right to drain storm water over land of the Town of Vernon, dated September 30, 1974 and recorded in Volume 255, Page 236. 
JONAS SPARKS HOUSE, 150 PHOENIX STREET 
Beginning at an iron bar set in the apparent general southeasterly line of Phoenix Street, which iron bar marks the westerly most corner of the premises herein described and a northwesterly corner of land now or formerly of Noel R. and Suzanne C. Roberts; thence running in a general northeasterly direction along Phoenix Street, a distance of 151.44 feet to a point; thence turning by an interior angle of 171° 51' 25" and continuing in line of Phoenix Street, a distance of 86.93 feet to an iron bar; thence turning by an interior angle of 90° 00' 00" and running along land now or formerly of Jean M. Merz, being Parcel "B" on the map above referred to, a distance of 168.49 feet to a point; thence turning by an interior angle of 144° 12' 05" and running still along land of said Merz, a, distance of 146.28 feet to an iron bar set in line of said Roberts, thence turning by an interior angle of 68° 44' 40" and running westerly along line of said Roberts, a distance of 87.82 feet to an iron bar; thence turning by an interior angle of 175° 08' 40" and running still along line of said Roberts, a distance of 88.69 feet to an iron bar; thence turning by an interior angle of 180° 24' 45" and running still along line of said Roberts through one iron bar, a distance of 129.43 feet to the iron bar which marks the point and place of beginning. Said last described line forms an interior angle with the first described line with Phoenix Street of 69° 25". 
Said parcel contains .96 of an acre. 
LEONARD ROGERS HOUSE, 100 SOUTH STREET 
Beginning at the southeast corner of the premises herein described which point is at the intersection of the northerly line of South Street and the westerly line of Fox Hill Drive; thence from said point of beginning westerly along the northerly line of South Street forming an" interior angle of 95° 37' with the westerly line of Fox Hill Drive, a distance of one hundred eighty-nine and ten one-hundredths (189.10) feet to a point; thence northerly forming an interior angle of 81° 25' with the last mentioned line, a distance of one hundred twenty-five and thirty-six one-hundredths (125.36) feet along the easterly line of land of the City of Rockville known as Henry Park to a steel pin; thence easterly forming an interior angle of 91° 35' with the last mentioned line, a distance of one hundred eighty-one and seventy-five one-hundredths (181.75) feet along the southerly line of land now or formerly of the Estate of Mary F. Brow to a steel pin; thence southerly along the westerly line of Fox Hill Drive forming an interior angle of 91° 23' with the last mentioned line, a distance of one hundred two and thirty one-hundredths (102.30) feet to the point and place of beginning. 
VALLEY FALLS FARM—A, 346 VALLEY FALLS ROAD 
First Piece: 
BEGINNING at point in the apparent general southerly line of the highway leading from Bolton Road to Valley Falls which point is the northwesterly comer of the premises herein described and the northeasterly comer of other land of the Releasee herein and which point is three hundred sixteen (316) feet westerly; in said southerly road line from the northwesterly corner of land now or formerly of Alvin R. and Marguerite P. Reinhart; thence generally south in line of other land of the releasee herein three thousand twenty-six (3,026) feet, more or less, to an iron pin about six (6) feet south of a forty-two (42) inch hemlock; thence easterly in line of land now or formerly of Antonio Caruolo about one thousand six hundred seventy (1,670) feet, more or less, to a point in the westerly line of Bolton Road; thence generally north in said westerly road line one hundred forty (140) feet, more or less, to a point in the southerly line of land now or formerly of Donald Cummings; thence in line of land of said Cummings along three (3) courses as follows: (1) Northwesterly two hundred seventy-five (275) feet, more or less, to a point; (2) Northerly three hundred sixty-nine (369) feet, more or less to a point; and (3) Northwesterly one hundred sixty-nine (169) feet, more or less, to a point; thence continuing northerly in line of land of said Cummings and in line of land now or formerly of John Noel, in part on each, four hundred two (402) feet, more or less, to a point in line of land now or formerly of Peter Durieko; thence continuing Northerly in line of land of said Dureiko three hundred (300) feet to a point in line of land now or formerly of Maurice Dureiko; thence continuing northerly in land of said Dureiko, two hundred eighty-three and thirty-eight one hundredths (283.38) feet to a point in line of land of now or formerly of John Rusher; thence westerly in line of land of said Rusher two hundred thirty-nine (239) feet to a point; thence northwesterly continuing in line of land of said Rusher one hundred ninety-seven and ninety-two one-hundredths (197.92) feet to a point; thence northerly still continuing in line of land of said Rusher three hundred fifty-five and seventy-five one-hundredths (355.75) feet to a point in line of land now or formerly of one Orfitelli; thence northerly easterly and northerly in line of land of said Orfitelli five hundred thirty (530) feet to a point in the southerly line of land now or formerly of the said Alvin R. and Marquerite P. Reinhart; thence northerly in line of land of said Reinhart three hundred forty eight (348) feet, more or less to a point in the southerly line of Valley Falls Road; thence westerly in said southerly Road Line three hundred sixteen (316) feet to the point and place of beginning. 
Containing 63 acres, more or less. 
Second Piece: 
Beginning at a point in the apparent general southerly line of the highway leading from Bolton Road to Valley Falls, which point is the northeasterly corner of the premises herein described and the northwesterly corner of other land of the grantors herein, and which point is three hundred sixteen (316) feet westerly in said southerly road line from the northwesterly corner of land now or formerly of Alvin R. and Marguerite P. Reinhart; thence generally south in line of other land of the grantors herein three thousand (3,000) feet, more or less, to an iron pin about six (6) feet south of a forty-two inch hemlock; thence southerly along the westerly line of land now or formerly of the heirs and devisees of P.J. O'Leary about eight hundred thirty (830) feet to an angle point; thence southerly by a slight angle to the right still along the westerly line of/and now or formerly of the heirs and devisees of P. J. O'Leary about nine hundred fifty (950) feet to an iron pin in the northerly line of land now or formerly of Douglas Roberts; thence westerly in the northerly line of land now or formerly of said Roberts about four hundred ten (410) feet to an iron pin; thence southerly in the westerly line of land now or formerly of said Roberts about four hundred thirty (430) feet to an iron pin; thence westerly along the northerly line of land now or formerly of said Roberts about five hundred twenty-two and five-tenths (522.5) feet to an iron pin marking the northeast corner of a strip of land now or formerly of Edith D. Beach; thence westerly along the northerly line of land now or formerly of said Beach in a prolongation of the last described line about two hundred thirty-seven and five-tenths (237.5) feet to the easterly line of right of way of the New York, New Haven & Hartford Railroad Company, an iron pin is located ten (10) feet west of this point; thence northerly in the easterly line of the right of way of said Railroad about forty-three hundred (4,300) feet to the easterly line of land now or formerly of George Webster; thence northerly in the easterly line of land now or formerly of said Webster passing through an iron pin, two stone heaps and a thirty-six (36) inch elm about one thousand forty (1,040) feet to an iron pin in the approximate southerly line of the highway leading from said Bolton Road to Valley Falls; thence easterly in the southerly line of said highway about nine hundred four (904) feet to the point and place of beginning. 
Containing one hundred thirty (130) acres, more or less. 
VALLEY FALLS FARM—B, 345 VALLEY FALLS ROAD 
Beginning at an iron pin in the approximate northerly line of a highway leading from Bolton Road to Valley Falls at the southeast corner of land now formerly of Fred Belding, et al; thence northerly in the easterly line of land now or formerly of said Belding, et al, about one hundred ninety-five (195) feet to an iron pin; thence, easterly in the southerly line of land now or formerly of said Belding, et al, about eighty-six (86) feet to an iron pin; thence northerly in the southerly line of land now or formerly of said Belding, et al, about two hundred ninety-one (291) feet to an iron pin marking the southwest corner of land now or formerly of Perry Lathrop; thence easterly in the southerly line of land now or formerly of said Lathrop about three hundred ninety (390) feet to an iron pin; thence, northerly in the eastern line of land now or formerly of said Lathrop about one hundred thirty-nine (139) feet to an iron pin; thence, easterly in the southerly line of land now or formerly of said Lathrop about two hundred two (202) feet to an iron pin in the approximate westerly line of Bolton Road; thence southerly in the westerly line of Bolton Road about six hundred forty-eight (648) feet to the northerly line of a highway leading from Bolton Road to Valley Falls; thence, westerly in the northerly line of said highway to Valley Falls about nine hundred fifty-three (953) feet to the point of beginning. 
[Reference is made to map entitled "Boundary Survey Prepared for The Darico Farm and Valley Falls Park", Scale: 1" = 40', Date: May 2001, by JC Sommers Associates Inc., Land Surveyors, Vernon, Connecticut] 
COUNTY HOME SCHOOL HISTORIC PROPERTY 
Beginning at a C-DOT Monument in the northwesterly line of Hartford Turnpike a.k.a. Conn. Rte. #30, said C-DOT Monument being located approximately 235 feet northeasterly of the present center line of Center Road as measured along the approximate northwesterly line of said Hartford Turnpike; Thence along the northwesterly line of said Hartford Turnpike S30°-13'-36"W for a distance of 77.53 feet to another C-DOT Monument; Thence still along the northwesterly line of Hartford Turnpike S32°-56'-00"W for a distance of 90.49 feet to a point; Thence southwesterly along the arc of a curve to the right having a radius of 30.00 feet, a central angle of 106°-41'-15", a length of 55.86 feet and a chord of S86°-16'-38"W for a distance of 48.13 feet to a point in the northeasterly line of Center Road; Thence along the northeasterly line of Center Road N40°-22'-45"W for a distance of 177.50 feet to a point; Thence still along the northeasterly line of Center Road N39°-10'-45"W for a distance of 29.00 feet to a point; Thence N51°-16'-30"E for a distance of 190.00 feet to a point; Thence S44°-55'-45"E for a distance of 145.00 feet to a point; Thence S34°-13'-25"E for a distance of 33.66 feet to the point of BEGINNING. The last three courses and distances are through land of the Town of Vernon. 
Historic area contains 41,736 Sq. Ft. / 0.9581 Acres. 
MAP REFERENCE 
"PERIMETER SURVEY DELINEATING PROPOSED LIMITS OF HISTORIC AREA 709 HARTFORD TURNPIKE VERNON, CT TOWN OF VERNON ENGINEERING DEPARTMENT 14 PARK PLACE VERNON, CT 06066 SCALE: 1"=40' DATE: MARCH 9, 2006 SHEET: 1OF1 FILE: Q: 709 Old School (Modified).DWG REVISIONS: 5/15/06 — 11 × 17 DRAWING", which map/plan is to be recorded in the office of the Vernon Town Clerk and made part of the Vernon Land Records for further reference. 
TALCOTTVILLE HISTORIC DISTRICT 
(Portions of Main Street and Elm Hill Road included) 
Beginning at a point being the northwesterly corner of property known as #126 Main Street, 
Thence running northeasterly along the southerly street line of Main Street approximately two hundred sixty-five (265) feet to the northwesterly corner of property known as #120 Main Street, 
Thence running northwesterly across Main Street approximately sixty (60) feet to the southeasterly corner of property known as #107-109 Main Street, 
Thence running northwesterly approximately one hundred and thirty-five (135) feet to the southwest corner of property known as #107-109 Main Street, 
Thence running northeasterly along the westerly property lines of properties known as #107-109 Main Street and #97 Main Street, approximately four hundred (400) feet, to the northwesterly corner of #97 Main Street, 
Thence running northwesterly along the southerly boundary of properties known as #85 Main Street and #79 Main Street one hundred forty-three (143) feet, to the centerline of the Tankerhoosen River, 
Thence running northeasterly along the centerline on the Tankerhoosen River approximately one thousand (1,000) feet to the southwesterly corner of property known as #17 Main Street, 
Thence running northerly and northeasterly along the westerly boundary lines of properties known as #17 and #19 Main Street approximately three hundred seventeen (317) feet to the southwesterly corner of property known as #11 Main Street, 
Thence running northerly along the westerly boundary line of property known as #11 Main Street approximately one hundred fifty-one (151) feet to the northwesterly corner of property known as #11 Main Street, said corner also bounding on the southerly non-access line of property of the State of Connecticut also known as Interstate Eighty-four (I-84), 
Thence running easterly and northeasterly along said non-access line approximately three thousand five hundred (3,500) feet to the westerly street line of Dobson Road, 
Thence running southeasterly along the westerly street line of Dobson Road approximately three hundred (300) feet to the northwesterly corner of property known as #5 Dobson Road, 
Thence running southeasterly along the westerly boundary of said #5 Dobson Road approximately two hundred (200) feet to the northerly boundary of property of the State of Connecticut also known as Vernon Rails to Trails, formerly known as the New York, New Haven and Hartford Railroad Co., 
Thence running southwesterly and southerly along said boundary of the State of Connecticut approximately two thousand eight hundred (2,800) feet to the northerly street line of Elm Hill Road, 
Thence running southwesterly across Elm Hill Road approximately fifty (50) feet to the Southeast corner of property known as #43 Elm Hill Road, 
Thence running southwesterly along the westerly boundary of said property of the State of Connecticut approximately one hundred thirty-five (135) feet to the southeasterly corner of property known as #43 Elm Hill Road, 
Thence running northwesterly approximately forty-seven (47) feet to the southwesterly corner of property known as #43 Elm Hill Road, 
Thence running northeasterly approximately one hundred thirty-five (135) feet to the northwesterly corner of property known as #43 Elm Hill Road, 
Thence running northwesterly along the southerly street line of Elm Hill Road approximately two hundred (200) feet to the northeasterly corner of property known as #31 Elm Hill Road, 
Thence running southwesterly along the easterly boundary of property known as #31 Elm Hill Road approximately one hundred sixty (160) feet to the southeasterly corner of property known as #31 Elm Hill Road, 
Thence running southwesterly along a line which is the extension of the previously described course approximately two hundred (200) feet to the northern boundary of property known as the Mount Hope Cemetery, 
Thence running southerly, northerly and westerly around the perimeter of the property known as Mount Hope Cemetery approximately one thousand four hundred (1,400) feet to the northeasterly corner of property known as #106 Main Street, 
Thence running southwesterly along the rear boundary line of properties known as #106, #110, #116, #120 and #126 Main Street approximately six hundred fifty (650) feet to the southwesterly corner of the property known as #126 Main Street, 
Thence running northwesterly along the westerly boundary of property known as #126 Main Street approximately one hundred seventy-five (175) feet to the northwesterly corner of property known as #126 Main Street, said point being the point of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 263, § 7, 1-17-06; Ord. No. 271, § 7, 11-21-06)  
DIVISION 3. - ENERGY IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT AND ENERGY IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT BOARD 
 
Sec. 2-127. - Purpose and intent: 
(a)  In accordance with PA-07-242 and G.S. 32-80a et seq., the Town of Vernon hereby establishes the Town of Vernon Energy Improvement District within and for the area more particularly defined as the municipal boundaries of the Town of Vernon to be created and operated according to the procedures set forth in PA 07-242 and G.S. 32-80a et seq. 
(b)  The purpose of this division is to promote the planning, development, construction, reconstruction, improvement, extension or operation of the energy improvement district with a view to increase efficiency, reliability and furtherance of commerce and industry in an energy improvement district. The operation of the district shall be for the benefit of the inhabitants of the municipality, for the increase of their commerce and for the promotion of their safety, health, welfare, convenience and prosperity. Further, the purpose is also to coordinate district activities with regard to such resources with relevant state, regional and federal agencies. 
(Ord. No. 292, § 1, 4-7-10)  
Sec. 2-128. - Definitions. 
Words and terms shall have the following meanings when context shall require or permit: 
Board shall mean the Energy Improvement District Board created by this division and as more particularly defined in PA 07-242 and G.S. 32-80a; 
District shall mean the Energy Improvement District which shall be the municipal boundaries of the Town of Vernon; 
Energy Improvement District Distributed Resources shall mean one (1) or more of the following: 
iii. Combined heat and power systems as defined in said section 16-1; 
iv. Class III renewable energy sources as defined in section 16-1 and; 
v. Connecticut General Statutes shall mean the revision of 1958, as revised and amended; 
vi. Ex officio shall mean nonvoting member; 
vii. State agency shall mean the State of Connecticut, any department of, or corporation agency; or instrumentality thereof, heretofore, of or hereafter created, designated, or established by the State of Connecticut; 
viii. Federal agency shall mean the United States of America and any department of or corporation, agency, or instrumentality thereof or hereafter created, designated or established by the United States of America; 
ix. Project shall mean the acquisition, purchase, construction, reconstruction, improvement or extension of one or more energy improvement district distributed resources. 
(Ord. No. 292, § 2, 4-7-10)  
Sec. 2-129. - Board. 
(a)  The mayor shall appoint the voting members of board of the district, as set out in G.S. 32-80a(2)(b)(1). These voting members shall be approved by the town council. The board of the district shall consist of six (6) voting members. The voting members shall be electors of the town or representatives of businesses located in the district. The terms of two (2) designated members shall expire on June 30, 2011. The terms of the two other (2), remaining designated members shall expire on June 30, 2012. The term of the last remaining designated members shall expire on June 30, 2013. Thereafter, upon the expiration of these original terms, all the terms shall be for a period of five (5) years. The mayor shall be a ex officio member of the board during his or her term as Mayor of Vernon. The mayor shall fill any vacancy for the unexpired portion of the term. Any vacancy shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment. The six (6) voting board members shall serve without compensation, except for reasonable and necessary expenses. 
(Ord. No. 292, § 3, 4-7-10)  
Sec. 2-130. - Powers and duties of the board. 
As set out in G.S. 32-80a the voting board members may lease or acquire office space and equip the same with suitable furniture and supplies for the performance of work of the board and may employ such personnel as may be necessary for such performance, subject to the recommendation of the mayor and approval of the town council. 
The voting board also shall have power to: 
(1)  Sue and be sued; 
(2)  Confer with any body or official having to do with electric power distribution facilities within and without the district and hold public hearings as to such facilities; 
(3)  Confer with electric distribution companies with reference to the development of electric distribution facilities in such district and the coordination of the same; 
(4)  Determine the location, type, size and construction of energy improvement district distributed resources, subject to the approval of any department, commission or official of the United States, the state or the municipality where federal, state or municipal statute or regulation requires it and subject to the recommendation of the mayor and approval of the town council; 
(5)  Make surveys, maps and plans for, and estimates of the cost of, the development and operation of requisite energy improvement district distributed resources and for the coordination of such facilities with existing agencies, both public and private, with the view of increasing the efficiency of the electric distribution system in the district and in the furtherance of commerce and industry in the district; 
(6)  Enter into contracts subject to the recommendation of the mayor and approval of the town council; including, but not limited to, contracts with independent consultants and suppliers of clean energy products and technology in order to reduce the town's carbon footprint, dependency on foreign energy sources, and to make available to local nonprofits and businesses the benefits of such a program; 
(7)  Subject to recommendation of the mayor and the approval of the town council, the energy improvement district and energy improvement district board shall have the power to enter into power purchase agreements and/or energy service agreements; 
Operate and maintain all energy improvement district distributed resources owned or leased by the board; 
(8)  Subject to the recommendation of the mayor and approval of the town council, accept gifts, grants, loans or contributions from the United States, the state or any agency or instrumentality of either, or a person or corporation, by conveyance, bequest or otherwise, and expend the proceeds for any purpose of the board and, as necessary, contract with the United States, the state or any agency or instrumentality of either to accept gifts, grants, loans or contributions on such terms and conditions as may be provided by the law authorizing the same; any revenue collected by the energy improvement district (EID) or energy improvement district board (EID) shall be submitted to the Town of Vernon general fund; 
(9)  Maintain paid staff to promote and develop the movement of commerce through the energy improvement district; and 
(10)  Use the officers, employees, facilities and equipment of the municipality, with the consent of the municipality, and pay a proper portion of the compensation or cost. 
(11)  The energy improvement district and energy improvement district board shall have the power to organize and analyze the Town of Vernon's energy needs. 
(12)  Subject to the recommendation of the mayor and approval of the council, the energy improvement district and energy improvements district board shall have the power to enter into power purchase agreements and or energy service agreements. 
13)  The energy improvements district and energy improvement district board shall not have any of the powers provided in G.S. 32-80a., b., c., or Public Act 07-242 unless they are also articulated in this division. 
(Ord. No. 292, § 4, 4-7-10)  
Sec. 2-131. - District properties. 
(1)  The properties included in the district shall be bound by the municipal boundaries of the Town of Vernon. 
(2)  The office of the mayor shall notify by mail each property owner of record within said district of said action. An owner may record on the land records in the municipality its decision to participate in the energy improvement district pursuant to this section and G.S. 32-80b and 32-80c. Any owner of record, including any new owner of record, may rescind said decision at any time. 
(Ord. No. 292, § 5, 4-7-10)  
Sec. 2-132. - Regulations by the board. 
The board may, subject to the recommendation of the mayor and approval by the town council, make and enforce any reasonable regulation which it may determine to be necessary relating to the facilities owned or leased by any individual or corporation, limited liability company, partnership, etc., within the district consistent with the laws of the State of Connecticut and the Vernon Town Charter and Code of Ordinances for the Town of Vernon. 
(Ord. No. 292, § 6, 4-7-10)  
Sec. 2-133. - Energy Improvement district (EID) payment in lieu of taxes (PILOT). 
In the event that property taxes are not paid or required to be paid to the Town of Vernon for real and personal property by the energy improvement district (EID) project, at the Town of Vernon's election the energy improvement district (EID) will be subject to a payment in lieu of taxes, the PILOT election shall be based upon the town's mill rate and the town's valuation of the energy improvement district (EID) project real and or personal property. The energy improvement district (EID) project real and personal property include any real or personal under any agreement of operation or lease between the energy improvement district (EID) and any entity, person or organization. This election shall be at least the ninety (90) days before the date at which the assessor of the Town of Vernon publishes the Town of Vernon Grand List for real and personal property for the Town of Vernon. Town of Vernon's election shall be based upon the recommendation of the mayor to the town council with the approval of the majority of the town council. This shall not be a PILOT upon any property owner in the boundaries of the energy improvement district (EID) only the energy improvement district (EID) project personal and real property is subject to this section. 
(Ord. No. 292, § 7, 4-7-10)  
Sec. 2-134. - Sunset provision. 
This division shall be effective for a period of not more than ten (10) years from the date of adoption at which time, if the town council does not or has not acted to renew the ordinance, the ordinance shall be deemed repealed. 
(Ord. No. 292, § 8, 4-7-10)  
Chapter 3 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Building code board of appeals, Ch. 8, § 4; alternate members of building code board of appeals, Ch. 8, § 6; permanent municipal building commission, Ch. 8, § 7; building inspection department, Ch. 11, § 20. 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 5; housing, Ch. 6; planning, Ch. 10; utilities, Ch. 14. 
State Law reference— State building code applicable to all municipalities, G.S. § 29-253. 
 
Sec. 3-1. - Building permit fees; certificate of occupance fees. 
The following are established as fees for certificates of occupancy and building permits in the town to be paid to the building official's office, after which a building permit and/or certificate of occupancy may be issued: 
(1)  The fee for a specific certificate of occupancy or code compliance, if one is required for the project, shall be ten dollars ($10.00). 
(2)  The fee for all building permits shall be thirty dollars ($30.00) for the first one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) of estimated cost, or any fraction thereof of estimated cost. Twenty dollars ($20.00) per one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) of estimated costs or any fraction thereof shall apply to any amount over one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) except residential real estate. The fee for all building permits for residential real estate shall be fifteen dollars ($15.00) per one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) up to and including seventy five thousand dollars ($75,000.00). Then twenty dollars ($20.00) per one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) of estimated costs or any fraction thereof shall apply to any amounts over seventy five thousand dollars ($75,000.00) for residential real estate. 
(3)  Any professional licensed or registered contractors found doing work without first filing for a permit shall be charged an amount equal to the cost of the permit, in effect doubling the amount. Any professional licensed or registered contractor that fails a regular scheduled inspection due to the work not being done at the time of the inspection, which causes the building department to make a second trip, will be subject to a re-inspection charge of thirty dollars ($30.00). This shall be payable prior to the inspection. Any work being done by a homeowner shall be exempt from these items. 
(4)  Building applications when taxes are delinquent. As provided by G.S. § 7-148(2)(B), withholding of building permits, certificates of occupancy and other building applications for a property for which taxes are delinquent is authorized and directed to be enacted by the building official in conjunction with the revenue collector. Issuance of all building permits, certificates of occupancy and/or other building applications shall be withheld until such time as the revenue collector verifies to the building official that no tax delinquencies exist on the property for which the building permit, certificates of occupancy or other building application is sought. 
The mayor shall have authority to override the withholding of the issuance of such permits on property for which a tax delinquency exists, if it is determined by the mayor that health or safety concerns or extraordinary circumstances warrant such override action. Notification of such override shall be provided, in writing, to the revenue collector, the building official. 
(5)  The building official shall exempt from the payment of building permit fees all projects involving the repair or replacement of defective concrete foundations including basement walls, footings and floors. To obtain this exemption, the applicant shall submit evidence of the defective concrete foundation at the time of the permit application to the satisfaction of the building official. In the event an applicant is aggrieved by the decision of the building official to deny an exemption request, the applicant shall have the right to an appeal as afforded by the Connecticut State Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 120, 5-19-80; Ord. No. 172, 8-9-87; Ord. No. 184, 3-6-90; Ord. No. 229, 5-16-00; Ord. No. 280, 8-7-07; Ord. No. 282, 2-5-08; Ord. No. 289, § 1, 3-17-09; Ord. No. 304 , 10-12-16)  
Sec. 3-2. - Numbering buildings. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section shall be to promote public safety and convenience by providing a rational street numbering system whereby addresses may be identified with the ease and speed which is essential to the quick response of emergency services, including police, firefighting and emergency medical care. 
(b)  Assignment of numbers. Under the supervision of the town engineer and town assessor, the town, without notice, may assign to each building, or part of a building other than an accessory building, a street identification number by which such building shall be known and may change such number of such building or part of such building. Whenever a new street or highway is laid out, the town shall assign to the land abutting such street or highway numbers at such measured intervals or distances as the public interest shall require. The town engineer shall assign such identification numbers to any subdivisions approved after July 20, 1986. The town assessor shall assign such identification numbers to all other buildings or lots. 
(c)  Buildings existing on July 20, 1986. The owners of buildings existing on July 20, 1986, shall affix numerals indicating the street identification number which has been assigned to such building. Any owner who refuses or neglects to comply with this section shall be notified by the town, in writing, of the provisions of this section and shall comply with such provisions within thirty (30) days of the mailing of such notice. Address identification using words rather than numerals shall not satisfy this requirement. 
(d)  Buildings completed after July 20, 1986. The owners of buildings completed after July 20, 1986, shall affix numerals indicating the street identification numbers assigned to such building prior to the occupancy of such buildings. 
(e)  Location and other specifications of numerals. The numerals used to indicate the street identification number of buildings shall be located on the exterior front of the building which they identify or on a post, sign, mailbox or other device located between the building and the street. Such numerals shall be at least three (3) inches in height and shall be of a color contrasting to the color of the background material to which they are affixed. When affixed, they shall be positioned not less than four (4) feet nor more than twelve (12) feet from the surface of the ground directly below them, except when they are affixed to a mailbox, in which case the minimum height for such numerals shall be forty-two (42) inches from street level. The location and size of such numerals shall be sufficient to ensure their legibility when the building which they occupy is viewed from one (1) or more points along the centerline of the street on which it fronts between projections of the sides of such building intersecting perpendicularly with the centerline. If such building is set back more than one hundred (100) feet from the centerline of the street on which it fronts, or if the numerals cannot be made legible from the centerline because of construction, the numerals shall be affixed to a post, sign, mailbox or other device which shall be located within ten (10) feet of the driveway entrance to the premises and which shall otherwise conform to the specifications herein. For buildings containing more than three (3) dwelling units which have entrances from interior passageways, numerals shall be affixed within five (5) feet of every door by which the building may be entered. Otherwise, the specifications and locations for such numerals shall be as for other buildings. 
(f)  Penalty for violation. Whoever shall violate any of the provisions of this section or refuses or neglects to comply with the same shall be deemed guilty of an infraction and shall be fined two dollars ($2.00) for each day, after notice in accordance with subsection (c) of this section, during which such violation continues. 
(g)  Enforcing agency. The enforcing agency for the provisions of this section shall be the police department or the building official. 
(Ord. No. 163, 7-1-86)  
Sec. 3-3. - Demolition delay. 
(a)  Findings. There are located in Vernon buildings of architectural and historic importance that are invaluable assets of the community and are irreplaceable. Historic buildings may be subject to demolition due to their age and condition. An owner of an historically significant building may not realize the significance of the building, the feasibility of rehabilitation, the potential for adaptive reuse or its marketability for sale to a party interested in obtaining an historic building. A temporary delay of demolition of an historic building accompanied by public notification of the pending demolition can prevent an irremediable error from occurring and be an important step in preserving the historically significant architecture of the community. 
(b)  Application to be filed; required information. Each person filing an application for a permit to demolish a building in the Town of Vernon that is more than fifty (50) years old shall file with the town's building official, on forms provided by the building official, the following: (1) Any information required by the building official; (2) The address of the building to be demolished; (3) The name and address of the building's owner; (4) The date on which demolition is desired to begin; and (5) The approximate age and type of building to be demolished. The application shall include a copy of the current assessor's street card. 
(c)  Notice. Upon receipt of an application, the building official shall publish a copy of the notice in a newspaper having a substantial circulation in the town. Such notice shall be published not later than fifteen (15) days after its receipt by the building official. The building official shall mail such notice, not later than the date of its publication, to the local historic properties commission, the municipal historian, and to any person or organization requesting such notification by a written document delivered to the building official. Each such request for notification shall be renewed annually in writing. 
(d)  Purpose of notice; delay authorized. The purpose of the notice of demolition is to provide public awareness of the intent to demolish a building more than fifty (50) years old so that proper consideration may be given to its historical, architectural and/or cultural significance to the town. If the building official has received no written objection to the application within fifteen (15) days after such notice is published, he/she may issue a demolition permit. If the building official receives a written objection to the issuance of a permit, he/she shall delay the issuance of a permit for up to ninety (90) days following the date on which he/she received the application and notice. 
(e)  Waiver by building official. If the building official, in consultation with the historic properties commission and/or the municipal historian, makes a written finding that the building which is proposed to be demolished is not of an age, style, location and/or cultural significance to the town, he/she may waive the provision of this section requiring notice of the provision requiring delay in the issuance of a demolition permit. 
(f)  Appeals. Any person aggrieved by the action of the building official in waiving such provisions or delaying the demolition may appeal to the building code board of appeals. Upon receipt of a written request for appeal, the building official shall request the chair of the building code board of appeals to conduct a public hearing within five (5) days, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays, after the date of receipt of the appeal. The board shall upon majority vote affirm, modify or reverse the decision of the building official in a written decision. The board shall file its decision with the building official not later than five (5) days, exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays, following the day of the hearing. A copy of the decision shall be mailed to the party making the appeal. 
(Ord. No. 198, §§ 1—6, 7-23-92) 
Cross reference— Condemnation of unfit structures, etc., § 6-246 et seq.; planning, Ch. 10.  
Sec. 3-4. - Vacant and blighted buildings. 
(a)  Purpose. This provision is authorized pursuant to Section 7-148(c)(7)(H)(xv) of the Connecticut General Statutes. It is hereby found and declared that there exist within the town real properties which contain vacant and blighted buildings. It is further found that the existence of these vacant and blighted buildings adversely affects property values within the town and threatens the health, safety and general welfare of its residents. 
(b)  Definitions. The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this section: 
Blighted buildings shall mean any vacant building and/or any of said buildings accessory structure(s), and in which at least one (1) of the additional following conditions exists: 
(1)  It is vacant and not being maintained. The following factors may be considered in determining whether a building or structure is not being maintained: 
a.  Missing or boarded windows or doors; except boarded openings as a temporary security measure for a period of one (1) year or less; 
b.  Collapsing or missing walls, roof or floor as determined by the zoning enforcement officer; 
c.  Exterior walls which contain breaks, loose or rotting materials or which are not properly surface coated to prevent deterioration; 
d.  Garbage, trash or junk on the premises; 
e.  Overgrown grass or weeds at least one (1) foot in height. 
(2)  It is vacant and attracting illegal activity as documented in police department records. 
(3)  The building or structure is vacant and a factor creating a substantial and unreasonable interference with the use and enjoyment of other properties within the surrounding area as documented by neighborhood complaints, police reports or the cancellation of insurance on proximate properties. 
Boarded openings shall mean any opening covered with cut and fit piece of solid and solid building material secured at the perimeter with nails and/or screws, painted to match the body color of the building used as a temporary security measure for less than one (1) year to preserve the integrity of the building. 
Citation hearing officer shall mean an individual(s) appointed by the mayor to conduct hearings authorized by this article pursuant to section 2-6, as amended. 
Legal occupancy shall mean occupancy in accordance with state building, state fire, local zoning, local housing and all other pertinent codes. 
Owner shall mean any person, institution, foundation, entity, or authority, which owns real property within the town, or the executor or administrator of any estate containing real property within the town in its inventory or the trustee of any trust holding legal title to real property within the town for the benefit of others. 
Premises shall mean a parcel of land with building(s) and/or accessory structures. 
Proximate property shall mean any premises or parcel of land under separate ownership from the subject premises within one thousand (1,000) feet of a vacant and blighted property. 
Vacant shall mean not legally occupied by human beings. Vacant status in and of itself does not constitute a blighted building. 
Vacant status date shall mean the date when a vacant building is verified by the zoning enforcement officer as being vacant and is included on the list of vacant buildings. 
Zoning enforcement officer shall mean such officer appointed in accordance with Chapter 124 of the Connecticut General Statutes or his designee. 
(c)  Prohibition against creating or maintaining blighted premises. No owner of real property, taxable or tax-exempt, within the town shall cause or allow blighted premises to be created nor shall any owner allow the continued existence of blighted premises. 
(d)  Certification of list of vacant buildings. 
(1)  Immediately following enactment of this section, the town administrator shall request that all town department heads report any property of which they are aware which appears to be vacant. Such reports shall be submitted within thirty (30) days of the town administrator's request. 
(2)  The town administrator shall use this information and any other available information to complete a list of potential vacant properties within fifteen (15) days. Upon compilation of the initial list, the town administrator will transmit said list to the zoning enforcement officer who will verify the vacant status within thirty (30) days of receipt and establish the vacant status date of the building. Thereafter, the zoning enforcement officer will, upon verification by physical inspection, add such subsequent vacant buildings to the list of vacant buildings as he becomes aware of, then noting the vacant status date of the building. 
(3)  Upon inclusion on the list of vacant buildings, the zoning enforcement officer shall, within fifteen (15) days, cause to be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, notice of inclusion on such list to the last known address of the last known owner of the building. This notice will include the vacant status date and will include a notice of what constitutes a vacant and blighted building and the penalties such properties are subject to under this section. The notice will also include a list of possible community resources available to the owner. 
(4)  The zoning enforcement officer shall, when a building has remained on the list of vacant buildings for a continuous period in excess of sixty (60) days from its vacant status date, inspect said property for conditions that would qualify it as vacant and blighted as referenced in subsections (b)(1), (2), and (3) above. 
(5)  On or before October 1 of each year the zoning enforcement officer shall provide a list of the additions or deletions to the list of vacant buildings to the tax assessor so that the assessment may be adjusted accordingly. 
(e)  Appointment of citation hearing officer. Hearings authorized by this section shall be conducted as provided in section 2-5. 
(f)  Enforcement and hearings with property owners. 
(1)  The zoning enforcement officer will undertake regular inspection of a property on the list of vacant properties for the purpose of documenting continuous vacancy. Once a property reaches sixty (60) days from its vacant status date, the zoning enforcement officer will inspect for conditions of blight as defined in subsections (b)(1), (2), and (3) above. If blighted conditions are found to exist, the zoning enforcement officer shall issue a notice of violation. 
(2)  The notice of violation must contain the following: 
a.  The date vacancy was established. 
b.  The date notice of vacancy was sent. 
c.  The date vacant and blighted was established. 
d.  The date of the violation. 
e.  The nature of the violation. 
(3)  If the violation is not remedied with thirty (30) days, the zoning enforcement official may issue a citation and impose a penalty in accordance with Section 7-148(c)(7)(H)(xv) of the General Statutes of Connecticut. 
(4)  A person receiving a citation shall be allowed a period of thirty (30) days from his or her receipt of the citation to make an uncontested payment of the fine specified in the citation payable to the town treasurer and mailed or delivered to the town's building department. The citation will be sent by both certified and regular mail by the zoning enforcement officer, return receipt requested, to the person's last-known address on file with the tax collector, per Section 7-152c(c) of the General Statues of Connecticut. 
(5)  At any time within twelve (12) months from the expiration of the final period for the uncontested payment of fines under this chapter, the zoning enforcement officer may send notice of enforcement of the citation to the person cited. 
(6)  The notice of enforcement of citation must contain the following: 
a.  The allegations against the person cited and the amount of the fines, penalties, costs or fees due. 
b.  Notice that the person may contest his liability before a citation hearing officer by delivering in person or by mail written notice within ten (10) days of the date thereof. 
c.  Notice that if the person does not demand such a hearing, an assessment and judgment shall be entered against him. 
d.  Notice that such judgment may issue without further notice. 
e.  A copy of Ordinance No. 218 "Hearing Procedure for Citation," codified herein as section 2-5. 
(7)  Any person issued an enforcement of a citation shall be entitled to a hearing to contest the enforcement of the citation. The procedure for hearing, disposition and enforcement shall be as set forth in General Statutes Section 7-152c, "Hearing Procedure for Citations," as the same may be amended from time to time by an ordinance of the Town of Vernon entitled "An Ordinance Amending Ordinance No. 215, entitled 'An Ordinance Establishing Hearing Procedures for Citations.'" 
(8)  Any unpaid fine imposed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter regulating blight, after judgment has entered on the record of assessment per Section 7-152c(f) of the General Statues of Connecticut, shall constitute a lien upon the real estate in the amount of the record of assessment. Each such lien may be continued, recorded and released in the manner provided by the Connecticut General Statutes for continuing, recording and releasing property tax liens. Each such lien shall take precedence over all other liens filed after the effective date of this section and encumbrances, except taxes, and may be enforced in the same manner as property tax liens, per Section 7-148aa of the General Statutes of Connecticut. 
(g)  Defenses. A person wishing to contest his liability shall appear at the hearing and may present evidence in his behalf. Relief may be granted if the owner can establish to the hearing officer's satisfaction that: 
(1)  The owner cited was not the owner of record of the property at the time the notice of violation and the order to correct was issued. 
(2)  Notice of the citation was not properly served upon the owner of record in accordance with subsection (f)(2) above. 
(3)  The notice of the citation was not in proper form in accordance with subsection (f)(4) above. 
(4)  The building is actively undergoing repairs that are required to be made to correct violations of subsection (b)(1) or (2) or (3), as certified by the zoning enforcement officer. 
(5)  If the person demonstrates that he intends to demolish the blighted structure, the hearing officer shall stay the matter and enter his determination in writing accordingly. Said stay shall be expressly conditioned upon the demolition of the blighted structure within three (3) months. If the conditions of the stay have not been met within three (3) months, the hearing officer shall enter and assess the fines, penalties, costs or fees against such person as provided by this section. 
If the hearing officer determines that the person is liable for the violation, he shall forthwith enter and assess the fines, penalties, costs or fees against such person as provided by this section against such person issued a notice of enforcement for said citation, and shall so notify said person both by certified mail return receipt requested and first class mail sent to the person's last known address on file per Section 7-152c(c) of the General Statues of Connecticut. 
(6)  Any other valid defense recognized in law or equity. 
(h)  Duration. This section shall be effective for not more than ten (10) years from the date of adoption; at which time, if the town council does not or has not acted to renew the ordinance, this section shall be deemed repealed. 
This section shall be reviewed by the town council annually and at such time the town council may proceed to amend or repeal said section as it so chooses. 
(i)  Severability. If any provision of this section or the application thereof shall be held invalid or unenforceable, the remainder of this section, or the application of such terms and provisions to persons or circumstances other than those to which it is held invalid or unenforceable, shall not be affected thereby, and each remaining term and provision hereof shall be deemed valid and shall be enforced to the fullest extent permitted by law. 
(j)  Administration. The provisions of this section, subsections (a) through (i) inclusive, shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any and all provisions of the Connecticut General Statutes and ordinances of the town. 
(k)  Reduction in assessment. Pursuant to Section 12-121(e) of the Connecticut General Statutes as amended, the town council may enter into an agreement with any party owning or proposing to acquire an interest in real property in the town which is on the certified list of vacant buildings, as set out in subsection 3-4(d), fixing the assessment of the real property which is the subject of the agreement and all improvements thereon or therein. An application requesting such a reduction shall [be] made in writing to the town administrator which shall include a business plan for the renovated property, a fiscal impact study and such other information or documentation which the town administrator deems necessary to make a recommendation to the town council. After review of the application, the town administrator will make a recommendation to the town council as to the amount and duration of any reduction of the assessment and the town council may grant or deny such request by a majority vote. If granted, the tax assessment shall be adjusted after the building is rehabilitated and a certificate of occupancy has been issued. Prior to granting any reduction the party receiving the reduction shall be required to provide proof via affidavit from the owner or authorized agent with such supporting data as the tax assessor may reasonably require as to the actual cost of the improvements made on the property. 
The following table lists the minimum value of an improvement that qualifies for a reduction, the maximum reduction and the maximum reduction period. The town council shall determine the specific reduction of the tax assessment for each project based upon the benefits to the town. 
Cost of Improvements 	Reduction 	Term 
$10 million and higher 	Up to 100% of increased assessment 	Up to 25 years 
$5—$10 million 	Up to 75% of increased assessment 	Up to 15 years 
$1—$5 million 	Up to 50% of increased assessment 	Up to 10 years 
Less than $1 million 	Up to 25% of increased assessment 	Up to 5 years 
 
(l)  Sunset. This section shall be effective for not more than ten (10) years from the date of adoption of the ordinance from which it is derived, at which time, if the town council does not or has not acted to renew the ordinance, it shall be deemed repealed. 
(Ord. No. 221, 11-17-98; Ord. No. 223, 2-2-99; Ord. No. 230, 6-21-00; Ord. No. 276, 5-1-07; Ord. No. 303 , 6-11-16)  
Sec. 3-5. - Homestead revitalization. 
(a)  Purpose. To facilitate "private investment," to preserve architectural history, increase tax rolls and eliminate blight and renew the abandoned and vacant housing stock and commercial properties of Vernon and Historic Rockville. 
This will be a means of curing the problems surrounding vacant and abandoned buildings such as health, safety, blight, and lack of tax revenue and low real property values through private developers. 
To establish as part of this article a committee that will establish a procedure for bidding on properties and the committee will review the properties for feasibility and review the bidding by eligible developers. This committee will be composed of nine (9) people; five (5) of whom are voting members that are to be appointed by the mayor with town council approval. The committee will meet on an annual or as needed basis. this committee will be established to review the each developer proposed plan. 
(b)  Definitions. For the purpose of this section the following terms are defined as: 
Agencies. Any state, federal or municipal public or quasi-public agencies, non-profit or any organization qualifying for I.R.C. § 501(c)(3) status. 
Committee. The nine (9) member committee. 
Developer. Any natural person, for profit corporation, limited liability company, for profit general or limited partnership. This specifically excludes any parties qualifying under I.R.O § 501(c)(3). 
Development agreement (bond for deed). A real-estate agreement for the transfer of title that is recordable on the town land records. 
Immediate family means a person (or the spouse of a person) who is related within the third degree. Third degree means great-grandparents, grandparents, parents, uncles, aunts, brothers; sisters, children, grandchildren, and great-grandchildren—-in short anyone related closer than cousin. 
Hazardous waste means asbestos, lead paint and underground oil tanks. 
Substantial failure which means less than substantial performance. "Substantial performance" shall mean the rendering of performance which does not exactly meet the terms of the agreement (slight deviation) will be looked upon as fulfillment of the obligations, less the damages which result from any deviation from the promised performance. 
Town. The Town of Vernon. 
Town engineer. The engineer employed by the Town of Vernon. 
(c)  Program description. In an effort to preserve architectural history, increase tax rolls and eliminate blight, the town will create the Homestead Property Revitalization Program. 
Town-acquired real estate is offered to individuals willing to rehabilitate properties into owner-occupied residences or well-managed commercial and rental buildings. 
In addition to properties owned by the town this program will help to deal with the new situations which arise under the enacted Blight Ordinance (codified herein as section 3-4) which provides for citations and penalties but it does not facilitate means of escape for the property owners to resolve the cited conditions. This program will allow property owners who own blighted properties to go in front of the committee and explain their situation and develop a plan to renew the blighted properties or abandon the properties to the committee for sale under this program. 
The mayor and the town council will refer the properties to the committee. The referral by the mayor and the town council will be in accordance with the Town of Vernon Charter and applicable Town of Vernon laws, by-laws, and ordinances. The disposition of the property is to be based upon established procedures, as the committee shall adopt. 
This section will establish a committee that will establish a procedure for bidding on properties and the committee will review the properties for feasibility and review the bidding by eligible developers. 
The committee membership will include five (5) voting members of who are voting members that are to be appointed by the mayor with town council approval and four (4) ex-officio members. The five (5) voting members will be as follows: 
(1)  One building contractor; 
(2)  One landlord; 
(3)  One real estate agent; 
(4)  One member versed in design review; and 
(5)  One other member. 
The four (4) ex-officio members will be: 
(1)  The town attorney or special town attorney; 
(2)  The town planner or his representative; 
(3)  The town building inspector; 
(4)  The town administrator. 
The committee will meet on an annual or as needed basis. This committee will be established to review each developer proposed plan. 
The town sells the property for minimal compensation to selected developers. Selection is based on rehabilitation plans and demonstrated ability to complete the work within one year. A development agreement (bond for deed) with the town is signed specifying the terms necessary for the transfer of the property. The developer shall post a five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) performance bond, letter of credit, and/or passbook savings account payable to the town upon the signing of the development agreement. 
The development agreement will contain each bidding developer's vision of what the property should be when the developer fully performs under that agreement. The committee will review the development agreement and determine which offer contains the best advantage for the town and complies with the purpose of this section. 
The town shall convey the property at the completion of the rehabilitation plan and upon the issuance of a certificate of occupancy (CO). 
The developer shall commence the planning, permitting and other processes that shall be necessary to rehabilitate the property in accordance with the development agreement. The developer shall seek to stabilize and to improve the interior and the exterior elements of the structure through a combination of new construction and renovation, as described in the development agreement. 
The developer shall agree to allow reasonable access to the town building officials to confirm the completion of the improvements in accordance with the development agreement. Both parties shall mutually agree upon the timing of these inspections. 
The developer agrees that to maintain the property, depending on the specifics of the developers agreement, either as: 
(1)  A residence for the developer or his immediate family; or 
(2)  Act as the landlord for the rental property which is to be managed by the developer. 
The developer (or a member of his/her immediate family) agrees to hold the property in this manner for a minimum period of five (5) years from the date that the town transfers the property to the developer in fee simple. 
In the event the developer sells or transfers title to the property before the end of the five (5) year period, the town shall be entitled to the following share of the net proceeds from the sale of the property, subordinate to a recognized financial lending institution(s): 
a. After 1 year 	75%. 
b. After 2 years 	60%. 
c. After 3 years 	50%. 
d. After 4 years 	40%. 
e. After 5 years 	0%. 
 
If a longer period is stipulated in the development agreement the committee shall set a percent for the succeeding years. However the minimum percentage of the net proceeds from the sale after the fifth year shall not be less than thirty (30) percent. 
The developer agrees to maintain the exterior of the property and the grounds to the standard as set in the Town of Vernon Ordinances during the period of time covered in the development agreement. 
The developer agrees to purchase insurance on the property to insure against personal injury and property damage and to hold the town harmless for any damages until the title to the property is conveyed to the developer. A certificate of insurance shall be filed with the town. 
The developer shall be liable for and shall remain current on all town taxes, fees and utility bills associated with the property. 
The developer shall be responsible for the proper disposal of hazardous materials, which might be found in or on the property in accordance with federal, state and local laws, regulations and ordinances. 
In the event that the developer shall be unable to complete the project as described in the development agreement within twelve (12) months from the date of the development agreement, the developer shall notify the town as to the nature of the issue and the parties shall attempt to negotiate a resolution of the same. If a mutually agreeable resolution cannot be reached the developer shall have the right to terminate the development agreement and forfeit the five thousand ($5,000.00) dollar security to the town (i.e. the )five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) performance bond, letter of credit, and/or passbook savings account payable to the Town of Vernon). 
Any substantial failure by the developer to complete the project in the manner as described in the development agreement, within the twelve-month period of the development agreement shall result in the property not being conveyed to the developer and the forfeiture of the five thousand ($5,000.00) dollar security (i.e. the five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) performance bond, letter of credit, and/or passbook savings account payable to the Town of Vernon). The town will agree that a project description and time schedule may be modified by mutual agreement from time to time as the project conditions require or based upon reasonable and documented conditions beyond the developer's control. 
It should be understood that compliance with the development agreement shall not be contingent on the developer's ability to secure grants and other sources of funding. 
(d)  Qualifications: 
(1)  The developer cannot be a previous owner of the foreclosed property. 
(2)  The developer must be current on all town taxes and fees. 
(3)  The developer must have financial ability to complete the work. 
(4)  The developer must provide to the committee the source of the funds to be used for the rehabilitation project and length of time those funds have been available to the developer. 
(5)  The developer must be able to acquire a five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) performance bond, letter of credit, and/or passbook savings account payable to the Town of Vernon. 
(e)  Selection criteria: 
(1)  A work plan describing improvements. 
(2)  A plan addressing historical preservation if applicable. 
(3)  Tax returns and asset sheets to demonstrate financial capability. 
(4)  The developer must provide a list of references to confirm abilities and capabilities. 
(5)  The plan must have a punch list with time frames to establish ability to complete the project within one year. 
(6)  A resume to establish the necessary experience needed for renovating and/or managing properties. 
(7)  Specific exclusion of agency participation unless no offers are made by any qualified developer. 
(8)  Preference will be given to developers renovating structures into owner-occupied units. 
(9)  Preference will be given to developers renovating multifamily structures into single family properties. 
(f)  Committee responsibilities and powers: 
(1)  The committee will recommend disposition of the building in question. They will evaluate the building's structure, location, and economic feasibility for the developer. 
(2)  The committee will have the building official or so designated professional do an evaluation on the property and provide a structural analysis of the structure on the property. 
(3)  The committee will meet on an annual or as-needed basis. 
(4)  This committee will review the developers proposed plan. The committee will give weight to each proposal based on which type of development is needed in the area and in accordance with this section. This should be based in part on the master plan of development. 
(5)  The committee will review the development agreement, if the property is a historic property, to ensure that the agreement is consistent with The Secretary of Interior's Guidelines on Historic Preservation. 
(Ord. No. 277, 6-19-07)  
Chapter 4 - ELECTIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Election of officers, Ch. 3; election of the mayor, Ch. 10, § 1. 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2. 
State Law reference— Elections, G.S. § 9-1 et seq. 
 
Sec. 4-1. - Registrars of voters. 
Pursuant to the provisions of section 9-189a of the general statutes, the term of office for the registrars of voters of the town shall, commencing at the regular elections of such office to be held in November of 1972, and every succeeding election for this office thereafter, be for four (4) years, from the first Wednesday after the first Monday of January succeeding their election. 
(Ord. No. 67, 5-1-72) 
Charter reference— Registrars of voters, Ch. 7, § 2.  
Sec. 4-2. - Justices of the peace. 
In accordance with chapter III, section 2 of the Charter, the town council determines that no more than thirty (30) justices of the peace be elected from the town. 
(Ord. No. 11, 5-16-66; Ord. No. 209, § 1, 6-18-96) 
State Law reference— Authority to reduce number, G.S. § 9-183a; terms of justices, vacancies, G.S. § 9-184.  
Chapter 5 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Fire department, Ch. 11, § 11. 
Cross reference— Housing, Ch. 6; use of explosives restricted, § 8-2; alarm systems, § 8-51 et seq. 
State Law reference— Authority to provide for fire protection, G.S. § 7-148(c)(4)(B); fire departments, G.S. § 7-301 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 5-1—5-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - OUTDOOR FIRES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 283, § 3, adopted April 1, 2008 states, "Any provision of Section 5-16 through 5-27 inclusive, using the term "fire warden" shall be construed to mean "fire marshal"." 
 
Sec. 5-16. - Definitions, specifications and uses. 
The following definitions, uses and specifications shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article: 
Approved incinerators shall mean any metal drum of adequate capacity, any masonry incinerator, or any steel or cast-iron receptacle with solid or perforated sides, fronts and backs, used to burn any type of combustible material. Specifications for approved incinerators shall be as follows: 
(1)  Perforations in an incinerator shall not exceed one (1) inch in length and one (1) inch in width; 
(2)  Each incinerator must be equipped with a spark arrester; 
(3)  Draft doors or openings designed to create a draft or stimulate combustion must be protected with a one-fourth-inch mesh-wire screen. 
The uses of incinerators shall be as follows: 
(1)  The fire warden or his deputy may regulate the location of all incinerators; 
(2)  No approved incinerator shall be located within ten (10) feet of any building or within ten (10) feet of any combustible material or within ten (10) feet of any property line without the consent of the fire warden; 
(3)  All incinerators must be emptied periodically to prevent choking and poor combustion; 
(4)  Burning in an approved incinerator may be denied by the fire warden or his deputy when such burning, because of weather, wind, drought, type and condition of material to be burned, proximity of structure or combustible materials, availability of means of fire control or other environmental factors, or other good and sufficient reasons, would constitute a hazard or a danger to public safety. 
Fire warden shall mean the duly appointed fire warden for the town or his duly appointed deputies. 
Outdoor fires shall mean any fire in the open air, or outside the confines of a building for the purpose of: 
(1)  Burning woodland, grassland, swampland, leaves, or other forest debris; 
(2)  Burning as a means of disposal of any type of structure, including marine or aircraft, vehicles, and the burning of debris from any of the foregoing; 
(3)  Burning, as a means of disposal, of papers, rubbish, and any other type of combustibles when such burning is done in the open air, outside of a structure. 
Spark arrester shall mean an approved cover on any approved incinerator sufficient to prevent the escape of sparks and of embers. The specifications of spark arresters shall be as follows: 
(1)  Spark arresters shall be large enough to cover the entire opening of the approved incinerator on which it is used; 
(2)  A spark arrester shall be of perforated sheet metal or of wire-mesh screen. No opening in a spark arrester shall exceed one-fourth inch in length and one-fourth inch in width. 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 5-17. - Permit—Required; exceptions. 
No person within the limits of the town and without a permit issued by the fire warden, or any deputy designated by him for such purpose, shall make, or cause to be made, any outdoor fire except as follows: 
(1)  In a covered container with both the container and the cover constructed of incombustible material for the purpose of burning waste and material outdoors. The container shall be covered with a spark arrester. No hole opening in the container shall exceed one (1) inch in length and one (1) inch in width. If the container has a draft door, it shall be covered by a wire-mesh screen with openings no larger than one-fourth inch in length and one-fourth inch in width; or 
(2)  For the purpose of cooking food in a fire-place or barbecue pit constructed of incombustible material or an incombustible grill; or 
(3)  In an approved incinerator as provided in section 5-16. 
(4)  The fee for a permit for open burning shall be fifty dollars ($50.00). Said permit is issued for one calendar day to be used at any time during a designated seven (7) day period of time. 
(Ord. No. 28, § II, 6-17-68; Ord. No. 283, § 1, 4-1-08) 
Cross reference— Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 7.  
Sec. 5-18. - Same—Application. 
An application for a fire permit required by this article may be made orally and will be promptly granted or denied orally by the fire warden or his designated deputy and if granted, will be logged, and if requested, confirmed in writing. An application may be denied as constituting a danger to public safety when, because of weather, wind, drought, type and condition of material to be burned, proximity of structures or combustible materials, availability of means of fire control or other environmental factors, or other good and sufficient reason, the fire would constitute a hazard. 
(Ord. No. 28, § III, 6-17-68)  
Sec. 5-19. - Same—Term. 
No permit for an outdoor fire required by this article, shall be valid for more than seven (7) days. 
(Ord. No. 28, § VII, 6-17-68)  
Sec. 5-20. - Same—Void under certain conditions. 
All permits for outdoor fires required by this article, shall be void when the wind exceeds ten (10) miles per hour or the forest fire danger, as given over the local radio or television stations, is "high" or "extreme." 
(Ord. No. 28, § VIII, 6-17-68)  
Sec. 5-21. - Same—Revocation. 
Any permit for an outdoor fire required by this article, may be revoked at any time, without prior notice, by the fire warden or any deputy designated by him to issue such permits. 
(Ord. No. 28, § IX, 6-17-68)  
Sec. 5-22. - Distance from structures, combustible material limited. 
No outdoor fire of any type, except the type specified in section 5-17, shall be ignited within fifteen (15) feet of any structure or accumulation of combustible material, or within ten (10) feet of a property line, provided; however, that any outdoor fire ignited on other than a house lot shall be in an area from which all combustible material for a distance of fifteen (15) feet in all directions shall have been removed. 
(Ord. No. 28, § IV, 6-17-68)  
Sec. 5-23. - Burning at night prohibited; exception. 
No fire for which a permit has been granted under this article shall burn between sunset and sunrise unless as specifically authorized in a written permit issued in accordance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 28, § V, 6-17-68)  
Sec. 5-24. - Termination of oral permits. 
All permits for outdoor fires granted orally shall terminate at sunset on the day issued. 
(Ord. No. 28, § VI, 6-17-68)  
Sec. 5-25. - Unattended fires; fires on streets, sidewalks prohibited. 
No person shall kindle or maintain a fire of any kind on any street, highway or sidewalk in the town, nor shall any person leave any outdoor fire unattended. 
(Ord. No. 28, § X, 6-17-68) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 11.  
Sec. 5-26. - Liability for damage of property; personal injury. 
Any person kindling or maintaining a fire under this article shall in no way be relieved of any legal responsibility if the fire is allowed to escape or cause personal injury to or damage to property of others. Neither the fire warden, any of his deputies nor the town, shall be liable for damages to the person or property of another resulting from a fire for which permission is given, or for any damage which may be caused by an incinerator which has been approved, either as to construction or location. 
(Ord. No. 28, § XI, 6-17-68)  
Sec. 5-27. - Penalty. 
Any person who violates any provisions of this article or who shall fail to comply with any notice or order by the fire marshal or his deputies may be fined ninety-nine dollars ($99.00). 
(Ord. No. 28, § XII, 6-17-68; Ord. No. 283, § 2, 4-1-08)  
Chapter 6 - HOUSING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Housing authority, Ch. 8, § 5. 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 3; delay of demolition of historic buildings and structures, § 3-3; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 5; planning, Ch. 10; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 11; utilities, Ch. 14. 
State Law reference— Creation of housing authorities, G.S. § 8-40; powers of housing authorities, G.S. § 8-44; state grants-in-aid for housing code enforcement, G.S. § 8-208. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 6-1. - Housing partnership. 
(a)  There is hereby created the housing partnership, the members of which shall be appointed by the mayor. The partnership shall consist of the following members: 
(1)  The mayor; 
(2)  Representatives of the planning commission, zoning commission, inland wetlands commission, housing authority and any local community development agency, not to exceed five (5) in number; 
(3)  Representatives of the local business community, such as local bankers, realtors and developers, not to exceed three (3) in number; 
(4)  Representatives of public interest groups, such as housing advocates, members of the clergy, members of local civic groups and representatives of local nonprofit corporations, not to exceed three (3) in number; and 
(5)  Local urban planning, land use and housing professionals, not to exceed four (4) in number. 
(b)  The responsibilities of the town, in order to receive initial designation under the state housing partnership program, shall include the following: 
(1)  Submit evidence to the commissioner of housing that the partnership has been formed in accordance with Public Act 88-305; and 
(2)  Submit evidence to the commissioner of housing that sufficient local resources have been committed to the partnership. 
(c)  The duties of the partnership, in order to receive development designation under the state housing partnership program, shall include the following: 
(1)  To examine and identify housing needs and opportunities in the community; 
(2)  To explore the availability of any state, municipal or other land that is suitable for the development of affordable housing; 
(3)  To review applicable zoning regulations to determine whether such regulations restrict the development of affordable housing in the community; 
(4)  To identify any necessary changes to such regulations; 
(5)  To establish priorities and develop a long-range plan to meet identified housing needs in the community consistent with regional housing needs; 
(6)  To establish procedures for the development of a written proposal to achieve such priorities in accordance with said plan; and 
(7)  To start an activity, development or project designed to create additional affordable housing in Vernon. 
(d)  This section shall not be construed so as to conflict with any state or federal statute, rule or regulation. 
(e)  No person shall have the right to expend any public funds of the municipality in carrying out any partnership activities authorized by this resolution without prior approval by the town council nor shall any person have any right to bind the municipality by contract, agreement, or otherwise without prior and specific approval of the town council. 
(Ord. No. 177, §§ 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 12-6-88)  
Sec. 6-2. - Landlord registration. 
(a)  Definitions. 
Address as used in this section, means a location as described by the full street number, if any, the street name, the city or town, and the state, and not a mailing address such as a post office box. 
Dwelling unit as used in this section, means any house or building, or portion thereof, which is rented, leased or hired out to be occupied, or is arranged or designed to be occupied, or is occupied, as the home or residence of one or more persons, living independently of each other, and doing their cooking upon the premises, and having a common right in the halls, stairways or yards. 
Agent in charge as used in this section, means one who manages real estate, including but not limited to, the collection of rents and supervision of property. 
(b)  Registration—Required. 
(1)  Any owner of occupied or vacant rental real property shall be required to file and maintain on file in the office of the tax assessor the current residential address of the owner of such property, his or her telephone number and a cell and fax number if any, if the owner is an individual. If the owner is a corporation, partnership, trust, or other legal recognized entity, then the current residential address of the agent in charge of the building, his or her telephone number and a cell and fax number if any, shall be filed in the office of tax assessor. 
(2)  The town clerk shall provide notice to all new property owners, outlining the provisions of this section. 
(3)  If such residential address changes, notice of the new residential address shall be provided by such owner or agent in charge of the building to the tax assessor not more than twenty-one (21) days after the date that the address change occurred. 
(4)  If the owner or agent fails to maintain on file an address as required by this section, the address to which the town mails property tax bills for the rental real property shall be deemed to be the owner or agent's current address. Such address may be used for compliance with the provisions of subsection (5) of this section. The tax assessor shall provide a list of all new filings on a town-wide common database for distribution to all town departments. 
(5)  Service of state or municipal orders relating to maintenance of such rental real property or compliance with state law and local codes concerning such real property directed to the owner or agent at the address on file, or deemed to be on file in accordance with the provisions of this section, shall be sufficient proof of service of notice of such orders in any subsequent criminal or civil action against the owner or agent for failure to comply with the orders. 
(6)  Any person who violates any provision of this section shall have committed an infraction. 
(c)  Penalty. 
(1)  The tax assessor shall provide the building official with a list of all non-compliant owners or agents. 
(2)  Any person who shall violate any provisions of subsection (b) of this section shall be fined in accordance with section 1-9 of this Code and an ordinance establishing civil penalties for a violation of [G.S.] § 47a-6a and this section. 
(3)  The building official, or his designee, shall send notice of the assessment to the owner of the property which is the subject of the violation. The building official, or his designee, shall be the enforcement agent for purposes of this section. 
(4)  Any person who is assessed a civil penalty pursuant to this section may appeal therefrom to the superior court. An appeal shall be instituted not later than thirty (30) days after the mailing of notice of such assessment by filing a petition to reopen assessment, together with an entry fee in an amount equal to the entry fee for a small claims case pursuant to section 52-259 of the Connecticut General Statutes, at the superior court facility designated by the chief court administrator, which shall entitle such person to a hearing in accordance with the rules of the judges of the Superior Court. 
(Ord. No. 272, §§ 1—3, 11-21-06) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 272, § 6, adopted Nov. 21, 2006, repealed the former § 6-2, and §§ 1—3 of said ordinance enacted a new § 6-2 as set out herein. The former § 6-2 pertained to identification of a landlord and derived from Ord. No. 265, adopted May 2, 2006.  
Secs. 6-3—6-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 302 , § 3, adopted May 17, 2016 and effective June 11, 2016, repealed the former Art. II, §§ 2-16—2-269, and §§ 1, 2 enacted a new Art. II as set out herein. The former Art. II pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 122, 11-10-80; Ord. No. 269, §§ 1—11, 6-20-06. Prior amendment and deletion resulted in only § 6-37, pertaining to building official designated as enforcing authority, being repealed without reenactment. For comprehensive derivation, see the Ordinance Disposition Table. 
State Law reference— Authority to make rules relating to maintenance of safe and sanitary housing, G.S. § 7-148(c)(7)(A)(i). 
 
Sec. 6-16. - International Property Maintenance Code adopted. 
That a certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the town clerk, being marked and designated as the International Property Maintenance Code, 2012 edition, as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Property Maintenance Code of the Town of Vernon, in the State of Connecticut for regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings and structures; by providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use, and the demolition of such existing structures as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said property maintenance code on file in the office of the town clerk are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this article, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in section 6-17. 
( Ord. No. 302 , § 1, 6-11-16)  
Sec. 6-17. - Amendments. 
The following sections are hereby revised: 
101.1. Code. This ordinance shall be known as the Property Maintenance Code of the Town of Vernon, herein referred as "this code." 
103.1 General. The [building official] zoning enforcement officer is hereby designated as the code official. 
103.4 Liability. The code official, officer or employee charged with the enforcement of this code, while acting for the jurisdiction, shall not thereby be rendered liable personally, and is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage accruing to persons or property as a result of an act required or permitted in the discharge of official duties. Any suit instituted against any officer or employee because of an act performed by that officer or employee in the lawful discharge of duties and under the provisions of this code shall be defended by the legal representative of the jurisdiction until the final termination of the proceedings. The code official or any subordinate shall not be liable for costs in an action, suit or proceeding that is instituted in pursuance of the provisions of this code; and any officer, acting in good faith and without malice, shall be free from liability for acts performed under any of its provisions or by reason of any act or omission in the performance of official duties in connection therewith. 
106.3 Prosecution of violation. Any person failing to comply with a notice of violation or order served in accordance with Section 107 shall be liable for a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) per violation in accordance with section 1-9 of the Code of Ordinances, Town of Vernon. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense. If the notice of violation is not complied with, the code official shall issue a citation. The citation may be enforced per Section 7-152c of the General Statues and section 2-5 of the Code of Ordinances. 
106.4 Reserved for future use. 
111.1 Application for appeal. Any person directly affected by a decision of the code official or a notice or order issued under this code shall have the right to appeal to the citation hearing officer who, in addition to the hearing appeals under Ordinance No. 218 "Hearing Procedure for Citations" codified herein as section 2-5, shall also hear appeals from decisions of the code official under the property maintenance code, provided that a written application for appeal is filed within thirty (30) days after the day the decision, notice or order was served. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this code or the rules legally adopted there under have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this code do not fully apply, the requirements of this code are adequately satisfied by other means, that the strict application of any requirement of this code would cause an undue hardship or any other valid defense recognized by law. 
111.2 Reserved for future use. 
111.2.1 Reserved for future use. 
111.2.5 Reserved for future use. 
111.7 Court review. Any person, whether or not a previous party of the appeal, shall have the right to appeal from a property maintenance code decision of the citation hearing officer in accordance with the provisions of Section 7-152c(g) of the General Statutes. 
111.8 Reserved for future use. 
112.4 Failure to comply. Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable to a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) or more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) per day. 
302.4 Weeds. All premises and exterior property shall be maintained free from weeds or plant growth in excess of twelve (12) inches. All noxious weeds shall be prohibited. "Weeds" shall be defined as all grasses, annual plants and vegetation, other than trees or shrubs provided; however, this term shall not include cultivated flowers and gardens. 
Upon failure of the owner or agent having charge of a property to cut and destroy weeds after service of a notice of violation, they shall be subject to prosecution in accordance with Section 106.3 and as prescribed by the authority having jurisdiction. Upon failure to comply with the notice of violation, any duly authorized employee of the jurisdiction or contractor hired by the jurisdiction shall be authorized to enter upon the property in violation and cut and destroy the weeds growing thereon, and the costs of such removal shall be paid by the owner or agent responsible for the property. 
304.14 Insect screens. Every door, window and other outside opening required for ventilation of habitable rooms, food preparation areas, food service areas or any areas where products to be included or utilized in food for human consumption are processed, manufactured, packaged or stored, shall be supplied with approved tightly fitting screens of not less than 16 mesh per inch (16 mesh per 25 mm) and every swinging door shall have a self-closing device in good working condition. 
Exception: Screens shall not be required where other approved means, such as air curtains or insect repellent fans, are employed. 
602.3. Heat supply. Every owner and operator of any building who rents, leases or lets one (1) or more dwelling units or sleeping units on terms, either expressed or implied, to furnish heat to the occupants thereof shall supply heat during the period from September 1 to May 1 to maintain a minimum temperature of 68°F (20°C) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms. 
Exceptions: 
1.  When the outdoor temperature is below the winter outdoor design temperature for the locality, maintenance of the minimum room temperature shall not be required provided that the heating system is operating at its full design capacity. The winter outdoor design temperature for the locality shall be as indicated in Appendix D of the International Plumbing Code. 
2.  In areas where the average monthly temperature is above 30°F (-1°C) a minimum temperature of 65°F (18°C) shall be maintained. 
602.4 Occupiable workspaces. Indoor occupiable work spaces shall be supplied with heat to maintain a temperature of not less than 65°F (18°C) from September 1 through May 1 during the period the spaces are occupied. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Processing, storage and operation areas that require cooling or special temperature conditions. 
2.  Areas in which person are primarily engaged in vigorous physical activities. 
3.  Warehouse, storage rooms and similar areas that are not occupied on a constant basis. 
702.1 General. A safe, continuous and unobstructed path of travel shall be provided from any point in a building or structure to the public way. Means of egress shall comply with the 2005 Connecticut State Fire Safety Code. 
702.2 Aisles. The required width of aisles in accordance with 2005 Connecticut State Fire Safety Code shall be unobstructed. 
( Ord. No. 302 , § 2, 6-11-16)  
Secs. 6-18—6-269. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - URBAN HOMESTEADING AGENCY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Boards, commissions and other agencies of the town, § 2-110 et seq. 
 
Sec. 6-270. - Establishment; purpose. 
(a)  There is hereby established an urban homesteading agency by the town for the purpose of reconstructing and rehabilitating vacant and abandoned buildings; protecting the public health, safety, convenience and welfare, protecting the value of all real property within the community; promoting aesthetically pleasing development; and preserving the special character of existing neighborhoods. 
(b)  For the purpose of this section, "agency" shall mean the urban homesteading agency. 
(Ord. No. 203, § 1, 1-4-94)  
Sec. 6-271. - Members; terms; qualifications; offices; vacancies. 
(a)  Members; terms. The agency shall be composed of five (5) regular members and two (2) alternate members, who shall be appointed upon the recommendation of the mayor and approval of the town council. The term of office for members and alternates shall be three (3) years, commencing February 1, 1994, except that of the five (5) regular members first appointed, two (2) shall be appointed for terms ending February 1, 1996, and one (1) shall be appointed for a term ending February 1, 1995. No member shall serve on the board for more than two (2) consecutive three-year terms. 
(b)  Qualifications. At least two (2) regular members shall be specifically qualified by reason of education, training or experience in construction, real estate sales or development, urban planning or historic preservation; one (1) regular member shall have experience in architecture, or urban renewal or building rehabilitation and at least one (1) alternate member shall have special training or experience in architecture, city planning, historic preservation, construction or other related businesses or professions. All regular and alternate members shall be residents of the town. 
(c)  Officers. The chairperson and vice-chairperson of the Committee shall be elected by a majority of the members of the committee for a term of one (1) year. Committee members shall not serve as chairperson or vice-chairperson for more than two (2) years. 
(d)  Vacancies; removal. Any vacancy shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term as original appointments are herein provided. Any regular member and alternate member who misses fifty (50) percent or more of the scheduled meetings in any calendar year shall be removed from the committee. 
(Ord. No. 203, § 2, 1-4-94)  
Sec. 6-272. - Meetings. 
The committee shall meet at least once a month, or as often as is deemed necessary. A quorum shall consist of three (3) members. In making recommendations on applications pending before it, the committee shall act in accordance with Connecticut General Statutes sections 8-169o through 8-169w and the regulations promulgated by the State Department of Housing pursuant to said statute. The committee shall report to the town council periodically with recommendations for the acquisition or disposition of property. 
(Ord. No. 203, § 3, 1-4-94)  
Sec. 6-273. - Renewal or repeal. 
This section will be effective for a period of not more than ten (10) years from date of adoption. If the town council does not act to renew the section, this section is repealed. 
(Ord. No. 203, § 1-4-94)  
Chapter 7 - LICENSES, PERMITS AND MISCELLANEOUS BUSINESS REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Building permit fees, § 3-1; outdoor fire permits, § 5-17 et seq.; licensing of collectors of recyclable materials, § 8-95; permit for driveways required, § 11-21. 
State Law reference— Itinerant vendor's licenses, G.S. §§ 21-27—21-35; pawnbrokers, G.S. §§ 21-39—21-47. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 7-1—7-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - GARBAGE AND REFUSE COLLECTORS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 296 , § 1, adopted Oct. 16, 2012, and effective Nov. 9, 2012, repealed Art. II, §§ 7-16—7-30, and enacted a new Art. II as set out herein. Former Art. II pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 169, §§ 1—4, 6—10, 7-11-87; Ord. No. 179, 3-12-89; Ord. No. 186, §§ 1—4, 6—8, 10, 10-2-90; Ord. No. 224, §§ 1, 2, 9-21-99; Ord. No. 225, §§ 4—7, 3-21-00; Ord. No. 235, §§ 2—16, 4-17-01. 
 
Sec. 7-16. - Declaration of policy. 
The accumulation, collection, removal and disposal of solid waste must be controlled by this municipality for the protection of the public health, safety, and welfare. It is consequently found and declared that: 
(1)  This municipality is authorized by law to regulate the disposition of solid waste generated within its boundaries and to collect a charge therefor and to license refuse collectors; 
(2)  This municipality is also authorized by Section 22a-220a of the Connecticut General Statutes to designate the area where solid waste generated within its boundaries shall be disposed; 
(3)  The enactment of this article is in furtherance of this municipality's solid waste management plan. 
There is hereby established a program for the collection and disposal of solid waste from all occupants of residential dwelling units, senior citizen age-restricted condominiums and stand-alone residential units as defined in Ordinance 241 located within this municipality. With the exception of residential condominiums, said program shall not apply to residential dwelling units of more than six (6) units, apartments, or business, commercial and industrial establishments. 
( Ord. No. 296 , § 2, 11-9-12)  
Sec. 7-17. - Definitions. 
The following terms shall have the following meanings: 
Director shall mean the director of public works of this municipality. 
Hazardous waste means pathological, biological, cesspool or other human wastes, human and animal remains, radioactive, toxic, and other hazardous wastes which according to federal, sate or local rules or regulations from time to time in effect required special handling in their collection, treatment or disposal, including those regulated under 43 U.S.C. §§ 6921—6925 and regulations thereunder adopted by the United States Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976, 90 Stat. 2806, 42 U.S.C. § 6901, such as cleaning fluids, crankcase oils, cutting oils, paints, acids, caustics, poisons, drugs, fine powdery earth used to filter cleaning fluid and refuse of similar nature. 
Municipal receptacle shall mean a litter storage and collection receptacle furnished by any private individual, partnership, corporation or LLC, or by any governmental agency for use by the public. 
Municipal service agreement shall mean the municipal solid waste management services contract between this municipality and any contractor selected by the town. 
Municipality shall mean the Town of Vernon. 
Refuse collectors shall include any person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of collecting and transporting commercial, household or industrial solid waste for hire within this municipality. 
Residential condominiums shall mean any group of individually owned dwelling units having ownership in common of shared facilities, organized under the Common Interest Ownership Act of the Connecticut General Statutes, as revised. 
Solid waste means unwanted or discarded material consistent with the meaning of that term pursuant to Section 22a-260(7) of the Connecticut General Statutes, excluding semi-solid or liquid materials collected and treated in a sewerage system. 
Transfer station shall mean that facility identified in a contract between the town and a contractor selected for the collection and disposal of solid waste. 
( Ord. No. 296 , § 3, 11-9-12)  
Sec. 7-18. - License required for refuse collection. 
All solid waste accumulated in this municipality shall be collected, conveyed and disposed of by this municipality or by persons licensed by this municipality to perform such work and in accordance with the provisions of this article. No other person shall collect, convey or dispose of any solid in this municipality, except that the actual producers of solid waste or the owners of premises in this municipality upon which solid waste has accumulated may personally collect, convey and dispose of such solid waste upon complying with the other provisions of this article and with any other applicable ordinances and regulations. No solid waste collected from outside this municipality shall be disposed of under a license or registration issued pursuant to this article. 
( Ord. No. 296 , § 4, 11-9-12)  
Sec. 7-19. - Refuse containers. 
(a)  Provision for containers. The owner or occupant of each residential dwelling units as defined in section 7-16 in which solid waste is created or generated shall provide, at a suitable place upon such premises, sufficient receptacles for receiving and holding such solid waste during the intervals between collections. Solid waste containers (as approved by the town) shall be maintained in good condition free of holes and fissures and shall be equipped with securely fitting covers. 
(b)  Containers for commercial solid waste. The standard container for commercial solid waste shall be a watertight, vermin-proof galvanized metal or nonbrittle plastic receptacle, with a tight lid, of not less than twenty (20) nor more than thirty (30) gallon capacity; except that commercial establishments may provide for a large covered container designed to be emptied into a refuse truck. 
(c)  Containers for household solid waste; number of collections. The standard container as approved by the town for household solid waste shall be watertight, vermin-proof galvanized metal or nonbrittle plastic receptacle, with a tight lid. Curbside collections shall be made at least once each week. 
( Ord. No. 296 , § 5, 11-9-12)  
Sec. 7-20. - Storing of solid waste. 
(a)  Public places. No person shall place any solid waste in any street, alley or other public place or upon any private property, whether owned by such person or not, within this municipality, except in proper containers or otherwise properly prepared for collection or under express approval granted by the director; nor shall any person throw or deposit any solid waste in any stream or other body of water. 
(b)  Accumulation of solid waste. Solid waste may not be placed at curbside for collection sooner than twenty-four (24) hours prior to the scheduled day of collection. Any uncontainerized accumulation of solid waste on any premises is hereby declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited. Failure to remove any accumulation of solid waste within twenty-four (24) hours after a written warning providing notice of a violation of this section in the form of a sticker affixed to the solid waste or its container will result in the removal by the town of the accumulated solid waste and the issuance of a citation to the owner and/or occupant of the premises imposing a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per violation pursuant to section 7-26. Each day shall constitute a separate offense when permitted by the Connecticut General Statutes. 
(c)  In the event that the accumulation of solid waste constitutes an immediate threat to public health, safety or welfare, it may be removed immediately by the town provided a written warning giving notice of the specific violation of this section is given to the owner and/or occupant of the premises prior to the issuance of a certificate of lien pursuant to Section 49-73b(b) of the Connecticut General Statutes. 
(d)  Any expenses incurred by the town under subsection (c) of this section for the removal of solid waste constituting an immediate threat to public health, safety, or welfare, may be recovered from the owner of the premises by filing a certificate of lien pursuant to the provisions of Section 49-73b of the Connecticut General Statutes. 
(e)  Scattering of solid waste. No person shall cast, place, sweep or deposit anywhere within this municipality any solid waste in such a manner that it may be carried or deposited by the elements upon or in any street, sidewalk, alley, sewer, parkway or other public place. 
(f)  Hazardous wastes. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to place hazardous wastes or similarly dangerous substances into any solid waste container or to transport any such substance to the transfer station. 
(g)  Litter. No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon any street, sidewalk, stream or other public place within the town, except in municipal receptacles, in authorized private receptacles for collection or in official town dumps. Persons placing litter in municipal receptacles or in authorized private receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon private property. Violation of this subsection shall result in the issuance of a citation to the owner and/or occupant of the premises imposing a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per violation. Each day shall constitute separate offense when permitted by the Connecticut General Statutes. 
( Ord. No. 296 , § 6, 11-9-12)  
Sec. 7-21. - Licensing of refuse collectors; registration of vehicles. 
(a)  Licensing and registration authority designated. The director shall be the licensing and registration authority for refuse collectors and vehicles and containers. The director shall grant a license within a reasonable time following the filing of a proper application and payment of the prescribed fee unless he finds one (1) or more of the following conditions to prevail: 
(1)  The applicant has had a previous suspension or revocation of licenses; or 
(2)  The applicant lacks suitable equipment with which to collect solid waste in a safe and nuisance-free manner and in compliance with this article. 
(b)  License required. Each refuse collector shall, annually on or before July 1, apply for a license from the director on such form as he shall prescribe to engage in the business of solid waste collection in the municipality. 
(c)  Certificate of insurance. No such license shall be issued until the contractor files with the town a certificate of liability insurance in the amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for property damage and three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) per person and five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) per occurrence for liability claims, together with such workers' compensation insurance as provided by law. 
(d)  Registration of vehicles, containers. Each license refuse collector shall obtain a separate registration for each vehicle he operates to transport solid waste within this municipality. Registration shall also be required for all permanent containers in capacity greater than ten (10) cubic yards. Registration shall not be transferable from vehicle to vehicle nor from container to container; provided, however, the director may allow such temporary transfer of registrations in hardship situations, such as a temporary breakdown of an individually licensed vehicle. 
(e)  Registration term, fee; renewal. All registrations shall be issued for a term not to exceed one (1) year and shall be renewable on or before July 1 of each year. The registration fee shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each vehicle. 
(f)  Reinspection upon sale or transfer of vehicle during registration year. Whenever a duly registered vehicle is sold or transferred to another refuse collector licensed in this municipality during the registration year, the vehicle shall be reinspected within seven (7) days of such transfer date, but no additional fee shall be required. 
(g)  Display of registration. The registration issued shall be conspicuously displayed on the left front of each vehicle so licensed, and each container, or as may be directed. 
(h)  Identification of vehicles and containers. Each licensee shall prominently display at all times on each registered vehicle and/or container in letters at least four (4) inches in height his name, registration number and telephone number. 
(i)  Notification required upon sale, transfer of route. When any licensee shall sell or transfer all or part of his route to another refuse collector presently licensed to collect solid waste in this municipality, he shall forthwith give written notice to the director at least seven (7) days before the date of the sale or transfer, stating the name of the buyer or transferee and the intended date of sale. 
(j)  Licenses nontransferable. Licenses are not transferable. When any licensee shall sell or transfer all or part of his route to any refuse collector not licensed in this municipality, he shall first notify the director, in writing, of his intent to sell, and the transferee shall, at the same time, make application for a license to operate in this municipality. 
( Ord. No. 296 , § 7, 11-9-12)  
Sec. 7-22. - Revocation or suspension of license. 
(a)  Generally. A license to engage in solid waste collection in this municipality and to use the transfer station or other refuse facilities provided by this municipality is a privilege, not a right. Failure to comply with the provisions of this article shall be grounds for revocation or suspension of any license or registration issued under the provisions of this article in addition to any other penalty imposed by law. 
(b)  Notice required. Revocation or suspensions shall only become effective five (5) calendar days after receipt of written notice from the director. 
(c)  Filing request for review; effect of failure to file. If a refuse collector objects to the director's action described in subsection (b) above to revoke or suspend his license or registration, he may, within the five (5) calendar days of receipt of the notice, file a written request for review with the town administrator. Failure to timely file such request for review shall make the director's action final and binding upon the refuse collector. 
(d)  Effect of timely filing. Timely filing of such request for review shall operate as an automatic stay of the director's action. 
(e)  Special appeals board; hearing. Upon a timely filing of a request for review, the mayor shall appoint forthwith a special appeals board consisting of three (3) electors of this municipality, one (1) licensed refuse collector and a member of the town council, and the board shall then, within thirty (30) days, hear and decide the matter. The decision of the board shall be final and binding upon the refuse collector. 
( Ord. No. 296 , § 8, 11-9-12)  
Sec. 7-23. - Administration; promulgation of rules and regulations. 
(a)  The director shall administer the licensing of any refuse collector engaged in the collecting and transporting of solid waste in this municipality. 
(b)  The director may promulgate additional rules on all collection and disposal procedures from time to time as he deems proper, but such rules shall not be inconsistent with this article or applicable state statute. 
( Ord. No. 296 , § 9, 11-9-12)  
Sec. 7-24. - Refuse collector's responsibilities and obligations. 
(a)  Place of delivery; payment. Each refuse collector shall deliver all solid waste meeting the contractual standards collected within the territorial limits of this municipality to the facility identified in a contract between the town and a contractor selected for the collection and disposal of solid waste. All other solid waste may be delivered to such place as the director may, from time to time, designate and any applicable charge shall be paid by the refuse collector. 
(b)  Failure to pay. Any refuse collector failing to pay this municipality any disposal charge within thirty (30) days after the date of a bill therefor shall pay, in addition to the disposal charge shown on such bill, interest on such disposal charge at the rate of one (1) percent per month or fraction thereof commencing on the date of such bill, plus all costs of collection, including an attorney's reasonable bill, incurred by this municipality. A failure to pay shall also be grounds for revocation or suspension of a license and registration. 
(c)  Prohibition on delivery. No licensee shall deliver any solid waste meeting the contractual standards to any place other than the facility identified in a contract between the town and a contractor selected for the collection and disposal of solid waste. 
(d)  Construction and maintenance of vehicles and containers. All vehicles registered to collect and transport solid waste shall be automatic unloading vehicles of a watertight construction and shall be maintained free of obnoxious odors and accumulated solid waste. Any such vehicle with a capacity in excess of ten (10) cubic yards shall be of a closed construction. A container utilized primarily for nonliquid solid waste need not have a capacity of less than ten (10) cubic yards, it may have an open top, provided that it be covered when it is in motion to prevent the escape of solid waste. 
(e)  Spilled solid waste. Refuse collectors shall clean up solid waste that may spill when being carried or transferred. 
( Ord. No. 296 , § 10, 11-9-12)  
Sec. 7-25. - Enforcement of article. 
It shall be the responsibility of the director or his/her agents, and/or the town's deputy health officer, the North Central Connecticut Health District, building inspector or the police department and their designated agents, to enforce all provisions of this article. 
( Ord. No. 296 , § 11, 11-9-12)  
Sec. 7-26. - Violations and penalty; appeals. 
(a)  In addition to the provisions of section 7-20(d) providing for liens when the accumulation of solid waste constitutes an immediate threat to public health, safety, and welfare, this article is specifically designated for enforcement by the citation process pursuant to Section 7-152c of the Connecticut General Statutes and Ordinance No. 218. 
(b)  Any violation of the terms of this article shall carry a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per offense, unless otherwise specified. Each violation shall constitute a separate offense when permitted by the Connecticut General Statutes. 
(c)  Any person issued a citation pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be entitled to a hearing to contest the citation. The procedure for the hearing, disposition and enforcement shall be set forth in Section 7-152c, of the Connecticut General Statutes entitled "Hearing Procedure for Citations," as be amended, and an ordinance of the town amending Ordinance No. 215 entitled "An Ordinance Establishing Hearing Procedures for Citations." 
( Ord. No. 296 , § 12, 11-9-12)  
Sec. 7-27. - Duration. 
This article shall be effective for not more than ten (10) years from the date of the adoption of the ordinance from which it is derived, at which time, if the town council has not acted to renew the ordinance, the article shall be deemed repealed. 
( Ord. No. 296 , § 13, 11-9-12)  
Sec. 7-28. - Severability. 
If any provision of this article or the application thereof shall be held invalid or unenforceable, the remainder of this article, or the application of such terms and provisions to persons or circumstances other than those to which it is held invalid or unenforceable, shall not be affected thereby; and each remaining term and provision hereof shall be deemed valid and shall be enforced to the fullest extent permitted by law. 
( Ord. No. 296 , § 14, 11-9-12)  
Sec. 7-29. - Administration. 
The provisions of the Article shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any and all provisions of the Connecticut General Statutes, state codes, and regulations and ordinances of the town. 
( Ord. No. 296 , § 15, 11-9-12)  
Sec. 7-30. - Applicability. 
In addition to other applicable provisions of this article, sections 7-19, 7-20 and 7-26 shall apply to all generators of solid waste, including residential dwelling units, apartments, business, commercial and industrial establishments. 
( Ord. No. 296 , § 16, 11-9-12)  
Secs. 7-31—7-45. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - RESERVED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 202, adopted Sept. 21, 1993, repealed Ord. No. 115, adopted Oct. 1, 1979, and Ord. No. 152, adopted April 3, 1984, from which were derived the provisions of Ch. 7, Art. III, which provisions pertained to massage establishments. 
 
Secs. 7-46—7-105. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - PEDDLERS, HAWKERS, SOLICITORS, CANVASSERS AND SALESMEN[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 11. 
State Law reference— Authority to license and regulate the business of peddlers, G.S. § 7-148(c)(7)(H)(iv); itinerant vendors, G.S. § 21-27 et seq.; hawkers and peddlers, G.S. § 21-36 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 7-106. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Canvasser or solicitor. A "canvasser" or "solicitor" is defined as any individual, whether resident of the town or not, taking or attempting to take orders from anyone on the premises of a house, apartment, trailer, or other place of residence for sale of goods, wares, merchandise, including articles of food, or personal property of any nature whatsoever for future delivery, or for services to be performed in the future, whether or not such individual shall carry or expose for sale a sample of the subject of such sale, or whether he is collecting advance payments on such sales or not. 
Community event. A community event is defined as an event defined by the Town Council of the Town of Vernon for a specific date or dates and for specific location or locations. 
Hawker or peddler. A "hawker" or "peddler" means any person whether principal or agent, who goes from town to town or from place to place in the same town selling or bartering, or carrying for sale or barter or exposing therefor, any goods, wares, merchandise, including articles of food, either on foot or from any animal or vehicle. 
Itinerant vendor. An "itinerant vendor" is defined as any person, whether a principal or agent, who engages in a temporary or transient business in this state either in one (1) locality or in traveling from place to place selling goods, wares, merchandise, or conducting any closeout sale and who for the purpose of carrying out such business or sale hires, leases or occupies any building or structure for the exhibition and sale of such goods, wares, and merchandise; temporary or transient business meaning and including any exhibition and sale of goods, wares, or merchandise which is carried on in any tent, booth, building or other structure, unless such place is open for business during usual business hours at least nine (9) months in each year. 
Salesman. A "salesman" is any person who shall sell or expose for sale, or solicit orders for any articles of food, or any goods, wares, merchandise, materials or services, or solicit for any contracts within the town to or from anyone on the premises of a house, apartment, trailer, or other place of residence, and shall include canvassers, solicitors, hawkers, peddlers, and itinerant vendors, as defined in this section. 
(Ord. No. 46, § 2, 10-6-69; Ord. No. 188, § 2, 1-15-91; Ord. No. 237, 3-5-02) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 7-107. - Exemptions. 
This article shall not apply to: 
(1)  Persons less than sixteen (16) years of age; 
(2)  Persons selling only to stores, institutions, business, industrial, commercial establishments and municipal agencies; 
(3)  Charitable, political, religious and government organizations and their representatives, including public service organizations engaged in soliciting for charitable projects; 
(4)  Persons canvassing, soliciting, or selling exclusively by telephone; 
(5)  Persons delivering food, groceries, fuel oil, milk, and other goods or supplies which have been ordered or contracted for; and 
(6)  Persons exempted by the statutes or laws of the state or persons in possession of valid licenses issued by the state covering the activities which would otherwise be regulated by this article. 
(Ord. No. 46, § 13, 10-6-69; Ord. No. 188, § 13, 1-15-91)  
Sec. 7-108. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall upon conviction thereof be punished in accordance with section 1-9. Each day of engaging in the activities described in section 7-106, without credentials as required by this article, shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 46, § 14, 10-6-69; Ord. No. 188, § 14, 1-15-91)  
Secs. 7-109—7-125. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CREDENTIALS 
 
Sec. 7-126. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any peddler, hawker, solicitor, canvasser, or salesman, except as provided in section 7-107, to engage in such business within the town limits without first obtaining identifying credentials therefor in compliance with this division. 
(Ord. No. 46, § 1, 10-6-69; Ord. No. 188, § 1, 1-15-91)  
Sec. 7-127. - Application—Contents. 
(a)  Applicants for credentials required by this division must file with the police chief a sworn application in writing, in duplicate, on a form to be furnished by the police chief, which shall give the following information: 
(1)  Name and description of the applicant; 
(2)  Permanent home address, previous home address, full local address and telephone number of the applicant; 
(3)  A detailed description of the nature of the business and goods to be sold; 
(4)  If employed, the name and address of the employer; 
(5)  The length of time for which the applicant wishes to engage in business; 
(6)  The place where the property proposed to be sold, or orders taken for the sale thereof, are manufactured or produced; 
(7)  Where such goods or products are located at the time such application is filed, and the proposed method of delivery; 
(8)  Make, model, or registration number of motor vehicle, if any, to be used; 
(9)  Whether, when, where and on what charges he has ever been arrested, together with the disposition of such charges; 
(10)  Whether, when, where, in what court, and by whom he or any present or former employer, principal or contract associate has ever been sued in a civil action alleging fraud or misrepresentation in connection with or as a result of the registrant's activities in soliciting for any contract or in selling, exposing or offering for sale or soliciting orders for any articles of food or any goods, wares, merchandise, materials or services. 
(11)  Business address and telephone number; 
(12)  List of towns and cities where applicant previously held or currently holds a solicitor's or similar license; 
(13)  Applicant's Social Security number. 
(b)  Each registrant for credentials required by this division shall, at the time he files any application form, exhibit identification satisfactory to the police chief and provide a specimen of his hand-writing. 
(Ord. No. 46, § 3, 10-6-69; Ord. No. 188, § 3, 1-15-91)  
Sec. 7-128. - Same—Fee. 
At the time of filing of the application for credentials required by this division and for the renewal application for credentials required by this division, the fee charged and collected by the chief of police shall be twenty dollars ($20.00). 
(Ord. No. 46, § 4, 10-6-69; Ord. No. 137, 8-31-82; Ord. No. 188, § 4, 1-15-91)  
Sec. 7-129. - Investigations. 
(a)  Upon receipt of an application for credentials required by this division, the chief of police shall cause to be undertaken and completed within a period of two (2) weeks such investigation of the applicant's business and moral character and the statements made in the application as he deems necessary for the public good, and if as a result of such investigation, the applicant's character or business responsibility if found to be unsatisfactory, the police chief shall endorse his disapproval on the application and his reasons for the same, and notify the applicant thereof. 
(b)  In such cases, credentials shall be refused, or, after issuance, revoked by the police chief and immediately returned to him if the registrant has made any patently and indisputably false statement or representation in any registration form filed by him pursuant to this article, has been convicted of any crime or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude or of any violation of this article, or if judgement shall at any time have been entered against him or any present or former employer, principal or contract associate in a civil action alleging fraud or misrepresentation in connection with or as a result of the activities of the registrant. 
(c)  If credentials are refused, no fee shall be charged. There shall be no refund where credentials, after being issued, are revoked. If for any reason the chief of police should fail to carry out and complete such investigation within the two-week period, the applicant may demand and be issued temporary credentials, which credentials may be revoked or made permanent depending on the results of the investigation. If the chief of police is of the opinion that the town building official or health officer should review the application, he shall refer it to them. 
(Ord. No. 46, § 5, 10-6-69; Ord. No. 188, § 5, 1-15-91)  
Sec. 7-130. - Issuance. 
If, as a result of such investigation, the character and business responsibility of the applicant for credentials required by this division are found to be satisfactory, the police chief shall endorse his approval on the application and deliver to the applicant credentials which shall show the name and address of the licensee, the kind of goods to be sold thereunder, the manner of sale, the date of issuance and the length of time the same shall be operative. 
(Ord. No. 46, § 6, 10-6-69; Ord. No. 188, § 6, 1-15-91)  
Sec. 7-131. - Fee. 
The fee for issuance of credentials charged by the town shall be five dollars ($5.00) per year. 
(Ord. No. 46, § 7, 10-6-69; Ord. No. 188, § 7, 1-15-91)  
Sec. 7-132. - Conditions. 
Each person to whom credentials have been issued pursuant to this division shall, while engaged in the town in the activities for which he has credentials shall observe the following conditions: 
(1)  Conduct himself at all times in a quiet, orderly and lawful manner; 
(2)  Enter within any home only upon being expressly invited to do so by occupant thereof; 
(3)  Leave any premises immediately upon the request of any occupant of the same; 
(4)  Deliver as agreed or represented, and within a reasonable time, all food, goods, wares, merchandise and materials, and perform in like manner all services for which he has been paid in whole or in part, except as provided in subsection (5) of this section; 
(5)  Refund promptly any payment made to him if he shall find that it is not reasonably possible for him to comply with subsection (4) of this section unless such refund shall be refused by the other party; 
(6)  Give a written and signed receipt for all payments in excess of two dollars ($2.00) received by him, stating the amount of such payment, a description of the food, goods, wares, merchandise, materials and/or services or contracts in connection with which such payment was made, the total of all charges made or to be made in connection with the same and when and in what amounts any additional payments are to be made; 
(7)  Give to the other party a copy, signed by the holder of the credentials, of any order, contract or other document which such party has signed. Compliance with this subsection shall constitute compliance with subsection (6) of this section to the extent that requirements of subsection (6) of this section are met by the document. 
(Ord. No. 46, § 11, 10-6-69; Ord. No. 188, § 11, 1-15-91)  
Sec. 7-133. - Expiration. 
Except as provided in section 7-107, no person whose credentials have expired shall engage in any of the activities named in section 7-106 until he shall have again registered with the police chief, obtained new credentials and paid the same fee as in the case of original credentials. 
(Ord. No. 46, § 8, 10-6-69; Ord. No. 188, § 8, 1-15-91)  
Sec. 7-134. - Display. 
It shall be the duty of any police officer of the town to request any person seen engaging in any of the activities prescribed in section 7-106 and who is not known by such officer to have proper credentials to produce his credentials and it shall be the duty of any such officer to enforce the provisions of this article against any person found to be violating the same; and peddlers, hawkers, solicitors, canvassers and salesmen are required to exhibit their credentials at the request of any citizen. 
(Ord. No. 46, § 9, 10-6-69; Ord. No. 188, § 9, 1-15-91)  
Sec. 7-135. - Revocation—Notice; hearing. 
(a)  Credentials issued under the provisions of this division may be revoked by the police chief after notice and hearing for any of the following causes: 
(1)  Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained in the application for credentials; 
(2)  Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement made in the course of carrying on his business as peddler, hawker, solicitor, canvasser or salesman; 
(3)  Any violation of the provisions of this article; 
(4)  Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude. 
(b)  Notice of hearing for revocation of credentials shall be given in writing setting forth specifically the grounds of complaint. Such notice shall be mailed by certified mail to the last known address of the holder at least five (5) days prior to the date set for hearing. 
(Ord. No. 46, § 10, 10-6-69; Ord. No. 188, § 10, 1-15-91)  
Sec. 7-136. - Records. 
It shall be the duty of the police chief to keep records of all credentials issued under the provisions of this division in a book or file kept for that purpose. Such records shall contain, as to each holder of credentials, all application forms signed by him with a notation on each as to whether credentials were issued or refused as a result of its being filed, the date of issuance or refusal, the reason for refusal, or the fee paid as the case may be, a summary of each complaint concerning the activities of the holder, and the date of any revocation of credentials granted pursuant to any application filed by him together with a statement of the reasons therefor. The police shall keep a detailed account of all receipts from applicants and shall turn such fees over to the town treasurer monthly. 
(Ord. No. 46, § 12, 10-6-69; Ord. No. 188, § 12, 1-15-91)  
Sec. 7-137. - Community event. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, the Vernon Town Council may designate an event as a "community event." All vendors who have satisfied all other sections of this article may apply, on a form and in a manner so determined by the town administrator or his assigns, for consideration for selection to participate in the community event in the location and times so established. Decisions on the peddlers, hawkers, solicitors, canvassers and salesmen so selected shall be based upon the mix of services or products to be provided, payments to the town to be made and the quality and level of service or product provided, with the decision of the town administrator or designee to be final. 
(Ord. No. 237, 3-5-02)  
Secs. 7-138—7-160. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - DRUG PARAPHERNALIA 
 
Sec. 7-161. - Definition. 
Drug paraphernalia refers to equipment, products and materials of any kind which are marketed for use or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing or concealing, or injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the human body, any controlled substance contrary to the provisions of chapter 420b of the general statutes including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Kits marketed for use or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting of any species of plant which is a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance can be derived; 
(2)  Kits marketed for use or designed for use in manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing or preparing controlled substances; 
(3)  Isomerization devices marketed for use in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a controlled substance; 
(4)  Testing equipment marketed for use or designed for use in identifying or analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of controlled substances. 
(5)  Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine hydrochloride, mannitol, mannite, dextrose and lactose marketed for use or designed for use in cutting controlled substances; 
(6)  Separation gins and sifters marketed for use or designed for use in removing twigs and seeds from or in otherwise cleaning or refining, marihuana; 
(7)  Capsules and other containers marketed for use or designed for use in packaging small quantities of controlled substances; 
(8)  Containers and other objects marketed for use or designed for use in storing or concealing controlled substances; 
(9)  Hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects marketed for use or designed for use in parenterally injecting controlled substances into the human body; 
(10)  Objects marketed for use or designed for use in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing marihuana, cocaine, hashish, or hashish oil into the human body, such as: Metal, wooden acrylic, glass, stone, plastic or ceramic pipes with screens, permanent screens, hashish heads or punctured metal bowls; water pipes; carburetion tubes and devices, smoking and carburetion masks, roach clips: Meaning objects used to hold burning material, such as a marihuana cigarette, that has become too small or too short to be held in the hand; miniature cocaine spoons, and cocaine vials; chamber pipes; carburetor pipes; electric pipes, air-driven pipes; chillums; bongs or ice pipes or chillers. 
(Ord. No. 176, § 5, 12-6-88)  
Sec. 7-162. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any provision of this article shall be fined in accordance with section 1-9. 
(Ord. No. 176, § 8, 12-6-88)  
Sec. 7-163. - License required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person or persons or corporations as principal, clerk, agent or servant to sell any drug paraphernalia, as hereafter defined, without obtaining a license therefor. Such license shall be in addition to any or all other licenses held by applicant. 
(b)  Such license shall be renewable annually. 
(Ord. No. 176, § 1, 12-6-88)  
Sec. 7-164. - Application for license. 
(a)  Application for a license or renewal thereof to sell drug paraphernalia shall be made to the chief of police of the Town of Vernon on forms available from the chief of police. 
(b)  The application shall be accompanied by affidavits by the applicant and each and every employee authorized to sell such drug paraphernalia that such person has never been convicted of a drug-related offense. 
(c)  The application shall be accompanied by a licensing fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) which shall be the annual licensing fee and shall be payable each year upon renewal. 
(d)  The applicant or license holder shall notify the chief of police whenever a principal, clerk, agent or servant who filed an affidavit pursuant to subsection (b) hereof is no longer engaged in such activity and upon a new principal, clerk agent or servant engaging in such activity shall file an affidavit for such person in conformance of subsection (b) hereof. 
(Ord. No. 176, § 2, 12-6-88)  
Sec. 7-165. - Minors. 
It shall be unlawful to sell or give drug paraphernalia as hereinafter defined, in any form to any person under eighteen (18) years of age. 
(Ord. No. 176, § 3, 12-6-88)  
Sec. 7-166. - Records. 
Every licensee must keep a duplicate set of records of all sales of drug paraphernalia and one such set shall be sent to the police department weekly and the other set shall be open to inspection of any police officer at any time during the hours of business. Such record shall contain the name and address of the purchaser, the name and quantity of the product, the date and the time of the sale and the licensee's signature. Such records shall be retained for no less than two (2) years. 
(Ord. No. 176, § 4, 12-6-88)  
Sec. 7-167. - Guidelines. 
The town council shall promulgate guidelines to be used in the interpretation and enforcement of this article. The guidelines may be modified from time to time as the council deems appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 176, § 6, 12-6-88)  
Secs. 7-168—7-179. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESS AND ESTABLISHMENTS[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Adult material and performances, § 8-3. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 7-180—7-189. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESSES 
 
Sec. 7-190. - Findings and purpose. 
The Town Council of the Town of Vernon, Connecticut, finds: 
(1)  There are "adult entertainment businesses" located in the Town of Vernon which require special supervision from the town's public safety agencies in order to protect and preserve the health, safety and welfare of the patrons of such establishments, as well as the health, safety and welfare of the town's citizens. 
(2)  Statistics and studies performed by a substantial number of cities and towns in the United States indicated that the regulation and supervision of such adult entertainment businesses tends to discourage sexual acts and prostitution and thereby promotes the health, safety and welfare of the patrons, clients and customers of such establishments. 
(3)  The continued unregulated operation of adult entertainment businesses including, without limitation, those specifically cited in paragraph (1) hereof, is and would be detrimental to the general welfare, health and safety of the citizens of Vernon. 
(4)  The Constitution and laws of the State of Connecticut grant to the town powers, especially police power, to enact reasonable legislation and measures to regulate and supervise adult entertainment businesses in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 210, § 1, 7-30-96)  
Sec. 7-191. - Definitions. 
Words and terms used in this division shall have the following meanings: 
Adult entertainment business: A public establishment which features topless or bottomless dancers, nude dancers, or strippers, either male or female, or persons or employees appearing in a topless, bottomless or nude state. 
Bottomless: Exposition to the public view of any portion of the pubic hair, anus cleft of the buttocks, vulva or genitals. 
Child day care center: A facility in which care is provided for more than twelve (12) related or unrelated children outside their own homes on a regular basis for part of the twenty-four (24) hours in one or more days of the week. 
Nude: The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering or the showing of covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. 
Public establishment includes: 
(1)  Any nightclub, bar, cafe, restaurant or retail establishment which is open to the public either for a fee, or for free; or 
(2)  Any private club which has a membership of more than ten (10) persons. 
School: Any public or private preschool, elementary school, junior high school or high school. 
Topless: The showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering, below a point immediately above the top of the areola. 
(Ord. No. 210, § 2, 7-30-96)  
Sec. 7-192. - Prohibited within certain distances of specified places. 
Adult entertainment businesses are prohibited within: 
(1)  Five hundred (500) feet of any school, or child day care center. 
(2)  Five hundred (500) feet of any church or other permanent house of worship. 
(3)  Five hundred (500) feet of any park, recreation facility or library owned or operated by the town. 
(4)  Five hundred (500) feet from any residential zone line boundary. 
(5)  Five hundred (500) feet from establishments selling alcoholic beverages. 
(6)  One thousand (1,000) feet from other adult-oriented establishment. 
(Ord. No. 210, § 3, 7-30-96)  
Sec. 7-193. - Measurement of distance. 
The distances provided in this division shall be measured by following a straight line, without regard to intervening buildings, from the nearest point of the property parcel upon which the adult entertainment business is to be located to the nearest point of the parcel of property from which the adult entertainment business is to be separated. 
(Ord. No. 210, § 4, 7-30-96)  
Sec. 7-194. - Penalty and prosecution. 
(a)  Any person, partnership, limited liability company, or corporation or other entity who is found to have violated this division, shall be fined one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each such violation. 
(b)  Each violation of this division shall be considered a separate offense. A violation shall be construed as each incident in which a person appears nude, topless or bottomless. 
(c)  This town may also maintain an action or special proceeding for an injunction or other equitable relief to compel compliance with, or to restrain the violation of, this division. The use of any remedy shall not prevent the use of any other remedy hereunder. The listing of remedies herein shall not deprive the town of the use of any other remedies provided by other provisions of law. 
(Ord. No. 210, § 5, 7-30-96)  
Sec. 7-195. - Severability. 
Should any section or provision of this division be declared to be unconstitutional or invalid by the courts, such decision shall not affect the validity of the balance of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 210, § 6, 7-30-96)  
Sec. 7-196. - Zoning requirements. 
Nothing in this division shall be construed to condone, sponsor, or authorize any adult entertainment business which is not allowed under the zoning regulations of the town. 
(Ord. No. 210, § 7, 7-30-96)  
Sec. 7-197. - Duration. 
This division shall be effective for not more than ten (10) years from the date of adoption, at which time, if the town council has not acted to renew the section, it shall be deemed repealed. 
(Ord. No. 210, § 8, 7-30-96)  
Secs. 7-198—7-207. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - ADULT-ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENTS 
 
Sec. 7-208. - Findings and purpose. 
(a)  The Town Council of the Town of Vernon, Connecticut, finds: 
(1)  There are "adult-oriented establishments" located in the town which require special supervision from the town's public safety agencies in order to protect and preserve the health, safety and welfare of the patrons of such establishments, as well as the health, safety and welfare of the town's citizens. 
(2)  Statistics and studies performed by a substantial number of cities and towns in the United States indicate that: 
a.  Large numbers of persons, primarily male, frequent such "adult oriented establishments," especially those which provide closed booths, cubicles, studios and rooms for the private viewing of so-called "adult" motion pictures and/or video tapes and/or live entertainment; and 
b.  Such closed booths, cubicles, studios and rooms have been used by patrons, clients or customers of such "adult-oriented establishments" for the purpose of engaging in certain sexual acts; and 
c.  Male and female prostitutes have been known to frequent such establishments in order to provide sex for hire to the patrons, clients or customers of such establishments within such booths, cubicles and rooms; and 
d.  Doors, curtain, blinds and/or other closures installed in or on the entrances and/or exits of such booths, cubicles, studios and rooms which are closed while such booths, cubicles, studios and rooms are in use encourage patrons using such booths, cubicles, studios and rooms to engage in sexual acts therein with prostitutes and/or with other members of the same sex, thereby promoting and encouraging prostitution and the commission of sexual acts which cause blood, semen and urine to be deposited on the floors and/or walls of such booths, cubicles, studios and rooms which deposits could prove detrimental to the health and safety of other persons who may come into contact with such deposits; and 
e.  The regulation and supervision of such "adult-oriented establishments" tends to discourage such sexual acts and prostitution, and thereby promotes the health, safety and welfare of the patrons, clients and customers of such establishments. 
(3)  The continued unregulated operation of adult-oriented establishments including, without limitation, those specifically cited in subsection (a)(1) hereof is and would be detrimental to the general welfare, health and safety of the citizens of Vernon. 
(4)  The Constitution and laws of the State of Connecticut grant to the town powers, especially police power, to enact reasonable legislation and measures to regulate and supervise "adult-oriented establishments" as hereinafter defined in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare. 
(b)  It is not the intent of the town council, in enacting this division, to deny any person rights to speech protected by the United States and/or state constitutions, nor is it the intent of the town council to impose any additional limitations or restrictions on the contents of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented films, video-tapes, books and/or other materials. Further, by enacting this ordinance, the town council does not intended to deny or restrict the rights of any adult to obtain and/or view any sexually oriented materials protected by the United States and/or state constitutions, nor does it intend to restrict or deny any constitutionally protected rights that distributors or exhibitors of such sexually oriented materials may have to sell, distribute or exhibit such materials. 
(Ord. No. 211, § 1, 7-30-96)  
Sec. 7-209. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this division, the words and phrases used herein shall have the following meanings, unless otherwise clearly indicated by the context: 
Adult bookstore means an establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock and trade in books, films, video cassettes, or magazines and other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" as defined below, and in conjunction therewith has facilities for the presentation of adult entertainment as defined below, and including adult-oriented films, movies or live entertainment, for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult entertainment means any exhibition of any adult-oriented motion pictures, live performance, display or dance of any type, which has as a significant or substantial portion of such performance any actual or simulated performance of "specified sexual activities" or exhibition and viewing of "specified anatomical areas", removal of articles of clothing or appearing unclothed, pantomime, modeling, and any other personal services offered customers. 
Adult mini-motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of less than fifty (50) persons regularly used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas", as defined below, for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of fifty (50) or more persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas," as defined below, for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult-oriented establishment shall include, without limitation, "adult bookstores", "adult motion picture theaters", "adult mini-motion picture theaters" and further means any premises to which the public, patrons or members are invited or admitted and which are so physically arranged as to provide booths, cubicles, rooms, studies, compartments, or stalls or separate from the common areas of the premises for the purpose of viewing adult-oriented motion pictures, or wherein an entertainer provides adult entertainment to a member of the public, a patron or a member, when such adult entertainment is held, conducted, operated or maintained for a profit, direct or indirect. An "adult-oriented establishment" further includes, without limitation, any "adult entertainment studio" or any premises that are physically arranged and used as such, whether advertised or represented as adult entertainment studio, rap studio, exotic dance studio, encounter studio, sensitivity studio, modeling studio, or any other term of like import. 
Child day care center shall mean a facility in which care is provided for more than twelve (12) related or unrelated children outside their own homes on a regular basis for a part of the twenty-four (24) hours in one or more days of the week. 
Employee means any and all persons, including independent contractors, who work in or at or render any services directly related to the operation of any adult-oriented establishment. 
Entertainer means any person who provides entertainment within an adult-oriented establishment as defined in this section, whether or not a fee is charged or accepted for entertainment and whether or not entertainment is provided as an employee or an independent contractor. 
Minor shall be deemed to refer to a person under the age of eighteen (18) years. 
Operator means any person, partnership or corporation operating, conducting or maintaining an adult-oriented establishment. 
School shall mean any public or private pre-school, elementary school, junior high school or high school. 
Sexual activities, as used in this division, is not intended to include any medical publications or films or bona fide educational publication or films, nor does it include any art or photography publications which devote at least twenty-five (25) percent of the lineage of each issue to articles and advertisements dealing with subjects of art or photography. Nor does this definition apply to any news periodical which reports or describe current events and which, from time to time, publishes photographs of nude or semi-nude persons in connection with the dissemination of the news. Nor does this definition apply to publications or films which described and report different cultures and which, from time to time, publish or show photographs or depictions of nude or semi-nude persons when describing cultures in which nudity or semi-nudity is indigenous to the population. 
Specified anatomical areas means: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered: 
a.  Human genitals, pubic region; 
b.  Buttocks; 
c.  Female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and 
(2)  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely opaquely covered. 
Specified sexual activities means: 
(1)  Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; 
(2)  Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, or sodomy; 
(3)  Fondling or erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breast. 
Town council means the Town Council of the Town of Vernon, Connecticut. 
(Ord. No. 211, § 2, 7-30-96; Ord. No. 239, § 2, 12-3-02)  
Sec. 7-210. - Requirements for adult-oriented establishments. 
(a)  No operator or employee of an adult-oriented establishment shall allow or permit any minor to loiter in any part of such establishment, including parking lots immediately adjacent to such establishment used by patrons of such adult-oriented establishment. 
(b)  Effective upon passage of this division, every adult-oriented establishment doing business in the town shall be well lighted at all times and be physically arranged in such a manner that the entire interior portion of the booths, cubicles, rooms or stalls, wherein adult entertainment is provided, shall be clearly visible from the common areas of the premises. Visibility into such booths, cubicles, rooms or stalls shall not be blocked or obscured by doors, curtains, partitions, drapes, or any other obstruction whatsoever. It shall be unlawful to install enclosed booths, cubicles, rooms or stalls within adult-oriented establishments for whatever purpose, but especially for the purpose of providing for the secluded viewing of adult-oriented motion pictures, or other types of adult-oriented entertainment. 
(c)  Effective upon passage of this division, the operator of each adult-oriented establishment shall be responsible for and shall provide that any room or other area used for the purpose of viewing adult-oriented motion pictures or other types of live adult entertainment shall be well lighted and readily accessible at all times and shall be continuously open to view in its entirety. The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than one footcandle as measured at the floor level. It shall be the duty of the operation and its agents to ensure that the illumination described above is maintained at all times that any patron is present in the premises. 
(d)  Every act or omission by any employee constituting a violation of the provisions of this division shall be deemed the act or omission of the operator if such act or omission occurs either with the authorization, knowledge or approval of the operator, or as a result of the operator's negligent failure to supervise the employee's conduct, and the operator shall be punishable for such act or omission in the same manner as if the operator committed the act or caused the omission. 
(e)  An operator shall be responsible for the conduct of all employees while on premises regulated by this division, and any act or omission of any employee constituting a violation of the provisions of this division shall be deemed the act or omission of the operator for purpose of determining whether the operator shall be subject to the penalties imposed by this division. 
(f)  All adult-oriented establishments shall be open to inspection at all reasonable times by the Vernon Police Department, inspectors employed by the town, or such other persons as the town council may designate. 
(g)  Further, adult oriented establishment applications will be prohibited within certain distances of specified places as follows: 
(1)  Five hundred (500) feet of any school or child day care center. 
(2)  Five hundred (500) feet of any church or other permanent house of worship. 
(3)  Five hundred (500) feet of any park, recreation facility or library owned or operated by the Town of Vernon. 
(4)  Five hundred (500) feet from any residential zone line boundary. 
(5)  Five hundred (500) feet from any establishment selling alcoholic beverages. 
(6)  One thousand (1,000) feet from other adult oriented establishments. 
(Ord. No. 211, § 3, 7-30-96; Ord. No. 239, § 3, 12-3-02)  
Sec. 7-211. - Penalties and prosecution. 
(a)  Any person, partnership or corporation who is found to have violated this division shall be fined a definite sum not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each such violation. 
(b)  Each violation of this division shall be considered a separate offense, and any violation continuing more than one hour of time shall be considered a separate offense for each hour of violation. 
(Ord. No. 211, § 4, 7-30-96)  
Sec. 7-212. - Savings clause. 
Should any court of competent jurisdiction declare any section, clause or provision of this division to be unconstitutional, such decision shall affect only such section, clause or provision so declared unconstitutional and shall not affect any other section, clause or provision of this division. 
(Ord. No. 211, § 5, 7-30-96)  
Sec. 7-213. - Duration. 
This division shall be effective for not more than ten (10) years from the date of adoption, at which time, if the town council has not acted to renew the division, it shall be deemed repealed. 
(Ord. No. 211, § 6, 7-30-96)  
Sec. 7-214. - Measurement of distance. 
The distances provided in this division shall be measured by following a straight line, without regard to intervening buildings, from the nearest point of the property parcel upon which the adult oriented establishment is to be located to the nearest point of the parcel from which the adult oriented establishment is to be separated. 
(Ord. No. 239, § 7, 12-3-02)  
Chapter 8 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— General penalty for Code violations, § 1-9. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 8-1. - Possession, consumption, distribution or sale of alcoholic beverages on school grounds, in school buildings prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to possess, consume, sell, or distribute alcoholic beverages of any kind on school grounds or in school buildings in the town. 
(b)  Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be punished in accordance with section 1-9. 
(Ord. No. 74, 2-27-73) 
Cross reference— Possession, etc., of alcoholic beverages in parks, § 9-1.  
Sec. 8-2. - Use of explosive restricted. 
(a)  Definition. "Explosives" as that term is used in this section shall mean those compounds and mixtures defined as explosives in section 29-343 of the general statutes. No provision of this section shall apply to small arms ammunition or components thereof, or to gunpowder in quantities of not more than fifty (50) pounds in any one (1) place, or to any materials for handloading, reloading or custom loading small arms ammunition for hunting or other sporting purposes. 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
(b)  Generally. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the use of explosives within the town until such person has furnished to the fire marshal proof of financial responsibility sufficient to satisfy claims for damages resulting from physical injury or property damage which may be incurred as a result of any act or omission in the use of such explosives. 
(c)  Proof of financial responsibility. The proof of financial responsibility required by this section shall be in such amount, character and form as the fire marshal deems necessary for the protection of the public, but in no event shall it be less than sufficient to satisfy claims for damages resulting from physical injury in the amount of two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) per person and five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) per occurrence, and claims for damages resulting from property damage in the amount of two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00) per occurrence. 
(d)  Certificate of insurance. Proof of financial responsibility may be satisfied by a liability insurance policy evidenced by a certificate of insurance filed with, and acceptable to, the fire marshal. Such policy shall cover public liability arising out of the use of explosives and have limits of coverage not less than those described in subsection (c) of this section. The insurer issuing such policy shall agree in writing to deliver to the fire marshal written notice of the cancellation of such insurance not less than ten (10) days prior to the effective date thereof, if such cancellation is to become effective prior to the termination of blasting operations. 
(e)  Penalty. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction, be punished in accordance with section 1-9. Each time explosives are used in violation of any of the provisions of this section shall be a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 146, §§ 1—4, 4-19-83) 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 5. 
State Law reference— Requirements for use of explosives, G.S. §§ 29-343—29-349.  
Sec. 8-3. - Adult material and performances. 
(a)  Definitions. As used in this section, the following words and phrases shall have meanings ascribed to them in this subsection unless the context requires otherwise: 
Disseminate means to import, publish, produce, print, manufacture, distribute, sell, lease, exhibit or display. 
Matter means any printed material, visual representation, live performance or sound recording, including but not limited to: books, magazines, motion pictures, films, pamphlets, phonographic records, picture, tapes, photographs, figures, statutes, plays and dances. 
Patently offensive means matter if taken as a whole: 
(1)  Appeals to prurient interest of the average person; 
(2)  Depicts or describes sexual conduct in a patently offensive way applying the contemporary standards of the state; 
(3)  Lacks serious literacy, artistic, political or scientific value. 
Sexual conduct means human masturbation, sexual intercourse, actual or simulated, normal or perverted, or any touching of the genitals, pubic areas or buttocks of the human male or female, whether alone or between members of the same or opposite sex, or between humans and animals, any depiction or representation of excretory functions, any lewd exhibitions of the genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship. Sexual intercourse is simulated when it depicts explicit sexual intercourse which gives the appearance of the consumption of sexual intercourse, normal or perverted. 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
(b)  Dissemination of patently offensive matter prohibited; penalty. Whoever sells, distributes or disseminates or imports or loans or possesses with the intent to sell, or exhibit, prints or publishes for the purpose of selling or distributing a book, pamphlet, ballad, printed paper, phonographic record tape, record, print, picture, movie, figure, image, or description which depicts or describes: 
(1)  Patently offensive representations or descriptions of ultimate sexual acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated; or 
(2)  Patently offensive representation or descriptions of masturbation, excretory functions, lewd exhibitions of the genitals; 
shall be punished in accordance with section 1-9. 
(c)  Promotion, performance of patently offensive acts prohibited; penalty. Whoever performs or promotes the performances of any act which depicts or describes: 
(1)  Patently offensive representations or descriptions of ultimate sexual acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated; or 
(2)  Patently offensive representations or descriptions of masturbation, excretory functions, lewd exhibition of the genitals; shall be punished in accordance with section 1-9. 
(Ord. No. 89, §§ 1—3, 12-16-74) 
Cross reference— Adult-oriented businesses and establishments, § 7-180 et seq.  
Sec. 8-4. - Curfew for minors. 
(a)  Purpose. The town council has found that the incidence of crimes committed by and against minors is increasing and has determined that a curfew ordinance is necessary and desirable. 
The council has also determined that persons under the age of eighteen (18) are particularly susceptible by their lack of maturity and experience to participate in unlawful activities and to be victims of older perpetrators of crime. 
The Town of Vernon recognizes that it has a moral and legal obligation to: 
(1)  Protect minors from each other and from other persons on the streets during nocturnal hours; 
(2)  Promote parental responsibility for and supervision of minors; and, 
(3)  Protect the general public from nocturnal mischief and crime committed by minors. 
Therefore, a curfew for those under the age of eighteen (18) will be in the interest of the public health, safety, and general welfare and will help to attain the foregoing objectives and to diminish the undesirable impact of such conduct on the citizens of the Town of Vernon. 
(b)  Definitions. For the purpose of this section the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
Curfew hours: For minors under eighteen (18) years old, curfew hours shall be between 11:00 p.m. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, or Thursday until 5:00 a.m. of the following day and 12:01 a.m. until 5:00 a.m. on any Saturday or Sunday. 
Emergency: An unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, or automobile accident, or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life. 
Establishment: Any privately owned place of business operating for a profit to which the public is invited, including, but not limited to, any place of amusement or entertainment. 
Guardian: A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor or a public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by the court. 
Minor: Any person under eighteen (18) years of age. 
Parent: A person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent, or step-parent of another person, or at least eighteen (18) years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian to have the care and custody of a minor. 
Public place: Any street, alley, highway, sidewalk, park, playground or place to which the general public has access and a right to resort for business, entertainment, or other lawful purpose. A public place shall include, but not be limited to, any store, shop, restaurant, tavern, bowling alley, cafe, theater, drug store, pool room, shopping center and any other place devoted to amusement or entertainment of the general public. It shall also include the front or immediate area of the above. 
Remain: To linger or stay, or fail to leave the premises when requested to do so by a police officer or the owner, operator, or other person in control of the premises. 
(c)  Offenses: 
(1)  Curfew for minors. It shall be unlawful for any minor to remain, idle, wander, stroll or play in any public place or establishment in the town during curfew hours unless accompanied by a parent, guardian, custodian or other adult person having custody or control of such minor or unless the minor is on an emergency errand or specific business or activity directed or permitted by his parent, guardian, or other adult person having the care and custody of the minor or where the presence of such minor is connected with or required by some legitimate employment, trade, profession or occupation, or unless the minor is exercising his/her First Amendment rights. 
(2)  Parent's responsibility. It shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian or other adult person having custody or control of any minor under the age of sixteen (16) to suffer or permit or by inefficient control to allow such person to be on the streets or sidewalks or on or in any public property or public place or establishment within the town during the curfew hours. However, the provisions of this section do not apply to a minor accompanied by his or her parent, guardian, custodian or other adult person having the care, custody or control of the minor, or if the minor is on an emergency errand or specific business or activity directed by the minor's parent, guardian, custodian or other adult having the care and custody of the minor or if the parent, guardian or other adult person herein has made a missing person notification to the Police Department. 
(d)  Special functions. Any minor attending a special function or event sponsored by any religious, school, club, or other organization that requires such minor to be out at a later hour than that called for in this section shall be exempt from the provisions of this section provided such minor has the approval of his or her parent or guardian to attend said function or event. Such minors who attend said function or event shall be required to be in their homes or usual places of abode within one half hour after said function or event is ended. 
(e)  Procedures: 
(1)  For minors sixteen (16) years and older: Any police officer upon finding a minor sixteen (16) years and older in violation of this section may issue the minor an infraction citation for the violation and subject to the fines as set forth in subsection (f)(3). The police officer shall report such action to the chief of police or his or her designate who in turn shall notify the parents, guardian, or person having custody of such minor. 
(2)  For minors under the age of sixteen (16) years: 
a.  Any police officer upon finding a minor under the age of sixteen (16) years in violation of this section shall ascertain the name and address of such minor and warn such minor that he or she is in violation of curfew and shall direct such minor to proceed at once to his or her home or usual place of abode. The police officer shall report such action to the chief of police or his or her designate who in turn shall notify the parents, guardian, or person having custody or control of such minor. 
b.  If such minor refuses to heed such warning or direction by any police officer or refuses to give such police officer his correct name and address, or if such minor has been warned on a previous occasion that he or she is in violation of curfew, he or she may be taken to the police department and the parent, guardian, or other adult person having the care and custody of such minor shall be notified to come and take charge of the minor. 
(f)  Penalties: 
(1)  Generally. Any person violating a provision of this section is guilty of a separate offense for each day or part of a day during which the violation is committed, continued or permitted. 
(2)  For minors sixteen (16) years of age and older. Violation of any provision of this section shall be deemed an infraction with a fine of not more than fifty dollars ($50.00) for the first offense. Seventy-five dollars ($75.00) for the second offense and ninety dollars ($90.00) for all subsequent offenses. 
(3)  For minors under the age of sixteen (16) years. Violation of subsection (c)(2) by any parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of a minor after having been previously notified under subsection (e) shall be deemed an infraction. 
a.  Said parent, guardian or other adult person shall be fined not more than fifty dollars ($50.00) for the first offense, seventy-five dollars ($75.00) for the second offense and ninety dollars ($90.00) dollars for all subsequent offenses. 
b.  It shall not constitute a defense that such parent, guardian, or other adult person did not have knowledge of the presence of the minor upon any of the establishments or public places. 
c.  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, any minor under the age of sixteen (16) violating the provisions of this section may be referred to juvenile authorities and dealt with in accordance with the juvenile court law and procedure. 
(g)  Severability. Severability is intended throughout and within the provisions of this section. If any provision, including, inter alla, any exception, part, phrase or term or the application to any person or circumstances is held to be invalid, other provisions or the application to other person or circumstances shall not be affected thereby. 
(h)  Duration: 
(1)  This section shall be reviewed by town council annually and at such time the town council may proceed to amend or repeal said ordinance if it so chooses. 
(2)  This section shall be effective for not more than ten (10) years from the date of adoption at which time, if the town council does not or has not acted to renew the section, the section shall be deemed repealed. 
(Ord. No. 204, 8-2-94; Ord. No. 222, 12-15-98)  
Sec. 8-5. - Loitering. 
(a)  Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural include the singular number, and words in the singular number the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
Loitering: Remaining idle in essentially one location and shall include the concept of spending time idly; to be dilatory; to linger; to stay; to saunter; to delay; to stand around and shall also include the colloquial expression "hanging around." 
Public place: Any place to which the general public has access and a right to resort for business, entertainment, or other lawful purpose, but does not necessarily mean a place devoted solely to the uses of the public. It shall also include the front or immediate area of any store, shop, restaurant, tavern or other place of business and also public grounds, areas, or parks. 
(b)  Offenses: 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter, loaf, wander, stand or remain idle either alone and/or in consort with others in a public place in such a manner as to: 
a.  Obstruct any public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other public place or building by hindering or impeding or tending to hinder or impede the free and uninterrupted passage of vehicles, traffic or pedestrians. 
b.  Commit in or upon any public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other public place or building any act or thing which is an obstruction or interference to the free and uninterrupted use of property or with any business lawfully conducted by anyone in or upon or facing or fronting on any such public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other public place or building, all of which prevents the free and uninterrupted ingress, egress, and regress, therein, thereon and thereto. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person or group of persons to loiter on the grounds or within any building of a school within the town so as to in any way impede, interfere with or interrupt the operation of any school or class within such school. Any person in charge of such school or his or her designee may order any person violating this subsection to immediately quit said premises. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter on private property: 
a.  If the property owner or tenant has posted the property with prominent "NO LOITERING" signs or other notices of like meaning at the entrance or entrances; or 
b.  The person to be charged with loitering has been asked by the owner or tenant of the property, by an employee of the owner or tenant, by a security officer, or by a law enforcement officer to leave the property and has failed to leave. 
(c)  Procedure. Whenever any police officer, in the exercise of reasonable judgment, shall decide that the presence of any person in any public place upon which the appropriate sign has been posted or on private property upon complaint of the owner thereof is causing or is to cause any of the conditions enumerated in subsection (b) herein, said police officer shall, if he or she deems it necessary for the preservation of the public peace and safety, order the person to leave that place. Any person who shall refuse to leave after being ordered to do so by a police officer shall be guilty of a violation of this section. 
(d)  Penalty. Any person who violates the provisions of this section shall be fined not more than seventy-five dollars ($75.00) for each offense. Each and every violation of this section shall constitute a separate offense. 
(e)  Severability. The various provisions of this section are to be considered as severable, and if any part or portion of this section shall be held invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining provisions of this section. 
(f)  Duration: 
(1)  This section shall be reviewed by town council annually and at such time the town council may proceed to amend or repeal said section if it so chooses. 
(2)  This section will be effective for a period of not more than ten (10) years from the date of adoption. If the town council does not act to renew the section, the section is repealed. 
(Ord. No. 207, 9-20-94)  
Sec. 8-6. - Litter. 
(a)  Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings given in this subsection: 
Aircraft means any contrivance now known or hereafter invented, used or designated for navigation or for flight in the air. The word "aircraft" shall include drones, helicopters and lighter-than-air dirigibles and balloons. 
Commercial handbill means any printed or written matter, any sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of literature which: 
(1)  Advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity or thing; 
(2)  Directs attention to any business or mercantile or commercial establishment, or other activity, for the purpose of either directly or indirectly promoting the interest thereof by sales; 
(3)  Directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind, for which an admission fee is charged for the purpose of private gain or profit; but the terms of this subsection shall not apply where an admission fee is charged or a collection is taken up for the purpose of defraying the expenses incident to such meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition, or event of any kind, when any of the same is held, given or takes place in connection with the dissemination of information which is not restricted under the ordinary rules of decency, good morals, public peace, safety and good order; provided that nothing contained in this subsection shall be deemed to authorize the holding, giving or taking place of any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition, or event of any kind, without a license, where such is or may be required by any law of this state, or under any ordinances of this town; or 
(4)  While containing reading matter other than advertising matter, is predominantly and essentially an advertisement, and is distributed or circulated for advertising purposes, or for the private benefit and gain of any person so engaged as advertiser or distributor. 
Garbage means offal, swill, all kinds of house garbage, animal and vegetable matter, and all other refuse or waste liable to decay. 
Litter means "garbage," "refuse," and "rubbish" as defined herein and all other waste material which, if thrown or deposited as herein prohibited, tends to create a danger to public health, safety and welfare. 
Newspaper means any newspaper of general circulation as defined by general law, any newspaper duly entered with the Postal Service of the United States, in accordance with federal statute or regulation, and any newspaper filed and recorded with any recording officer as provided by general law; and, in addition thereto, shall mean and include any periodical or current magazine regularly published with not less than four (4) issues per year, and sold to the public. 
Noncommercial handbill means any printed or written matter, any sample, or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine, paper, booklet, or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of literature not included in the aforesaid definitions of a "commercial handbill" or "newspaper." 
Park means a park, reservation, playground, beach, recreation center or any other public area in the town, owned or used by the town and devoted to active or passive recreation. 
Person means any individual, firm, partnership, association, syndicate, company, trust, corporation, limited liability company or other legal entity of any kind. 
Private premises means any dwelling, house, building, or other structure, designed or used, either wholly or in part, for private residential purposes, whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant, and shall include any yard, ground, walk, driveway, porch, step, vestibule or mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building or other structure. 
Public place means any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or other public ways and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds and buildings. 
Refuse means all putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes, including garbage, rubbish, ashes, incinerator residue, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned automobiles and shopping carts and solid commercial and industrial wastes. 
Rubbish means nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery and similar materials, but shall not include property maintained compost. 
Vehicle means every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, including devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
(b)  Littering in public places. No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon any street, sidewalk or other public place within the town except in public receptacles, in authorized private receptacles for collection, or in official town disposal areas. 
(c)  Placing of litter in receptacles to prevent scattering. Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in private receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon private property. 
(d)  Sweeping litter into public places; duty to keep sidewalks clean. No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within the town the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying property shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free of litter. 
(e)  Merchants to keep sidewalks and public places free of litter. No person owning or occupying a place of business shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within the town the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying places of business within the town shall keep the sidewalk in front of their business premises free of litter. 
(f)  Throwing litter from vehicles. No person, while a driver or passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or deposit litter upon any street or other public place within the town or upon private property. 
(g)  Vehicles causing litter. No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the town unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any load, contents or litter from being blown or deposited upon any street, alley or other public place, nor shall any person drive or move any vehicle or truck within the town, the wheels or tires of which carry onto or deposit in any street, alley or other public place mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter or foreign matter of any kind. 
(h)  Litter in parks. No person shall throw or deposit litter in any park within the town except in public receptacles and in such a manner that the litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of the park or upon any street or other public place. Where public receptacles are not provided, all such litter shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere as provided herein. 
(i)  Littering fountains or bodies of water. No person shall throw or deposit litter in any fountain, pond, lake, stream, bay or other body of water in a park or elsewhere within the town. 
(j)  Depositing handbills on uninhabited premises. No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any private premises which is temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant. 
(k)  Distributing handbills at posted premises. No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or noncommercial handbill upon any private premises, if requested by anyone thereon not to do so, or if there is placed on such premises in a conspicuous position near the entrance thereof a sign bearing the words: "No Trespassing," "No Peddlers or Agents," "No Advertisement," or any similar notice, indicating in any matter that the occupants of such premises do not desire to be molested or have their right of privacy disturbed, or to have any such handbills left upon such premises. 
(l)  Distributing handbills at inhabited private premises. 
(1)  Manner of delivery. No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon private premises which are inhabited, except by handing or transmitting any such handbill directly to the owner, occupant, or other person then present in or upon such private premises; provided, however, that, in case of inhabited private premises which are not posted, as provided in this section, such person, unless requested by anyone upon such premises not to do so, may place or deposit any such handbill in or upon such inhabited private premises, if such handbill is so placed or deposited as to secure or prevent such handbill from being blown or drifted about such premises or sidewalks, streets or other public places, and except that mailboxes may not be so used when so prohibited by federal postal law or regulations. 
(2)  Exemption for mail and newspapers. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the distribution of mail by the United States, nor to newspapers (as defined herein), except that newspapers shall be placed on private property in such a manner as to prevent their being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon private property. 
(m)  Dropping litter from aircraft. No litter, handbill or any other object shall be dropped from an aircraft within the town. 
(n)  Posting notices prohibited. No person shall post or affix any notice, poster or other paper or device, calculated to attract the attention of the public, to any lamppost, public utility pole or shade tree, or upon any public structure or building, except as may be authorized or required by law. 
(o)  Litter on occupied private property. No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied private property within the town, whether owned by such person or not, except that the owner or person in control of private property may maintain private receptacles for collection in such a manner that litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon any private property. 
(p)  Duty to maintain premises free of litter. The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all times maintain the premises free of litter; provided, however, that this section shall not prohibit the storage of litter in private receptacles for collection. 
(q)  Litter on vacant lots. No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant private property within the town whether owned by such person or not. 
(r)  Clearing litter from open private property by town; costs. 
(1)  Notice to remove. The chief building official is hereby authorized and empowered to notify the owner of any open or vacant private property within the town or the agent of such owner to properly dispose of litter located on such owner's property which is dangerous to public health, safety or welfare. Such notice shall be by registered mail, addressed to said owner at his last known address. 
(2)  Action upon noncompliance. Upon the failure, neglect or refusal of any owner or agent so notified to properly dispose of litter dangerous to the public health, safety or welfare within ten (10) days after receipt of written notice provided for in subsection (r)(1) above, or within ten (10) days after the date of such notice in the event the same is returned to the town post office because of inability to make delivery thereof, provided the same was properly addressed to the last known address of such owner, or agent, the chief building official is hereby authorized and empowered to pay for the disposing of such litter or to order its disposal by the town. 
(3)  Recorded statement constitutes lien. Upon completion of such work, the town administrator or authorized representative shall determine the reasonable cost thereof and bill the owner or agent therefor. Upon failure of the owner or agent to remit to the town the amount of such charge within thirty (30) days from the date of such notice, the town manager or authorized representative, within ninety (90) days from the date of such notice, shall cause to be recorded in the land records of the town a sworn statement showing the cost and expense incurred for the work, the date the work was done and the location of the property on which said work was done. The recordation of such sworn statement shall constitute a lien and privilege on the property and shall remain in full force and effect for the amount due in principal and legal interest, plus costs of court, if any, for collection, until final payment has been made. Sworn statements recorded in accordance with the provisions hereof shall be prima facie evidence that all work has been done properly and satisfactorily and shall be full notice to every person concerned that the amount of the statement, plus interest, constitutes a charge against the property designated or described in the statement and that the same is due and collectible as provided by law. Said lien shall be of the same effect and may be foreclosed in the same manner as a tax lien. 
(s)  Penalties for offenses. Any person violating any provision of this article shall be fined in accordance with section 1-9 of this Code of Ordinances. Each day that any such violation shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. The imposition of any fine hereunder shall not prevent the enforced abatement of any unlawful condition by the town. 
( Ord. No. 309 , 4-8-18)  
Secs. 8-7—8-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ALARM SYSTEMS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 5. 
 
Sec. 8-51. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to provide minimum standards and regulations applicable to burglar, hold-up and fire alarm systems and alarm users, and to encourage the installation of protective alarm systems in all dwellings, commercial, industrial and agricultural structures. 
(Ord. No. 141, § 1, 12-21-82)  
Sec. 8-52. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alarm agent means any person employed by an alarm business whose duties include the altering, installing, maintaining, moving, repairing, replacing, selling, servicing, responding to, or causing others to respond to an alarm device. 
Alarm business means any business operated by a person for a profit which engages in the activity of altering, installing, leasing, maintaining, repairing, replacing, selling, servicing or responding to a burglar, hold-up alarm system or fire alarm system, or which causes any of these activities to take place. 
Alarm system means an assembly of equipment and devices (or a single device, such as a solid-state unit, which plugs directly into a 110 volt AC line) arranged to signal the presence of a hazard requiring urgent attention and to which police or firemen are expected to respond. In this article, the term "alarm system" shall include the terms "automatic hold-up alarm systems," "burglar alarm systems," "hold-up alarm systems," "manual hold-up alarm systems," and "fire alarm systems" as those terms are defined in this section. Alarm systems which monitor temperature, humidity or any other condition not directly related to the detection of an unauthorized intrusion into a premises or an attempted robbery or a fire or smoke condition at a premises are specifically excluded from the provisions of this article. 
Alarm user means any person on whose premises an alarm system is maintained within the town except for alarm systems on motor vehicles or proprietary systems. If, however, an alarm system on a motor vehicle is connected with an alarm system at a premises other than a proprietary system, the person using such a system shall be an alarm user. Also excluded from this definition and from the coverage of this article are persons who use alarm systems to alert or signal persons within the premises in which the alarm system is located, of an attempted unauthorized intrusion or hold-up attempt. If such a system, however, employs an audible signal-emitting sound or a flashing light or beacon designed to signal persons outside the premises, such system shall be within the definition of alarm system and shall be subject to this article. 
Annunciator means the instrumentation on an alarm console at the receiving terminal of a signal line which through both visual and audible signals shows when an alarm device at a particular location has been activated or it may also indicate line trouble. 
ANSI stands for the American National Standards Institute. 
Answering service refers to a telephone answering service providing among its services the service of receiving on a continuous basis through trained employees, emergency signals from alarm systems and thereafter immediately relaying the message by live voice to the communication center of the police department. 
Automatic hold-up alarm system means an alarm system in which the signal transmission is initiated by the action of the robber. 
Automatic protective device is any emergency reporting device which utilizes mechanical or electrical means to automatically place a telephone call and which plays a prerecorded message to another location upon activation (a dialer alarm). 
Burglar alarm system refers to an alarm system signaling an entry or attempted entry into the area protected by the system. 
Central station equipment refers to the signal receiving, recording or retransmitting equipment installed in the central station. 
Central station system means a system in which the operation of electrical protection circuits and devices are signaled automatically to, recorded in, maintained, and supervised from a central station having trained operators and guards in attendance at all times. 
Central system means an office to which remote alarm and supervisory signaling devices are connected, where operators supervise the circuits, and where guards are maintained continuously to investigate signals. 
Direct connect means an alarm system which has the capability of transmitting system signals to and receiving them at an agency maintained by the local government; for example, a police communication center. 
Direct line means a telephone line leading directly from a central station to the communication center of the police department that is for use only to report emergency signals on a person-to-person basis. 
False alarm means the activation of an alarm system through mechanical failure, malfunction, improper installation or the negligence of the owner or lessee of an alarm system or of his employees or agents. Such terminology does not include, for example, alarms caused by hurricanes, tornadoes, earthquakes, or other violent conditions. False fire alarms shall not mean alarms transmitted because of a water main break or similar causes that occur outside of the protected property. False alarms also do not include those alarms that are transmitted with a criminal, malicious or mischievous intent. 
Fire alarm system refers to a signal or message from a person or device indicating the existence of a fire or other emergency which requires fire department action. 
Fire chief means the certified person designated as fire chief by the town, or his designated representative. 
Fire department means the publicly supported companies authorized by the town to provide fire protection services. 
Hold-up alarm system refers to an alarm system signaling a robbery or attempted robbery. 
Local alarm system refers to a signaling system which when activated causes an audible or visual signaling device to be activated in or on the premises within which the system is installed. 
Manual hold-up alarm system refers to an alarm system in which the signal transmission is initiated by the direct action of the person attacked or by an observer of the attack. 
Modified central station means an office to which remote alarm and supervisory signaling devices are connected, where operators supervise the circuits. Such modified central station is not listed by Underwriters' Laboratories. 
Police chief means the chief of the police department of the town or his designated representative. 
Police or police department means the publicly supported police department of the town or any authorized agent thereof. 
Primary trunkline means a telephone line leading directly into the communication center of the police department that is for the purpose of handling emergency calls on a person-to-person basis, and which is identified as such by a specific number included among the emergency numbers listed in the telephone directory issued by the telephone company and covering the service area within the police department's jurisdiction. 
Remote signaling system means an alarm signaling system which when activated by an alarm device transmits a signal from an alarm signaling device to a central location, other than the police department, where appropriate action is taken to investigate and respond to the signal. 
Signal line refers to the transmission line through which the signal passes from one (1) of the elements of the signal transmission to another. 
Subscriber means a person who buys or leases, or otherwise obtains an alarm signaling system and thereafter contracts with or hires an alarm business to monitor or service the alarm device. 
Telephone company means the utility that furnishes telephone services to the town. 
UL stands for Underwriters' Laboratories. 
(Ord. No. 141, § 1, 12-21-82) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 8-53. - Registration—Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to own or to occupy any building or structure where there is installed an alarm system, which is used or so installed that it can be used by such owner or occupant, without registering the same with the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 141, § 2, 12-21-82)  
Sec. 8-54. - Same—Application; contents. 
(a)  Applications for registration of an alarm system shall be made within thirty (30) days of any installation of an alarm system on forms provided by the chief of police and shall include the following information: 
(1)  Name, residence address and telephone number of owner or occupant; 
(2)  Address of place where device is installed and telephone number at that location; 
(3)  Name and telephone number of any other person at a different location who is authorized to respond to any emergency and open the place where the device is installed; 
(4)  Name, address and telephone number of company responsible for servicing the alarm. 
(b)  A form will be available from the police department. 
(Ord. No. 141, § 2, 12-21-82)  
Sec. 8-55. - Direct connections to police headquarters. 
(a)  Upon the favorable recommendation of the police chief, alarms from business premises and financial institutions may be terminated in police headquarters. 
(b)  The alarm subscriber approved for a direct connection to police headquarters or the alarm business contracting for servicing the subscriber's alarm system, shall be responsible for obtaining the leased telephone line between subscriber's premises and the alarm receiving equipment at police headquarters and for furnishing the appropriate interface equipment, if required, in order to provide an input signal which is compatible with the receiving equipment used to operate the standard annunciator panel. 
(Ord. No. 141, § 3, 12-21-82)  
Sec. 8-56. - Owner or lessee to maintain-system. 
Each owner or lessee, at his expense, is required to maintain all components of his alarm system in good working order at all times to ensure that the sensory mechanism used in connection with such device be adjusted to suppress false indications of hold-ups or intrusions or fire or smoke conditions so that the device will not be activated by impulses due to short flashes of light, wind, noises, vehicular noise or other forces unrelated to genuine alarms. 
(Ord. No. 141, § 4, 12-21-82)  
Sec. 8-57. - Testing not to be conducted without permission of chief of police or fire chief. 
No alarm system designed to transmit emergency messages directly to police headquarters shall be tested or demonstrated without first obtaining permission from the chief of police or fire chief. Permission is not required to test or demonstrate alarm devices not transmitting emergency messages directly to police headquarters unless the messages are to be relayed to police headquarters. 
(Ord. No. 141, § 5, 12-21-82)  
Sec. 8-58. - Notice of disruption in service. 
When an alarm business's service to its subscribers is disrupted for any reason by the alarm business, or the alarm business becomes aware of such disruption, it shall promptly notify its subscriber by telephone that protection is no longer being provided. If, however, the alarm business has written instructions from its subscriber not to make such notification by telephone during certain hours, the alarm business may comply with such instruction. 
(Ord. No. 141, § 6, 12-21-82)  
Sec. 8-59. - Indicator panel. 
(a)  There shall be only one (1) indicator panel, which shall meet the specifications established by Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc. and the requirements of the chief of police, installed in the communications control center. Such panel shall be installed and maintained by the alarm equipment supplier at no cost to the town. 
(b)  The number of indicators mounted in such panel shall be limited as the chief of police may deem practical and within the capacity of the police communications center to monitor adequately. 
(Ord. No. 141, § 7, 12-21-82)  
Sec. 8-60. - Alarm performance standards—Enforcement; penalties. 
(a)  Enforcement and administration of this article shall be the function of the chief of police except that the fire chief shall have jurisdiction over fire alarm systems and shall enforce and administer provisions concerning same as provided in this section. 
(b)  The standards for alarm performance are as follows: 
(1)  No automatic protecting device installed after January 12, 1983, in the town shall be keyed either to primary or secondary trunklines of the police department. 
(2)  Within sixty (60) days after January 12, 1983, all automatic protective devices in the town that are keyed on that date to a primary or secondary trunkline of the police department shall be disconnected therefrom. The owner or lessee of such a device, at his own expense, shall be responsible for such disconnection. 
(3)  Automatic dialer devices shall not be responded to on an emergency basis. They will be handled as a routine call only. 
(4)  A maximum of six (6) false alarms from any one (1) protected property per calendar year shall be acceptable. 
(5)  After the sixth false alarm, the subscriber shall be notified in writing. Such notification shall require that their alarm system be inspected by the installing alarm company and the subscriber shall review alarm procedures with all employees. Also, written notification shall be made to the police chief or fire chief, as appropriate, indicating that the alarm problem has been corrected. 
(6)  Upon receipt of the seventh and eighth false alarms, the town shall charge a penalty of fifteen dollars ($15.00); for any subsequent false alarm, the town shall charge a penalty of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(7)  After that, if the alarm has not been repaired it will be disconnected and will not be reconnected until the problem has been solved with a written notice of such repair from the alarm company which did the installation, or other qualified installer. 
(c)  If the owner of, or lessee or alarm equipment supplier fails to comply with any requirement of this article, the chief of police may terminate, in writing, the privilege of having equipment and indicators in the communications center in the police department and may require removal of the same within three (3) days from the receipt of the written notice, exclusive of Saturday, Sunday and holidays, at the expense of such owner or lessee or alarm equipment supplier. Failure to remove the equipment and indicators, as specified above, shall result in the town removing same at the expense of the person so notified. 
(d)  Failure of any owner or lessee, or alarm equipment supplier to comply with the requirements of a written notice of a violation of any provision of this article within three (3) days of receipt of such notice, exclusive of Saturday, Sunday and holidays, shall also constitute an offense punishable in accordance with section 1-9. 
(e)  All monies received from the above-mentioned fines shall be used by the police department for the internal security equipment fund. 
(Ord. No. 141, § 8, 12-21-82)  
Sec. 8-61. - Liability. 
The town shall not be liable for any defects in operation of any signal line system, for any failure or neglect to respond appropriately upon receipt of an alarm from such a source, for any failure or neglect of any person in connection with the installation, operation, disconnection or removal of equipment, the transmission of alarm signals, or the relaying of such signals or messages. 
(Ord. No. 141, § 9, 12-21-82)  
Secs. 8-62—8-74. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - RECYCLABLE MATERIAL COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 297 , § 15, adopted Oct. 16, 2012, and effective Nov. 9, 2012, repealed the former Art. III, Divs. 1, 2, §§ 8-75—8-84, 8-95—8-97, and enacted a new Art. III as set out herein. The former Art. III pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 187, §§ 1—12, 10-16-90. 
 
Sec. 8-75. - Declaration of policy. 
The accumulation, collection, removal and disposal of designated recyclable material must be controlled by this municipality for the protection of the public health, safety, and welfare. It is consequently found and declared that: 
(1)  This municipality is authorized by law to regulate the collection and the disposition of designated recyclable material generated within its boundaries and to collect a charge therefore and to license recycling collectors; 
(2)  This municipality is also authorized by Public Act No. 90-220 to provide for the separation, collection, processing and marketing of recyclable material and monitoring progress in recycling; 
(3)  This municipality is further authorized by Public Act 90-249 to impose a penalty not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each violation by a commercial establishment of the requirements of Section 22a-241(c) of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended by Section 1 of Public Act 90-220; and 
(4)  The enactment of this article is in furtherance of this municipality's regional solid waste management plan. 
There is hereby established a program for the collection and disposal of recyclables from all occupants of residential dwelling units, senior citizen age-restricted condominiums and stand-alone residential units as defined in Ordinance No. 241 located within this municipality. With the exception of residential condominiums, said program shall not apply to residential dwelling units of more than six (6) units, apartments, or business, commercial and industrial establishments. 
( Ord. No. 297 , § 1, 11-9-12)  
Sec. 8-76. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following definitions shall apply; 
Acceptable recyclables shall mean the type of materials identified below, as amended from time to time, and at any time by agreement of the town and a contracting party. Acceptable recyclables do not include any unacceptable waste and any material that has the reasonable possibility of adversely affecting the operation or useful life of any part of the recycling facility. 
Antifreeze shall mean a substance of low freezing point added to a liquid, especially to the water in a radiator of an automobile, or to gasoline in the tank to prevent freezing. 
Corrugated cardboard shall mean cardboard which has been processed to have forms or shapes like wrinkles or folds or into alternating ridges and groves and is placed between two (2) flat surfaces for the sake of strength and which is commonly used to form cartons. Corrugated cardboard products shall have a minimum of contamination by food or other material. 
Curbside recycling container. The owner or occupant of each residential dwelling units as defined in section 8-75(5) in which recycling material is created or generated shall provide, at a suitable place upon such premises, a sufficient receptacle for receiving and holding such recyclables during the intervals between collections. Recycling containers as approved by the town shall be maintained in good condition free of holes and fissures and shall be equipped with securely fitting covers. 
Dry-cell battery shall mean device used for generating electric current through a chemical reaction, including, but not limited to, nickel-cadmium batteries, carbon batteries and alkaline batteries. 
Glass food container shall mean a glass bottle or jar of any size or shape used to package food and beverage products suitable for human or animal consumption. 
Grass clippings shall mean grass and other trimmings from the care of a lawn, with a minimum of contamination by pesticides. 
HDPE plastic container shall mean a high-density polyethylene bottle or jar of any size or shape used to package food, household laundry products, or crankcase oil. 
Metal food container shall mean an aluminum, bimetal, steel, tin-plated steel, or other metallic can, plate or tray of any size or shape used to package food and beverage products suitable for human or animal consumption. 
Newspaper shall mean used or discarded newsprint which has a minimum of contamination by food or other material. 
Office paper shall mean used or discarded high-grade white paper and manila paper, including, but not limited to, paper utilized for file folders, tab cards, writing, typing, printing, computer printing, and photocopying, which is suitable for recycling and which has a minimum of contamination. For the purposes of this article, office paper generated by households is excluded. 
PET plastic food container shall mean a polyethylene terephthalate container of any size or shape used to package beverages. 
Scrap metal shall mean used or discarded items which consist predominantly of ferrous metals, aluminum, brass, copper, lead, chromium, tin, nickel or alloys thereof, including, but not limited to, white goods and metal food containers. 
Scrap tires shall mean discarded rubber or synthetic rubber tires used by or manufactured for vehicles, including, but not limited to, automobiles, trucks, buses, and trailers. 
Storage battery shall mean lead acid batteries or other batteries used in motor vehicles such as automobiles, airplanes, boats, recreational vehicles, tractors and like applications. 
Waste motor oil shall mean crankcase oil that has been utilized in internal combustion engines. 
Yard waste and leaves shall mean brush and the boughs and foliage of trees. 
( Ord. No. 297 , § 2, 11-9-12)  
Sec. 8-77. - Program established. 
(a)  On and after the effective date of this article and under regulations issued by the director of public works in accordance with the terms of this article, there is hereby established a program for the mandatory separation from municipal solid waste in the town of glass and metal food and drink containers, newspaper, corrugated cardboard, storage batteries, scrap metals, waste motor oil, scrap tires, and major household appliances. 
(b)  The town or its authorized agents shall provide a program for the separate collection of recyclable materials from all occupants of residential dwelling units and condominiums and senior citizen age-restricted condominiums and stand-alone residential units as defined in Ordinance No. 241. Said program shall not apply to residential dwelling units of more than six (6) units; apartment complexes; or business, commercial, industrial or institutional entities. However, all residential dwelling units, including apartment complexes; business, commercial or industrial establishments; and public, private, and nonprofit institutions shall also engage in recycling as required by ordinance and applicable state statutes. 
(c)  This municipality is not required to collect solid waste from any occupant or owner who includes such glass or metal food and drink containers, newspaper, and corrugated cardboard with their solid waste or does not place and contain the separated items for collection in accordance with this article or authorized regulations. 
( Ord. No. 297 , § 3, 11-9-12)  
Sec. 8-78. - Method of placing materials. 
The occupant of any residential dwelling unit or condominium or senior citizen age-restricted condominiums and stand-alone residential units as defined in Ordinance No. 241 whose recyclable material is or will be collected by or on behalf of this municipality shall place the following acceptable recyclables in a curbside recycling container, or other type of container so designated by the director of public works, in strict conformity with the following minimum regulations: 
(1)  Recyclable materials. 
a.  Mixed paper. 
1.  Newspaper and inserts. 
2.  Magazines and catalogs. 
3.  White and colored paper. 
4.  Mail. 
5.  Junk mail. 
6.  Bills. 
7.  Receipts. 
8.  Computer paper. 
9.  Mixed office paper. 
b.  Corrugated cardboard. 
1.  Chipboard, including cartons, without box linings or pasta box windows. 
c.  Glass. 
1.  Food and drink jars: rinsed, unbroken, labels may be left, no caps or lids. 
2.  Bottles: rinsed, unbroken, labels may be left, no caps or lids. 
d.  Metal cans and food trays. 
1.  Aluminum cans, rinsed and uncrushed. 
2.  Steel/tin cans up to three (3) gallons, rinsed and uncrushed. 
3.  Foil food trays, rinsed, uncrushed. 
4.  Aerosol cans, empty, uncrushed, non-hazardous contents (no paint, pesticides or other). 
e.  Plastics. 
1.  #1, #2, all plastic containers under three (3) gallons. 
2.  #3—#7, plastic food and beverage containers under three (3) gallons. 
3.  #1, #2 plastic laundry product containers, rinsed but not crushed. 
4.  Cartons, milk and juice cartons/boxes, rinsed with caps and straws removed. 
(2)  Unacceptable items. Batteries, black plastics, ceramics, electronics, flower pots, light bulbs or drinking glasses, motor oil, anti-freeze, paint, or any hazardous material containers, plastic bags, plastic toys, pots and pans, scrap metal, Styrofoam or other foam plastics. 
( Ord. No. 297 , § 4, 11-9-12)  
Sec. 8-79. - Alternate means of recycling. 
(a)  The provisions of this article shall not preclude the director of public works or his agent from designated alternative recycling programs for residential dwelling units of more than six (6) units; apartment complexes; business, commercial or industrial establishments; and public, private or nonprofit institutions, and promulgating rules and regulations pursuant to this article and applicable state statutes. 
(b)  The provisions of this article shall not preclude waste generators from receiving permission from the director of public works or his agent, from donating recyclable material and transporting same to any person, partnership or corporation whether operating for profit or not for profit. 
( Ord. No. 297 , § 5, 11-9-12)  
Sec. 8-80. - Documentation of recycling activities of residential dwelling units of more than six (6) units, nonresidential establishments, and public institutions or facilities. 
It shall be mandatory for all owners or managers of residential dwelling units of more than six (6) units, nonresidential establishments and public institutions or facilities to submit documentation in the form of certified weight slips or a signed business form letter by their recyclable disposition site, which picked or accepted the materials for recycling, no less frequently than quarterly. Reports are to be submitted to the town's refuse/recycling program supervisor commencing January 1, 1991. Recycling documentation will be due on or before the 8th of the month following the end of each quarter as follows: 
Reporting Period 	Due Date 
January 1—March 31 	April 8 
April 1—June 30 	July 8 
July 1—September 30 	October 8 
October 1—December 31 	January 8 
 
Failure to comply with reporting requirements will subject individuals to penalties as set forth in Section 22a-241(c) of the Connecticut General Statutes. 
( Ord. No. 297 , § 6, 11-9-12)  
Sec. 8-81. - Collection by unauthorized person. 
It shall be a violation of this article for any person not authorized by the town to collect or pick up or cause to be collected or picked up any designated recyclable items whether at curbside and/or at a designated storage area, including recycling container. Any and each such collection, including the collection of individual recycling containers, in violation hereof from one (1) or more residences shall constitute a separate and distinct violation punishable as herein provided. 
( Ord. No. 297 , § 7, 11-9-12)  
Sec. 8-82. - License required for recyclables collection and disposal. 
All designated recyclables accumulated in this municipality shall be collected, conveyed and disposed of by this municipality or by persons licensed by the municipality to perform such work in accordance with the provisions of this article. No other person shall collect, convey or dispose of any recyclable material in the municipality except that which comply with the other provisions of this article and with any other applicable ordinances and regulations. No other recyclable material collected from outside this municipality shall be disposed of under a license or registration issued pursuant to this article. 
( Ord. No. 297 , § 8, 11-9-12)  
Sec. 8-83. - Licensing of recycling collectors; registration of vehicles, etc. 
(a)  Licensing and registration authority designated. The director of public works shall be the licensing and registration authority for recycling collectors and vehicles. The director of public works shall grant a license within a reasonable time following the filing of a proper application and payment of the prescribed fee unless he finds one (1) or more of the following conditions to prevail: 
(1)  The applicant has had a previous suspension or revocation of licenses; or 
(2)  The applicant lacks suitable equipment with which to collect recyclables in a safe and nuisance-free manner and in compliance with this article. 
(b)  License required. Each recycling collector shall annually, on or before July 1, apply for a license from the director of public works on such form as he shall prescribe to engage in the business of recycling collection in this municipality. 
(c)  Certificate of insurance. No such license shall be issued until the contractor files with the town a certificate of liability insurance in the amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00), property damage three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) liability, each person five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) per accident, together with such recommended compensation insurance as provided by law. 
(d)  Registration of vehicles, containers. Each licensed recycling collector shall obtain a separate registration for each vehicle he operates to transport recyclable material within the municipality. Registrations shall also be required for all permanent containers in capacity greater than three (3) cubic yards. Registrations shall not be transferable from vehicle to vehicle; however, the director of public works may allow such temporary transfer of registrations in hardship situations, such as temporary breakdown of an individually licensed vehicle. 
(e)  Registration term, fee; renewal. All registrations shall be issued for a term not to exceed one (1) year and shall be renewable on or before July 1 of each year. The registration fee shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each vehicle. 
(f)  Reinspection upon sale, transfer of vehicle during registration year. Whenever a duly registered vehicle is sold or transferred to another recycling collector licensed in this municipality during the registration year, said vehicle shall be reinspected within seven (7) days of such transfer date but no additional fee shall be required. 
(g)  Display of registration. The registration issued shall be conspicuously displayed on the left front of the body of each vehicle so licensed, or as may be directed. 
(h)  Identification of vehicles and containers. Each licensee shall prominently display at all times on each registered vehicle in letters at least four (4) inches in height his name, registration number and telephone number. 
(i)  Notification required upon sale, transfer of route. When any licensee shall sell or transfer all or part of his route to another recycling collector presently licensed to collect recyclables in this municipality, he shall forthwith give written notice to the director of public works at least seven (7) days before the date of sale or transfer stating the name of the buyer or transferee and the intended date of sale. 
(j)  Licenses nontransferable. Licenses are not transferable. When any licensee shall sell or transfer, all or part of his route to any recycling collector not licensed in this municipality, he shall first notify the director of public works in writing, of his intent to sell and the transferee shall, at the same time, make application for a license to operate in the municipality. 
( Ord. No. 297 , § 9, 11-9-12)  
Sec. 8-84. - Revocation or suspension of license or registration. 
(a)  Generally. A license to engage in recycling collection in this municipality is a privilege, not a right. Failure to comply with the provisions of this article shall be grounds for revocation or suspension of any license or registration issued under the provisions of this article in addition to any other penalty imposable by law. 
(b)  Notice required. Revocation or suspension shall only become effective five (5) calendar days after receipt of written notice from the director of public works. 
(c)  Request for review—filing; effect of failure to file. If a recycling collector objects to the director of public works' action described in subsection (b) above to revoke or suspend his license or registration, he may, within the five (5) calendar days of receipt of said notice, file a written request for review with the town administrator. Failure to timely file such request for review shall make the director of public works' action final and binding upon the recycling collector. 
(d)  Effect of timely filing. Timely filing of such request for review shall operate as an automatic stay of the director of public works' action. 
(e)  Special appeals board; hearing. The mayor shall appoint forthwith a special appeals board consisting of three (3) electors of this municipality and one (1) licensed recycling collector and one member of the town council, and said board shall then within fifteen (15) days hear and decide the matter. Such hearing may be public if so requested, in writing, by the recycling collector. The decision of said board shall be final and binding upon the recycling collector. 
( Ord. No. 297 , § 10, 11-9-12)  
Sec. 8-85. - Administration; promulgation of rules and regulations. 
(a)  The director of public works shall administer the licensing of any recycling collector engaged in the collecting and transporting of recyclable materials in this municipality. 
(b)  The director of public works, under authorization of the town council, may designate where recyclable items generated within this municipality from residential properties, as defined by state statute, shall be taken for processing or sale. 
(c)  The director of public works may promulgate additional rules or may subtract rules on all collection and disposal procedures from time to time as he deems proper, but such rules shall not be inconsistent with this article and applicable state statutes. 
( Ord. No. 297 , § 11, 11-9-12)  
Sec. 8-86. - Enforcement of article. 
It shall be the responsibility of the director of public works or his/her agents, and/or the town's deputy health officer or the town's police department and their designated agents to enforce all provisions of this article. 
( Ord. No. 297 , § 12, 11-9-12)  
Sec. 8-87. - Penalties. 
(a)  A violation of any provision of this article shall be considered an infraction pursuant to the state statute governing infractions, and subject the violator to a fine of ninety dollars ($90.00), unless otherwise specified. 
(b)  Recycling collectors who knowingly mix recyclables with other solid waste are subject to the provisions of this article. 
( Ord. No. 297 , § 13, 11-9-12)  
Sec. 8-88. - Severability. 
In case, for any reason, any section or provision of this article shall be held to be unconstitutional or invalid, the same shall not affect any other section or provision of this article, except so far as the section or provision so declared unconstitutional or invalid shall be served from the remainder of any portion thereof. 
( Ord. No. 297 , § 14, 11-9-12)  
Secs. 8-89—8-120. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY 
 
Sec. 8-121. - Definitions. 
Dog shall mean any member of the canine species, male, female, neutered male or spayed female. 
Owner shall mean any person or persons, firm, association, partnership, LLC or corporation possessing, keeping, harboring or having custody of a dog. 
At large shall mean off the premises of the owner, and not under the control of the owner by a leash, cord or chain. 
(Ord. No. 233, 10-3-00)  
Sec. 8-122. - Running at large prohibited at properties owned by the Town of Vernon and/or operated by the Vernon Board of Education and Parks and Recreation Department. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any owner of any dog to allow such dog to be at large within any property owned by the town and/or operated by the town board of education, or any property owned by the town and/or operated by the town parks and recreation department with the exception of any property which the town council may designate as an area for dogs to be at large. 
(b)  The provisions of this article shall not apply to dogs owned or controlled by government law enforcement agencies or organized fire departments or persons authorized by said agencies or departments to engage in search and rescue activity or training for such activity. 
(c)  Any violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each violation. 
(d)  This section shall be reviewed by the town council two (2) years from its effective date, and at such time the town council may amend or repeal this section if it so chooses. 
(Ord. No. 233, 10-3-00)  
Sec. 8-123. - Removal of feces. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person owning, keeping, walking or in control of any dog to allow or permit such animal to defecate upon any private property owned by another person, condominium common elements, street, sidewalk, gutter or other public area unless such person shall remove all feces so deposited by such animal before leaving the immediate premises. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to any person who is blind or deaf, walking or in control of a guide dog licensed pursuant to General Statutes section 22-345, or by any person who is physically unable to remove said feces. 
(c)  The provisions of this article shall not apply to dogs owned or controlled by government law enforcement agencies or organized fire departments or persons authorized by said agencies or departments to engage in search and rescue activity or training for such activity. 
(d)  Any violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each violation. 
(e)  This section shall be reviewed by the town council two (2) years from its effective date, and at such time the town council may amend or repeal this section if it so chooses. 
(Ord. No. 232, 10-3-00)  
Secs. 8-124—8-150. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - PANHANDLING 
 
Sec. 8-151. - Findings. 
The town council finds that residents of Vernon and others visiting the town are increasingly being solicited for money or donations on the streets and sidewalks of the town in unwanted ways. It is the intention of the town council to pass the following solicitation ban: 
(1)  To protect potential citizens and visitors from solicitors in the environment where the freedom of movements is restricted; 
(2)  To accommodate and encourage the safe, efficient ordinary movement of pedestrians; 
(3)  To protect all people using the business ways from activities; and 
(4)  To protect the local merchant economy. 
( Ord. No. 300 , § 1, 5-7-16)  
Sec. 8-152. - Definitions. 
As used in this section, "panhandling" means any solicitation made in person requesting an immediate donation of money or the purchase of an item for an amount far exceeding its value under circumstances where a reasonable person would understand that its purchase is, in substance, a donation. 
( Ord. No. 300 , § 2, 5-7-16)  
Sec. 8-153. - Exceptions. 
Except where the following activity is on private property without the permission of the property owner or tenant of such property, panhandling does not include passively standing or sitting with a sign or other non-verbal indication that one is seeking donation, without addressing any solicitation to any specific person other than in response to an inquiry by that person. 
( Ord. No. 300 , § 3, 5-7-16)  
Sec. 8-154. - Offenses. 
No person shall engage in panhandling: 
(1)  Between sunset and sunrise on any street, sidewalk, public right-of-way, of other public property; 
(2)  At a bus stop; 
(3)  In a vehicle on the street; 
(4)  On private property, unless the person panhandling has the written permission from the owner or tenant of the private property; 
(5)  In a manner that blocks the path of the person being asked for a donation; 
(6)  By following a person who walks away from the person who is a panhandling; 
(7)  By making a statement of gesture, or other communication by which the person panhandling knows or should have known, that their action causes, or would cause, another to believe that the panhandler will cause physical harm to the person or property of the other person; 
(8)  By knowingly making any false or misleading representation in the course of panhandling; 
(9)  By stating that the donation is needed for a specific purpose then spending the donation received for a different purpose; 
(10)  By standing on the median or shoulder of a public highway where upon the person panhandling must enter onto the traveled portion of a public highway to seek donations thus endangering themselves or the motoring public. 
( Ord. No. 300 , § 4, 5-7-16)  
Sec. 8-155. - Penalty. 
Any violation of this article shall be fined not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each offence. 
( Ord. No. 300 , § 5, 5-7-16)  
Sec. 8-156. - Severability. 
If any part of this article is held by the courts to be in conflict with any state or federal laws or constitutions, the validity of the remaining portions shall of said article shall not be affected and the rights and obligations of the parties shall be construed and enforced as if the article did not contain the provision held to be invalid. 
( Ord. No. 300 , § 6, 5-7-16)  
Chapter 9 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Parks and recreation department, Ch. 11, § 16. 
Cross reference— Planning, Ch. 10; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 11. 
State Law reference— Authority to provide for entertainment, amusements, concerts, celebrations and cultural activities, G.S. § 7-148(c)(4)(B); authority to establish, maintain, etc., parks, playgrounds, playfields, etc., G.S. § 7-148(c)(6)(A)(i). 
 
Sec. 9-1. - Possession or consumption of alcoholic liquors in town parks and recreation areas prohibited. 
(a)  Finding. The town council finds that the unregulated consumption of alcoholic liquors in town parks and recreation areas has caused a serious impediment to the town, has further resulted in the congregation of large and disruptive crowds in these areas, and has posed a danger to the orderly and peaceful flow of both traffic and persons in these areas. 
(b)  Definitions. As used in this section: 
Alcoholic liquor shall be defined as in the Liquor Control Act, Chapter 545 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended, and shall include alcohol, beer, spirits and wine. 
Drugs shall be defined as those substances as outlined in Section 21a-240(8) and (9) of the Connecticut General Statutes. 
Intoxicated shall be defined as requiring the exhibition of visible or perceivable symptoms from which an observer can discern that the person is under the influence of alcohol and/or drugs. 
Park or recreation area is a park, reservation, camp, playground, beach, swimming pool, recreation center or any other area in the town, owned, used or leased by the town and devoted to active or passive recreation, including adjacent sidewalks, pathways, driveways, and roads. Lessors of town parks or recreational areas shall be exempt from the provisions of this ordinance with regard to sponsored activities of said lessors. 
Person is any association, organization or group formally organized for social, civic or charitable purposes, and any family group which is further defined as any number of individuals related by blood, marriage, or adoption; provided, however, the word "person" as used in the penalty section, subsection (e) hereof, and in the prohibition section, subsection (c) hereof, is any natural person, partnership, corporation, association or society. 
(c)  Prohibition. No person shall possess or consume any alcoholic liquor in any town park or recreation area. Nor shall any person be intoxicated, or appear to be intoxicated, in any town park or recreation area. 
(d)  Posting. The director of public works is hereby directed to post every town park and recreation area with a sign that reads in substance that possession or consumption of alcoholic liquors and being intoxicated or appearing intoxicated is prohibited. 
(e)  Penalty. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be fined not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each offense. 
(Ord. No. 111, §§ I—V, 8-1-78; Ord. No. 295 , §§ I—V, 8-10-12) 
Cross reference— Possession, etc., of alcoholic beverages on school grounds, § 8-1.  
Sec. 9-2. - Restricted activities in parks, cemeteries and school grounds. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to enter or be upon, or have a vehicle parked upon any school ground between one-half hour after sundown to sunrise, except when participating in or attending activity sponsored by the town or allowed under permit issued by the board of education. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to enter or be upon, or have a vehicle parked upon any town cemetery between one-half hour after sundown to sunrise. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to enter or be upon, or have a vehicle parked upon Valley Falls Park or Henry Park in the town between one-half hour after sundown to sunrise, except when participating in or attending activity sponsored by the town or allowed under permit issued by the parks and recreation department. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or ride any motorized minibike, motorbike, motorized go-cart, any other motorized vehicles at any time in any park, railroad right-of-way, cemetery or school ground or any area which is not a public parking area, highway or thoroughfare open to public use for such purposes in the town. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to play golf or drive golf balls in any park, cemetery or school ground in the town. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any person to fly a model airplane in the cemeteries or school grounds or parks in the town except that the parks and recreation department may allow the flying of model airplanes in the parks of the town at their direction. 
(g)  Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be fined in accordance with section 1-9. 
(Ord. No. 45, 8-4-69; Ord. No. 127, 7-20-81) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 11.  
Chapter 10 - PLANNING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Planning and zoning commission, Ch. VIII, § 1; zoning board of appeals, Ch. VIII, § 2; alternate members of the planning and zoning commission, Ch. VIII, § 6; planning department, Ch. XI, § 13. 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 3; delay of demolition of historic buildings and structures, § 3-3; housing, Ch. 6; parks and recreation, Ch. 9; utilities, Ch. 14. 
State Law reference— Municipal planning commission, G.S. §§ 8-18—8-30a; creation of planning commission, G.S. § 8-19; plan of development, G.S. § 8-23; requirement that municipal improvement proposals must be referred to planning commission, G.S. § 8-24; requirement that proposals concerning subdivisions of land be approved by planning commission G.S. § 8-25; requisite of approval of subdivision plans by planning commission, G.S. § 8-26; appeals from planning commission, G.S. § 830; municipal redevelopment generally, G.S. §§ 8-124—8-139; authority for urban renewal projects, G.S. § 8-141; urban renewal plan, G.S. § 8-142; powers of redevelopment agency, G.S. § 8-143; powers of municipality concerning urban renewal, G.S. § 8-144; state aid for city redevelopment and urban renewal, G.S. §§ 8-151—8-162; federal aid for city redevelopment and urban renewal, G.S. §§ 8-163—8-169. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 10-1. - Establishment of offices in town hall for the zoning commission, planning commission, zoning board of appeals—Designation of agents for receipt of applications, petitions, requests or appeals. 
(a)  The planning and zoning commission shall have office space in the town planning department office area which shall be maintained during the regular business hours of the town hall, and the town planner and his designees shall act as the agent for the planning and zoning commission for the purpose of receipt of applications, petitions, requests or appeals to the planning and zoning commission. 
(b)  The zoning board of appeals shall have office space in the offices of the town building inspector which shall be maintained during the regular business hours of the town hall, and the building inspector and his designees shall act as the agent for the zoning board of appeals for the purpose of receipt of applications, petitions, requests or appeals to the zoning board of appeals. 
(Ord. No. 148, 7-7-83) 
State Law reference— Receipt of applications, petitions, requests or appeals by agents of zoning commission, planning commission or zoning board of appeals, G.S. § 8-7d; receipt of applications, petitions, requests or appeals by agents of planning commission, G.S. § 8-26d.  
Sec. 10-2. - Planning and zoning commission designated aquifer protection agency. 
(a)  Designation and membership: 
(1)  In accordance with the provisions of section 22a-354 et seq., of the general statutes, the planning and zoning commission is hereby designated as the Aquifer Protection Agency (hereinafter "APA") of the Town of Vernon. The staff of the planning department shall serve as the staff of the APA. 
(2)  Members of the planning and zoning commission shall serve coexisting terms on the APA. The membership requirements of the APA shall be the same as those of the planning and zoning commission, including, but not limited to, the number of members, terms, method of selection and removal, and filling vacancies. 
(3)  At least one (1) member of the APA or staff of the APA shall complete the course in technical training formulated by the Commissioner of Environmental Protection of the State of Connecticut pursuant to section 22a-354v of the general statutes. 
(b)  Regulations to be adopted. The APA shall adopt regulations in accordance with section 22a-354p of the Connecticut General Statutes. Such regulations shall provide for: 
(1)  The manner in which boundaries of aquifer protection areas shall be established and amended or changed. 
(2)  Procedures for the regulation of activity within the area. 
(3)  The form for an application to conduct regulated activities within the area. 
(4)  Notice and publication requirements. 
(5)  Criteria and procedures for the review of applications. 
(6)  Administration and enforcement. 
(Ord. No. 200, §§ 1, 2, 1-5-93)  
Secs. 10-3—10-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CAPITAL REGION PLANNING AGENCY 
 
Sec. 10-16. - Participation by town. 
Pursuant to the provisions of chapter 127 of the general statutes, the town hereby adopts sections 8-31a to 8-37a of the general statutes and joins the regional planning agency for the capital region as defined by the state development commission under the provisions of section 32-7 of the general statutes. 
(Ord. No. 8, § I, 2-21-66)  
Sec. 10-17. - Local representation. 
The town is entitled to two (2) regional planning representatives on the capital region planning agency and additional representation on the agency at a ratio of one (1) representative for each fifty thousand (50,000) of population or fraction thereof over and above a population of twenty-five thousand (25,000) as determined by the last completed census in accordance with the provisions of section 8-31a of the general statutes. The mayor is authorized to appoint two (2) representatives to the capital region planning agency subject to ratification by the town council, by a majority of those members present and voting at the meeting, one (1) appointment for a term expiring July 31, 1967, and one (1) appointment effective January 1, 1971, for a term expiring July 31, 1971. Thereafter, appointments shall be made for a period of two (2) years. An appointee shall continue to serve after expiration of his term until his successor has been appointed and takes office. Appointees may be reappointed for successive terms. Any vacancy shall be filled by the appointing body for the unexpired term. 
(Ord. No. 8, § II, 2-21-66; Ord. No. 54, 11-16-70)  
Sec. 10-18. - Attendance of representatives. 
Any representative to the capital region planning agency who is absent from three (3) consecutive regular meetings of the capital region planning agency and any intervening duly-called special meetings thereof shall be considered to have resigned from the agency. The provisions of this section may be waived where illness or other extenuating circumstances makes it impossible for a representative to meet the attendance requirements of this section. 
(Ord. No. 8, § III, 2-21-66)  
Sec. 10-19. - Notification by town clerk of appointments, reappointments, amendments to article. 
The town clerk shall transmit a copy of the ordinance from which this article derives and of any amendments thereto, to the capital region planning agency and shall notify the agency of the appointments and reappointments of representatives to the agency. 
(Ord. No. 8, § IV, 2-21-66; Ord. No. 54, 11-16-70)  
Secs. 10-20—10-35. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - REGIONAL COUNCIL OF GOVERNMENTS 
 
Sec. 10-36. - Participation by town. 
The town hereby adopts sections 4-124i through 4-124p of the general statutes, providing for the formation of a regional council of governments within a planning region as defined or redefined by the director of the office of state planning, and hereby joins such regional council of governments when and as such council is duly established in accordance with the state statutes, upon the adoption of the state statutes by not less than sixty (60) percent of all municipalities within such planning region. The adoption of such sections of the general statutes is intended to include the provisions of any special act of the 1973 general assembly respecting additional representation for the core city within the capital region on a regional council of governments, and a nonvoting advisory regional forum thereunder, consistent with proposed bylaws of such regional council of governments dated January 25, 1973, and endorsed by the existing regional council of governments on May 3, 1973. 
(Ord. No. 78, § 1, 6-18-73)  
Sec. 10-37. - Town clerk to notify state. 
The town clerk is directed to immediately prepare and file with the director of the office of state planning a certified copy of the ordinance from which this article derives. 
(Ord. No. 78, § 2, 6-18-73)  
Secs. 10-38—10-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - REGIONAL COUNCIL OF ELECTED OFFICIALS 
 
Sec. 10-51. - Participation by town. 
The town hereby joins with such of the towns, cities or boroughs within its planning region as defined by the state development commission, as may enact a similar ordinance, to create a regional council of elected officials as such council is defined by section 4-124c of the general statutes. 
(Ord. No. 7, 2-7-66)  
Secs. 10-52—10-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT COMMITTEE 
 
Sec. 10-61. - Established. 
The town council, by the authority granted to it by the general statutes and the Town Charter, hereby establishes the capital improvement committee for the purposes set forth in chapter 12, section 5 of the Town Charter, to advise and assist the mayor in preparing the capital improvement program. 
(Ord. No. 138, 8-31-82)  
Sec. 10-62. - Composition; appointment; terms of members. 
The capital improvement committee shall be comprised of five (5) members who shall be appointed by the mayor under the following standards: 
(1)  No more than three (3) members of any one (1) political party shall be appointed to the capital improvement committee to serve concurrently at any one (1) time; 
(2)  No more than two (2) members of the town council shall be appointed to serve on the capital improvement committee at any time; 
(3)  All members of the capital improvement committee shall be electors of the town during their term of membership thereon; 
(4)  The initial appointment of members to the capital improvement committee shall be as follows: 
a.  Two (2) members for three-year terms; 
b.  Two (2) members for two-year terms; 
c.  One (1) member for a one-year term. 
(5)  After the initial appointments of members, all appointments of members of the capital improvement committee shall be for three-year terms, subject to vacancies in membership of the committee being filled for the remaining duration of the vacated membership term; 
(6)  All appointments to the capital improvement committee shall become effective on September first and shall expire on August thirty-first. 
(Ord. No. 138, 8-31-82)  
Sec. 10-63. - Town planner to act as ex officio member. 
The town planner shall act as an ex officio member of the capital improvement committee for the purposes of advising, recommending and assisting the committee to fulfill its function. 
(Ord. No. 138, 8-31-82)  
Sec. 10-64. - Powers and duties. 
The town council, by resolution, shall, annually prior to November first, prescribe such duties and powers to the capital improvement committee as the council deems advisable. 
(Ord. No. 138, 8-31-82)  
Secs. 10-65—10-80. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal economic development commissions, G.S. § 7-136. 
 
Sec. 10-81. - Established. 
There is hereby established pursuant to chapter 97 of the general statutes, an economic development commission for the promotion and development of the economic reserves of the town, and the provisions of section 7-136 of the general statutes in relation thereto are accepted. 
(Ord. No. 15, 3-6-67)  
Sec. 10-82. - Powers and duties; composition; terms of members. 
The economic development commission shall have those powers and duties conferred on it by state statute. The economic development commission shall consist of ten (10) members all of whom shall be appointed by the mayor. The members shall be appointed for terms of five (5) years provided that members of the commission first appointed shall be appointed as follows: Two (2) members for a term of one (1) year, two (2) members for a term of two (2) years, two (2) members for a term of three (3) years, two (2) members for a term of four (4) years, two (2) members for a term of five (5) years. 
(Ord. No. 15, 3-6-67)  
Secs. 10-83—10-90. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - CONSERVATION COMMISSION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Conservation commissions, G.S. § 7-131a. 
 
Sec. 10-91. - Establishment; powers and duties. 
The town council, under the authority granted to municipalities by the General Statutes, revision of 1958, as amended, hereby establishes a conservation commission. The conservation commission shall have those powers and duties conferred upon conservation commissions by section 7-131a of the General Statutes, revision of 1958, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 189, 1-15-91)  
Sec. 10-92. - Membership. 
The conservation commission shall consist of five (5) regular members and two (2) alternate members which shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of a majority of the town council for terms of three (3) years. Initially, two (2) regular members and two (2) alternate members shall be appointed for three (3) years; two (2) regular members shall be appointed for two (2) years; and one (1) regular member shall be appointed for one (1) year, commencing January 1, 1991. Thereafter, each appointment shall be for a term of three (3) years. Any vacancy shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term of the original appointment as herein provided. No regular member who serves two (2) consecutive full terms shall be reappointed sooner than one (1) year following completion of the second term.  
Secs. 10-93—10-104. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - DESIGN REVIEW ADVISORY COMMITTEE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Charter reference— Advisory boards and commissions, Ch. XV, § 3. 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2. 
 
Sec. 10-105. - Establishment; purpose; subjugation to Freedom of Information laws. 
(a)  There is hereby established a design review advisory commission by the Town of Vernon for the purpose of maintaining a high standard of community development, protecting the public health, safety, convenience and welfare, protecting the value of all real property within the community, promoting aesthetically pleasing development and preserving the special character of existing neighborhoods. 
(b)  For the purpose of this article, "commission" shall mean the design review advisory commission. 
(c)  The commission shall be subject to all applicable Freedom of Information rules, regulations and laws. 
(Ord. No. 191, § 1, 10-15-91; Ord. No. 268, § 1, 6-6-06)  
Sec. 10-106. - Members; terms; qualifications; offices; vacancies. 
(a)  Members and terms of office. The commission shall be composed of five (5) regular members and four (4) alternate members who each shall be appointed upon the recommendation of the mayor and the approval of the town council. The term of office for members and alternates shall be three (3) years. All present members of the design review advisory commission shall become members of the design review advisory commission in their terms shall continue until such time as their term may presently expire or until December 31, 2008, or whichever comes later. Thereafter, December 31, 2008, no member shall serve on the board for more than two (2) full consecutive terms. 
(b)  Qualifications. At least two (2) regular members shall be qualified by reason of education, training or experience in architecture, landscape architecture, city planning, historic preservation or related graphic arts, or any one of the related fields to the above. One regular member shall be a real estate development or construction professional and at least one alternate member shall have specific training or experience in architecture, city planning, historic preservation, construction, or other related businesses or professions. All other alternate members will not require any specific qualifications. All regular and alternate members shall be residents or electors of the Town of Vernon. 
(c)  Officers. The chairperson and vice-chairperson of the commission shall be elected by a majority of the members of the commission for a term of two (2) years. Commission members shall not serve as chairperson or vice-chairperson for more than two (2) years. 
(d)  Vacancies. Any vacancy shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term as original appointments are herein provided. Any regular member or alternate member who misses fifty (50) percent or more of the scheduled meetings in any calendar year shall be removed by the commission consistent with Chapter 8, section 11 of the Vernon Town Charter entitled "Removal". 
(Ord. No. 191, § 2, 10-15-91; Ord. No. 268, § 2, 6-6-06)  
Sec. 10-107. - Meetings. 
The commission shall meet at least twice a month or as often as is deemed necessary. Quorum shall consist of at least three (3) members. In making recommendations on applications pending before it, the commission shall act in accordance with the zoning regulations adopted by the planning and zoning commission. The commission shall report at least annually to the town council and the planning and zoning commission on its activities. 
(Ord. No. 191, § 3, 10-15-91; Ord. No. 268, § 3, 6-6-06)  
Sec. 10-108. - Procedures. 
(a)  Submission: An application for a special permit site plan approval, subdivision, or modification to an already approved plan, or plan approved special permit or approved site plan when said modification or special permit or site plan involves significant architectural features, shall submit an extra set of all materials with said application for the commission's review and any said other material as the commission may require. 
(b)  Forwarding to commission: The town planner shall upon receipt of an application, forward a copy of all completed application material to the commission. 
(c)  Faction by the commission: At least seven (7) days prior to a hearing by the planning and zoning commission on the request for a special permit, site plan approval, or modification to an already approved plan or special permit or site plan application, the commission shall submit a written report, including specific recommendations and suggestions, to the applicant, the town planner, and the planning and zoning commission. Failure of the commission to comply with the time requirements of this subsection shall not delay the town's action on the application, unless such delay is requested by the applicant. 
(d)  [Member of commission to attend meetings:] A representative of the commission shall attend each meeting of the planning and zoning commission at which an application involving design review is heard. 
(e)  Preliminary considerations: An applicant may request preliminary consideration by the commission of his general plans prior to seeking a special permit, site plan approval, or modification to an already approved plan, or special permit or site plan. When seeking preliminary consideration, the applicant shall submit a plan showing the proposed structures, improvement and packing, together with a general description of his plans. The commission shall submit comments, together with its recommendations and suggestions, to the applicant no later than twenty (20) days after receipt thereof. 
(Ord. No. 191, § 4, 10-15-91; Ord. No. 193, 2-4-92; Ord. No. 219, 7-23-98; Ord. No. 268, § 4, 6-6-06)  
Secs. 10-109—10-120. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - MUNICIPAL FLOOD AND EROSION CONTROL BOARD 
 
Sec. 10-121. - Membership. 
Such municipal flood and erosion control board shall consist of five (5) members and three (3) alternates. The terms of office shall be as follows: three (3) members shall be appointed for a term to expire on December 31, 2001. Two (2) members shall be appointed for a term to expire on December 31, 2002. Of the three (3) alternates initially appointed two (2) alternates shall be appointed for a term to expire on December 31, 2001 and one (1) alternate shall be appointed for a term to expire on December 31, 2002. All subsequent appointments of regular and alternate members shall be for a term of three (3) years commencing on the first day of January. No member shall serve more than two consecutive terms. Any vacancy in a membership of the board shall be filled by appointment by the mayor and approval of the town council for the unexpired term of such member. All members shall reside in the town at their date of appointment and throughout their term of office. 
(Ord. No. 226, § 1, 4-4-00)  
Sec. 10-122. - Hearing procedures. 
(a)  The board shall give written notice of all public hearings to all abutting landowners, and persons whose property, which in the sole discretion of the board, may be significantly affected by the pending action, no less than fifteen (15) days prior to any scheduled hearing. 
(b)  Notice of the time and place of hearing shall be published in a newspaper having substantial circulation in the community, no less than ten (10) days prior to any scheduled hearing. 
(c)  Notice of the board's decision shall be mailed certified mail, return receipt requested, to all applicants, within fifteen (15) days of decision. 
(d)  Persons claiming to be aggrieved as a result of any decision of the board may appeal to the superior court within fifteen (15) days of notice in the manner provided by Connecticut General Statutes, section 8-8 for appeal from the decision of a municipal zoning board of appeals. 
(Ord. No. 226, § 2, 4-4-00)  
Sec. 2-123. - Duration. 
This article shall be effective for not more than ten (10) years from the date of adoption. If the town council does not act to renew this article, this article shall be deemed repealed. 
(Ord. No. 226, § 3, 4-4-00)  
Secs. 10-124—10-145. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - RESERVE FOR LAND ACQUISITION AND PRESERVATION 
 
Sec. 10-146. - Establishment. 
In recognition that land is a valuable resource to the town, that land use is important to the general welfare of town residents and that the opportunity to preserve land through acquisition and/or purchase of development rights and conservation restrictions occurs on an irregular basis, a reserve for land acquisition and preservation is hereby established as part of the fund balance of the reserve for capital and nonrecurring expenditures. 
(Ord. No. 228, § 1, 5-2-00)  
Sec. 10-147. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article: 
Appropriation shall mean a legal authorization granted by the town council to make expenditures and to incur obligations for specific purposes. 
Conservation restriction shall mean a limitation, whether or not stated in the form of a restriction, easement, covenant or condition, in any deed, will or other instrument executed by or on behalf of the owner of the land described therein or in any order of taking such land whose purpose is to retain land or water areas predominantly in their natural, scenic or open condition or in agricultural, farming, forest or open space use. (Connecticut General Statutes section 47-42a(a)). 
Development rights shall mean the rights or combination of rights of fee simple owners of open, unimproved, forest and agricultural land to develop, construct on, sell, lease or otherwise develop or improve such land for uses that result in rendering such land no longer open, unimproved, forest or agricultural. The acquisition of development rights is not intended to prevent any development of the land to which the development rights relate, provided that such development is consistent with the public purpose for which such development rights are purchased and provided that such development is permitted pursuant to a written document approved by the town council and subject to state and local regulation. 
Land shall mean real property with or without improvements thereon located within the town. 
Open space acquisition program shall mean the town's preservation of land, identified in the open space program dated August 14, 1998, as amended, and the town master plan of conservation and development, as amended, through acquisition and/or purchase of development rights and conservation restrictions. 
Open space task force shall mean the subcommittee of the town conservation commission which was recognized by resolution of the town council on October 23, 1999. 
Reserve shall mean an account used to identify a portion of fund balance that indicates that it is not available to appropriate for expenditures; the reserve shall be an account used to identify a portion of fund equity as legally restricted for specific future use. 
Town shall mean the Town of Vernon. 
(Ord. No. 228, § 2, 5-2-00)  
Sec. 10-148. - Types of land to be considered for acquisition and preservation as open space. 
(a)  The types of land to be considered for acquisition by the town council must be: 
(1)  Land that has value as a significant natural resource, including but not limited to, wetlands, watercourses, greenway corridors, watershed properties, scenic vistas, ridgelines, or other land as set forth in the town master plan of conservation and development, as amended, and identified in the open space acquisition program, as defined herein; or 
(2)  Land that has recreational value as outlined in the park and recreation plan of development; or 
(3)  Land that is contiguous to town owned property that enhances the value thereof when retained as open space; or 
(4)  Land that has value as urban park areas; or 
(5)  Land that has significant historical archeological value based on the character of the land and/or improvements thereon. 
(b)  The types of development rights and conservation restrictions to be considered for purchase by the town council must be consistent with the general purpose of this ordinance and may include one or more of the following: 
(1)  Development rights and conservation restrictions which will maintain and enhance the conservation of natural or scenic resources; 
(2)  Development rights and conservation restrictions which will protect natural topography, streams or water supply; 
(3)  Development rights and conservation restrictions which will enhance public recreational opportunities; 
(4)  Development rights and conservation restrictions which will protect historical or archaeological sites; 
(5)  Development rights and conservation restrictions which will promote conservation of agricultural soils, particularly prime farmland soil; 
(6)  Development rights and conservation restrictions which will contribute towards the preservation of agriculture in the town; 
(7)  Development rights and conservation restrictions which will promote orderly development of the town; 
(8)  Development rights and conservation restrictions which will promote certain publicly desirable uses of land, at the present time expected to include agricultural, forest and natural uses. 
(c)  In considering the acquisition of a particular parcel of land or certain development rights thereto, the town council shall obtain written recommendations from: 
(1)  The planning and zoning commission pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes section 8-24, the conservation commission, open space task force and Hockanum River linear park committee as to all land considered for acquisition. 
(2)  The director of the parks and recreation department as to land that has recreational value as outlined in the park and recreation plan of development. 
(3)  The town administrator as to land that is contiguous to town owned property that enhances the value thereof when retained as open space. 
(4)  The historical society as to land that has significant historical archeological value based on the historical record of the land and/or improvements thereon. 
(5)  A statement from any other advisory committee or private organization whose opinion is deemed appropriate by the town council. 
(Ord. No. 228, § 3, 5-2-00)  
Sec. 10-149. - Public hearings. 
(a)  The town council shall hold one or more advisory public hearings regarding the acquisition of a particular parcel of land, or the development rights thereto or a conservation restriction thereon. 
(b)  When a public hearing is to be held, the town council shall cause notice to be published at least five (5) days prior to said public hearing in a newspaper having substantial, continuous circulation in the town. 
(Ord. No. 228, § 4, 5-2-00)  
Sec. 10-150. - Approval; administrative. 
Determination that a particular parcel of land or development right thereto or conservation restrictions thereon is to be acquired with monies in the reserve shall be made solely by the town council. Referral to the town planning and zoning commission shall be made pursuant to Connecticut General Statute section 8-24. The reserve shall be administered by the town finance officer as directed by the town council in accordance with the provisions of section 6 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 228, § 5, 5-2-00)  
Sec. 10-151. - Funding. 
(a)  In preparing the annual town budget, the town council shall consider adding to the reserve as part of its open space acquisition program. The town shall also investigate on a continuing basis the availability of any state and federal money available for acquisition of land, conservation restrictions and development rights. 
(b)  Contributions to the reserve shall be accepted from individuals, corporations, associations, partnerships and any other legal entities. Said contributions shall be used exclusively for the herein stated purposes of the reserve for land acquisition and preservation as open space. 
(Ord. No. 228, § 6, 5-2-00)  
Sec. 10-152. - Minimum balance of reserve. 
A minimum balance of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) shall be maintained in the reserve, effective with budget appropriations of fiscal year 2001-2002. If at any time the reserve falls below the ten thousand dollar ($10,000.00) minimum, said minimum funds shall be restored during the next annual budget. 
(Ord. No. 228, § 7, 5-2-00)  
Sec. 10-153. - Dissolution of reserve. 
If the reserve is terminated for any reason, the balance remaining in the reserve at the time of such termination shall be used exclusively for the benefit of the town's parks and recreation department. 
(Ord. No. 228, § 8, 5-2-00)  
Sec. 10-154. - Annual review, sunset provision. 
(a)  This article shall be reviewed by the town council annually. 
(b)  Unless otherwise provided by the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended from time to time, this article shall be effective for a period of not more than ten (10) years from the date of adoption. If the town council does not act to renew this article, this article is repealed. 
(Ord. No. 228, § 9, 5-2-00)  
Chapter 11 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Public works department, Ch. 11, § 12. 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 3; parks and recreation, Ch. 9; planning, Ch. 10; utilities, Ch. 14. 
State Law reference— Power of town to control the excavation of the highways and streets, G.S. § 7-148(c)(6)(C)(iii); to lay out, construct, etc., streets, sidewalks, etc., G.S. § 7-148(c)(6)(C)(i); to provide for lighting the streets, etc., G.S. § 7-148(c)(4)(F); to provide for the planting, etc., of shade and ornamental trees on the streets and public grounds, G.S. § 7-148(c)(6)(A)(v); to keep open, etc., the streets, sidewalks, etc., G.S. § 7-148(c)(6)(C)(ii); to require owners or occupants of land adjacent to any sidewalk to remove snow, etc., G.S. § 7-148(c)(6)(C)(v); to regulate and prohibit the excavation, etc., of sidewalks, etc., G.S. § 7-148(c)(6)(C)(iv); to prohibit and regulate the discharge of drains from roofs of buildings over or upon the sidewalks, streets, etc., G.S. § 7-148(c)(6)(B)(iv); to keep the streets, sidewalks and public places free from undue noises and nuisances, etc., G.S. § 7-148(c)(7)(F)(i); highways and bridges, G.S. § 13a-1 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 11-1. - Removal of snow, sleet or ice from sidewalks. 
(a)  Required. The owner, lessee or occupant [owners, occupant or occupants, corporate or otherwise] of any building, or lot of land bordering on any street, square or public place within the town, where there is a sidewalk, [graded, or graded and paved] shall cause to be removed therefrom any and all snow, sleet and ice, and shall cause such sidewalk to be made safe for travel and use by covering the same with sand or other suitable substance within eight (8) hours after said snow or sleet shall have fallen, or said sidewalk shall have become slippery by reason of ice forming thereon, or within eight (8) hours after sunrise when said snow or sleet shall have fallen after 8:00 p.m., [in the night season,] or said sidewalk shall have become slippery by reason of ice forming thereon after 8:00 p.m. [in the night season.] 
(b)  Exceptions permitted. The town council may issue exceptions to the above provisions only in such case where the Town of Vernon or the State of Connecticut has erected a physical barrier at least three (3) feet in height preventing a landowner from directly accessing the sidewalk from his property. 
(c)  Placement of snow or ice on streets, etc., prohibited. No person shall place or cause to be placed any snow or ice onto any [traveled] portion of a public street, highway, sidewalk or throughway under the jurisdiction of the town so as to create a hazard to vehicular or pedestrian traffic or hamper or impede the removal of snow and ice by the town. 
(d)  Penalty for violation. Any person, or in the case of a corporation the officers thereof, who shall violate any provision of this section shall be fined [not more than fifty dollars ($50.00) for each offense] in accordance with section 1-9 of this Code. 
(e)  Duration. This section shall be effective for not more than ten (10) years from the date of adoption at which time, if the town council does not or has not acted to renew the section, the section shall be deemed repealed. 
This section may be reviewed by the town council annually and at such time the town council may proceed to amend or repeal said section as it so chooses. 
(Ord. No. 20, 9-18-67; Ord. No. 166, 4-26-87; Ord. No. 190, 2-19-91; Ord. No. 243, §§ I—IV, 3-18-03; Ord. No. 267, §§ 2—6, 5-2-06) 
State Law reference— Authority to require owners or occupants of land adjacent to sidewalks to remove snow, ice, etc., G.S. § 7-148(c)(6)(C)(v).  
Sec. 11-2. - Town's liability for injury caused by ice and snow on public sidewalks. 
(a)  This section is adopted pursuant to the provisions of Section 7-163a of the Connecticut General Statutes. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 13a-149 of the Connecticut General Statutes or any other general statute or special act, the town shall not be liable to any person injured in person or property caused by the presence of ice or snow on a public sidewalk unless the town is the owner in possession and control of land abutting such sidewalk, other than land used as a highway or street, provided the town shall be liable for its affirmative acts with respect to such sidewalk. 
(c)  The owner or person in possession and control of land abutting a public sidewalk shall have the same duty of care with respect to the presence of ice or snow on such sidewalk toward the portion of the sidewalk abutting his property as the town had prior to the effective date of this section, and shall be liable to persons injured in person or property where a breach of duty is the proximate cause of injury. 
(d)  No action to recover damages for injury to the person or to property caused by the presence of ice or snow on a public sidewalk against a person who owns or is in possession and control of land abutting a public sidewalk shall be brought but within two (2) years from the date when the injury is first sustained. 
(Ord. No. 133, 3-2-82; Ord. No. 306 , §§ 2—5, 3-2-17)  
Sec. 11-3. - Use of surfboards, skateboards restricted. 
(a)  Reckless use forbidden. The reckless use of sidewalk surfboards or skateboards is forbidden upon the sidewalks and streets of the town. 
(b)  Definition. Sidewalk surfboards or skateboards are any wheeled device consisting of a platform or seat of metal, wood, plastic or any other material designed to carry its user in an erect, kneeling, sitting or prone position in a manner similar to that of a true surfboard. 
(c)  Erection of ramps on public roads, etc., prohibited. The erection of any skateboard device such as ramps or other auxiliary devices on any public road or sidewalk is prohibited. 
(d)  Parent/guardian responsibility. The parent or guardian of any child shall not authorize nor knowingly permit any such child to violate this section. 
(e)  Violations. Violations of the provisions of this section shall be dealt with in the following manner: 
(1)  First offense. A warning letter will be sent to the parent or guardian of a child who violates this section by the chief of police. The warning letter will state that the parents may set up a meeting with the chief of police or his designee to discuss the alleged violation. 
(2)  Subsequent offenses. Subsequent offenses shall be punishable by fine of thirty-five dollars ($35.00) with a five-dollar surcharge fee as regulated by the state infraction schedule. 
(f)  Impoundment. The chief of police and sworn officers of the police department shall be authorized and empowered to impound any such sidewalk surfboard or skateboard used upon the sidewalks and streets of the town in cases where there has been continuous noncompliance with the provisions of this section by the child or parents or guardians. 
(Ord. No. 165, 8-19-86)  
Sec. 11-4. - Possession of alcoholic liquor in public areas, highways and parking areas. 
(a)  Short title. This section shall be known and may be cited as "Ordinance Regarding Possession and Consumption of Alcoholic Liquor in, within and upon Public Areas, Public Highways and Parking Areas within the Town of Vernon." 
(b)  Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms shall be defined as follows: 
(1)  Alcoholic liquor shall have the same meaning as ascribed to that term in section 30-1(2) of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended from time to time. 
(2)  Motor vehicle means a motor vehicle as defined in section 14-1(30) of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended from time to time. 
(3)  Open container means any open bottle, flask or other container lacking an intact liquor tax stamp or seal, whether or not stopped; any can or other container which has been opened in any way; any keg, mini-keg or other container or vessel containing an alcoholic beverage which is open or has been opened in any way. 
(4)  Parked vehicle shall have the same meaning as ascribed to that term in section 14-1(3) of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended from time to time. 
(5)  Public highway means a highway, road, street, avenue, boulevard or other way located within and under the control of the Town of Vernon and open to public use, including the tree-belts and sidewalks of any such public highway. This term shall not include sidewalks or driveways located within the boundaries of privately owned property. 
(6)  Public area means any park, plaza, mall, arena, stadium, theater, cemetery and other areas, regardless of by whom owned or controlled, open to the public use with or without charge. This term shall not include any private property whose owner or lessee has given written permission to any person who consumes alcoholic liquor therein to so use the property. 
(7)  Parking area means parking lots, parking garages and similar areas made available for the parking of motor vehicles away from the highway or street which are open to the public use with or without charge. 
(c)  Possession and consumption of alcoholic liquor prohibited. Except as permitted by subsection (b)(6) above, no person shall consume any alcoholic liquor or have in his possession any open container of alcoholic liquor while upon or within the limits of any public highway, public area or parking area within the Town of Vernon. The possession of an open container of alcoholic liquor or consumption therefrom by any person while in a motor vehicle parked within or upon a public area shall also be a violation hereof. 
(d)  Penalty. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section shall be fined no more than ninety-nine dollars ($99.00) for each violation. 
(Ord. No. 195, §§ A—D, 3-3-92) 
Cross reference— Traffic and motor vehicles, Ch. 13.  
Secs. 11-5—11-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CONSTRUCTION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of town to construct, repair, alter, etc., streets, sidewalks, G.S. § 7-148(c)(6)(C)(i). 
 
Sec. 11-21. - Driveways. 
(a)  No person shall construct a new driveway, relocate or expand an existing driveway leading onto a town highway or road, without first obtaining a permit from the town engineer. In determining the advisability of issuing such permits, the town engineer shall consider the location of the proposed driveway, its effect on highway drainage, highway safety, the width and character of the highway affected, the density of traffic thereon and the character of such traffic. The person to whom the permit is issued shall comply with the provisions and restrictions contained therein at his own expense. 
(b)  The town engineer shall publish regulations, specifications and requirements for the conduct of the work provided for by this section as he may deem for the best interest of the town. Fees have been established in order to offset the costs associated with providing said service to the community. 
The following procedures and fees are established: 
(1)  A license is required to perform specific work within the rights-of-way and will be issued by the town engineer or his designated agent to any person or corporation who shall meet the following conditions: 
a.  Make proper application thereof. 
b.  File a satisfactory bond. 
c.  File evidence of liability insurance as specified herein; and 
d.  Satisfy the town engineer or his designated agent that he or it is competent and intends to perform the work with all applicable conditions, rules, regulations and specifications as published in "Regulations & Specifications regarding Curbs, Sidewalks and Street Excavations" revised July of 2007 established by the town engineer and the "Driveway Regulations & Specifications" revised July of 2007 and as may have been or be amended from time to time. A fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each license issued. 
(2)  A permit application must be submitted and approved by the town engineer prior to performance of any work by a licensed contractor within the public right of way in the Town of Vernon. Each permit application must be approved by the town engineer or his designated agent. No work shall be commenced or be continued unless the approved permit is posted by or in the possession of the licensee or his/its agent at the location of the work to be performed. A fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) will be charged except if the work requires a roadway cut on town property. Then the fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) will be charged for the permit application and license issued. No work shall be performed until the permit application is approved. 
(3)  Utility pole location. Utility poles shall be installed no closer than eight (8) feet from the curb or edge of roadway unless specifically approved by the engineer. Utility poles shall not be located or relocated in any sidewalk within the town's right of way unless the sidewalk meets the American Disabilities Act (ADA) and is approved by the engineer. 
(4)  The inclusion of substitute Bill No. 5931 "An Act Concerning Road Repairs by Utility Companies "(effective October 1, 2007) into the "Regulations & Specifications regarding Curbs, Sidewalks and Street Excavations" revised July of 2007. 
(c)  When possible traffic hazards exist, the approval of the traffic authority shall be obtained prior to issuance of a permit. 
(d)  The violation of this section or any rule or regulation shall be unlawful and the fine for such offense shall be in accordance with section 1-9. 
(Ord. No. 142, 12-21-82; Ord. No. 245, 5-6-03; Ord. No. 279, 8-7-07; Ord. No. 291, 2-24-10)  
Sec. 11-22. - Sidewalks, curbs and gutters. 
(a)  Construction generally. The town council is authorized to lay, set, construct and place in the streets and highways in the town, sidewalks, curbs and gutters of such material and of such dimensions, styles, kinds and forms as the public convenience and necessity in the use of the streets and highways may require. 
(b)  Special construction. Where, in the opinion of the traffic authority, a traffic hazard exists to children walking to school along streets where there are no sidewalks, the town council is authorized to lay, set, construct and place in the streets and highways in town, sidewalks, curbs and gutters of such material and of such dimensions, styles, kinds and forms as is necessary for the protection of the children walking to school. The traffic authority shall submit a written report to the town council stating where the traffic hazard exists, for what distance, together with their recommendations on placement of such sidewalks and priorities for construction. Upon acceptance of the report by the town council, the traffic authority shall take steps to implement the report. Nothing contained in this subsection shall be construed as relieving the abutters from the responsibility to remove snow and ice from sidewalks as provided by section 11-2. 
(Ord. No. 83, §§ 1—5, 4-15-74; Ord. No. 308 , § 2, 5-23-17)  
Secs. 11-23—11-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - OBSTRUCTIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of town to keep streets, sidewalks free from obstructions, G.S. § 7-148(c)(6)(C)(ii). 
 
Sec. 11-41. - Short title. 
This article shall be cited and may be referred to as the "Road and Sidewalk Obstruction Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 140, § 1, 11-16-82)  
Sec. 11-42. - Legislative findings. 
The town finds that road and sidewalk obstructions, such as shrubbery, hedges, trees, vegetation, rock walls and fences, or other obstructions, create hazards and inconvenience by: 
(1)  Interfering with vision and proper sight distance at corners and intersections; 
(2)  Making public travel on roads and sidewalks inconvenient and annoying; 
(3)  Obstructing the free passage of light maintained by the town. 
(Ord. No. 140, § 2, 11-16-82)  
Sec. 11-43. - Applicability. 
This article shall apply to the whole town. 
(Ord. No. 140, § 3, 11-16-82)  
Sec. 11-44. - Visual obstructions at intersections prohibited. 
(a)  No shrubbery, hedge or other natural growth or fence, except a transparent fence, such as chicken wire, in which the solid area is not more than five (5) percent of the total area of the fence or wall over three (3) feet higher than the apex at the centerline of the street shall be located within the triangular area shown shaded in sketch A, at the intersection of two (2) streets. 
(b)  No limbs or foliage on any tree shall obstruct vision or be permitted to grow nearer to the ground than eight (8) feet where such limbs or foliage overhang or arc over or upon land within the triangular area as shown in sketch A. 
(Ord. No. 140, § 4, 11-16-82) 
Editor's note— Sketch A is not included in this article but is available in the office of the director of public works.  
Sec. 11-45. - Trees overhanging streets or sidewalks prohibited. 
Every owner and occupier of land abutting upon any street or public way shall, whenever requested to do so by the director of public works, in writing, remove any tree, shrub or vine or any limb or branch thereof, standing upon such land and overhanging any street, sidewalk or other public way in such manner as to endanger public travel, or make the same inconvenient or annoying or to obstruct the free passage of light from the public lamps maintained by the town. 
(Ord. No. 140, § 5, 11-16-82)  
Sec. 11-46. - Hedges and plants with thorns. 
No person shall plant or maintain a hedge or plant having thorns thereon in such a manner as to infringe upon any public street, sidewalk or other public way. 
(Ord. No. 140, § 6, 11-16-82)  
Sec. 11-47. - Planting within sidewalk lines. 
No person shall set out any tree, shrub or vine within the lines of any sidewalk in the town, without a permit from the director of public works. 
(Ord. No. 140, § 7, 11-16-82)  
Sec. 11-48. - Enforcement. 
This article shall be administered and enforced by the department of public works with the assistance of the police department as set forth below: 
(1)  Upon the determination of the public works department that a violation exists, pursuant to the provisions of sections 11-44 through 11-47, it shall send a written notice specifying the violations and requiring compliance within ten (10) days thereafter. Such notice shall be served upon a person of suitable discretion in charge of the subject premises and by mailing a copy thereof addressed to the owner of record of such land if he is other than the person served at the address shown on the last preceding assessment roll. If the land is vacant and there is no one available to be served on the property, then a certified mailing of such violation notice to the owner of record shall be sufficient. 
(2)  If the notice specified in subsection (1) of this section is not complied with after a period of ten (10) days from date of service, then the police department shall issue a summons upon the filing of any information alleging the violation herein. 
(3)  In addition to any other penalty provided under the law for noncompliance, the town council may, in its legislative discretion, authorize the director of public works to remove the visual obstruction. 
(4)  The expenses incurred by the director of public works, pursuant to subsection (3) of this section, shall be paid by the owner or occupant of the premises or by the person who caused or maintained such obstruction. The director of public works shall file among his records an affidavit stating with fairness and accuracy the items of expense incurred in removing the obstruction. The town council may institute a suit to recover such expenses against any person liable for such expenses or may cause such expenses to be charged against the property as a lien. 
(5)  To effectuate the purposes and objectives of this article, the police department shall cooperate with and assist the public works department as set forth in this article and otherwise as may seem proper or required in the circumstances. 
(Ord. No. 140, § 8, 11-16-82)  
Sec. 11-49. - Penalty. 
Any violation by a person of any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed an offense punishable by a fine not to exceed twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(Ord. No. 140, § 9, 11-16-82)  
Secs. 11-50—11-75. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - DESIGNATION OF SCENIC ROADS 
 
Sec. 11-76. - Purpose and authority. 
The scenic and rural roads of Vernon are a cherished and irreplaceable resource critical for the protection of Vernon's natural heritage. The scenic values of many of Vernon's roads have been destroyed or are in danger of being destroyed because of past or potential alterations to their right-of way. These changes have had an adverse impact on the quality of Vernon's aesthetic and historic environment, an environment that is beneficial to both residents and visitors alike. 
It is the purpose of this article to balance the need to preserve and protect the scenic and historic values of rural roads with the need to maintain them in good and sufficient repair and passable condition. 
Pursuant to Connecticut General Statute Section 7-149a, the town may, by ordinance, designate town roads or portions of town roads as "scenic roads." The power to designate such scenic roads is delegated hereby this said article to the planning and zoning commission (PZC). No state highway or portion thereof may be designated as a scenic road under this article. 
(Ord. No. 256, § 1, 12-21-04)  
Sec. 11-77. - Criteria for scenic road designation. 
The Vernon Planning and Zoning Commission (hereafter referred to as "commission") shall consider designating as a scenic road only those town roads, which are free of intensive commercial development and intensive vehicular traffic and meet at least one of the following criteria: 
(1)  It is unpaved; 
(2)  It is bordered by mature trees or stone walls; 
(3)  The traveled portion is no more than twenty (20) feet wide; 
(4)  It offers scenic views, which for purposes of this article shall mean it affords vistas of marshes, shoreline, forests with mature trees, ridgelines or notable geologic or other natural features; 
(5)  It passes through agricultural land or abuts land on which is located an historic building or structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the State Register of Historic Places, compiled pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes (CGS); 
(6)  It blends naturally into the surrounding terrain, or 
(7)  It parallels or crosses over brooks, streams, lakes or ponds. 
(Ord. No. 256, § 2, 12-21-04)  
Sec. 11-78. - Procedure for scenic road designation. 
(a)  Any party seeking to have a road or a portion of a road designated as a "scenic road" may file an application for such designation with the commission. When a road is to be considered for designation as a scenic road, the commission shall schedule a public hearing on the application. 
Hearing notices and deadlines shall be made in compliance with the provisions of Sections 8-26d and 8-26e of the Connecticut General Statutes. The commission shall notify the Vernon Town Council, the Vernon Public Works Director, the conservation commission and all owners of lot frontage abutting the road or portion of the road under consideration for a scenic road. 
(b)  Following the public hearing, the commission shall vote on the proposed design-nation. No road or portion of a road may be designated as a scenic road under this article unless owners of a majority of lot frontage abutting the road or portion of the road agree to the designation by filing a written statement of approval with the Vernon Town Clerk. The commission shall send notice of said designation to the owners of lots with frontage abutting the road. Said notice shall provide that the owners shall have sixty (60) days to either agree or disagree with the designation. Those owners who fail to file a written statement with the town clerk shall be considered to be in agreement with the designation, provided that any abutter who fails to respond shall not be deemed to have waived their right to appeal said designation under subsection (d) of this article. 
(c)  The scenic road designation may be rescinded by the commission, using the same procedures, and having the written concurrence of the majority of owners with lot frontage abutting the scenic road. 
(d)  Any person who is aggrieved by a designation of a road or portion of a road as a scenic road may appeal such designation in the manner and utilizing the same standards of review provided for appeals from the decisions of planning commissions under Section 8-8 of the Connecticut General Statutes. 
(Ord. No. 256, § 3, 12-21-04)  
Sec. 11-79. - Procedures for scenic road alteration and improvement. 
(a)  Subject to the notice and hearing requirements set forth in this article, any road or portion of any road designated as a scenic road shall be maintained by the Town of Vernon in good and sufficient repair and in passable condition. 
(b)  Any party, including the Town of Vernon, proposing to carry out an activity within a scenic road right-of-way (ROW) must apply to the commission, which shall schedule a public hearing on the proposal. Hearing notices and deadlines shall be made in compliance with the provisions of Sections 8-26d and 8-26e of the Connecticut General Statutes. 
(c)  No road which has been designated as a scenic road under this article shall be altered or improved, except for good cause as determined by the commission. "Alterations or improvements" include, but are not limited to, widening of the right-of-way (ROW) or the traveled portion of the road, paving, changes of grade, straightening, removal of stone walls and mature trees. "Good cause" means maintaining the scenic road in good and sufficient repair and in passable condition. In the case of a natural disaster where the scenic road becomes impassable or posts a danger to public safety, it can be repaired to pre-emergency conditions. Examples of "good cause" include, but are not limited to, correcting drainage problems; removing dead and decaying trees and branches of trees; straightening of curves that pose a danger for vehicles traveling on them; repairing existing bridges, guardrails, guideposts and other engineering structures with similar materials that compliment the scenic character of the road; trimming tree branches and brush that overhang or encroach on the traveled portion of the road; and removing obstacles that prevent vehicles from traveling on the road. The commission shall state the reasons for its approval of such alterations and improvements in its minutes. 
Emergency, routine, and minor maintenance on any road that has been designated as a scenic road under this article shall be continued by the Town of Vernon without the necessity of town council vote, review by the planning and zoning commission (PZC) or public hearing. Such work includes the removal of dead, diseased, damaged, or dangerous trees and branches of trees; trimming of tree branches that encroach on the traveled portion of the road below the height needed to allow school busses, emergency vehicles, and town road maintenance vehicles to pass; trimming or removal of brush and removal of boulders or other obstacles that encroach on the traveled portion of the road; necessary trimming for utility lines; trimming of brush to enhance and to protect scenic views, stone walls, and mature trees; correction of drainage problems; striping, gravelling, filling, retreatment including, but not limited to, overlay paving and chip sealing and repair of existing roadway surfaces; grading; snowplowing; sanding and emergency repairs to the scenic road in the case of a natural disaster that makes it impassable or unsafe for public traffic. 
(d)  Nothing in this article shall be deemed to prohibit a person owning or occupying land abutting a scenic road from maintaining and repairing the land which abuts the scenic road if the maintenance or repair occurs on land not within the right-of-way, or provide minor maintenance in the right-of-way, paved or unpaved, of the scenic road. 
(Ord. No. 256, § 4, 12-21-04)  
Chapter 12 - TAXATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Board of tax review, Ch. 9, § 3; taxation, Ch. 13. 
Cross reference— Administration generally, Ch. 2; licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 7. 
State Law reference— Finance and taxation, G.S. § 12-40 et seq.; general provisions, G.S. § 7-398 et seq. 
 
Sec. 12-1. - Property tax exemption for veterans receiving financial aid for specially adapted housing under federal law. 
Pursuant to the provisions of section 12-81(21) of the general statutes, the dwelling house and the lot whereupon the same is erected belonging to or held in trust for any citizen and resident of this state, occupied as his domicile shall be fully exempt from local property taxation, if he is a veteran who served in the Army, Navy, Marine Corps, Coast Guard or Air Force of the United States and has received financial assistance for specially adapted housing under the provisions of section 801 of Title 38 of the United States Code and has applied such assistance toward the acquisition of such dwelling house. The same exemption may also be allowed on such housing units owned by the unremarried surviving spouse of such veteran, or by such veteran and spouse while occupying such premises as a residence. 
(Ord. No. 145, 3-1-83)  
Sec. 12-2. - Property tax exemption for veterans qualified under certain income requirements. 
(a)  Any veteran or active military duty member or widow or widower of a veteran as defined by section 12-81(22) (C.G.S.) of the United States Armed Forces shall be entitled to an exemption from property tax in accordance with subdivision (19) of section 12-81 [of the General Statutes]. 
(b)  The amount of the exemption is ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) to those qualifying under certain income guidelines as outlined in the Elderly Circuit Breaker program as administered by the Office of Policy and Management, State of Connecticut (OPM). The ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) exemption is a reduction in assessment of real or personal property including motor vehicles. For the October 1, 2004 grand list, income received in the calendar year 2003 will be used to determine eligibility. The 2003 adjusted gross income limits are twenty-six thousand five hundred ($26,500.00) for unmarried persons or thirty-two thousand three hundred ($32,300.00) for married couples. The income limits shall be adjusted by the Vernon Tax Assessor in succeeding years as determined by OPM. 
(c)  The filing deadline is October 1 st . Applications are made with the assessor and applicants must submit proof of income received for the "tax year…ending immediately prior to the assessment date with respect to which such additional exemption is claimed". Therefore, a person seeking a 2004 grand list exemption must file an application on or before October 1, 2004. The application must reflect income received in the 2003 calendar year. 
(d)  Those seeking this additional exemption must file biennially (once every other year). 
(e)  The provisions of State Statute 12-81f, as amended, allow only those "entitled to an exemption from property tax" pursuant to subdivisions (19) and (22) of section 12-81 [of the General Statutes] to qualify for this additional exemption. 
(f)  This section will become effective for the October 1, 2004, grand list and continue on for not more than ten (10) years from the date of adoption. If the town council does not renew the section, the section is repealed. 
(Ord. No. 157, 7-2-85; Ord. No. 205, 9-20-94; Ord. No. 247, 1-20-04)  
Sec. 12-3. - Property tax exemption for the blind under certain income requirements. 
(a)  Any person entitled to the exemption from property tax applicable to the assessed value of property up to the amount of three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) as provided under subdivision (17) of section 12-81 [of the General Statutes], shall be entitled to an additional exemption from such tax in an amount up to two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) of such assessed value, provided such person's qualifying income does not exceed the applicable maximum amount as provided under section 12-81l [of the General Statutes]. 
(b)  Any person submitting a claim for the additional exemption as provided under subsection (a) of this section shall be required to file an application, on a form prepared for such purpose by the assessor, not later than the date of the assessment list with respect to which such additional exemption is claimed. Each such application shall include a copy of such person's federal income tax return, or in the event a return is not filed, such evidence related to income as may be required by the assessor for the tax year of such person ending immediately prior to the approval of a claim for such additional exemption. 
(e)  This section will be effective for a period of not more than ten (10) years from date of adoption. If the town council does not act to renew this section, this section is repealed. 
(Ord. No. 159, 9-17-85; Ord. No. 206, 9-20-94)  
Sec. 12-4. - Property tax exemption for property acquired by certain institutions. 
(a)  Pursuant to the provisions of section 12-81b of the general statutes, the property tax exemption authorized by sections 12-81(7) through 12-81(16), inclusive, of the general statutes shall be effective as of the date of acquisition of the property to which the exemption applies. 
(b)  The tax-exempt organization shall be reimbursed by the town for any tax paid by it for the period subsequent to such acquisition date, and for any tax paid by the prior owner for a period subsequent to such acquisition date for which such organization reimbursed such owner on the transfer of title to such property. 
(c)  Applications for reimbursement shall be made to the tax collector in affidavit form, and shall be approved by the town attorney, who will certify his approval to the treasurer to make payment to such organization. 
(Ord. No. 44, 8-4-69)  
Sec. 12-5. - Property tax exemption for solar energy systems. 
(a)  Pursuant to section 12-81(56) of the general statutes, any building or addition to a building, the construction of which is commenced on or after October 1, 1976 and before October 1, 1991, which is equipped with a solar energy heating or cooling system, to the extent of the amount by which the assessed valuation of such real property equipped with such solar heating or cooling system exceeds the assessed valuation of such real property equipped with the conventional portion of the heating or cooling system, exclusive of any portion of such system related to solar energy, shall be exempt from property from property taxation, provided this exemption shall only apply to the first fifteen (15) assessment years following construction of such building or addition. 
(b)  As used in this section, "solar energy heating or cooling system" means equipment, including windmills and water wheels, which provides for the collection, transfer, storage and use of incident solar energy for water heating, space heating or cooling which absent such solar energy system would require a conventional energy resource, such as petroleum products, natural gas or electricity, and which meets standards established by regulation by the commissioner of planning and energy policy. 
(c)  Any person who desires to claim the exemption provided in this section shall file with the assessor within thirty (30) days following the annual assessment date, written application claiming such exemption on a form as prescribed by the state tax commissioner. Failure to file such application in such manner and form within the time limit prescribed shall constitute a waiver of the right to such exemption for the assessment year. 
(Ord. No. 102, §§ I—III, 2-15-77)  
Sec. 12-6. - Personal property tax exemption for certain ambulances. 
Pursuant to section 12-81c of the general statutes, there is hereby created an exemption from personal property taxation any ambulance-type motor vehicle which is used exclusively for the purpose of transporting any medically incapacitated individual, except any such vehicle used to transport any such individual for payment. 
(Ord. No. 96, 4-6-76)  
Sec. 12-7. - Collection of garbage, rubbish declared a general benefit to the town. 
It is hereby declared that the collection of garage and rubbish is a service which is of a general benefit to the town in accordance with chapter 13, section 1 of the Charter. 
(Ord. No. 12, 6-6-66) 
Charter reference— Taxation generally, Ch. 13. 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate garbage, trash, rubbish, ashes or waste material collection and disposal, G.S. § 7-148(c)(4)(H).  
Sec. 12-8. - Provisions and procedures for assignment of delinquent tax liens. 
The following provisions and procedures shall apply to the assignment of delinquent tax liens: 
(1)  Pursuant to section 12-195h of the General Statutes, the town has the power to assign any liens filed by the tax collector to secure unpaid taxes on real property by resolution of the town council. 
(2)  The town council has found it useful to assign delinquent tax liens in order to facilitate the rehabilitation of deteriorating properties and to raise revenue from delinquent accounts. 
(3)  The town council, by resolution, shall from time to time, upon recommendation of the Mayor, assign such tax liens securing unpaid taxes on real estate for such consideration as is negotiated between the town and the assignee in accordance with the provisions of this section and a policy statement entitled "Town of Vernon Policy Statement Governing The Sale, Purchase or Lease of Town Owned Property And The Assignment of Delinquent Tax Liens" adopted by resolution of the town council. 
(4)  The terms of the policy statement entitled "Town of Vernon Policy Statement Governing The Sale, Purchase or Lease of Town Owned Property And The Assignment of Delinquent Tax Liens" are hereby incorporated by reference and made a part hereof. 
(5)  All assignments of tax liens filed by the tax collector to secure unpaid taxes on real property shall be in accordance with section 12-195h, of the General Statutes and the provisions of this section and said policy statement. 
(6)  In assigning delinquent tax liens, the tax collector shall: 
a.  Send letters to taxpayers indicating that the municipality is exploring a tax lien sale; that theirs is in category of liens to be sold; that town will be publicizing the list of liens to be put out for sale and suggesting payment. 
b.  Announce and publicize the municipality's intention to sell delinquent liens. 
c.  Seek approval of the town council as required by Connecticut General Statutes section 12-195h. 
d.  Contact the housing authority to ascertain if there is any interest in the real estate securing the lien for one of their programs. If not; 
e.  Refer to the planning and zoning commission for check against the master plan of development. 
(7)  The auction or sale of any assigned tax liens pursuant to section 12-157 of the General Statutes shall be prohibited. 
(8)  The town council may authorize the town administrator to prepare and conduct a request for proposal (RFP). The following provisions shall be included. 
a.  A prohibition against the successful bidder doing a "sale of real estate for taxes" pursuant to G.S. § 12-157. 
b.  Standards of conduct for collection, including at a minimum compliance with laws and regulations regarding the same. 
c.  Reservation of the right to withdraw any tax liens prior to the award of the contract. 
d.  Reservation of the right to withdraw, extend or amend tax lien procedures at any time or, at its sole discretion, to reject any or all bids, and to withdraw from the sale any delinquent tax liens and to waive informality or technical defects in bids if it is deemed in best interest of Town of Vernon to do so. 
e.  A requirement that the successful bidder must buy all future liens against the liened property until title vests in a new party. If they do not, the RFP shall provide that the liens purchased shall be subordinate in property to the new ones. 
f.  A provision making bidders responsible for conducting their own due diligence. 
g.  Requiring that the successful bidder shall supply the tax collector with monthly reports as to status of collection. 
h.  A statement of firm qualifications, staff qualifications, experience, skills, and disclosure of principals and a description of administrative support available. 
i.  A minimum acceptable bid with the qualification that alternative proposals will be considered in the event that no proposal is for the minimum amount. 
j.  Requiring that the successful bidder shall make a deposit of ten (10) percent of bid. 
k.  Selling liens "as is" with no representation as to value, condition, collectability, or legal status. 
l.  Town will represent that: 
1.  Liens are correct statement of sums date. 
2.  The Town of Vernon has duly recorded certificates of liens. 
3.  The Town of Vernon has legal authority to assign liens and all necessary approvals have been obtained. 
4.  In the event that a court determines by a final, nonappealable judgment that any of the assigned liens or future assigned liens contained is unenforceable due to the negligence or error of the Town of Vernon, the town will refund that portion of the purchase price allocated to that lien, without interest. 
5.  The town shall take no further actions in collecting the taxes secured by the assigned liens or purchased future assigned liens after the date of sale, and that any taxpayers seeking to pay the same shall be referred to the assignee for payment. 
6.  In the event payments are received by the town for any such assigned lien or purchased future assigned lien, the town will immediately forward such sums to assignee, provided assignee is in compliance with all the terms of this agreement. 
m.  A provision requiring the successful bidder to indemnify the town for any claims or liabilities arising out of the collection or enforcement of any assigned lien. 
n.  A provision prohibiting the subsequent assignment/securitization of the sold liens. 
o.  A prohibition against the assignee from pledging, assigning or otherwise using assigned liens to secure any indebtedness to third parties or otherwise transfer to third parties any of the assigned liens without written consent from the town. 
(9)  If the town council authorizes the town administrator to prepare and conduct a request for proposal (RFP) consistent with subsection (8), as amended, then the town administrator shall prepare an agreement for the assignment of tax liens incorporating the request for proposal provisions. The town shall modify provisions of subsection (8)a.—o. of this section for assignments to facilitate the rehabilita tion of deteriorating properties where applicable to include the assignment of a tax lien conditioned upon completion of rehabilitative measures, execution of a declaration of restrictive covenants and tax relief for a maximum of one hundred eighty (180) days from assignment. 
(10)  This section shall be effective for not more than ten (10) years from the date of adoption, at which time, if the town council does not or has not acted to renew this section, this section shall be deemed repealed. 
(11)  This section shall be reviewed by the town council annually and at such time the town council may amend or repeal this section if it so chooses. 
(Ord. No. 217, §§ 1—11, 8-12-97; Ord. No. 231, 9-12-00)  
Sec. 12-9. - Certain activities of charitable, religious or nonprofit organizations exempt from taxation. 
(a)  For a charitable, religious or nonprofit organization to qualify for tax-exempt status from the town, an organization must have achieved tax-exempt status issued by the Internal Revenue Service and qualifies for exemption from municipal taxes in accordance with Title 12 of the Connecticut General Statues. 
(b)  When any charitable, religious or nonprofit organization allows the use of its land, buildings, personal property or other facilities by another charitable, religious or nonprofit organization, said income or compensation received by the lessor shall not subject the real or personal property of the lessor to municipal taxation. The income or compensation received may be in cash or in-kind services. 
(c)  If any charitable, religious or nonprofit organization believes that it has been unlawfully taxed, then that organization may appeal to the board of assessment appeals and then to the superior court in accordance with Connecticut General Statutes. 
(d)  This section shall remain in full force and effect for a period of ten (10) years from the date of its passage and shall thereafter expire unless extended by the town council. 
(Ord. No. 220, §§ 1.1—1.4, 10-6-98; Ord. No. 287, § 1.1, 9-16-08)  
Sec. 12-10. - Waive interest on property tax due for any real property owners whose spouse is on active duty. 
Pursuant to the provisions of Public Act 05-3 (Section 9) of the June 2005 Special Session. 
(1)  Any person who is domiciled with and the spouse of a member of the armed services of the United States or of any state or of any reserve component there of who has been called to active service in the armed forces of the United States for military operation that are authorized by the President of the United States that entail military action in Iraq and who is serving in the Middle East on the final day that payment of such property tax or installment or part there of is due shall not be charged any interest for period of one year on any property tax or installment or part there of that is payable for real property assessed on the Vernon 2003 grand list. 
(2)  The Vernon Collector of Revenue is authorized to require written proof of the above described status in order to implement the above described waiver of interest. 
This section shall be effective for real property accrued on the 2003 grand list. If the Vernon Town Council does not renew this section, more than ten (10) years from date of its adoption, the section is repealed. 
(Ord. No. 264, 9-20-05)  
Sec. 12-11. - Property tax exemption for hybrid electric vehicles and certain authorized alternative fuel vehicles. 
Pursuant to the provisions of Public Act 07-242 of the January 2007 Regular Session of the Connecticut General Assembly: 
(1)  The town shall grant a one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) property tax exemption for any passenger car that has a United States Environmental Protection Agency estimated city or highway gasoline mileage rating of at least forty (40) miles per gallon, as defined in G.S. § 12-412(110), purchased on or after January 1, 2008 and prior to July 1, 2010. 
(2)  The town shall grant a one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) property tax exemption for any hybrid passenger vehicle, as defined in G.S. § 12-412(115), purchased on or after October 1, 2004 and prior to October 1, 2008. 
(3)  The owner of a vehicle that is registered in Vernon and qualifies for this tax exemption may apply for such an exemption with the tax assessor. The Vernon tax assessor is authorized to require such written proof as deemed necessary to confirm that the vehicle complies with the requirements of this section prior to granting such an exemption. 
This section shall take effect on July 1, 2008 and shall expire on July 31, 2010 if the town council does not renew it prior to that date. 
(Ord. No. 281, 1-22-08)  
Chapter 13 - TRAFFIC AND MOTOR VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 11; possession of alcoholic liquor in public areas, highways and parking areas, § 11-4. 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate traffic generally, G.S. § 7-148(c)(7)(B)(i); authority to regulate speed of vehicles, G.S. § 7-148(c)(7)(B)(ii); authority restricted, G.S. § 14-162. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 13-1. - Motorized vehicles on bicycle paths, nature trails, etc., prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to operate or ride on any type of motorized vehicles, including minibicycles, motorcycles, go-carts, mopeds, and any other motorized vehicles on any nature trail, public wooded area, or designated walk provided solely for the use of pedestrians or pedestrians and bicycles, or any area designated "Bike Route," in the town, except any portion of a bike route which is located within the limits of the travelled portion of a public highway. 
(b)  Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be punished in accordance with section 1-9. 
(Ord. No. 128, 7-20-81)  
Sec. 13-2. - Prohibition of all commercial motor vehicles on Thrall Road. 
(a)  Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the term "commercial motor vehicle" means "a vehicle defined in § 14-1(a)(11) of the General Statutes as a vehicle designed or used to transport passengers or property, except a vehicle used within one hundred fifty (150) miles of a farm in connection with the operation of such farm, fire fighting apparatus or other authorized emergency vehicles, or a recreational vehicle in private use, which (A) has a gross vehicle weight rating of twenty-six thousand and one (26,001) pounds or more; (B) is designed to transport sixteen (16) or more passengers, including the driver or is designed to transport more than ten (10) passengers, including the drive, and used to transport students under the age of twenty-one (21) years to and from school; or (C) is transporting hazardous materials and is required to be placarded in accordance with the Code of Federal Regulations Title 49, Part 172, Subpart F, as amended." 
(b)  Prohibition. No person shall operate any commercial motor vehicle, as defined in subsection (a), on Thrall Road between the intersection of Route 83 and Thrall Road and the intersection of Thrall Road and Dart Hill Road unless such person is engaged on a trip with a point of origin or point of destination located on Thrall Road, Watson Road, or Worcester Road. 
(c)  Finding. The town council finds that there is an adequate alternate route for commercial motor vehicles by using Route 83 and Dart Hill Road. 
(d)  Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to trucks and buses owned and operated by the Town of Vernon or any of its departments, or to trucks or buses owned and operated by the Vernon Board of Education, or to trucks and buses operated by private contractors for the benefit of the Town of Vernon or the Vernon Board of Education, nor to public transit vehicles. 
(e)  Penalty. Any violation of the provisions of this Section shall subject the violator to a fine of ninety-nine dollars ($99.00) for each offense. 
(f)  Duration. This section shall be effective for not more than ten (10) years from the date of adoption at which time, if the town council has not acted to renew the section, the section shall be deemed repealed. 
(g)  Severability. If any provision of this section or the application thereof shall be held invalid or unenforceable, the remainder of this section, or the application of such terms and provisions to persons or circumstances other than those to which it is held invalid or unenforceable, shall not be affected thereby; and each remaining term and provision hereof shall be deemed valid and shall be enforced to the fullest extent permitted by law. 
(h)  Administration. The provisions of this Article shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any and all provisions of the Connecticut General Statutes, state codes, and regulations and ordinances of the Town of Vernon. 
(Ord. No. 240, 3-4-03)  
Secs. 13-3—13-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - TRAFFIC AUTHORITY 
 
Sec. 13-16. - Authorized. 
The town, under authority granted to it by the general statutes, hereby empowers the mayor to appoint a traffic authority as defined by section 14-297 of the general statutes and authorizes the traffic authority to have those powers conferred on it by such statute. 
(Ord. No. 14, 2-6-67)  
Sec. 13-17. - Composition; appointment. 
The traffic authority shall consist of seven (7) members all of whom shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the board of representatives. 
(Ord. No. 14, 2-6-67; Ord. No. 180, 2-21-89)  
Sec. 13-18. - Terms of members. 
After the staggered terms of the initial members of the traffic authority have terminated, the members of the traffic authority shall serve terms of three (3) years. 
(Ord. No. 14, 2-6-67)  
Secs. 13-19—13-35. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PARKING, STOPPING AND STANDING 
 
Sec. 13-36. - Time limit parking. 
(a)  Generally. Except on Sundays or legal holidays it shall be unlawful to park any motor vehicle on any public street or highway in the town under the jurisdiction of the traffic authority between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., and on Thursdays and Fridays between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. for a longer consecutive period of time than that designated and posted by order of the traffic authority pursuant to section 14-307(a) of the general statutes, in any area designated as a limited parking area and so marked. 
(b)  Posted signs. The traffic authority shall cause signs to be posted in all areas where parking is so limited, indicating such limitations. 
(c)  Regulations. The traffic authority may promulgate all necessary rules and regulations in order to implement this section. 
(Ord. No. 98, §§ I—III, 9-21-76)  
Sec. 13-37. - Parking during snow removal or sanding of streets restricted. 
(a)  No person shall park a motor vehicle within the limits of a public highway in the Town of Vernon in such a manner as to interfere with, impede or obstruct the removal of snow from said highway, or the sanding of said highway, during any storm or for [eight (8)] twelve (12) hours after such storm has subsided. 
(b)  Nothing in paragraph a. herein shall restrict the parking by a physician on emergency call. [, nor prevent a vehicle, which has become disabled to such an extent that it is impossible or impracticable to remove it, from remaining for a reasonable time for the purpose of making repairs thereto or of obtaining sufficient assistance to remove it.] 
(c)  Whenever any motor vehicle is found parked in violation of this section, it may be removed and conveyed by, or under the direction of, any law enforcement officer having jurisdiction in the Town of Vernon, by means of towing or otherwise, to a vehicle pound designated by the [mayor] town administrator of said town. Before any designated place or garage shall be authorized to be a vehicle pound, or before towing, such garage shall furnish to the [mayor] town administrator of said town satisfactory evidence of insurance coverage to protect the Town of Vernon from any claims for damages arising from the towing or storage of any impounded vehicle. Before the owner or person in charge of such vehicle shall be permitted to remove the same from such vehicle pound, he shall furnish to the [mayor or to such] law enforcement officer [as the mayor shall designate] evidence of his identity, ownership or right to possession, and shall sign a receipt for the same, and he shall pay the costs of [removal and storage] a fine imposed under section 1-9, of the Code of Ordinances, Town of Vernon, and costs of removal and storage fees, but not exceeding the maximum rates and charges on file with the Commissioner of Motor Vehicles for the State of Connecticut Wrecker, Towing and Road Service Rates for each day, or portion of a day, said vehicle is stored in the vehicle pound in excess of the first twenty-four (24) hours said vehicle is impounded. 
(d)  The owner of any impounded vehicle shall be duly informed as to the nature and circumstances of the violation on account of which such vehicle has been impounded. In case protest is made against the payment of any fine, towing or storage fees, the designated law enforcement officer shall mark upon the receipt evidencing payment of the fine, towing and storage fees the words "paid under protest". In such case, it shall thereupon be the duty of the law enforcement officer having knowledge of the facts to forthwith issue a citation pursuant to section 1-9 of the Code of Ordinance, Town of Vernon, [institute the proper proceedings in any Circuit Court having jurisdiction within said town], charging the owner or driver of such vehicle with the violation of the section on account of which the vehicle was impounded. In the event the owner or driver of said vehicle is found not guilty of the offense charged, he shall be reimbursed the sum of the fine so paid under protest and towing and storage fees. 
(e)  It shall be the duty of the law enforcement officer designated by the [mayor] town administrator to keep a record of the names of all owners of vehicles impounded, the numbers of their state license plates, the place where such vehicle was impounded, the nature and circumstances of each violation, and the disposition of each case. 
(f)  Proof of the registration number of any motor vehicle concerned with a violation of this section shall be prima facie evidence in any [criminal] enforcement action that the registered owner was the operator thereof. 
(g)  The chief of police is authorized to suspend parking specifically permitted by signs and prohibit parking temporarily in any area where, in his opinion, it is necessary in order to facilitate the removal of snow, the construction of public works improvements or for other good and sufficient purposes; and he shall give notice of such temporary prohibition by causing to be placed suitable signs indicating that parking is prohibited and also, if practicable, by radio and newspaper. 
(h)  Parking shall be temporarily prohibited on the traveled portions of all streets and highways during any snowstorm and shall remain prohibited within eight (8) hours after the end of any snowstorm. 
(i)  Any person who violates any provisions, of this section shall be fined in accordance with subsection 13-39 (c), in addition to any other charges set forth in subsection (c) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 117, 2-19-80; Ord. No. 121, 6-16-80; Ord. No. 266, 5-2-06; Ord. No. 273, § 5, 2-6-07)  
Sec. 13-38. - Nighttime parking. 
Any person leaving a vehicle parked upon a public highway or street in the town between 3:30 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. shall be fined in accordance with subsection 13-39 (c). Exemptions may be granted by the police department in the event of fire, sickness or emergency. 
(Ord. No. 151, 3-20-84; Ord. No. 182, 9-19-89; Ord. No. 238, 5-7-02; Ord. No. 273, § 6, 2-6-07)  
Sec. 13-39. - Fines for parking violations. 
(a)  The traffic authority of the town, pursuant to G.S. § 14-307, shall cause to be marked any area designated for limitations on parking and shall cause to be promulgated all necessary rules and regulations in order to implement the provisions of this section. 
(b)  The traffic authority shall periodically review and recommend to the town council for adoption by ordinance a schedule of fines not to exceed ninety-nine dollars ($99.00), for the following offenses; 
(1)  Overtime parking; 
(2)  Parking within ten (10) feet of a fire hydrant; 
(3)  Parking within twenty-five (25) feet of a corner or a stop sign; 
(4)  Parking within a bus stop area; 
(5)  Parking within a loading or unloading zone; 
(6)  Parking so as to obstruct a driveway; 
(7)  Parking on the wrong side of a street; 
(8)  Parking on a sidewalk; 
(9)  Parking more than twelve (12) inches from the curb; 
(10)  Parking in a designated no-parking area; 
(11)  Double parking; 
(12)  Parking in an intersection; 
(13)  Parking in a handicapped area; 
(14)  Overnight parking; 
(15)  Failure to remove snow from sidewalks; and, 
(16)  Violation of the temporary no-parking Ordinance No. 117 in effect during snow removal and capital improvement projects. 
Adoption of such fines in excess of twenty dollars ($20.00) by the town council shall be done after a public hearing; except as to parking in handicapped area, any fine for which may be adopted without such public hearing. 
(c)  The following are the parking offenses and fines for violation thereof: 
Violation 	Fine 	After 15 Days 
Overnight parking 	$15.00 	$30.00 
Overtime 	15.00 	30.00 
Within 10' of hydrant 	30.00 	60.00 
25' from stop sign/corner 	15.00 	30.00 
Bus stop area 	20.00 	40.00 
Loading or unloading zone 	15.00 	30.00 
Obstructing driveway 	30.00 	60.00 
Wrong side of street 	15.00 	30.00 
On sidewalk 	30.00 	60.00 
More than 12" from curb 	15.00 	30.00 
No parking area 	15.00 	30.00 
Double parking 	15.00 	30.00 
In an intersection 	30.00 	60.00 
In "Fire lane" 	50.00 	99.00 
Failure to remove snow from walk 	20.00 	40.00 
Temporary no parking area snow removal and capital improvements 	20.00 	40.00 
Handicapped area 	99.00 	99.00 
 
(d)  The fine for violation of this section shall be payable until the fourteenth (14th) day after the date of issuance of a ticket or summons showing a violation and fine. If the required fine is not paid during that period, the fine due and payable from the fifteenth (15th) day through the thirtieth (30th) day after issue shall be double the amount indicated. If payment is not received within thirty (30) days after issue, a warrant shall be issued for the arrest of the person named on the ticket or summons and said person shall be subject to the maximum penalties provided by law. The, ticket or summons issued to the violator shall indicate the offense charged, and a warning showing the consequences of late payment as set forth herein. 
(e)  The mayor shall appoint, subject to confirmation by the town council, a parking violation hearing officer to conduct the hearings authorized by ordinances of the town. The parking violation hearing officer may be a retired sworn police officer who shall be a resident of the State of Connecticut and may not be an employee of the town. He or she shall serve without compensation, but may be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in performing the duties of this office to the extent that funds have been made available by the town council. The parking violation hearing officer shall serve for a term of two (2) years, unless removed for cause. 
(Ord. No. 126, 5-18-81; Ord. No. 181, 9-19-89; Ord. No. 273, §§ 1—4, 2-6-07; Ord. No. 274, § 2, 2-6-07)  
Sec. 13-40. - Commercial motor vehicle parking prohibited on town streets. 
(a)  Commercial motor vehicle shall mean: "A vehicle defined in Connecticut General Statute Section 14-1(a)(11) is a vehicle design or used to transport passengers or properties, except a vehicle used within one hundred fifty (150) miles of a farm in connection with the operation of such farm, firefighting apparatus or other authorized emergency vehicles, or a recreational vehicle in private use, which (A) has a gross vehicle weight rating of twenty-six thousand and one (26,001) pound or more; (B) is designed to transport sixteen (16) or more passengers, including the driver, or is designed to transport more than ten (10) passengers, including the driver, and is used to transport students under the age of twenty-one (21) years to and from school; or (C) is transporting hazardous materials and is required to be placarded in accordance with the Code of Federal Regulations Title 49, Part 172, Subpart F, as amended." 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to park any commercial motor vehicle on any public street or highway in the Town of Vernon under the jurisdiction of the Vernon Traffic Authority, unless such commercial vehicle is making an immediate delivery of product or household goods. 
(c)  Immediate delivery shall mean the closely related in time parking of a commercial motor vehicle and the delivery of products or household goods to a property adjacent to the public street or highway upon which a commercial motor vehicle and/or its trailer is parked. 
(d)  Fine levied. The fine for such parking of a commercial motor vehicle shall be ninety-nine dollars ($99.00) per day, each day being defined as a consecutive twenty-four (24) hour period of time. 
(e)  (1)  Whenever any motor vehicle is found parked in violation of this section, it may be removed and conveyed by, or under the direction of, any law enforcement officer having jurisdiction in the town, by means of towing or otherwise, to a vehicle pound designated by the mayor. Before any designated place or garage shall be authorized to be a vehicle pound, or before towing, such garage shall furnish to the mayor satisfactory evidence of insurance coverage to protect the town from any claims for damages arising from the towing or storage of any impounded vehicle. Before the owner or person in charge of such vehicle shall be permitted to remove the same from such vehicle pound, he shall furnish to the mayor or to such law enforcement officer as the mayor shall designate, evidence of his identity, ownership or right to possession, and shall sign a receipt for the same, and he shall pay the costs of removal and storage, but not exceeding the maximum rates and charges on file with the state commissioner of motor vehicles concerning wrecker, towing and road service for each day, or portion of a day, the vehicle is stored in the vehicle pound in excess of the first twenty-four (24) hours the vehicle is impounded. 
(2)  The owner of any vehicle impounded under the provisions of this section shall be duly informed as to the nature and circumstances of the violation for which such vehicle has been impounded. In case protest is made against the payment of any towing or storage fees, the designated law enforcement officer shall mark upon the receipt evidencing payment of the towing and storage fees the words "paid under protest." In such case, it shall thereupon be the duty of the law enforcement officer having knowledge of the facts to forthwith institute the proper proceedings in any court having jurisdiction within the town, charging the owner or driver of such vehicle with the violation of the section for which the vehicle was impounded. In the event the owner or driver of the vehicle is found not guilty of the offense charged, he shall be reimbursed the sum so paid under protest. 
(3)  It shall be the duty of the law enforcement officer designated by the mayor to keep record of the names of all owners of vehicles impounded, the numbers of their state license plates, the place where such vehicle was impounded, the nature and circumstances of each violation, and the disposition of each case. 
(4)  Proof of the registration number of any motor vehicle concerned with a violation of this section shall be prima facie evidence in any criminal action that the registered owner was the operator thereof. 
(f)  Duration. This section shall be effective for not more than ten (10) years from the date of adoption at which time, if the town council does not renew the section, the section shall be deemed repealed. 
(Ord. No. 244, 4-15-03)  
Secs. 13-41—13-55. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - ABANDONED, WRECKED, DISMANTLED OR INOPERATIVE MOTOR VEHICLES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Removal of abandoned motor vehicles by municipalities, G.S. § 7-150a. 
 
Sec. 13-56. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandon shall mean having the appearance that the owner has relinquished possession without the intention of reclaiming it. 
Junk motor vehicle shall mean any motor vehicle which has no registration marker plates or invalid registration marker plates and (a) the motor vehicle is apparently abandoned; (b) the market value of such motor vehicle in its current condition is five hundred dollars ($500.00) or less, and (c) the motor vehicle is so vandalized, damaged or in disrepair as to be unusable as a motor vehicle. 
Motor vehicle shall mean a machine propelled by power other than human power designed to travel along the ground by use of wheels, treads, runners, or slides, and transport persons or property or pull machinery and shall include, without limitation, automobile, truck, trailer, motorcycle, tractor, buggy and wagon. 
Property shall mean any real property within the town which is not a street or highway. 
Street or highway shall mean the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part hereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. 
(Ord. No. 150, § 1, 10-4-83; Ord. No. 246, 10-21-03) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 13-57. - Abandonment of motor vehicles prohibited. 
No person shall abandon any vehicle within the town and no person shall leave any vehicle at any place within the town for such time and under such circumstances as to cause such vehicle reasonably to appear to have been abandoned. 
(Ord. No. 150, § 2, 10-4-83)  
Sec. 13-58. - Disposition of wrecked or discarded vehicles. 
No person in charge or control of any property within the town, whether as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee or otherwise shall allow an apparently abandoned or inoperable motor vehicle to remain on such property; and no person shall leave any such vehicle on any property within the town; except that this section shall not apply with regard to a vehicle in an enclosed building; a vehicle on the premises of a business enterprise operated in a lawful place and manner when necessary to the operation of such business enterprise; a vehicle in an appropriate storage place or depository maintained in a lawful place and manner by the town or any vehicle which is in the active process of being restored to operable condition, as determined by the building inspector or any member of his department designated by him based upon his observations and information, if any, supplied by the owner of the vehicle or property, subject to the following criteria: 
(1)  Only one (1) such vehicle shall be permitted at any one (1) time on the property in question; 
(2)  Automobile parts used in the restoration must be stored in the vehicle or in a structure; 
(3)  Such restoration work is not to take place in the required yard areas as set forth in the zoning regulations; 
(4)  One (1) vehicle, in addition to the vehicle being restored, which is being used for parts may be maintained on the property for no more than thirty (30) days; 
(5)  Such vehicles are to be covered with a tarpaulin whenever work is not being done upon them. 
(Ord. No. 150, § 3, 10-4-83)  
Sec. 13-59. - Removal of motor vehicle by town authorized; notice. 
The building inspector or any member of his department designated by him, is hereby authorized to remove or have removed any motor vehicle which is abandoned or inoperable within the limits of the town which remains unmoved for thirty (30) days after the following: 
(1)  Notice, by personal service or by registered mail, return receipt requested, to the owner of the property on which such motor vehicle so remains, requesting the removal of such motor vehicle; and 
(2)  Notice in a newspaper having a substantial circulation in the town. 
(Ord. No. 150, § 4, 10-4-83)  
Sec. 13-60. - Towing, storage, disposal of abandoned motor vehicle by town authorized; recovery of costs. 
(a)  After giving the required notice and after waiting the required thirty (30) days, the building inspector or any member of his department designated by him, may remove such vehicle by a town truck or by a commercial tow truck, to a commercial garage or an automobile wrecking yard or any suitable place for the disposal of rubbish. The building inspector may thereafter file an action in the name of the town in the appropriate court upon any person upon whom he served the aforesaid demand, for the purpose of recovering the cost of removing and storing the vehicle in the event the proceeds of any sale thereof shall be insufficient to recover the costs. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit or limit the ability of any official identified in §§ 14-150 or 14-151 of the Connecticut General Statutes, et seq. from taking possession of and removing a "junk motor vehicle" as defined in section 13-56 above, in accord with the procedures set forth in § 14-150, et seq. of the Connecticut General Statutes. 
(Ord. No. 150, § 4, 10-4-83; Ord. No. 246, 10-21-03)  
Sec. 13-61. - Sale of abandoned vehicles by town not required. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed to require the building inspector or any member of his department to hold a sale of any vehicle removed, disposed or towed under the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 150, § 4, 10-4-83)  
Sec. 13-62. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in accordance with section 1-9. 
(Ord. No. 150, § 5, 10-4-83)  
Sec. 13-63. - Junk motor vehicle removal program. 
The town building inspector is authorized to establish a program for the removal of "junk" cars consistent with the provisions of this article and Connecticut General Statutes, which program may include the imposing of a reasonable fee for the removal by the Town of Vernon of a "junk motor vehicle." The amount of any such fee shall be approved by the town council. 
(Ord. No. 246, 10-21-03)  
Secs. 13-64—13-75. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - FIRE LANES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 5. 
 
Sec. 13-76. - Defined. 
A fire lane is a designated, unobstructed passageway sufficient in size to permit free passage of fire and other emergency equipment from a public highway to all necessary areas or portions of any private or public property as hereinafter set forth. 
(Ord. No. 93, § 1, 11-17-75)  
Sec. 13-77. - Established by fire marshal. 
Whenever the fire marshal shall determine that the reasonable safety of persons occupying, or using, any premises, public or private, having a capacity of at least fifteen (15) persons, requires the establishment of a fire lane for orderly access of fire and other emergency equipment, he shall establish such fire lane by written order and cause a public announcement of the establishment of such fire lane to be printed in a newspaper having substantial circulation in the community. Further, he shall cause a copy of such order to be delivered, in person or by registered mail, to the owner of any private land on which such fire lane is established, or to the agent of such owner. 
(Ord. No. 93, § 2, 11-17-75)  
Sec. 13-78. - Notice of establishment. 
Whenever a fire marshal establishes a fire lane, he shall file one (1) copy of his order with the director of administration and with the police department. Any person aggrieved by such order may file, with the director of administration, within fifteen (15) days after the date of such order, written notice of appeal, setting forth therein reasons for aggrievement. After hearing, the director of administration may affirm, modify or rescind such order. 
(Ord. No. 93, § 3, 11-17-75)  
Sec. 13-79. - Designated signs. 
Upon establishment of a fire lane, the public works department shall cause to be erected or installed, adequate signs, markings and other devices to delineate the fire lane. Signs, markings and other devices erected or installed on privately owned premises, shall be at the cost of the owner, and may be billed for and collected as a municipal fee in the same manner as municipal taxes. 
(Ord. No. 93, § 4, 11-17-75)  
Sec. 13-80. - Unlawful parking. 
No person shall park, or permit to stand, a motor vehicle in a fire lane which has been established in accordance with this article except when the operator remains in the vehicle and is in the actual process of picking up or discharging passengers. Any person violating this section shall be fined in accordance with subsection 13-39 (c). The registered owner of a motor vehicle shall be presumed to be the operator of such vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 93, § 5, 11-17-75; Ord. No. 273, § 7, 2-6-07)  
Sec. 13-81. - Towing of illegally parked vehicles. 
(a)  Any motor vehicle found standing in a fire lane which has been established in accordance with this article may be towed, upon the direction of a police officer, to any public or private parking facility, and all expense of such towing, and any subsequent storage, shall be borne by the registered owner of such vehicle. 
(b)  Whenever a vehicle is found standing in violation of section 13-80, a police officer shall serve upon the owner or operator of such vehicle, or place upon such vehicle, a notice directing the owner or operator thereof to appear at the police department prior to a time specified in said notice. If any person receiving the notice shall appear as directed, and shall pay an amount as specified in subsection 13-39 (c), such payment shall bar a prosecution for violation of section 13-80. 
(Ord. No. 93, §§ 6, 7, 11-17-75; Ord. No. 273, § 8, 2-6-07)  
Chapter 14 - UTILITIES[1] 


Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Water pollution control authority, Ch. 8, § 3; department of water pollution control, Ch. 11, § 18; duties of the water pollution control authority and the town council on enterprise activity budgets, Ch. 12, § 4. 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 3; housing, Ch. 6; planning, Ch. 10; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 11. 
State Law reference— Power of town to lay out, construct, etc., sewer and drainage systems and sewage disposal plants, G.S. § 7-148(c)(6)(B)(i); power of town to contract for the furnishing of water, G.S. § 7-148(c)(4)(G); power of town to create, etc., all things in the nature of public works and improvements, G.S. § 7-148(c)(6)(A)(ii); power of town to regulate the laying, etc., of water pipes, drains, sewers, etc., in the streets and public places, G.S. § 7-148(c)(6)(B)(iii); power of town to regulate and prohibit the construction, etc., of sinks, cesspools, G.S. § 7-148(c)(7)(C); municipal waterworks systems, G.S. § 7-234 et seq.; municipal sewerage systems, G.S. § 7-245 et seq.; sewer districts, G.S. § 7-324 et seq.; water resources, G.S. § 25-1 et seq.; sewer revenue bonds, G.S. §§ 7-259—7-266. 
 
Sec. 14-1. - Fees for sewage disposal systems and wells. 
(a)  The fee for witnessing soil tests (deep test holes) and percolation tests with respect to any proposed subdivision or single lot subsurface sewage disposal investigations is twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for the first hour, or any part thereof, and fifteen dollars ($15.00) for each hour thereafter. 
(b)  The prepayment fee for plan review with on-site sewage disposal systems which have flows of less than two thousand (2,000) gallons per day shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(c)  The prepayment fee for plan review with on-site sewage disposal systems which have flows greater than two thousand (2,000) gallons per day shall be fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(d)  The fee for inspection of an on-site sewage disposal system with flows of less than two thousand (2,000) gallons per day shall be: 
(1)  New ..... $40.00 
(2)  Repair ..... 25.00 
(e)  The fee for inspection of an on-site sewage disposal system with flows of greater than two thousand (2,000) gallons per day shall be: 
(1)  New ..... $100.00 
(2)  Repair ..... 75.00 
(f)  The fee for the services of the town environmental health officer to issue a permit to discharge to a subsurface sewage disposal system shall be five dollars ($5.00). 
(g)  The fee for the services of the town environmental health officer to inspect the installation of a new well shall be fifteen dollars ($15.00). 
(h)  The fee for the services of the town environmental health officer to perform a sanitary survey shall be forty dollars ($40.00). 
(i)  All such fees shall be paid to the town and shall be deposited in its general fund. 
(Ord. No. 174, 7-5-88) 


ZONING REGULATIONS 
Town of Vernon, Connecticut 

____________ 
Published 2018 
Amendments through January 1, 2018 
____________ 

SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Legislation Date 
Adopted Included/
Omitted Supplement Number PZ-2017-09 11-15-2017 Included 1  
SECTION 1 - GENERAL 

1.1 
The following regulations have been designed for the purpose of lessening congestion to the streets; to secure safety from fire, panic, flood, and other dangers; to promote health and the general welfare; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding of land; to avoid undue concentration of population and facilitate the adequate provision for transportation, water, sewage, schools, parks, and other public requirements. 
1.2 
The Town of Vernon is divided into zoning districts as described under individual classifications as follows: 
R-10 Single Family Residential R-15 Single Family Residential R-22 Single Family Residential R-27 Single Family Residential R-40 Single Family Residential MHP Mobile Home Parks PRD Planned Residential Development C Commercial I Industrial FZ-ID Special Floating Zone Industrial Development PND Planned Neighborhood Development NR-10 Neighborhood R-10 RC Residential Commercial RW Restricted Watershed HD-I Historic District Industrial SED Special Economic Development PC Planned Commercial SFZ-GZ Special Floating Zone - Garden Zone DBR Downtown Business & Residential PDZ Gerber Planned Development Zone: Geber Farm Area PDZ Exit 67 Planned Development Zone: I-84 Exit 67 Area OS Open Space CMD Comprehensive Multifamily Dwelling  
1.3 
The boundaries of these zones are shown on a series of maps entitled, "Zoning Map, Town of Vernon, Connecticut," which are declared to be a part of these regulations. 
1.3A 
Proposed changes to the Zoning Map shall be identified on a map prepared to Class D survey accuracy showing the properties proposed for the zone change and all properties within a 200 foot radius of the boundaries of the proposed zone change. Owners shall be identified for all properties referenced above. 
1.4 
Where the boundary is shown following a street, railroad or utility right-of-way, the boundary shall be the centerline thereon, unless otherwise indicated. Where the boundary is shown outside of a street, railroad or utility right-of-way and approximately parallel thereto, the boundary shall be deemed parallel to the nearest line thereof, and the figure placed on the zoning map shall be the distance in feet between them, as measured at a right angle from such line, unless otherwise stated. Where the boundary of a district follows a river, stream, pond or other watercourse, the boundary line shall be the centerline thereon, unless otherwise indicated. 
Where the location of a district boundary line is uncertain, the zoning enforcement officer shall determine its position in accordance with the distance in feet from other lines as given or as measured from the scale of the map. 
The provision of these regulations shall be construed to be minimum requirements. 
1.5 
Withdrawal of Application: No application coming in before the Planning and Zoning Commission may be withdrawn after it has been advertised for a public hearing unless the Chairman or Secretary of the Planning and Zoning Commission is notified in writing by the applicant or his representative not later than 48 hours prior to the scheduled hearing before the Commission unless good cause for such withdrawal is found by the Commission after a hearing on the withdrawal. 
1.6 
This set of zoning regulations was compiled from regulations in force for the City of Rockville and the Vernon Fire District at the time of their consolidation into the Town of Vernon on July 1, 1965. The regulations have been further amended and supplemented as herein set out. 
1.7 
As per public referendum passed by the voters on November 6, 1984, the Planning and Zoning Commissions were combined into one body effective January 1, 1985. As a result, the word "Commission" as used in these regulations, shall include both the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
1.8 
The operative date of the regulations for the purpose of establishing non-conformance status is July 1, 1965, the effective date of consolidation of the Town of Vernon. 
SECTION 2 - DEFINITIONS 
For purposes of these regulations, the following terms shall be defined as below: 

2.1 - Affordable Housing: 
Housing for which persons and families pay thirty percent or less of their annual income, where such income is less than or equal to the area median income for municipality in which such housing is located as determined by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development. 
2.2 - Antenna: 
Means a device used to receive or transmit electromagnetic waves. Examples include, but are not limited to, whip antennas and dish antennas. 
2.3 - Applicant: 
The property owner, the property owner's agent, or someone who has a direct financial interest in the subject property and said interest shall be explained. Written permission for an application must be obtained from the property owner if the applicant is not the property owner. 
2.4 - Aquifer: 
Geologic formation composed of rock or sand and gravel that contain significant amounts of potentially recoverable potable water. 
2.5 - Aquifer Protection Zone: 
All materials, liquid and solid, natural and man-made overlying stratified drift aquifers and their primary recharge areas identified or to be identified for the purpose of developing regulations to facilitate the management of activities that may degrade, pollute or destroy the quality of ground waters. 
2.6 - Deleted. 
2.7 - Deleted. 
2.8 - Assisted Living Facility: 
A managed residential community having support services including adult and child day areas that encourage residents primarily 55 years or older to maintain a maximum level of independence. It includes on-site 24 hour nursing services, recreational services and food services, and provides necessary assistance with activities of daily living. The included services shall provide an alternative for elderly and/or handicapped persons who require some help or aid with activities of daily living in order to remain in their independent, private residential units within the managed community. 
2.9 - Bed & Breakfast: 
An owner occupied residential property providing over-night accommodations for a period not exceeding twenty-one (21) days and meals to guests, but not operating a restaurant open to the public. A Bed & Breakfast establishment provides accommodations to transients with the hospitality of a residential environment. The provision of accommodations and/or meals is not an activity defined as "boarding house, convalescent home, group home, hotel, motel, restaurant, rooming home, or shelter." 
2.10 - Best Management Practices: 
A practice, procedure or facility designed to prevent, minimize or control spills, leaks or other releases that pose a threat to groundwater. 
2.11 - Boarding Home: 
A building, owner occupied, solely intended to provide food and/or lodging on a permanent basis to individuals. 
2.12 - Building Area: 
The ground area enclosed by the walls of a building, together with the area of all covered porches and other roofed portions. 
2.13 - Building Coverage: 
The percentage, which the aggregate area of all buildings on the lot bears to the area of the lot. 
2.14 - Building Height: 
The vertical distance from the average grade of a structure to the highest point on the structure. For the purposes of this ordinance, the following shall be excluded from height determinations: Church spires, chimneys, flagpoles, supports for overhead utility lines, radio and television masts in commercial and industrial zones, radio and television masts and towers in residential zones that are less than 100 feet in height and are not operated for financial gain. 
2.15 - Building Line: 
The line, which denotes the distance between the lot frontage and the point at which the principal building is constructed. 
2.16 - Camping Park: 
A parcel of land, which has been planned for the temporary placement of two (2) or more seasonal or recreational vehicles. 
2.17A - Certification: 
A signed, written approval by the Certifying Agent that a plan complies with the applicable requirements of these regulations. 
2.17B - Charitable Donation Bin: 
An outdoor receptacle made of steel or a similar product, placed in public locations that is intended to accept and store donated items such as books, clothing or other nonperishable goods or materials. 
2.18 - Co-Location: 
Means locating wireless communication facilities from more than one provider on a single site. 
2.19 - Commercial Educational Service or Facility: 
Any service or facility where a fee is paid in exchange for instruction given or classes held to improve an individual's knowledge or skills. 
2.20 - Commercial Recreational Facility: 
Any facility where a fee is paid in exchange for activities, events, or programs related to athletics, physical conditioning and accessory activities. 
2.21 - Commercial Wireless Telecommunication Facility: 
Means a facility operated by a licensed commercial wireless telecommunication service provider, which consists of the equipment and structures involved in receiving or transmitting electromagnetic waves, associated with wireless telecommunication services. 
2.22 - Commercial Wireless Telecommunication Services: 
Means a service operated by a licensed commercial wireless telecommunication provider including cellular, personal communication services (PCS), specialized mobilized radio (SMR), enhanced specialized mobilized radio (ESMR), paging and similar services that are marketed to the general public. 
2.23 - Condominium, Residential: 
Individual ownership in fee simple of a residential dwelling unit located in a detached dwelling, an attached dwelling, a semi-detached dwelling, or a multi-family dwelling, with ownership of an undivided interest held in common with all of the other owners of the dwelling units contained in a community housing development, and as further defined under the Unit Ownership Act, Chapter 825 of the Connecticut General Statutes. 
2.24 - Cone of Depression: 
A three dimensional conical cavity produced in a water table by a pumping well. 
2.25 - Convalescent and Nursing Homes: 
A building or group of buildings intended and designed solely for the temporary care of the aged or infirm with full-time medical staff. Accessory uses to convalescent and nursing homes include child day care centers and adult day care center, as defined in these regulations. 
2.26 - Conversion Condominium: 
A change in the type of ownership of a parcel or parcels of real property, together with the existing attached, detached, semi-detached and/or multi-family dwellings and any accessory structures, to that defined as a community housing development regardless of the present or prior use of such land and structures and whether substantial improvements have been made or are to be made to such structures. 
2.27 - Cooperative Unit: 
A housing unit where the mortgage on the unit is held by a nonprofit sponsor and the individual members qualify by acquiring a share in the cooperative as well as residing in the unit. 
2.28 - County Soil and Water Conservation District: 
The Tolland County Soil and Water Conservation District established under subsection (a) of Section 22a-315 of the General Statutes. 
2.29 - All Day Care services shall be registered with the State and shall include: 
2.29.1  Adult Day Care: A service which provides a program of supplemental care to adults outside of their own residences on a regular basis for a part of the twenty four hours in one or more days of the week. 
2.29.2  A " child day care center " which offers or provides a program of supplementary care to more than twelve related or unrelated children outside their own homes on a regular basis for a part of the twenty-four hours in one or more days in the week. 
2.29.3  A " family day care home " which consists of a private family home caring for not more than six children, including the provider's own children not in school full time, where the children are cared for not less than three nor more than twelve hours during a twenty-four hour period and where care is given on a regularly recurring basis. During the regular school year, a maximum of three additional children who are in school full time, including the provider's own children, shall be permitted, except that if the provider has more than three children who are in school full time, all of the provider's children shall be permitted. 
2.29.4  A " group day care home " which offers or provides a program of supplementary care to not less than seven or more than twelve related or unrelated children on a regular basis for a part of the twenty-four hours in one or more days in the week. 
2.30 - Developable Acreage: 
The gross acreage of a parcel less that area designated as inland wetlands or floodplain, less areas with slopes in excess of 15%. 
2.31 - Development: 
Any construction or grading activities to improved or unimproved real estate. 
2.32 - Discharge: 
The spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying, or dumping of toxic or hazardous materials upon or into any land or waters in the Town of Vernon. Discharge includes, without limitations, leakage of such materials from failed or discarded containers or storage systems, and disposal of such materials into any, on site sewage disposal system, drywell, catch basin, or unapproved landfill. 
2.33 - District: 
A division of an area established by the provision of Section 4 of these regulations. 
2.34A - Disturbed Area: 
An area where the ground cover is destroyed or removed leaving the land subject to accelerated erosion. 
2.34B - Dumpster: 
A large metal bin for refuse designed to be hoisted onto a specially equipped truck for emptying or hauling away. 
2.35 - Dwelling: 
A structure or portion thereof designed exclusively for residency, but not including hotels, motels, lodging houses or mobile homes or structures solely for transient or overnight occupancy. 
2.36 - Dwelling Attached: 
A dwelling having any portion of two walls in common with an adjoining dwelling. 
2.37 - Dwelling, Multi-family: 
A structure or group of structures designed as an integrated development which is used or is intended to be used by three (3) or more families living independently of each other. 
2.38 - Dwelling, Multiple Single-family Dwellings: 
Three or more single family dwellings, owner occupied, attached by a common wall, extending from foundation to roof. 
2.39 - Dwelling, Seasonal: 
A structure designed and used for human occupancy of a seasonal or recreational nature, which shall not be occupied for a total of more than thirty (30) days between October 15th and the next following May 15th. 
2.40 - Dwelling, Semi-detached: 
A dwelling having any portion of one wall in common with an adjoining building. 
2.41 - Dwelling, Single-family: 
A structure used or intended to be used exclusively for occupancy by one family. 
2.42 - Dwelling, Two-family: 
A structure used or intended to be used exclusively for occupancy by two (2) families living independently of each other. 
2.43 - Dwelling Unit: 
One or more rooms providing complete living facilities for one family including equipment for cooling or provisions for same, and including room or rooms for living, sleeping, bathing, and eating. 
2.44 - Emergency Shelter for the Homeless: 
A structure or portion of a structure intended to provide temporary shelter to people on an emergency basis only. 
2.45 - Erosion: 
The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by water, wind, ice or gravity. 
2.46 - Deleted. 
2.47 - Family: 
Any number of individuals related by blood, marriage or adoption, living together as a single household unit, provided that a group of not more than seven (7) persons keeping house together but not necessarily related by blood or marriage or adoption may be considered a family. 
2.48 - Floor Area: 
The total area of all floors as compiled by measuring the outside horizontal dimensions of each floor. The required floor area shall not include the basement, attic, open or screened porch, breezeway or garage. 
2.49 - Frontage: 
The distance measured along a public street right-of-way between side lot lines or private streets within a mobile home park. 
2.50 - Fur-bearing Animals: 
Mammals that bear hairy coats or pelts of a commercially desired quality including, but not limited to; rabbits, foxes, mink, muskrats, raccoon, and beaver. 
2.51 - Garden Center: 
An establishment where horticultural products are sold for both indoor and outdoor use, including related dry goods to beautify the home or landscape, but not including an establishment where internal combustion wheeled equipment is sold and/or serviced. 
2.52 - Grading: 
Any excavating, grubbing, filling (including hydraulic fill) or stockpiling of earth materials or any combination thereof, including the land in its excavated or filled condition. 
2.53 - Greenhouse: 
An enclosure used for the cultivation or protection of plants. 
2.54 - Ground Water: 
All the water found beneath the surface of the ground. In this regulation, the term refers to the slowly moving subsurface water present in aquifers and recharge areas. 
2.55 - Hazardous Material: 
See Section 2.129 Toxic or Hazardous Materials. 
2.55A - Historic District (use districts): 
Unique and distinctive areas in the Town of Vernon, which contribute significantly to the overall character and identity of the Town and are worthy of preservation and protection. Some of these districts contain designated Historic Districts while some of the others contain buildings and resources, which may have sufficient historical and architectural or cultural significance for future designation. 
2.55B - Historic District, Local: 
A defined area established by the Town of Vernon to protect distinctive and significant characteristics of an area and encourage modifications to existing buildings, structures, and other resources, and designs for new buildings, structures, and other resources that are compatible with the areas historic distinctiveness. 
2.55C - Historic District, National Register: 
A defined area accepted by the State Historic Preservation Office and the National Park Service by being placed on the Nation's official list of cultural resources worthy of protection as authorized under the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966. Properties listed in this district have been identified as part of a historic and/or archeological resource. A National Register District will include sites buildings, structures and other resources, which collectively are significant in American history, architecture, archeology, engineering and culture. 
2.56 - Home Based Business: 
a commercial venture operated within and/or from a principal dwelling as an accessory and subordinate use by one or more occupants of the dwelling, and further classified as: 
Minor: a home based business which presents no visible evidence of its existence and has no discernible impact on neighboring properties. 
Major - Type 1: a home based business which is visibly evident to passersby and to neighboring residents and which may have some impact on the immediate neighborhood by virtue of its operation, but which does not rely on customer trade at the dwelling or premises. 
Major - Type 2: a home based business which relies on customer trade at the dwelling or premises. 
2.57 - Hospital: 
An institution licensed by the State of Connecticut as a hospital, which renders all customary and necessary functions including but not limited to both in and out patient medical and surgical care, laboratory and diagnostic services, emergency room services, offices for administrative and staff personnel, leased offices to physicians and other medical care providers, maintenance, and engineering facilities, parking spaces, food service and retail gift shop for the primary use of hospital patients, staff and visitors, accommodations for transportation of patients both by helicopter and ground transport and such other uses of the facility which are related to and necessary for the efficient operation of the facility. 
2.58 - Hotel: 
A building providing lodging for persons with or without meals, and intended for the accommodation of transients and so designed that normal access and egress are controlled from a central point. 
2.59 - Household Pet: 
Any domestic animal kept for pleasure rather than utility or profit which is normally kept within a residence and includes, among others, dogs, cats, gerbils, guinea pigs, hamsters, reptiles, birds, turtles, and tropical fish. 
2.60 - Impervious Surface: 
A paved surface, building or other structure, which does not allow water or other liquids to penetrate to the ground below. 
2.61A - Inspection: 
The periodic review of all aspects of a development. 
2.61B - Kennel: 
A facility, whether a building or outdoor area, for the keeping, boarding, care, training, or grooming of dogs or cats: 
2.61B.1  Commercial Kennel: A facility that keeps, boards, cares for, trains, or grooms dogs or cats for a fee or is operated as an accessory use to a business providing animal care services. 
2.61B.2  Domestic Kennel: A facility accommodating domestic pets as an accessory use to a residence, when the dogs or cats are owned by the occupant(s) of the residence and a commercial enterprise is not being conducted. 
2.62 - Landscaped Buffer Strip: 
A required landscaped strip which functions to provide a barrier to sound, vision, odors, artificial lighting, etc., in accordance with Section 9 of this ordinance. 
2.63 - Leachable Waste: 
Waste materials including solid wastes, sludge, and agricultural wastes that are capable of releasing water-borne contaminants to the surrounding environment. 
2.64 - Livestock: 
Any hoofed animal including cattle, sheep, goats, swine or equine raised for domestic or commercial use. 
2.65 - Lot or Parcel: 
A parcel of land in single ownership defined by metes, bounds or boundary lines in a recorded deed or shown on a recorded plan or plot with frontage and access on a public street. A parcel of land on which a principal structure, building or buildings and its accessories are placed or could be placed together with the required area and yards. A lot may or may not be the land shown as a lot on a duly recorded plot. 
2.66 - Lot, Corner: 
A lot at the intersection of two (2) or more streets. The rear yard shall be deemed to be opposite the portion of the lot having the least frontage. 
2.67 - Lot, Coverage: 
The area of a lot covered by impervious surface including but not limited to buildings and parking areas. 
2.68 - Lot, Depth: 
The distance measured from the lot frontage to the rear lot line without crossing any other lot lines. 
2.69 - Lot Line: 
The established line between lots or between a lot and a street. 
2.70 - Lot Line, Front: 
The boundary of a lot which abuts an existing or dedicated public street. 
2.71 - Lot Line, Rear: 
The line dividing one lot from other lots, being the boundary of a lot which is opposite or approximately opposite the front lot line. In the case of corner lots, the rear lot line shall be opposite the position of the lot having the least frontage. 
2.72 - Lot Line, Side: 
Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line. 
2.73 - Lot, Rear: 
Any lot which has less than 51 feet of frontage on a public or private street in a mobile home park, has at least 1.25 times the minimum required lot area (including the access strip) for the zone in which it is located and has less than the required lot width at any point within the fifty feet of the lot frontage. 
2.74 - Lot Width: 
The distance between the side lot lines measured to the side lot lines at the building line or setback line whichever is less restrictive. Where there is only one side lot line, lot width shall be measured between such lot line and the opposite lot line. 
2.74A - Town LID Manual: 
the Town of Vernon Low Impact Development Stormwater Quality Manual adopted by the Planning and Zoning Commission February 21, 2013, as may be amended. 
2.75 - Massage: 
Means the systematic and scientific manipulation and treatment of the soft tissues of the body, by use of pressure, friction, stroking, percussion, kneading, vibration by manual or mechanical means, range of motion and nonspecific stretching. Massage therapy may include the use of oil, ice, hot and cold packs, tub, shower, stream, dry heat, or cabinet baths for the purpose of, but not limited to, maintaining good health and establishing and maintaining good physical and mental condition. Massage therapy does not encompass diagnosis, the prescribing of drugs or medicines, spinal or other joint manipulations, nor any service or procedure for which a license to practice medicine, chiropractic, naturopathy, physical therapy, or podiatry is required by law. 
2.76 - Massage Area or Establishment: 
Any area or establishment by whatever name called, where any person engages in or carries on or permits to be engaged in or carries on or permits to be engaged in or carried on any of the activities of massage, as defined in the practice of massage therapy. 
2.77 - Massage Therapist: 
Massage Practitioner, Massagist, Masseur, and Masseuse: Any person licensed by the State under CGS20-206b, who for any consideration whatsoever, engages in the practice of massage working in accordance with the laws of the State of Connecticut and holds a valid license to practice massage therapy. 
2.78 - Mining of Land: 
The removal of geologic materials such as topsoil, sand, gravel, or bedrock. 
2.79 - Mobile Home: 
Means a manufactured detached residential unit having three- dimensional components which are intrinsically mobile with or without a wheeled chassis or a detached residential unit built on or after June 15, 1976 in accordance with federal manufactured home construction and safety standards and, in either case, containing sleeping accommodations, a flush toilet, tub or shower bath, kitchen facilities and plumbing and electrical connections for attachment to outside systems, and designed for long-term occupancy and to be placed on rigid supports at the site where it is to be occupied as a residence, complete and ready for occupancy; except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly operations and connection to utilities systems. 
2.80 - Mobile Home Park: 
A parcel of land, which has been planned for the placement of two (2) or more mobile homes. 
2.81 - Mobile Home Site: 
A designated site within a mobile home park for the exclusive use of the occupants of a single mobile home. 
2.82 - Motel: 
A building or group of buildings providing lodging for persons with or without meals and intended for the accommodation of transients and so designed to have private outside entrances for each room or suite of rooms. 
2.83 - Nursery: 
An area where trees, shrubs, or plants are grown for transplanting, for use as stocks for budding and grafting, or for sale. 
2.84 - Open Space: 
Land protected from development by legislation, dedication, conservation or other legal means, which shall be used only for recreational, conservation, educational and agricultural purposes. 
2.85 - Deleted. 
2.86A - Poultry: 
Domestic fowls such as chickens, turkeys or ducks raised for flesh or eggs. 
2.86B - Portable Storage Container (Temporary): 
A transportable unit designed and used primarily for temporary storage of building materials (before they are utilized for building purposes), household goods, and other such materials for use on a limited basis (typically known as PODS, MODS etc.), please also see 2.104B Shipping/Cargo Storage Container. 
2.87 - Deleted. 
2.88 - Professional Office: 
The office of a physician, surgeon or dentist, provided there are no hospital facilities in connection therewith. The office or studio of an architect, artist, musician, and other offices, which in the judgment of the Planning and Zoning Commission are similar in nature. 
2.89 - Public Institution: 
Any church building, library or charitable institution which is supported by public or private funds, or any public or parochial school, and any federally, state or municipally owned park or open space land. 
2.90 - Public Utility Structure: 
A structure utilized by an organization such as a telephone company that provides a public service under governmental regulation. Public utility structures shall not include poles, traffic control devices or telephone or electrical switching equipment of less than 50 square feet. 
2.91 - Recharge Areas: 
Areas that collect precipitation or surface water and transmit it into the cone of depression of existing or potential water supply wells. Primary recharge areas are mapped as unconsolidated aquifer areas surrounding existing or potential water supply well sites. Secondary recharge area is till and bedrock areas adjacent to the primary areas, which contribute stream flow to streams or undefined watercourses or groundwater flowing through or onto the primary, recharge areas. 
2.92 - Redemption Center for Used Beverage Containers: 
A facility wholly within a building or complex of buildings at which the public submits used beverage containers, such as bottles and cans, to receive refund or rebate of deposits paid on the containers when the beverage was purchased. 
2.93 - Resident Facilities for Special Education: 
A residential living facility for children having been classified by their school district Planning and Placement Teams as in need of Special Education under Connecticut General Statutes, Sections 10-76a through 10-76q inclusive, and the appropriate staff. Which facility shall be operated by a Regional Educational Service Center as defined and authorized by Connecticut General Statutes, Sections 10-66a through 10-66m inclusive, and shall be operated in accordance with the regulations and licensing requirements promulgated for such a program by the Connecticut Department of Children and Youth Services. 
2.94 - Restaurant: 
2.94.1.1  Restaurant, Full Service: A full service restaurant is any establishment whose principal business is the sale of foods and beverages to the customer in a ready-to-consume state where customers are provided with an individual menu and are served their foods and beverages by a restaurant employee at the same table at which their foods and beverages are consumed, and if permitted to serve alcoholic beverages under Section 17 of these regulations, does so under either a restaurant permit, a restaurant permit for beer only, or a restaurant permit for wine and beer only, as said permits are defined in the Liquor Control Act, Chapter 545 of the General Statutes, as amended. 
2.94.1.2  Restaurant, Non Full Service: A non full service restaurant is any establishment whose principal business is the sale of foods and beverages to the customer in a ready-to-consume state where customers are served their foods and beverages by a restaurant employee and their foods and beverages can be consumer on the premises. Alcoholic beverages are not permitted in a non-full service restaurant. 
2.95 - Retail Sales: 
The sale of commodities or goods such as food, drugs, clothing, jewelry, hardware, stationery, household items, appliances or furnishings, in small quantities to ultimate consumers, but does not include restaurants. 
2.96 - Re-use, Adaptive: 
The remediation, redevelopment, rehabilitation, renovation, modernization, and conversion of an existing obsolete and deteriorated building or complex based upon a comprehensive site and facility plan to accommodate a change of use, which may include mixed-use, that is designed in relation to the unique characteristics of the site and structures to conform with contemporary building codes, to offer modern amenities, and to be economically viable. 
2.97 - Deleted. 
2.98 - Sanitary Waste Water: 
Waste waters arising from ordinary domestic water use as from toilets, sinks, bathing facilities, etc., and containing such concentrations and types of pollutants as to be considered normal wastes. 
2.99 - School: 
An institution of formalized instruction, given by state certified instructors who follow prescribed curriculum. The institution must be licensed by a governing body and the instruction must ultimately lead to a formal graduation and granting of a diploma or degree. 
2.100 - Deleted. 
2.101 - Sediment: 
Solid material, either mineral or organic that is in suspension, is transported or has been moved from its site of origin by erosion. 
2.102 - Seller of Alcoholic Beverages: 
An establishment which sells alcoholic beverages as defined in the Connecticut Liquor Control Act for consumption off the premises, including but not limited to such uses as package stores, pharmacies with an alcoholic beverage permit, and grocery and convenience stores with a beer permit. 
2.103 - Separating Distance: 
The straight line measured from the building or enclosure within a building housing a regulated use to the nearest point of a building or enclosure within a building housing another regulated use. 
2.104A - Server of Alcoholic Beverages: 
An establishment, which serves alcoholic beverages as defined in the Connecticut Liquor Control Act for consumption on the premises, including but not limited to such uses as restaurants, bars, grills, taverns, and clubs. 
2.104B - Shipping/Cargo Storage Container: 
An industrial, standardized (typically 8ft x 20ft or 8ft x 40ft) reusable portable container that was originally, specifically or formally designed for use in the packing, shipping or transportation of goods or commodities, and designed to be mounted on rail car, truck or ship. 
2.105 - Sign: 
Any sign or device and all parts thereof which are used to advertise products, goods, services or otherwise promote the sale or rental of objects or identify objects for sale or for rent or the occupancy or use of any land, structure or building. Excludes interior signs visible from the exterior. For the purpose of this definition and these regulations, the word "sign" does not include the flag, pennant, or insignia of any nation, state, city or other political unit, or official traffic control signs, or notices required by law. 
2.106 - Sign, Advertising: 
2.106.1  Off-premises, Billboard, Outdoor Advertising: A sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service, or activity which is generally sold, offered or conducted elsewhere than upon the premises where such sign is located. 
2.106.2  Message Board: A sign that identifies and/or promotes the sale of specific products or services and/or sales prices; a sign that provides sales information about a business, product, or service; a sign that presents information in addition to the identification, location, and nature of a business at a specific location. 
2.106.3  Electronic Message Board (EMB): A message board that displays messages by way of electrically illuminated lights against a contrasting background whose message may be changed at intervals that are preset by means of electronic programming. 
2.106.4  Menu Board: A sign that identifies specific products or services that me be ordered and ordered and obtained at a retail facility, including sales at a service window. 
2.107 - Sign, Face: 
A sign face is a plane defined by the continuous perimeter enclosing the extreme limits of the message or messages of the sign, including other representation or material or color lying within said plan that draws attention to a message or messages. However, such perimeter shall not include any structural elements lying outside the limits of such a sign and not forming an integral part of the display. 
2.108 - Sign, Double Faced: 
A sign with two faces, neither face exceeding the maximum area allowed for the district in which it is located, and where the faces are mounted back to back not more than 18" apart and parallel. 
2.109 - Sign, Multiple Faced: 
A sign with two or more faces, except double-faced sign. 
2.110 - Sign, Single Faced: 
A sign with one face. 
2.111 - Sign, Gross Area Of: 
The "Gross Area" of a sign shall be defined and measured as follows: 
2.111.1  Sign, Single Faced: The Gross Area shall be the area of the single face. 
2.111.2  Sign, Double Faced: The Gross Area shall be the area of largest face or the area of one face if both faces have equal area. 
2.111.3  Sign, Multiple Faced: The Gross Ares shall be the confined area of all faces. 
2.112 - Sign, Directional: 
A sign on the premises indicating the use or purpose of a building, doorway, or area; or signs indicating danger or whether or not a facility is open for business. 
2.113 - Sign, Identification: 
A sign on the premises bearing the name of a subdivision, the name of a group housing project or of a school, college, park, church building, or other public or quasi-public facility, or a professional or firm nameplate, or the name of the person, firm or corporation occupying the premises, but bearing information pertaining only to the premises on which such sign is located. Excludes interior signs visible from the exterior. 
2.114 - Deleted. 
2.115 - Sign, Temporary: 
A sign intended to advertise special events, products or services on a temporary basis. Temporary signs shall not include "For Sale" or "For Rent" real estate signs, nor signs erected to advertise non-commercial community or civic projects or construction projects. 
2.116 - Soil: 
Any unconsolidated mineral or organic material of any origin. 
2.117 - Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plan: 
A scheme that minimizes soil erosion and sedimentation resulting from development and includes, but is not limited to, a map and narrative. 
2.118 - Solid Waste: 
Useless, unwanted, or discarded solid material with insufficient liquid content to be free flowing. This includes, but is not limited to, rubbish, garbage, and scrap materials, junk, refuse, inert fill material, and landscape refuse. 
2.119 - Stratified Drift: 
Means predominantly sorted sediment laid down by or in melt water from glaciers and includes sand, gravel, silt, and clay arranged in layers. 
2.120 - Street, Private: 
Any non public street, avenue, boulevard, road, land, highway or other way open to public vehicular traffic and providing a principal means of access to abutting property and not owned or maintained by the Town of Vernon or the State of Connecticut. Streets proposed as part of a subdivision approved by the Vernon Planning or Planning and Zoning Commission and recorded in the Town Clerk's office, shall become a public street upon acceptance by the Vernon Town Council. 
2.121 - Street, Public: 
Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, land, highway, or other way open to public vehicular traffic and providing a means of access (direct or indirect) to abutting property and owned and/or maintained by the State of Connecticut or the Town of Vernon or given as an easement to the Town of Vernon. A public street shall include the entire right-of-way. 
2.122 - Structure or Building, Accessory: 
Any structure or building which is unattached from, and is incidental or subordinate to, and customarily in connection with, the principal structure or use and located on the same lot with such principal building or use. 
2.123 - Structure or Building: 
Anything constructed, erected on or attached to a fixed location on or below the ground to give support, provide shelter or satisfy other purposes. 
2.124 - Structure or Building, Nonconforming: 
Any structure or building which is nonconforming by reason of inadequate lot width, lot area, yards or floor area in relation to the requirements of Section 11 of this ordinance. 
2.125 - Deleted. 
2.126 - Till: 
Unconsolidated, unsorted material composed of a mixture of rock sizes ranging from clay to boulders that was deposited by glacial ice. 
2.127 - Tower: 
Means a structure that is intended to support equipment used to receive and/or transmit electromagnetic waves. Design examples of a tower included (a) self- supporting lattice, (b) guyed, and (c) monopole. 
2.128 - Tower Height: 
Means a distance from the ground elevation of such tower to the top most point of the tower including any antenna or other appurtenances. 
2.129 - Toxic or Hazardous Materials: 
Any substance or mixture of such physical, chemical or infectious characteristics as to pose a significant, actual or potential hazard to water supplies, or other hazard to human health, if such substance or mixture were discharged into land or waters of this town. Toxic or hazardous materials include, without limitation, organic chemicals, petroleum products, heavy metals, radioactive or infectious wastes, acids, and alkalis, and include products such as pesticides, herbicides, solvents and thinners, unless and except to the extent that anyone using such products can demonstrate the contrary to the satisfaction of the Commission. Waste generated by the following activities, without limitation, are presumed to be toxic or hazardous unless and except to the extent that anyone engaging in such an activity can demonstrate the contrary to the satisfaction of the Commission: 
• Airplane, boat and motor vehicle service and repair. 
• Chemical and bacteriological laboratory operation. 
• Cabinet making. 
• Dry Cleaning. 
• Electronic circuit assembly. 
• Metal plating, finishing and polishing. 
• Motor and machinery service and assembly. 
• Painting, wood preserving and furniture stripping. 
• Pesticide and herbicide application. 
• Photographic processing and printing. 
2.130 - Upland: 
Ground elevated above the lowlands along rivers and between hills. 
2.131 - Use: 
The specific purpose, for which land or a building is designed, arranged, intended or for which it is or may be occupied or maintained. The term "permitted use" or its equivalent shall not be deemed to include any nonconforming use. 
2.132 - Use, Accessory: 
A subordinate, secondary, or incidental activity or use of land or building, when the activity or use is customary, associated, complimentary, or inherent to the permitted use on the same parcel. 
2.133 - Use, Nonconforming: 
A legally existing use of land or building established prior to the enactment of this ordinance which fails to comply with the regulations set forth in this ordinance applicable to the zoning district in which such use is located. 
2.134 - Use, Permitted: 
Any use of land or building, which is specifically permitted within a specific zoning district under the provisions of this ordinance. 
2.135 - Yard, Depth or Width of: 
The depth of front and rear yards and the wide of side yards shall be measured perpendicularly to the respective lot lines. 
2.136 - Yards, Front: 
An area per Section 2.140 between the building, structure or accessory structure and the front lot line extending the full width of the lot or in the case of a corner lot or a through lot, extending along all streets. 
2.137 - Yards, Rear: 
An area per Section 2.140 between the building, structure or accessory structure and the rear lot line, extending the full width of the lot. 
2.138 - Yards, Required Front, Rear or Side: 
So much of the front, rear or side yard, as is required by the applicable provisions of this bylaw. 
2.139 - Yards, Side: 
An area per Section 2.140 between the building, structure or accessory structure and a side lot line, extending from the front yard to the rear yard. 
2.140 - Area and Yard Requirements: 
Area and yards are intended to establish the placement of buildings, structures or accessory structures (including roofs, overhangs, and canopies, but excluding chimneys and uncovered steps) and the dimensions of the lot upon which they are to be built. 
SECTION 3 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

3.1 - Compliance with Regulations: 
No land, building or premises or part thereof shall hereafter be used and no building or part thereof or other structure shall be constructed, reconstructed, extended or enlarged, moved or altered, except in conformity with these regulations. 
3.2 - Accessory Uses: 
Accessory uses, as defined in Section 2.132, are permitted on the same parcel as the permitted use, provided they are not located within the required yards and otherwise comply with the Zoning Regulations. 
3.3 - Accessory Building: 
3.3.1  Not for Motor Vehicles: Accessory buildings, as defined in Section 2.132, that are not for the parking, storage, repair, or maintenance of motor vehicles are permitted on the same parcel as the permitted use, provided they are not located within the required yards, do not exceed the building height requirement of the zoning district, do not exceed four hundred square feet (400 sf) in floor area, are not used for human habitation or housing of animals, and otherwise comply with the Zoning Regulations. 
3.3.2  For Motor Vehicles: Accessory buildings, as defined in Section 2.132, that are designed to be used for motor vehicle (including motor cycle) parking or storage with entrance/exit ways able to accommodate an average size passenger car, but are not used for the repair of motor vehicles, are permitted on the same parcel as the permitted use, provided they are not located within the required yards, do not exceed the building height requirements of the zoning district. 
3.3.3  Lawn and garden equipment used for the maintenance of the property on which the accessory building is located are not considered motor vehicles as Zoning Regulation Section 3.4 applies to the use of accessory buildings. 
3.4 - Collection and Disposal of Storm Drainage: 
Proper provision shall be made for collection and disposal of storm water from roofs and parking areas through a pipe system connected to existing storm drains or carried to a natural watercourse or to an on-site area approved by the Town Engineer in compliance with the recommendations of the latest edition of the "Stormwater Quality Manual" of the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection (DEP). 
3.5 - Common Wall: 
Abutting property owners in Commercial zoning districts may join together to construct a structure with a common wall along a common property line subject to the approval of a Special Permit by the Vernon Planning Commission. 
3.6 - Debris Resulting from Catastrophe: 
The site of structures damaged by fire, explosion or other catastrophe must be cleared of debris within sixty-days of the initial damage. The Zoning Commission may, upon written request of the owner, grant an extension of time; provided, however, that such extension does not exceed sixty-days. 
3.7 - Obstructions at Roadway Intersections: 
No fence, wall, hedge, shrubbery, tree canopy or other obstruction to sight distance vision shall be placed or allowed to be placed at roadway intersections, private access road intersections, and driveway curb cuts. The minimum sight distance from the roadway intersection, private access road intersection or driveway curb cut shall be based on the posted speed for the approach roadway being intersected as indicated below. If the speed limit for the approach roadway is not posted, the sight distance shall be based on a speed limit of 30 miles per hour (MPH). 
Posted Speed 
Limit Minimum Sight 
Distance 30 MPH 350 feet 35 MPH 425 feet 40 MPH 475 feet  
The sight distance shall be based on the front of the approach vehicle being ten (10) feet back from the extended curb line of the intersecting roadway. The Town Engineer or his representative may vary the above minimum sight distances on Town roads when he/she deems it necessary and on State roads in consultation with the Connecticut Department of Transportation (CT DOT). 
3.8 - Private Roads and Parking Areas: 
Where the permitted use of a property includes roads and parking areas to be retained under private ownership, the maintenance of such roads and parking areas shall be the sole responsibility of the owner of record, and proper maintenance shall be a condition of compliance with these regulations. 
3.9 - Reserved. 
3.10 - Reduction of Lot Area or Dimensions: 
No lot shall be diminished, nor shall any yard, court or any other area be reduced except in conformity with these regulations. No existing parcel of land shall be hereafter divided in such a manner that any portion of the parcel or any building thereon is not in conformance with these regulations. 
3.11 - Required Lot Frontage on Public Streets: 
No building shall be built on any lot unless such lot meets the definition of lot and has the required lot width as defined in Section 2 and has access to and a frontage of at least twenty-five (25) feet on a public street. 
3.12 - Storage of Trailers and Boats: 
3.12.1  During the period from November 1 to and including March 31 (the seasonal storage period), camp trailers, utility trailers, travel trailers, recreational vehicles, boat trailers, and boats owned by the occupant of the premises zoned for residential use shall be stored behind the plane of the front wall of the principal dwelling and not in the required side or rear yards, notwithstanding the presence of a driveway within a side or rear yard, and shall not be inhabited for sleeping purposes. 
3.12.2  If there is inadequate space at the side or rear of the dwelling to seasonally store a trailer, boat, or recreational vehicle without encroaching on the required side or rear yard, a zoning permit shall first be obtained from the Zoning Enforcement Officer before any trailer, boat, or recreational vehicle may be seasonally stored in a required side or rear yard. 
3.12.3  To accommodate seasonal storage a surface shall be established in accordance with section 3.15 sufficient to envelope the trailer, recreational vehicle, and/or boat a minimum of one foot (1') beyond the largest dimensions of the trailer, recreational vehicle, and/or boat. All open portions of boats and trailers shall be covered to prevent entry during periods of seasonal storage. 
3.12.4  During the period from April 1 to and including October 31, trailers, boats, and recreational vehicles may be parked in an established driveway on the property occupied by the owner(s) of the trailer, boat, or recreational vehicle, provided no part of such trailer, boat, or recreational vehicle shall extend over a property line or violate section 3.7 of these regulations. The parking of any such trailer, boat, or recreational vehicle before or after these dates shall require the issuance of a zoning permit by the Zoning Enforcement Officer. 
3.13 - Swimming Pools: 
Swimming pools are permitted as any accessory use in residential districts subject to Section 429.83 of the State of Connecticut Basic Building Code. 
3.14 - Storage of Waste and Refuse: 
In all zones, the temporary storage of waste, refuse, and debris shall be within a building, or within a solid enclosure that does not encroach upon the required yards and which is provided with a visual screen from adjoining property and public streets. 
3.15 - Surfacing: 
In all zones, all required parking, driveways, loading areas, motor vehicle storage, and display lots and access driveways shall have an adequate paved or alternate surface approved by the Town Engineer capable of allowing free and safe movement of all vehicles. Permeable pavement may be used for surfacing. If used it shall be designed in accordance with the Town LID Manual. 
3.16 - Radioactive Materials: 
The dumping, burial or otherwise disposal of radioactive material is not permitted in any zoning district under any circumstances. 
3.17 - Outdoor Motion Picture Theaters: 
The erection, operation or any other use of outdoor motion picture theaters is not permitted in any zoning district under any circumstance. 
3.18 - Building Above or Below Center Line of Road: 
3.18.1  Prior to the issuance of a building permit for construction of a house, commercial building, accessory building, or any lot or parcel of land with the top of foundation more than five (5) feet above or below the center line grade of the road opposite the midpoint of the front foundation wall, a detailed site plan showing the existing and proposed topography, driveways, storm drainage, provisions for potable water supply and sewage disposal, location of existing and proposed structures, elevation, floor plans and any other information as may be required by the Town Engineer or Building Department, shall be submitted to the Building Department for approval by the Building Official. 
3.18.1.1  No driveway shall exceed 14% at any point except as proposed in Driveway Ordinance #142 for grade between gutter and street line. 
3.18.2  Retaining Wall - when required. When there is danger of dirt fill washing or sliding from the property to be filled onto other adjoining lots of land, a retaining wall shall be built and a plan showing construction and size of wall shall be submitted to the building department for approval before any work is started. 
3.18.3  Dust Control. When dirt has been brought in or taken out and left in such a manner that there is danger of dust arising from said land, some form of grass or rye seed shall be planted or some form of chemical used to lay said dust. 
3.19 - Roadside Selling: 
The sale of commodities or goods, but not services, which takes place out of the public right-of-way in an area immediately adjacent to the right-of-way and within the required setbacks on a property. 
3.19.1  Roadside selling activities may not violate Section 3.7 of these regulations. 
3.19.2  Roadside selling is permitted in all zoning districts by special exception from the Zoning Board of Appeals except as outlined in Sections 4.9, 4.10, 4.17, 4.20, and 4.21. Homegrown vegetables may be sold without a special exception. 
3.19.3  The seller of the goods or commodities shall be the owner of the property or have a lease from the property owner of at least thirty-days duration. 
3.19.4  Carnivals, temporary alcoholic beverages sales and similar events shall be considered roadside selling and are subject to the provisions of Section 3.19. 
3.19.5  The total area involved in any roadside selling activity shall not exceed 200 square feet. 
3.20 - In all zones which permit single or two family dwellings, 
excluding special permits issued for assisted living facilities or housing for the elderly, only one principal building or structure and any accessory building shall be permitted on a lot. 
3.21 - Vacancy Rate: 
At least once a year, the Town Planner shall establish a town wide vacancy rate. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall accept or reject the Town Planner's vacancy rate. 
3.22 - Deleted. 
3.23 - Radio and Television Masts and Towers In Residential Zones: 
Any mast or tower in excess of fifty (50) feet in height in a residential zone or any mast or tower permitted by variance or pre-existing use to be operated for financial gain in a residential zone shall be subject to approval of a Special permit by the Vernon Planning and Zoning Commission. 
3.24 - Burial of Materials: 
During construction, reconstruction, alterations, etc., there shall be no on-site burial of building materials or debris of any kind. 
3.25 - Sidewalks: 
Sidewalks shall be installed for all new developments in all areas, unless waived by a three-quarters vote of all members of the Commission. Sidewalks and granite curbs shall be installed in those areas designated as "Sidewalk Policy Areas," which is made part of these regulations. Alternative curb designs may be used for the purpose of managing stormwater in accordance with the Town LID Manual. For the purposes of managing stormwater, sidewalks should be constructed of pervious materials or be graded to other permeable surfaces whenever practicable. 
3.26 - Re-use, Adaptive: 
An Adaptive Re-use proposal, as defined in Section 2.96, may be approved by special permit for the redevelopment of an existing obsolete mill or former mill building or complex or building that is either (1) recorded as an architecturally or historically significant site or structure in the National Registry of Historic Places or (2) has been designated as an architecturally or historically significant site or structure by the Connecticut State Office of Historic Preservation or (3) is a structure constructed no later than 1910 which contains a minimum of 5,000 square feet (5,000 S.F.) of gross floor area, excluding attics, basements and porches, located in the Town of Vernon Historical Districts as shown on a map entitled "Town of Vernon Historical District and Properties" created by the Town of Vernon GIS Department and Community/Economic Development (CED) Coordinator, dated January 2009 that requires remediation, redevelopment, rehabilitation, renovation, modernization, and/or conversion based upon a comprehensive site plan to accommodate a change of use, which may include mixed-use, that is designed in relation to the unique characteristics of the site and structure(s) in order to preserve the historically significant structure or site or to prevent the deterioration or destruction of the site or structure due to functional obsolescence. The special permit for Adaptive Re-use may be granted for a use or combination of uses based upon an approved site plan of development, architectural plans, and specific uses of buildings and activities within buildings to assure the preservation of the property and the successful re-use of the site and structures without conflicts of uses within the complex or with the surrounding area. 
3.27 - Drive-up Service Windows: 
Approval of a drive-up service window, in zoning districts in which allowed, requires approval of both a Site Plan of development and Special Permit by the Planning & Zoning Commission (PZC) and may not be approved administratively as a "Minor Modification." 
3.28 - Outdoor Wood Burning Furnaces: 
As allowed by special permit in Sections 4.4 and 4.5, and regulated by CGS 22a-174k, Outdoor Wood Burning Furnaces (OWF) must operate only on wood that has not been chemically treated; must be located not less than 200 feet from the nearest residence not being served by the unit; and must have a chimney that is more than the height of the roof peaks of residences located within 500 feet of the OWF, provided the chimney height is not more than 55 feet. Prior to the installation of an OWF, the applicant shall submit to the Town of Vernon Zoning Enforcement Officer a map drawn by a licensed land survey or professional engineer showing vertical and horizontal measurements to all residences within the 500 foot radius required by law in order to demonstrate compliance with CGS 22a-174k. 
3.29 - Home Based Businesses. 
Home based businesses shall be permitted in accordance with the following requirements: 
3.29.1  Minor home based businesses shall be permitted in any conforming residential dwelling, including condominiums and multifamily developments, in Use Districts 4.1 through 4.9, 4.15 through 4.17, and 4.23 upon issuance of a zoning permit in accordance with the following requirements: 
3.29.1.1  The home based business shall not occupy more than 25 % of the habitable floor area of the dwelling and shall be conducted entirely within the principal dwelling; 
3.29.1.2  The home based business shall not change the exterior residential character of the dwelling, building, or premises in any manner and shall not rely on a separate exterior entrance for exclusive access to the business space; 
3.29.1.3  No person other than resident(s) of the dwelling shall be employed on the premises in the conduct of the business; 
3.29.1.4  The home based business shall not generate any customer traffic to the dwelling or the premises; 
3.29.1.5  Deliveries of goods to the home based business shall be limited to passenger vehicles, mail carriers, and express carriers using step vans; deliveries shall be limited to the hours between 8:00 am and 6:00 pm; 
3.29.1.6  No parking shall be established beyond the normal parking demands for residential use of the premises in accordance with Section 12.1.7; 
3.29.1.7  The home based business shall not display or advertise on the premises any commodity or service for purchase, except that signage identifying the business shall be permitted in accordance with Section 16.2.1; 
3.29.1.8  No materials, products, or equipment for the home based business shall be stored outside of the space designated for the business in subsection 3.28.1.1, above; 
3.29.1.9  The home based business shall not create any noise, odor, dust, vibrations, smoke, gas fumes, radiation, electromagnetic interference, unusual lighting, or unsightly conditions on the premises discernible at the property lines; use and storage of hazardous materials in excess of quantities permitted in residential structures shall not be permitted; 
3.29.1.10  No commercial vehicles shall be parked or stored on the premises except as provided in section 12.3.11; 
3.29.1.11  A home based business, if granted a zoning permit, shall not constitute a vested right in the property; discontinuance of the business by virtue of property conveyance or other action shall extinguish the permit; 
3.29.1.12  The granting of a zoning permit for a home based business shall entitle the Zoning Enforcement Officer to make inspections of the home based business at least annually to verify compliance with the provisions of the permit; such inspections shall be performed during normal business hours by arrangement with the operator of the business. 
3.29.2  Major - Type 1 home based businesses shall be permitted on conforming parcels and within conforming structures in Use Districts 4.1 through 4.9, 4.15 through 4.17, and 4.23 upon approval of a site plan in accordance with Section 14, Site Plans, and the following requirements: 
3.29.2.1  The home based business shall not occupy more than 750 sq. ft. of floor area within the dwelling and/or within an accessory building on the premises; the floor area(s) intended for such use shall be indicated on floor plan(s) bearing room dimensions and floor areas and on the site plan; 
3.29.2.2  The home based business shall not change the exterior residential character of the dwelling or premises in any manner except that (1) a separate exterior entrance may be installed for exclusive access to the business space, and (2) an area may be established for the parking of commercial vehicles used in the business and employees vehicles, as limited in section 3.28.2.5, below; 
3.29.2.3  Not more than two persons other than resident(s) of the dwelling may be employed on the premises or start and finish their workday from the premises in the conduct of the business; 
3.29.2.4  The home based business shall not be of a nature that relies on or generates customer traffic to the dwelling or the premises; 
3.29.2.5  No commercial vehicles shall be parked or stored on the premises except as provided in section 12.3.11; 
3.29.2.5.1  Parking shall be provided for nonresident employees, if any, in addition to the normal parking demands for residential use of the premises; off-street parking for residential and home based business use of the premises shall be in accordance with the requirements of Sections 12.1.7 and 12.1.9; 
3.29.2.5.2  All parking of vehicles used by the home based business shall be located in the side or rear yard or, for a corner lot, in the innermost quadrant of the property, and shall be screened with fencing and/or vegetation of sufficient height and opacity to prevent viewing from neighboring properties and the street; parking for the home based business shall be shown on the site plan; 
3.29.2.6  The home based business shall not display or advertise on the premises any commodity or service for purchase, except that signage identifying the business shall be permitted in accordance with Section 16.2.1; 
3.29.2.7  No materials, products, equipment, or machinery used in the operation of the home based business shall be stored or operated on the premises outside of the space designated for the business in subsection 3.28.2.1, above; 
3.29.2.8  The home based business shall not create any noise, odor, dust, vibrations, smoke, gas fumes, radiation, electromagnetic interference, unusual lighting, or unsightly conditions on the premises; 
3.29.2.9  The following businesses shall not be permitted as a home based business: 
3.29.2.9.1  Repair and servicing of vehicles or heavy equipment; 
3.29.2.9.2  Manufacturing, except that which can reasonably be conducted in a home workshop or at a "kitchen table," such as computer assembly; 
3.29.2.9.3  Machine shop; 
3.29.2.9.4  Landscaping services; 
3.29.2.10  The Commission, in granting site plan approval for a home based business, may attach reasonable conditions with respect to hours of operation, deliveries and shipping, external lighting, landscaping and visual screening, means of access for pedestrian and vehicles, and environmental safeguards, both physical and operational. 
3.29.2.11  A home based business, if granted a zoning permit with site plan approval, shall not constitute a vested right in the property; discontinuance of the business by virtue of property conveyance or other action shall extinguish the permit. 
3.29.2.12  The granting of site plan approval for a home based business entitles the Zoning Enforcement Officer to make inspections of the home based business at least annually to verify compliance with the provisions of the permit; such inspections shall be performed during normal business hours or by arrangement with the operator of the business. 
3.29.3  Major - Type 2 home based businesses shall be permitted on conforming parcels and within conforming structures in Use Districts 4.1 through 4.9, 4.15 through 4.17, and 4.23 upon approval of a special permit and site plan in accordance with Sections 14, Site Plans, and Section 17.3, Special Permits, and the following requirements: 
3.29.3.1  Requirements listed for Major - Type 1 home based businesses under subsections 3.28.2.1 through 3.28.2.3 and 3.28.2.6 through 3.28.2.10 shall be applicable to Major - Type 2 home based businesses; 
3.29.3.2  With approval of a special permit and a site plan by the Commission, the home based business may be of a nature that relies on or generates customer traffic to the dwelling or the premises; the Commission may restrict the number of customers that patronize the home based business on a daily basis; 
3.29.3.3  No commercial vehicles shall be parked or stored on the premises except as provided in section 12.3.11; 
3.29.3.3.1  Parking shall be provided for nonresident employees, if any, and patrons in addition to the normal parking demands for residential use of the premises; off-street parking for residential and home based business use of the premises shall be in accordance with the requirements of Sections 12.1.7 and 12.1.9; 
3.29.3.3.2  All parking of vehicles used by the home based business shall be located in the side or rear yard or, for a corner lot, in the innermost quadrant of the property, and shall be screened with fencing and/or vegetation of sufficient height and opacity to prevent viewing from neighboring properties and the street; parking for the home based business shall be shown on the site plan; 
3.29.3.4  The Commission, in granting a special permit with site plan approval for a home based business, may attach reasonable conditions with respect to hours of operation, deliveries and shipping, external lighting, landscaping and visual screening, means of access for pedestrian and vehicles, and environmental safeguards, both physical and operational; the Commission may limit the duration of the special permit to a period of one or more years and require its renewal at such intervals as the Commission deems appropriate. 
3.29.3.5  A home based business, if granted a special permit with site plan approval, shall not be changed to another home based business without approval by the Commission of a new special permit and site plan therefor. 
3.29.3.6  The granting of a special permit with site plan approval for a home based business entitles the Zoning Enforcement Officer to make inspections of the home based business at least annually to verify compliance with the provisions of the permit; such inspections shall be performed during normal business hours or by arrangement with the operator of the business. 
SECTION 4 - USE DISTRICTS 
4.1 - RESIDENTIAL 10-SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL 

4.1.1 - Area and Yard Requirements: 
4.1.1.1  Minimum lot area: 10,000 square feet 
4.1.1.2  Minimum lot width: 80 feet 
4.1.1.3  Minimum front yard: 30 feet 
4.1.1.4  Minimum side yard: 10 feet 
4.1.1.5  Minimum rear yard: 20 feet 
4.1.1.6  Minimum floor area: 1,000 square feet 
4.1.1.7  Maximum building height; 35 feet (2 1/2 stories) 
4.1.1.8  Maximum lot coverage when not in an aquifer protection zone: 25% 
4.1.1.8.1  When in an aquifer protection zone, a special permit for increased lot coverage shall be required for any lot coverage exceeding 25 percent above and subject to Section 20.5. 
4.1.2 - Permitted Uses: 
4.1.2.1  Single-family dwellings. 
4.1.2.2  Two-family dwellings. 
4.1.2.3  Accessory uses customarily incidental to the above permitted uses, provided that such accessory use shall not include any activities conducted for gain. 
4.1.2.4  Signs subject to Section 16. 
4.1.2.5  Special Exceptions: The following uses may be permitted when granted a special exception by the Vernon Zoning Board of Appeals. 
4.1.2.5.1  Private non-profit clubs. 
4.1.3 - Special Permits: 
The following uses may be permitted when granted a Special Permit by the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
4.1.3.1  Professional office when located in the same building as a private residence. Not more than two (2) persons shall be engaged in such activity. Such offices shall not alter the essential residential character of the property. In the case of conversion of existing residential structures, said conversation shall not alter the residential character of the exterior of the building or increase the existing floor area of the building. 
4.1.3.2  Convalescent homes or nursing homes or assisted living facilities when connected to public water and sanitary sewer. 
4.1.3.3  Boarding houses. 
4.1.3.4  Funeral Homes. 
4.1.3.5  Hospitals, church buildings, schools, public libraries, public utility structures, governmental buildings, cemeteries, golf courses, country clubs, and telecommunication towers. 
4.1.3.6  Lot coverage exceeding 25% subject to the provisions of Section 20.5. 
4.1.3.7  Bed & Breakfast. 
4.1.3.8  Home based businesses of Major-Type 2. 
4.1.3.9  Radio and Television masts and towers in residential zones. Any mast or tower in excess of fifty (50) feet in height in a residential zone or any mast or tower permitted by variance or pre-existing use to be operated for financial gain in a residential zone. 
4.1.4 - Use Variances: 
Under no circumstances shall the Zoning Board of Appeals grant a variance to allow a use in this zoning district that is specifically allowed by the Planning and Zoning Commission under Section 4.1.3. 
4.2 - RESIDENTIAL 15-SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL 

4.2.1 - Area and Yard Requirements: 
4.2.1.1  Minimum lot area: 15,000 square feet 
4.2.1.2  Minimum lot width: 100 feet 
4.2.1.3  Minimum front yard: 30 feet 
4.2.1.4  Minimum side yard: 10 feet 
4.2.1.5  Minimum rear yard: 20 feet 
4.2.1.6  Minimum floor area: 1,000 square feet 
4.2.1.7  Maximum building height: 35 feet (2 1/2 stories) 
4.2.1.8  Maximum lot coverage when not in an aquifer protection zone: 25% 
4.2.1.8.1  When in an aquifer protection zone, a special permit for increased lot coverage shall be required for any lot coverage exceeding 25 % and subject to Section 20.5. 
4.2.2 - Permitted Uses: 
4.2.2.1  Single-family dwellings. 
4.2.2.2  Accessory uses customarily incidental to the above permitted use, provided that such accessory use shall not include any activities conducted for gain. 
4.2.2.3  Signs subject to Section 16. 
4.2.2.4  Two-family dwellings. 
4.2.3 - Special Exceptions: 
The following uses may be permitted when granted a special exception by the Vernon Zoning Board of Appeals. 
4.2.3.1  Private non-profit clubs. 
4.2.4 - Special Permits: 
The following uses may be permitted when granted a Special Permit by the Planning and Zoning Commission: 
4.2.4.1  Professional office when located in the same building as a private residence. Not more than two (2) persons shall be engaged in such activity. Such offices shall not alter the essential residential character of the property. In the case of conversion of existing residential structures, said conversion shall not alter the residential character of the exterior of the building or increase the existing floor area of the building. 
4.2.4.2  Convalescent homes or nursing homes and assisted living facilities when connected to public water and sanitary sewer. 
4.2.4.3  Funeral homes. 
4.2.4.4  Boarding houses. 
4.2.4.5  Hospitals, church buildings, schools, public libraries, public utility structures, cemeteries, golf courses, country clubs, governmental buildings, and telecommunication towers. 
4.2.4.6  Lot coverage exceeding 25%, subject to the provisions of Section 20.5 
4.2.4.7  Bed & Breakfast. 
4.2.4.8  Home based businesses of Major-Type 2. 
4.2.4.9  Radio and television masts and towers in residential zones. Any mast or tower in excess of fifty (50) feet in height in a residential zone or any mast or tower permitted by variance or pre-existing use to be operated for financial gain in a residential zone. 
4.2.5 - Use Variances: 
Under no circumstances shall the Zoning Board of Appeals grant a variance to allow a use in this zoning district that is specifically allowed by the Planning and Zoning Commission under Section 4.2.4. 
4.3 - RESIDENTIAL 22-SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL 

4.3.1 - Area and Yard Requirements: 
4.3.1.1  Minimum lot area: 22,000 square feet 
4.3.1.2  Minimum lot width: 125 feet 
4.3.1.3  Minimum front yard: 30 feet 
4.3.1.4  Minimum side yard: 10 feet 
4.3.1.5  Minimum rear yard: 20 feet 
4.3.1.6  Minimum floor area 1,000 square feet 
4.3.1.7  Maximum building height 35 feet (2 1/2 stories) 
4.3.1.8  Maximum lot coverage when not in an aquifer protection zone: 25% 
4.3.1.8.1  When in an aquifer protection zone, a Special Permit for increased lot coverage shall be required for any lot coverage exceeding 25% and subject to Section 20.5 
4.3.2 - Permitted Uses: 
4.3.2.1  Single-family dwellings 
4.3.2.2  Two-family dwellings 
4.3.2.3  Accessory uses customarily incidental to the above permitted uses, provided that such accessory use shall not include any activities conducted for gain. 
4.3.2.4  Signs subject to Section 16. 
4.3.3. - Special Exceptions: 
The following uses may be permitted when granted a Special Exception by the Vernon Zoning Board of Appeals. 
4.3.3.1  Private non-profit clubs. 
4.3.4 - Special Permits: 
The following uses may be permitted when granted a Special Permit by the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
4.3.4.1  Professional office when located in the same building as a private residence. Not more than two (2) persons shall be engaged in such activity. Such offices shall not alter the essential residential character of the property. In the case of conversion of existing residential structures, said conversion shall not alter the residential character of the exterior of the building or increase the existing floor area of the building. 
4.3.4.2  Convalescent homes or nursing homes and assisted living facilities when connected to public water and sanitary sewer. 
4.3.4.3  Boarding houses. 
4.3.4.4  Funeral homes. 
4.3.4.5  Hospitals, church buildings, schools, public libraries, public utility structures, cemeteries, golf courses, country clubs and governmental buildings, municipal non-profit recreational facilities and telecommunication towers. 
4.3.4.6  Lot coverage exceeding 25%, subject to the provision of Section 20.5. 
4.3.4.7  Bed & Breakfast. 
4.3.4.8  Home based businesses of Major-Type 2. 
4.3.4.9  Radio and television masts and towers in residential zones. Any mast or tower in excess of 50 feet in height in a residential zone or any mast or tower permitted by variance or pre-existing use to be operated for financial gain in a residential zone. 
4.3.5 - Use Variances: 
Under no circumstances shall the Zoning Board of Appeals grant a variance to allow a use in this zoning district that is specifically allowed by the Planning and Zoning Commission under Section 4.3.4. 
4.4 - RESIDENTIAL 27-SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL 

4.4.1 - Area and Yard Requirements: 
4.4.1.1  Minimum lot area: 27,000 square feet 
4.4.1.2  Minimum lot width: 150 feet 
4.4.1.3  Minimum front yard: 30 feet 
4.4.1.4  Minimum side yard: 10 feet 
4.4.1.5  Minimum rear yard: 20 feet 
4.4.1.6  Minimum floor area: 1,000 square feet 
4.4.1.7  Maximum building height: 35 feet (2 1/2 stories) 
4.4.1.8  Maximum lot coverage when not in an aquifer protection zone: 25% 
4.4.1.8.1  When in an aquifer protection zone, a Special Permit for increased lot coverage shall be required for any lot coverage exceeding 25% and subject to Section 20.5 
4.4.2 - Permitted Uses: 
4.4.2.1  Single-family dwellings. 
4.4.2.2  Accessory uses customarily incidental to the above permitted use, provided that such accessory use shall not include any activities conducted for gain. 
4.4.2.3  Signs subject to Section 16 
4.4.3 - Special Exceptions: 
The following uses may be permitted when granted a Special Exception by the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
4.4.3.1  Commercial farming excluding commercial piggeries and fur farms. 
4.4.3.2  The keeping of livestock for either commercial or non-commercial purposes (excluding pigs and fur-bearing animals) subject to the following conditions: 
4.4.3.2.1  The area to be used for raising or boarding livestock shall be entirely fenced. The maximum area to be fenced shall be defined by the year requirements of the R-27 district with an increase of side yard requirements to a minimum of twenty (20) feet. 
4.4.3.2.2  The minimum area of a parcel on which livestock is to be housed shall be a minimum of two (2) acres in area. 
4.4.3.2.3  The building or structure housing said livestock shall be located not less than eighty (80) feet from any property line. 
4.4.3.2.4  All barnyards, corrals, sties, and similar structures shall be properly drained and free from excessive dust, odor, and mud. 
4.4.3.2.5  No manure pile shall be placed less than fifty (50) feet from any property line and shall be so located that it will not drain on any adjoining premises. 
4.4.3.2.6  The keeping of livestock shall be accompanied by a joint residential use on the same premises. 
4.4.3.2.7  When livestock is kept for noncommercial purposes, no manure pile shall exceed one cord. 
4.4.4 - Special Permits: 
The following uses may be permitted when granted a Special Permit by the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
4.4.4.1  Professional office when located in the same building used by the person as his private residence; not more than two (2) persons shall be engaged in such activity. Such offices shall not alter the essential residential character of the property. In the case of conversion of existing residential structures, said conversion shall not alter the residential character of the exterior of the building or increase the existing floor area of the building. 
4.4.4.2  Convalescent homes or nursing homes and assisted living facilities when connected to public water and sanitary sewer. 
4.4.4.3  Boarding houses. 
4.4.4.4  Funeral homes. 
4.4.4.5  Hospitals, church buildings, schools, public libraries, public utility structures, cemeteries, golf courses, country clubs, and governmental buildings, facilities including recycling facilities for organic materials and telecommunication towers. 
4.4.4.6  Lot coverage exceeding 25% subject to the provisions of Section 20.5. 
4.4.4.7  Bed & Breakfast. 
4.4.4.8  Home based businesses of Major-Type 2. 
4.4.4.9  Radio and Television masts and towers in residential zones. Any mast or tower in excess of 50 feet in height in a residential zone or any mast or tower permitted by variance or pre-existing use to be operated for financial gain in a residential zone. 
4.4.4.10  Outdoor Wood Burning Furnaces subject to Section 3.28 and CGS 22a-174k. 
4.4.4.11  Adaptive Re-Use per Sections 2.96 and 3.26. 
4.4.5 - Use Variances: 
Under no circumstances shall the Zoning Board of Appeals grant a variance to allow a use in this zoning district that is specifically allowed by the Planning and Zoning Commission under Section 4.4.4. 
(Appl. PZ-2017-09, 11-15-2017) 
4.5 - RESIDENTIAL 40-SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL 

4.5.1 - Area and Yard Requirements: 
4.5.1.1  Minimum lot area: 40,000 square feet 
4.5.1.2  Minimum lot width: 200 feet 
4.5.1.3  Minimum front yard: 30 feet 
4.5.1.4  Minimum side yard: 10 feet 
4.5.1.5  Minimum rear yard: 20 feet 
4.5.1.6  Minimum floor area: 1,000 square feet 
4.5.1.7  Maximum building height: 35 feet (2 1/2 stories) 
4.5.1.8  Maximum lot coverage when not in an aquifer protection zone: 25% 
4.5.1.8.1  When in an aquifer protection zone, a Special Permit for increased lot coverage shall be required for any lot coverage exceeding 25% and subject to Section 20.5. 
4.5.2 - Permitted Uses: 
4.5.2.1  Single-family dwellings. 
4.5.2.2  Accessory uses customarily incidental to the above permitted use, provided that such accessory use shall not include any activities conducted for gain. 
4.5.2.3  Signs subject to Section 16. 
4.5.3 - Special Exceptions: 
The following uses may be permitted when granted a Special Exception by the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
4.5.3.1  Commercial farming excluding commercial piggeries and fur farms. 
4.5.3.2  The keeping of livestock for either commercial or non-commercial purposes (excluding pigs and fur-bearing animals) subject to the following conditions: 
4.5.3.2.1  The area to be used for raising or boarding livestock shall be entirely fenced. The maximum area to be fenced shall be defined by the yard requirements of the R-27 district with an increase of side yard requirements to a minimum of thirty (30) feet. 
4.5.3.2.2  The minimum area of a parcel on which livestock is to be housed shall be a minimum of two (2) acres in area. The building or structure housing said livestock shall be located not less than eighty (80) feet from any property line. 
4.5.3.2.3  All barnyards, corrals, sites and similar structures shall be properly drained and free from excessive dust, odor, and mud. 
4.5.3.2.4  No manure pile shall be placed less than fifty (50) feet from any property line and shall be so located that it will not drain on any adjoining premises. 
4.5.3.2.5  The keeping of livestock shall be accompanied by a joint residential use on the same premises. 
4.5.4 - Special Permits: 
The following uses may be permitted when granted a Special Permit by the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
4.5.4.1  Professional office when located in the same building used by the person as his private residence; not more than two (2) persons shall be engaged in such activity. Such offices shall not alter the essential residential character of the property. In the case of conversion of existing residential structures, said conversion shall not alter the residential character of the exterior of the building or increase the existing floor area of the building. 
4.5.4.2  Convalescent homes or nursing homes and assisted living facilities when connected to public water and sanitary sewer. 
4.5.4.3  Board houses. 
4.5.4.4  Funeral homes. 
4.5.4.5  Single-family cluster development in accordance with Section 7. 
4.5.4.6  Hospitals, church buildings, schools, public libraries, public utility structures, cemeteries, golf courses, country clubs, and governmental buildings, facilities including recycling facilities for organic materials and telecommunication towers. 
4.5.4.7  Lot coverage exceeding 25%, subject to the provision of Section 20.5 
4.5.4.8  Bed & Breakfast 
4.5.4.9  Home based businesses of Major-Type 2. 
4.5.4.10  Radio and Television masts are towers in residential zones. Any mast or tower in excess of 50 feet in height in a residential zone or any mast or tower permitted by variance or pre-existing use to be operated for financial gain in a residential zone. 
4.5.4.11  Outdoor Wood Burning Furnaces subject to Section 3.28 and CGS 22a-174k. 
4.5.5 - Use Variances: 
Under no circumstances shall the Zoning Board of Appeals grant a variance to allow a use in this zoning district that is specifically allowed by the Planning and Zoning Commission under Section 4.5.4. 
4.6 - RESIDENTIAL MHP-MOBILE HOME PARKS 

4.6.1 - Area and Yard Requirements: 
4.6.1.1  Minimum lot area: 15 acres 
4.6.1.2  Minimum lot width: 200 feet 
4.6.1.3  Minimum front yard: 20 feet 
4.6.1.4  Minimum side yard: 10 feet 
4.6.1.5  Minimum rear yard: 20 feet 
4.6.1.6  Maximum building height: 36 feet (2 1/2 stories) 
4.6.1.7  Maximum lot coverage when not in an aquifer protection zone: 40% 
4.6.1.7.1  When in an aquifer protection zone, a Special Permit for increased lot coverage shall be required for any lot coverage exceeding 40 percent and subject to Section 20.5 
4.6.2 - Permitted Uses: 
4.6.2.1  Mobile home parks and mobile home park subdivision subject to approval of site plan by the Planning and Zoning Commission in accordance with Section 14. 
4.6.2.2  Accessory uses customarily incidental to the above. 
4.6.2.3  Permitted use. Accessory uses may include but are not necessarily limited to community buildings and service buildings. A service building for each mobile home shall not exceed one hundred (100) square feet in ground floor area. 
4.6.2.4  Signs subject to Section 16. 
4.6.2.5  Temporary decks, patios, or porches not to exceed one-fourth of the total floor area of the mobile home. 
4.6.3 - Special Exceptions: 
There are no Special Exceptions in the Mobile Home Park Zone. 
4.6.4 - Special Permits: 
4.6.4.1  Single-family homes on 10,000 square foot lots with side yards of 10 feet, front yards of 20 feet, and a rear yard of 20 feet. 
4.6.5 - Minimum protective provisions: 
The following minimum protective provisions shall be required in a Mobile Home Park District: 
4.6.5.1  The owner of each mobile home shall secure a permit from the zoning enforcement officer within forty-eight (48) hours of placing the mobile home in a park. A fee of five dollars ($5.00) shall be paid said officer by the applicant. It shall be the duty of the park operator to inform the owners of incoming mobile homes of this provision. 
4.6.5.2  Park operators shall promptly notify the Zoning Officer of any mobile homes removed from their park. The requirement shall remain in force until such time as the roads within the Mobile Home Park are accepted by the Town. 
4.6.5.3  The park operator shall keep on file the names of all occupants of each mobile home. This requirement shall remain in force until such time as the roads within the Mobile Home Park are accepted by the Town. 
4.6.5.4  Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 4.6.5.6 below, each mobile home site shall provide: 
4.6.5.4.1  A minimum mobile home site frontage of fifty (50) feet. 
4.6.5.4.2  A minimum mobile home site front yard of twenty (20) feet. 
4.6.5.4.3  A minimum mobile home site side yard of ten (10) feet. 
4.6.5.4.4  Deleted. 
4.6.5.4.5  A minimum mobile home site rear yard of ten (10) feet. 
4.6.5.4.6  A minimum mobile home site area for each mobile of five thousand (5,000) square feet. 
4.6.5.5  Each mobile home shall have its frontage on a street having a fifty-(50) foot wide right-of-way, and all roadways in the park are to be built to Town of Vernon Road Standards. 
4.6.5.6  All mobile home parks shall be entirely serviced by public sewers. 
4.6.5.7  All mobile home parks shall be entirely serviced by a public water supply. 
4.6.5.8  Repealed. 
4.6.5.9  New streets, which are not through streets within a mobile home park, shall have a combined length of no more than 1500 feet. 
4.6.5.10  Notwithstanding the provision of Section 4.6.5.4 and 4.6.5.5, existing mobile home sites which were created and occupied by a mobile home prior to January 1, 1992 may continue to be used subject to the following: 
4.6.5.10.1  Existing manufactured mobile homes may continue to be used and maintained on their existing mobile home site, regardless of the size of the mobile home site. 
4.6.5.10.2  If an existing manufactured mobile home shall be replaced, then a new manufactured mobile home may only be located upon an existing mobile home site which shall contain a minimum of two-thousand (2,000) square feet and shall have a minimum frontage of twenty-nine (29) feet on an existing corner mobile home site, the frontage shall be measured along the total right-of-way adjoining the mobile home site. 
4.6.5.10.3  Any new manufactured mobile home placed upon an existing mobile home site must have a minimum side yard of at least five (5) feet on each side and must have a minimum rear yard of five (5) feet. 
4.6.5.10.4  Any new manufactured mobile home placed upon an existing mobile home site must have a minimum front yard of ten (10) feet. 
4.6.5.10.5  Any applicant who wishes to replace an existing manufactured mobile home that was in existence on January 1, 1992 by providing a survey prepared by a land surveyor, registered in the State of Connecticut as set forth in Section 4.6.5.10.2 above shall have the burden of proving the mobile home site, which survey shall show all the existing mobile home sites owned by the applicant, and which survey shall be filed with the Town Clerk of the Town of Vernon together with any related documents that the applicant may wish to provide or which the building Inspector or Town Planner may reasonably require. 
4.6.5.10.5.1  Section 4.6.5.10 shall not apply to any manufactured mobile home site that has received approval from the Planning and Zoning Commission and which met the requirements of Section 4.6.5.4 when approval was obtained. 
4.6.6 - Special Permits. 
4.6.6.1  When in an aquifer protection zone, a Special Permit for increased lot coverage shall be required for any lot coverage exceeding forty (40) percent and subject to Section 20.5. 
4.6.7 - Use Variances: 
Under no circumstances shall the Zoning Board of Appeals grant a variance to allow a use in this zoning district that is specifically allowed by the Planning and Zoning Commission under Section 4.6.4 or 4.6.6. 
4.7 - RESIDENTIAL PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT (PRD) 

4.7.1 - Area and Yard Requirements: 
4.7.1.1  Minimum lot area: 1 acre 
4.7.1.2  Minimum lot width: 150 feet 
4.7.1.3  Minimum front yard: 50 feet 
4.7.1.4  Minimum side yard: 20 feet 
4.7.1.5  Minimum rear yard: 50 feet 
4.7.1.6  Minimum floor area (single level) See Section 10, "Minimum Floor Areas" 
4.7.2 - Permitted Uses: 
There are no permitted uses in this zone. 
4.7.3 - Special Exceptions: 
There are no special exceptions in the PRD district. 
4.7.4 - Special Permits: 
The following uses may be permitted when granted a Special Permit by the Planning and Zoning Commission: 
4.7.4.1  Multi-family units with a height exceeding two (2) stories or thirty-five (35) feet; provided, however, that such development does not exceed the density requirements of Section 4.7.5 below. 
4.7.4.2  Convalescent homes or nursing homes and assisted living facilities when connected to public water and sanitary sewer. 
4.7.4.3  Funeral homes. 
4.7.4.4  Hotel or motel. 
4.7.4.5  Hospitals, church buildings, schools, public libraries, public utility structures, governmental buildings, cemeteries, golf courses, country clubs, non-profit recreational facilities, and telecommunication towers. 
4.7.4.6  Lot coverage of sixty (60) percent or more. In order to grant this Special Permit, the Commission must find that this additional coverage will not increase the off site storm water runoff or it is the written opinion of the Town Engineer that all storm water runoff should be discharged off site. If the area is in an aquifer protection zone, the provisions of Section 20.5 shall also apply. 
4.7.4.7  Multiple single-family dwellings subject to the requirements of Section 4.7.6, 4.7.7, and 4.7.8. emergency shelter for the homeless. 
4.7.4.8  Multi-family dwellings. 
4.7.4.9  Accessory uses customarily incidental to the listed uses, provided such accessory use shall not include any activity conducted for gain. 
4.7.4.10  Signs subject to Section 16. 
4.7.4.11  Single-family dwellings. 
4.7.4.12  Two family dwellings. 
4.7.4.13  Adult day care and group day care facilities. 
4.7.4.14  Bed & Breakfast. 
4.7.4.15  A structure with a height exceeding two (2) stories or thirty-five (35) feet. In order to grant this Special Permit, the Commission must receive a written opinion from the Fire Marshal as to the fire safety aspects the increased height would involve. 
4.7.4.16  Radio and television masts and towers in residential zones. Any mast or tower in excess of fifty (50) feet in height in a residential zone or any mast or tower permitted by variance or pre-existing use to be operated for financial gain in a residential zone. 
4.7.4.17  Home Occupations in single-family and two family owner occupied dwellings. 
4.7.4.18  Home Occupations in multiple single-family and multi-family owner occupied dwellings. The applicant must present evidence of approval or permission from the homeowners association of the property at which the activity is to occur. 
4.7.5 - Schedule for multi-family dwelling unit/area ratio: 
Minimum area requirements per dwelling unit shall be determined on the basis of the number of bedrooms or each unit and floor on which each unit is located as follows: 
TABLE A TABLE B Number of bedrooms per dwelling unit Number of square feet in land area per dwelling unit for the first two stories of any multi-family structure Number of square feet in land area per dwelling unit for the third story and above of any multi-family structure 3 7,500 6,500 2 5,500 4,000 1 3,500 3,000  
4.7.5.1  For purpose of this regulation, all rooms that are in addition to a living room, kitchen, hall or foyer, alcove, pantry, laundry, bathroom, closet or storage space, shall be interpreted as being bedrooms. 
4.7.5.2  Weather proof, lockable storage space will be provided for each dwelling unit. Such storage space shall be in addition to that ordinarily contained within a unit such as cabinets, pantries and clothes closets. Such space will not be counted in computing the residential floor area for the dwelling unit. Such space may be located in an area separated from the dwelling unit, but at a minimum located within or adjacent to the building in which the dwelling unit is contained. 
4.7.6 - Livability Space Requirements: 
4.7.6.1  The following minimum amounts of space must be devoted to the provision of livability space, which is that space appropriately improved and located within the development as outdoor living space for residents and for aesthetic appeal. Such space includes lawns and other landscaped areas, walkways, and the areas accessible from them, paved terraces and sitting areas, outdoor recreational areas, and patios. Space provided on decks may also be counted toward the livability space requirement. 
PRD zone: 2.0 times the gross residential floor area. 
Residential Commercial Zone: 2.3 times the gross residential floor area. 
4.7.6.2  At the discretion of the Planning and Zoning Commission, each dwelling unit shall have constructed adjacent to it a patio, terrace or deck. Such space will be included as part of the livability space requirement. 
4.7.7 - Minimum Protective Provisions: 
4.7.7.1  All multi-family structures shall be entirely serviced by public sewers. 
4.7.7.2  All multi-family structures shall be entirely serviced by a public water supply. 
4.7.8 - This section is designed to allow the construction of multi-family units in excess of applicable density limits in accordance with a contract entered into, and between a developer and the town to allow for the provision of affordable housing subject to the following criteria: 
4.7.8.1  For each dwelling unit constructed by the developer in excess of the number of such units permitted by applicable density limits, the developer shall construct in the municipality within one year from the effective date of the contract, a unit of affordable housing, as defined in Section C.G.S 8-39a, which is of comparable size and workmanship. 
4.7.8.2  For a period which shall not be less than thirty (30) years from the date of completion of any units of affordable housing constructed pursuant to 4.7.8.1, such units of affordable housing shall be offered for sale or rent only to persons and families having such income as specified under Section 2.2 of these regulations but which shall not exceed the area median income of the municipality as determined by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development. 
4.7.8.3  The sale price or rent for any such unit of affordable housing shall not exceed an amount which shall be specified in such contract, provided such contract shall contain provisions concerning reasonable periodic increases of the specified sale price or rent. 
4.7.8.4  Such units of affordable housing shall be conveyed by deeds containing covenants incorporating the terms and conditions contained in such contract between the developer and the municipality, which covenants shall run with the land and be enforceable by the municipality until released. 
4.7.8.5  The requirements of these regulations shall apply to the resale, the purchase and subsequent leasing and the conversion the common interest form of ownership and subsequent sale of any unit of affordable housing during and for the remaining term of such period. 
4.7.9 - Use Variances: 
Under no circumstances shall the Zoning Board of Appeals grant a variance to allow a use in this zoning district that is specifically allowed by the Planning and Zoning Commission under Section 4.7.4. 
4.8 - DELETED 
4.9 - COMMERCIAL 

4.9.1 - Area and Yard Requirements: 
4.9.1.1  Minimum lot area: 22,000 square feet 
4.9.1.2  Minimum lot width: 100 feet 
4.9.1.3  Minimum front yard: 50 feet 
4.9.1.4  Minimum rear yard: 50 feet 
4.9.1.5  Minimum side yard: 20 feet 
4.9.1.6  Minimum floor area 1,000 square feet 
4.9.2 - Permitted Uses: 
4.9.2.1  Retail sale of food, non-alcoholic beverages, drugs, clothing, jewelry, hardware, stationery, specialty items, household appliances or furnishings. 
4.9.2.2  Full service restaurants or clubs; service of alcohol is subject to Section 17.1, Alcoholic Liquors. 
4.9.2.3  Non-full service restaurants; drive-up service windows are subject to Section 4.9.4.17. 
4.9.2.4  Any professional or business office, bank, studio or other financial institution. 
4.9.2.5  Wholesale showroom with storage limited to floor samples only. 
4.9.2.6  Indoor movie theatres. 
4.9.2.7  Signs subject to Section 16. 
4.9.2.8  Accessory uses customarily incidental to the listed uses. 
4.9.2.9  Personal convenience services limited to barbershops, beauty salons, and dry cleaning establishments. 
4.9.2.10  Medical or research laboratory. 
4.9.2.11  Day care centers. 
4.9.2.12  Salesroom or display area for retail sale of new vehicles or rental of vehicles, including vehicle sale lots for display of new vehicles. 
4.9.2.13  Retail or wholesale sale of used vehicles shall be permitted only when affiliated with and located within 300 feet measured from the closest point of the property to the property used as a display area for retail sale of new vehicles. 
4.9.2.14  Commercial parking facility with site plan approval. 
4.9.2.15  Multi-story, climate controlled indoor self-storage building, provided all services are contained within the building, the building contains at least 50,000 sq. ft. of floor area, the building exterior is designed with architectural styling and fenestration, and no more than six (6) overhead loading doors are visible from the public street(s) on which the building and lot front unless screened from view. Building height is subject to the provisions of section 4.9.4.15.7 of these regulations. 
4.9.3 - Special Exceptions: 
The following uses may be permitted when granted a special exception by the Zoning Board of Appeals: 
4.9.3.1  Deleted. 
4.9.3.2  Laundromats serviced by public sewers. 
4.9.3.3  Personal convenience services not listed above as a permit use. 
4.9.4 - Special Permits: 
The following uses may be permitted when granted a Special Permit by the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
4.9.4.1  Mixed residential/commercial uses where the current use of the property is residential and less than fifty (50) percent of the structure will continue to be used residentially. 
Mixed Commercial and Multi-Family Uses provided a parcel contains a minimum of five (5) acres and at least twenty five (25%) of the total lot area is reserved for commercial development, then multi-family development shall be permitted on said parcel subject to the following: 
a. The portion of the lot devoted to multi-family use must comply with Sec. 4.7.5 and Section 4.7.6 of the Vernon Zoning Regulations. 
b. The site shall be entirely serviced by public sewers and by public water. 
4.9.4.2  Funeral homes. 
4.9.4.3  Hotels or motels. 
4.9.4.4  Hospitals, places of worship, schools, public libraries, public utility structures, governmental buildings, cemeteries, golf courses, country clubs, non-profit recreational facilities. 
4.9.4.5  Any retail outlet dealing in merchandise or service similar to the items listed above as permitted uses. 
4.9.4.6  Commercial education or recreational activities. 
4.9.4.7  Telecommunication towers. 
4.9.4.8  Residential facilities for special education. 
4.9.4.9  Deleted. 
4.9.4.10  Deleted. 
4.9.4.11  Seller or server of alcoholic beverages unless considered an excluded establishment as stated in section 17.1.1. 
4.9.4.12  Deleted. 
4.9.4.13  Commercial kennel, as defined in Section 2, provided that such a facility is located no closer than three hundred (300) feet from a residence or residential district. The three hundred (300) feet separation requirement shall not apply to veterinary facilities housed inside a building. 
4.9.4.14  General automotive repairing and servicing. The sale of gasoline and/or used vehicles is not permitted with this use. 
4.9.4.15  In addition to any other required permits or approvals, a Special Permit shall be required for any use or development in this zone when any of the following thresholds are met for any parcel or development. 
4.9.4.15.1  More than forty (40) off-street spaces are required or; 
4.9.4.15.2  The proposed structure is within two-hundred (200) feet of a residential structure or; 
4.9.4.15.3  The proposed development has any off-street parking or loading spaces within one-hundred (100) feet of a residential structure or; 
4.9.4.15.4  The aggregate square footage for all structures on any parcel exceeds twenty-five (25) thousand; 
4.9.4.15.5  This section shall not apply to developments or subsequent modifications to projects approved by the Commission when said original approvals were obtained prior to March 1, 1992. 
4.9.4.15.6  Lot coverage of sixty (60) percent or more. In order to grant this Special Permit the Commission must find that this additional coverage will not increase the off site storm water runoff or it is the written opinion of the Town Engineer that all storm water runoff should be discharged off site. If the area is in an aquifer protection zone, the provisions of Section 20.5 shall also apply. 
4.9.4.15.7  A structure with a height exceeding two (2) stories or thirty-five (35) feet. In order to grant this Special Permit, the Commission must receive a written opinion from the Fire Marshal as to the fire safety aspects the increased height would involve. 
4.9.4.15.8  A development having less than the required rear and side yards providing the abutting zoning classification is the same as the zoning classification of the proposed development and all other Special Permit requirements are met. 
4.9.4.15.9  Outside displays by retain sales establishments when said displays occupy an area greater than ten (10) percent of the gross floor area of the individual business utilizing the display. 
4.9.4.16  Redemption center for used beverage containers. 
4.9.4.17  Drive-up service window by approval of both a Site Plan and a Special Permit. 
4.9.4.18  Motor vehicle washing facility as accessory use of retail gasoline sales operation, provided; a) automotive repairs are not conducted on the site, b) minimum lot area shall be one (1) acre, c) no more than forty (40) percent of the maximum lot coverage area shall be used exclusively for the washing facility, and d) the facility shall contain no more than one bay, be automatic, and be patron activated 
4.9.4.19  Any establishment, which sells gasoline or diesel fuel. 
4.9.4.20  Electronic or mechanical games. In any commercial establishment in which the principal use or activity is not the playing of electronic or mechanical games, no more than three (3) such games or devices shall be placed for public or private use in or on the premises, without a Special Permit from the Planning & Zoning Commission. These games are not classified as a commercial recreational activity. 
4.9.4.21  Deleted. 
4.9.4.22  A non independent massage area or establishment: In order to grant a Special Permit, the PZC must find the following: 
4.9.4.22.1  All massage services must be carried out in clearly marked rooms within the establishment, and such rooms shall provide privacy to the patron while allowing for the capability to inspect all activity within the room for the purposes of determining that the provisions of these regulations are complied with. Such rooms shall be provided with continuous white lighting, which shall remain on at all time that such room is in use, and sufficient to light the entire room. 
4.9.4.22.2  For all massage therapists who will be employed in the establishment, evidence of a valid license from the State of Connecticut must be presented to the PZC. 
4.9.4.22.3  A massage area or establishment shall not constitute the principle use of any business or building but shall be strictly an accessory use to another business contained in said building. 
4.9.4.22.4  The massage area shall not occupy more than ten (10) percent of the gross floor area of the business to which it (the massage area) is an accessory use. 
4.9.4.23  Independent Massage Therapy Practice. In order to grant a Special Permit the PZC must find the following: 
4.9.4.23.1  All massage services must be carried out by licensed massage therapist in clearly marked establishments. Such establishments shall provide rooms with professional lighting which shall remain on at all times that the room is in use and sufficient to light the entire room. 
4.9.4.23.2  For all massage therapists, a valid license from the State of Connecticut and either valid active membership in the AMTA or evidence of Professional Liability insurance equal to that provided by AMTA membership must be presented to the PZC. 
4.9.4.23.3  The valid Connecticut Massage Therapy License must be displayed in plain view in the place of business. 
4.9.4.24  Message board sign by approval of both a Site Plan and Special Permit. 
4.9.5 - Use Variances: 
Under no circumstances shall the Zoning Board of Appeals grant a variance to allow a use in this zoning district that is specifically allowed by the Planning and Zoning Commission under Section 4.9.4. 
4.10 - INDUSTRIAL (I) 

4.10.1 - Area and Yard Requirements: 
4.10.1.1  Minimum lot area: 40,000 square feet 
4.10.1.2  Minimum lot width: 150 feet 
4.10.1.3  Minimum front yard: 50 feet 
4.10.1.4  Minimum side yard: 30 feet 
4.10.1.5  Minimum rear yard: 40 feet 
4.10.1.6  Minimum floor area: 5 percent of land area 
4.10.2 - Permitted Uses: 
4.10.2.1  Manufacturing, storing, processing, fabricating, packaging or assembling activities wholly within a building or unified complex of buildings. 
4.10.2.2  Printing or publishing establishment. 
4.10.2.3  Wholesale showroom with or without storage and repair facilities. 
4.10.2.4  Wholesale distribution or warehouse facility. 
4.10.2.5  Bulk petroleum storage. 
4.10.2.6  Open storage facility for contractors and building suppliers. 
4.10.2.7  Salesroom or display areas for wholesale and retail sales and rental of vehicles including vehicle sales lots. 
4.10.2.8  Temporary storage of new motorized vehicles. 
4.10.2.9  Dry clean or laundering plant. 
4.10.2.10  Research and experimental laboratories. 
4.10.2.11  Wholesale or retail sale of products fabricated, assembled or packaged in a building on the premises. 
4.10.2.12  Motor vehicle washing facilities. 
4.10.2.13  Signs subject to Section 16. 
4.10.2.14  Accessory uses customarily incidental to the listed uses. 
4.10.2.15  Commercial education facility. 
4.10.2.16  Any uses permitted in section 4.9, excluding section 4.9.4.20. 
4.10.3 - Special Exceptions: 
The following use may be permitted when granted a Special Exception by the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
4.10.3.1  Heliport. 
4.10.4 - Special Permits: 
The following may be permitted when granted a Special Permit by the Planning & Zoning Commission. 
4.10.4.1  Commercial recreational facility. 
4.10.4.2  Freight or trucking terminal with warehouse storage facilities. 
4.10.4.3  Auto body, soldering or welding shop. 
4.10.4.4  Automotive repair shop. 
4.10.4.5  Radio or television towers and facilities and commercial telecommunication towers. 
4.10.4.6  Governmental buildings and public utilities structures. 
4.10.4.7  Small engine and lawn mower repair shop. 
4.10.4.8  Redemption center for used beverage containers. 
4.10.4.9  Deleted. 
4.10.4.10  Deleted. 
4.10.4.11  In addition to any other required permits or approvals, a Special Permit shall be required for any use or development in this zone when any of the following thresholds are met for any parcel or development. 
4.10.4.11.1  More than forty (40) off-street parking spaces are required or; 
4.10.4.11.2  The proposed structure is within two-hundred (200) feet of a residential structure or; 
4.10.4.11.3  The proposed development has any off-street parking or loading spaces within one hundred (100) feet of a residential structure or; 
4.10.4.11.4  The aggregate square footage for all structures on any parcel exceeds twenty-five (25) thousand; 
4.10.4.11.5  This section shall not apply to developments or subsequent modifications to projects approved by the Commission when said original approvals were obtained prior to March 1, 1992. 
4.10.4.11.6  Lot coverage of forty (40)% or more. In order to grant this Special Permit, the Commission must find that this additional coverage will not increase the off site storm water runoff or it is the written opinion of the Town Engineer that all storm water runoff should be discharged off site. If the area is in aquifer protection zone, the provisions of Section 20.5 shall also apply. 
4.10.4.11.7  A structure with a height exceeding three (3) stories or forty (40) feet. In order to grant this Special Permit, the Commission must receive a written opinion from the Fire Marshal as to the fire safety aspects the increased height would involve. 
4.10.4.11.8  A development having less than the required rear and side yards providing the abutting zoning classification is the same as the zoning classification of the proposed development and all other Special Permit requirements are met. 
4.10.4.11.9  Outside displays when said displays occupy an area greater than ten (10) % of the gross floor area of the individual business utilizing the display. 
4.10.4.12  Electronic or mechanical games: In any commercial establishment in which the principal use or activity is not the playing of electronic or mechanical games, no more than three (3) such games or devices shall be placed for public or private use in or on the premises, without a Special Permit from the Planning Commission. 
4.10.4.13  Adaptive Re-use per Sections 2.96 & 3.26 
4.10.4.14  Drive-up service window by approval of both a Site Plan and a Special Permit. 
4.10.4.15  Commercial kennel, as defined in Section 2, provided that such a facility is located no closer than three hundred (300) feet from a residence or residential district. The three hundred (300) feet separation requirement shall not apply to veterinary facilities housed inside a building. 
4.10.4.16  Message board sign by approval of both a Site Plan and Special Permit. 
4.10.5 - Use Variances: 
Under no circumstances shall the Zoning Board of Appeals grant a variance to allow a use in this zoning district that is specifically allowed by the Planning and Zoning Commission under Section 4.10.4. 
4.10.6 - Protective Provisions: 
4.10.6.1  All industrial uses must be connected to sanitary sewers unless the Health Department approves the use of a septic system in writing prior to PZC action. 
4.14 - SPECIAL FLOATING ZONE-INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT 

4.14.1 - Area and Yard Requirements: 
4.14.1.1  Minimum lot area: 4 acres 
4.14.1.2  Minimum lot width: 200 feet 
4.14.1.3  Minimum front yard: 60 feet 
4.14.1.4  Minimum rear yard: 40 feet 
4.14.1.5  Minimum side yard: 40 feet 
4.14.1.6  Minimum floor area: 5 percent of land area 
4.14.2 - Permitted Uses: 
There are no permitted uses in this zone. 
4.14.3 - Special Exceptions: 
There are no Special Exceptions in the "Special Floating Zone for Industrial Development". 
4.14.4 - Special Permits: 
The following may be permitted when granted a Special Permit by the Planning & Zoning Commission. 
4.14.4.1  Manufacturing, storing, processing, fabricating, packaging or assembling activities wholly within a building or unified complex of buildings. 
4.14.4.2  Printing or publishing establishments. 
4.14.4.3  Wholesale distribution or warehouse facility. 
4.14.4.4  Freight or trucking terminal with warehouse storage facilities. 
4.14.4.5  Wholesale showroom with or without storage and repair facilities. 
4.14.4.6  Research and experimental laboratories. 
4.14.4.7  Offices for industrially oriented businesses. 
4.14.4.8  Restaurant serving food for consumption inside a building. 
4.14.4.9  Professional office buildings. 
4.14.4.10  Signs subject to Section 16. 
4.14.4.11  Accessory uses customarily incidental to the listed uses. 
4.14.4.12  In addition to any other required permits or approvals, a Special Permit shall be required for any use or development in this zone when any of the following thresholds are met for any parcel or development. 
4.14.4.12.1  More than forty (40) off-street parking spaces are required or; 
4.14.4.12.2  The proposed structure is within two-hundred (200) feet of a residential structure or; 
4.14.4.12.3  The proposed development has any off-street parking or loading spaces within one hundred (100) feet of a residential structure or; 
4.14.4.12.4  The aggregate square footage for all structures on any parcel exceeds 25,000 feet; 
4.14.4.12.5  This section shall not apply to developments or subsequent modifications to projects approved by the Commission when said original approvals were obtained prior to March 1, 1992. 
4.14.4.12.6  Lot coverage of forty (40) percent or more. In order to grant this Special Permit the Commission must find that this additional coverage will not increase the off site storm water runoff or it is the written opinion of the Town Engineer that all storm water runoff should be discharged off site. If the area is in an aquifer protection zone, the provisions of Section 20.5 shall also apply. 
4.14.4.12.7  A structure with a height exceeding three (3) stories or forty (40) feet. In order to grant this Special Permit, the Commission must receive a written opinion from the Fire Marshal as to the fire safety aspects the increased height would involve. 
4.14.4.12.8  A development having less than the required rear and side yards providing the abutting zoning classification is the same as the zoning classification of the proposed development and all other Special Permit requirements are met. 
4.14.4.12.9  Outside displays when said displays occupy an area greater than ten (10) % of the gross floor area of the individual business utilizing the display. 
4.14.4.13  Message board sign by approval of both a Site Plan and Special Permit. 
4.14.5 - Procedure: 
The applicant for a "Special Floating Zone" must make application to the Commission at least twenty (20) days prior to the scheduled meeting date. The Commission, at this preliminary hearing, may set the date for a public hearing, and may request the applicant present at the public hearing, any or all information required under Section 14 Site Plan. The Commission may, at this meeting, approve both the Floating Zone and the Site Plan. A Site Plan must be submitted for approval to the Commission within a six (6) month period of time following the approval of the "Special Floating Zone" or the zoning approval will become null and void, and the parcel of land will return to its original classification. 
4.14.6 - Use Variances: 
Under no circumstances shall the Zoning Board of Appeals grant a variance to allow a use in this zoning district that is specifically allowed by the Planning and Zoning Commission under Section 4.14.4. 
4.15 - HISTORIC DISTRICT-PLANNED NEIGHBORHOOD DEVELOPMENT 

4.15.1 - Area and Yard Requirements: 
4.15.1.1  Minimum lot area: 20,000 square feet 
4.15.1.2  Minimum lot width: 120 feet 
4.15.1.3  Minimum front yard: 30 feet 
4.15.1.4  Minimum side yard: 10 feet 
4.15.1.5  Minimum rear yard 20 feet 
4.15.1.6  Minimum floor area: 1,000 square feet 
4.15.2 - Permitted Uses: 
4.15.2.1  Single family and two-family dwellings. 
4.15.2.2  Accessory uses customarily incidental to the above permitted uses, provided that such accessory use shall not include any activities conducted for gain. 
4.15.2.3  One sign meeting all of the requirements of Section 16.1 and 16.2. 
4.15.3 - Special Permits: 
The following uses may be permitted when granted a Special Permit by the Planning & Zoning Commission: 
4.15.3.1  Multi-family and accessory uses customarily incidental to them, provided that accessory uses shall not be conducted for gain. Multi-family units are subject to the requirements of Section 10.1.2 and Sections 4.7.5, 4.7.6, and 4.7.7 of these Zoning Regulations. 
4.15.3.2  Professional or business offices, banks or other financial institutions. 
4.15.3.3  Convalescent homes or nursing homes and assisted living facilities when connected to public water and sanitary sewer. 
4.15.3.4  Boarding homes. 
4.15.3.5  Church buildings, schools, public libraries, public utility structures, cemeteries, hospitals, and governmental buildings. 
4.15.3.6  Residential facilities for special education. 
4.15.3.7  Funeral homes. 
4.15.3.8  Home based businesses of Major-Type 2. 
4.15.3.9  Group day care facilities. 
4.15.3.10  In addition to any other required permits or approvals, a Special Permit shall be required for any use or development in this zone when any of the following thresholds are met for any parcel or development. 
4.15.3.10.1  More than forty (40) off-street parking spaces are required or; 
4.15.3.10.2  the proposed structure is within two-hundred (200) feet of a residential structure or; 
4.15.3.10.3  The proposed development has any off-street parking or loading spaces within one-hundred (100) feet of a residential structure or; 
4.15.3.10.4  The aggregate square footage for all structures on any parcel exceeds twenty-five (25,000) thousand. 
4.15.3.10.5  This section shall not apply to developments or subsequent modifications to projects approved by the Commission when said original approvals were obtained prior to March 1, 1992. 
4.15.3.10.6  Lot coverage of forty-five (45) percent or more. In order to grant this special permit, the Commission must find that this additional coverage will not increase the off site storm water runoff or it is the written opinion of the Town Engineer that all storm water runoff should be discharged off site. If the area is in an aquifer protection zone, the provisions of Section 20.5 shall also apply. 
4.15.3.10.7  A structure with a height exceeding two and a half (2 1/2) stories or thirty-five (35) feet. In order to grant this Special Permit the Commission must receive a written opinion from the Fire Marshal as to the fire safety aspects the increased height would involve. 
4.15.3.10.8  A development having less than the required rear and side yards providing the abutting zoning classification is the same as the zoning classification of the proposed development and all other Special Permit requirements are met. 
4.15.3.11  Bed & Breakfast. 
4.15.3.12  Radio and Television masts and towers. 
4.15.4 - Protective provision concerning front yard compatibility: 
4.15.4.1  When seventy-five (75) percent or more of the structures on one side of a street, measured between two intersecting streets, have front yards of less depth than the required front yard in this zoning district, the Commission, when considering a Special Permit request, may allow new structures built on the same side of the street to conform to the average established setback. In no case may the front yard be reduced to less than ten (10) feet. 
4.15.4.2  When 75% or more of the structures on one side of a street, measured between two intersecting streets, have front yards of less depth than the required front yard in this zoning district, the Building Inspector, when issuing a building permit for a single or two-family structures, may allow these structures, if built on the same side of the street, to conform to the average established setback. In no case may the front yard be reduced to less than 10 feet. 
4.15.5 - Use Variances: 
Under no circumstances shall the Zoning Board of Appeals grant a variance to allow a use in this zoning district that is specifically allowed by the Planning and Zoning Commission under Section 4.15.3. 
4.15.6 - Adaptive Re-use per Sections 2.97 & 3.26 
4.16 - HISTORIC DISTRICT-NEIGHBORHOOD R-10 

4.16.1 - Area and Yard Requirements: 
4.16.1.1  Minimum lot area: 10,000 square feet 
4.16.1.2  Minimum lot width: 80 feet 
4.16.1.3  Minimum front yard: 30 feet 
4.16.1.4  Minimum side yard: 10 feet 
4.16.1.5  Minimum rear yard: 20 feet 
4.16.1.6  Minimum floor area: 1,000 square feet 
4.16.2 - Permitted Uses: 
4.16.2.1  Single family and two-family dwellings. 
4.16.2.2  Accessory uses customarily incidental to the above permitted uses, provided that such accessory use shall not include any activities conducted for gain. 
4.16.3 - Special Permits: 
The following uses may be permitted when granted a Special Permit by the Planning & Zoning Commission: 
4.16.3.1  Convalescent homes or nursing homes and assisted living facilities when connected to public water and sanitary sewer. 
4.16.3.2  Boarding Homes. 
4.16.3.3  Places of worship, schools, public libraries, public utility structures, cemeteries, hospitals, and governmental buildings. 
4.16.3.4  Residential facilities for special education. 
4.16.3.5  Funeral homes. 
4.16.3.6  Public parks and public recreational areas. 
4.16.3.7  Signs subject to Section 16. 
4.16.3.8  Home based businesses of Major-Type 2. 
4.16.3.9  Day care center when conducted as an accessory use to a non-profit institution such as a school or church. 
4.16.3.10  The operation of a program with the express purpose of providing vocational training and employment services to developmentally disabled and other handicapped citizens. 
4.16.3.11  In addition to any other required permits or approvals, a Special Permit shall be required for any use or development in this zone when any of the following thresholds are met for any parcel or development. 
4.16.3.11.1  More than forty (40) off-street parking spaces are required or; 
4.16.3.11.2  The aggregate square footage for all structures on any parcel exceeds 25,000; 
4.16.3.11.3  This section shall not apply to developments or subsequent modifications to projects approved by the Commission when said original approvals were obtained prior to March 1, 1992. 
4.16.3.11.4  Lot coverage of forty (40) percent or more. In order to grant this Special Permit, the Commission must find that this additional coverage will not increase the off-site storm water runoff or it is the written opinion of the Town Engineer that all storm water runoff should be discharged off-site. If the area is in an aquifer protection zone, the provisions of Section 20.5 shall also apply. 
4.16.3.11.5  A structure with a height exceeding two and a half (2 1/2) stories or thirty-five (35) feet. In order to grant this Special Permit, the Commission must receive a written opinion from the Fire Marshal as to the fire safety aspects the increased height would involve. 
4.16.3.11.6  A development having less than the required rear and side yards providing the abutting zoning classification is the same as the zoning classification of the proposed development and all other Special Permit requirements are met. 
4.16.3.12  Bed & Breakfast. 
4.16.3.13  Deleted. 
4.16.3.14  Radio and television masts and towers. 
4.16.4 - Protective provision concerning front yard compatibility: 
4.16.4.1  When seventy-five (75) or more of the structures on one side of a street, measured between two intersecting streets, have front yards of less depth than the required front yard in this zoning district, the Commission, when considering a Special Permit request, may allow new structures built on the same side of the street to conform to the average established setback. In no case may the front yard be reduced to less than ten (10) feet. 
4.16.4.2  When seventy-five (75) or more of the structures on one side of a street, measured between two intersecting streets, have front yards of less depth than the required front yard in this zoning district, the Building Inspector, when issuing a building permit for single or two-family structures, may allow these structures, if built on the same side of the street, to conform to the average established setback. In no case may the front yard be reduced to less than ten (10) feet. 
4.16.5 - Use Variances: 
Under no circumstances shall the Zoning Board of Appeals grant a variance to allow a use in this zoning district that is specifically allowed by the Planning and Zoning Commission under Section 4.16.3. 
4.17 - HISTORIC DISTRICT-RESIDENTIAL COMMERCIAL 

4.17.1 - Area and Yard Requirements: 
4.17.1.1  Minimum lot area: 20,000 square feet 
4.17.1.2  Minimum lot width: 120 feet 
4.17.1.3  Minimum front yard: 30 feet 
4.17.1.4  Minimum side yard: 10 feet 
4.17.1.5  Minimum rear yard: 20 feet 
4.17.1.6  Minimum floor area: 1,000 square feet 
4.17.2 - Permitted uses: 
4.17.2.1  Single family and two-family dwellings. 
4.17.2.2  Accessory uses customarily incidental to the above permitted uses, provided that such accessory use shall not include any activities conducted for gain. 
4.17.2.3  One sign, per business, not larger than fourteen (14) square feet, provided this sign meets all the other requirements of Section 16. Additional signage and/or signs in excess of fourteen (14) square feet and otherwise in compliance with Section 16 may be permitted when granted a Special Permit by the Planning & Zoning Commission. 
4.17.3 - Special Permits: 
The following uses may be permitted when granted a Special Permit by the Planning & Zoning Commission: 
4.17.3.1  Multi-family dwellings, and accessory uses customarily incidental to them, provided that such accessory uses shall not be conducted for gain. Multi- family units are subject to the requirements of Section 10.1.1 and Sections 4.7.5, 4.7.6, and 4.7.7 of these Zoning Regulations. 
4.17.3.2  Professional or business offices, banks or other financial institutions. 
4.17.3.3  Convalescent homes or nursing homes and assisted living facilities when connected to public water and sanitary sewer. 
4.17.3.4  Indoor movie theaters. 
4.17.3.5  Church buildings, schools, public libraries, public utility structures, cemeteries, hospitals, and governmental buildings. 
4.17.3.6  Residential facilities for special education. 
4.17.3.7  Funeral homes. 
4.17.3.8  Buildings, which have previously been used industrially, and existing industrial operations located within the residential commercial zone may be allowed. Existing industrial buildings and operations are not subject to Section 11 of the regulations. These existing industrial buildings may be extended, enlarged or rebuilt only after a Special Permit is obtained. All industrial buildings and operations are subject to the requirements set forth in Section 4.19-Historic District-Industrial. 
4.17.3.9  Retail sale of food, non-alcoholic beverages, drugs, clothing, jewelry, hardware, stationery, specialty items, household appliances or furnishings. 
4.17.3.10  Personal convenience services limited to barbershops, beauty shops and dry cleaning establishments. 
4.17.3.11  Full service restaurant with or without alcoholic beverage permit. 
4.17.3.12  Seller or server of alcoholic beverages unless considered an excluded establishment as stated in section 17.1.1. 
4.17.3.13  Public parks and public recreational areas. 
4.17.3.14  Hospitals, medical offices, laboratories and similar health care facilities. 
4.17.3.15  Commercial parking facility. 
4.17.3.16  Drive-up service window by approval of both a Site Plan and a Special Permit. 
4.17.3.17  Additional signage and/or signs in excess of fourteen (14) square feet. These signs area also subject to the requirements of Section 
4.17.3.18  Deleted. 
4.17.3.19  Deleted. 
4.17.3.20  Commercial, educational or recreation services. 
4.17.3.21  Any retail outlet dealing in merchandises or services which the Commission finds to be similar in nature to the above use. 
4.17.3.22  Child Day Care Centers. 
4.17.3.23  Multiple single-family dwellings subject to the requirements of Section 4.7.5.2, 4.7.6, 4.7.7, and 17.3.3, and to a finding to be made by the Commission that the construction of, or conversion to, multiple single-family dwellings will not reduce the availability of existing habitable rental housing in the Rockville section of the Town of Vernon. 
4.17.3.24  In addition to any other required permits or approvals, a Special Permit shall be required for any use or development in this zone when any of the following thresholds are met for any parcel or development. 
4.17.3.24.1  More than forty (40) off-street parking spaces are required or: 
4.17.3.24.2  The proposed structure is within two-hundred (200) feet of a residential structure or; 
4.17.3.24.3  The proposed development has any off-street parking or loading spaces within one-hundred (100) feet of a residential structure or; 
4.17.3.24.4  The aggregate square footage for all structures on any parcel exceeds 25,000; 
4.17.3.24.5  This section shall not apply to developments or subsequent modifications to projects approved by the Commission when said original approvals were obtained prior to March 1, 1992. 
4.17.3.24.6  Lot coverage of forty-five (45) percent or more. In order to grant this Special Permit, the Commission must find that this additional coverage will not increase the off-site storm water runoff or it is the written opinion of the Town Engineer that all storm water runoff should be discharged off site. If the area is in an aquifer protection zone, the provision of Section 20.5 shall also apply. 
4.17.3.24.7  A structure with a height exceeding two and a half (2 1/2) stories or thirty-five (35) feet. In order to grant this Special Permit, the Commission must receive a written opinion from the Fire Marshal as to the fire safety aspects the increased height would involve. 
4.17.3.24.8  A development having less than the required rear and side yards providing the abutting zoning classification is the same as the zoning classification of the proposed development and all other Special Permit requirements are met. 
4.17.3.24.9  Outside displays by retail sales establishments when said displays occupy an area greater than ten (10) percent of the gross floor area of the individual business utilizing the display. 
4.17.3.25  Emergency shelter for the homeless when conducted by a non-profit organization. 
4.17.3.26  Bed & Breakfast. 
4.17.3.27  Home occupations in single-family homes. 
4.17.3.28  Outside displays by retail sales establishments when said displays occupy an area greater than ten (10) percent of the gross floor area of the individual business utilizing the display. 
4.17.3.29  A parking lot or parking facility as a principal use on a lot to provide for an allowed use(s), which allowed use(s) is located on another lot(s) that is located within sixteen hundred (1,600) feet of the lot on which the parking lot or parking facility is located. The parking lot or parking facility shall be reserved to provide parking exclusively for the aforementioned allowed use(s). 
4.17.3.30  Radio and television masts and towers in residential zones. Any mast or tower in excess of one-hundred (100) feet in height in a residential zone or any mast or tower permitted by variance or pre-existing use to be operated for financial gain in a residential zone. 
4.17.3.31  Adaptive Re-use per Sections 2.96 & 3.26 
4.17.3.32  Message board sign by approval of both a Site Plan and Special Permit. 
4.17.4 - Protective provision concerning front yard compatibility: 
4.17.4.1  When seventy-five (75) percent or more of the structures on one side of a street, measured between two intersecting streets, have front yards of less depth than the required front yard in this zoning district, the Commission when considering a Special Permit request, may allow new structures built on the same side of the street to conform to the average established setback. In no case may the front yard be reduced to less than ten (10) feet. 
4.17.4.2  When seventy-five (75) percent or more of the structures on one side of a street, measured between two intersecting streets, have front yards of less depth than the required front yard in this zoning district, the Building Inspector when issuing a building permit for single or two-family structures, may allow these structures, if built on the same side of the street, to conform to the average established setback. In no case may the front yard be reduced to less than ten (10) feet. 
4.17.5 - Use Variances: 
Under no circumstances shall the Zoning Board of Appeals grant a variance to allow a use in this zoning district that is specifically allowed by the Planning and Zoning Commission under Section 4.17.3. 
4.18 - HISTORIC DISTRICT-RESTRICTED WATERSHED 

4.18.1 - Area and Yard requirements: 
4.18.1.1  Minimum lot area: 40,000 square feet 
4.18.1.2  Minimum lot width: 200 feet 
4.18.1.3  Minimum front yard: 30 feet 
4.18.1.4  Minimum side yard: 10 feet 
4.18.1.5  Minimum rear yard: 20 feet 
4.18.1.6  Minimum floor area: 1,000 square feet 
4.18.2 - Permitted uses: 
4.18.2.1  Those uses associated with the operation of a public water company. 
4.18.2.2  Public and non-profit parks. 
4.18.2.3  Wildlife sanctuaries or preserves when owned by non-profit entities. 
4.18.3 - Special Permits: 
The following uses may be permitted when granted a Special Permit by the Planning & Zoning Commission. 
4.18.3.1  Single-family dwellings. 
4.18.3.2  Governmental buildings. 
4.18.3.3  In addition to any other required permits or approvals, a Special Permit shall be required for any use or development in this zone when any of the following thresholds are met for any parcel or development. 
4.18.3.3.1  More than forty (40) off-street parking spaces are required or; 
4.18.3.3.2  The proposed structure is within 200 feet of a residential structure or; 
4.18.3.3.3  The proposed development has any off-street parking or loading spaces within one-hundred (100) feet of a residential structure or; 
4.18.3.3.4  The aggregate square footage for all structures on any parcel exceeds twenty-five (25) thousand; 
4.18.3.3.5  This section shall not apply to developments or subsequent modifications to projects approved by the Commission when said original approvals were obtained prior to March 1, 1992. 
4.18.3.3.6  Lot coverage of twenty-five (25) percent or more. In order to grant this Special Permit, the Commission must find that this additional coverage will not increase the off-site storm water runoff or it is the written opinion of the Town Engineer that all storm water runoff should be discharged off-site. If the area is in an aquifer protection zone, the provision of Section 20.5 shall also apply. 
4.18.3.3.7  A structure with a height exceeding two and a half (2 1/2) stories or thirty-five (35) feet. In order to grant this Special Permit, the Commission must receive a written opinion from the Fire Marshal as to the fire safety aspects the increased height would involve. 
4.18.3.3.8  A development having less than the required rear and side yards providing the abutting zoning classification is the same as the zoning classification of the proposed development and all other Special Permit requirements are met. 
4.18.3.4  Bed & Breakfast. 
4.18.4 - Use Variances: 
Under no circumstances shall the Zoning Board of Appeals grant a variance to allow a use in this zoning district that is specifically allowed by the Planning and Zoning Commission under Section 4.18.3. 
4.19 - HISTORIC DISTRICT-INDUSTRIAL 

4.19.1 - Area and Yard requirements: 
4.19.1.1  Minimum lot area: 1 acre 
4.19.1.2  Minimum lot width: 160 feet 
4.19.1.3  Minimum front yard: 35 feet 
4.19.1.4  Minimum side yard: 15 feet 
4.19.1.5  Minimum rear yard: 30 feet 
4.19.1.6  Minimum floor area: 10 percent of land area 
4.19.2 - Permitted uses: 
4.19.2.1  Manufacturing, storing, processing, fabricating, packaging or assembling activities wholly within a building or unified complex of buildings. 
4.19.2.2  Printing or publishing establishments. 
4.19.2.3  Wholesale distribution or warehouse facility. 
4.19.2.4  Office buildings and financial institutions. 
4.19.2.5  Research laboratories. 
4.19.2.6  Restaurant serving food for consumption inside the building. 
4.19.2.7  Wholesale or retail sale of products fabricated, assembled or packaged in a building on the premises. 
4.19.2.8  Signs subject to Section 16. 
4.19.3 - Special Permits: 
The following uses may be permitted when granted a Special Permit by the Planning & Zoning Commission. 
4.19.3.1  Governmental buildings, public utility structures and telecommunication towers. 
4.19.3.2  In addition to any other required permits or approvals, a Special Permit shall be required for any use or development in this zone when any of the following thresholds are met for any parcel or development. 
4.19.3.2.1  More than forty (40) off-street parking spaces are required or; 
4.19.3.2.2  The proposed structure is within two-hundred (200) feet of a residential structure or; 
4.19.3.2.3  The proposed development has any off-street parking or loading spaces within one-hundred (100) feet of a residential structure or' 
4.19.3.2.4  The aggregate square footage for all structures on any parcel exceeds twenty-five (25) thousand; 
4.19.3.2.5  This section shall not apply to developments or subsequent modifications to projects approved by the Commission when said original approvals were obtained prior to March 1, 1992. 
4.19.3.2.6  Lot coverage of sixty-five (65) percent or more. In order to grant this Special Permit, the Commission must find that this additional coverage will not increase the off-site storm water runoff or it is the written opinion of the Town Engineer that all storm water runoff should be discharged off-site. If the area is in an aquifer protection zone, the provision of Section 20.5 shall also apply. 
4.19.3.2.7  A structure with a height exceeding three (3) stories or forty (40) feet. In order to grant this special permit, the Commission must receive a written opinion from the Fire Marshal as to the fire safety aspects the increased height would involve. 
4.19.3.2.8  A development having less than the required rear and side yards providing the abutting zoning classification is the same as the zoning classification of the proposed development and all other Special Permit requirements are met. 
4.19.3.2.9  Outside displays when said displays occupy an area greater than 10% of the gross floor area of the individual business utilizing the display. 
4.19.3.3  Adaptive Re-use per Sections 2.96 & 3.26 
4.19.3.4  Drive-up service window by approval of both a Site Plan and a Special Permit. 
4.19.3.5  Message board sign by approval of both a Site Plan and Special Permit. 
4.19.4 - Use Variances: 
Under no circumstances shall the Zoning Board of Appeals grant a variance to allow a use in this zoning district specifically allowed by the Planning and Zoning Commission under Section 4.19.3. 
4.20 - SPECIAL DEVELOPMENT ZONE-ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT 

4.20.1 - Area and Yard requirements: 
4.20.1.1  Minimum lot area: 1 acre 
4.20.1.2  Minimum lot width: 150 feet 
4.20.1.3  Minimum front yard: 50 feet 
4.20.1.4  Minimum rear yard: 30 feet 
4.20.1.5  Minimum side yard: 30 feet 
4.20.1.6  Minimum floor area: 5 percent of land area 
4.20.2 - Permitted uses: 
There are no permitted uses in this zone. 
4.20.3 - Special Exceptions: 
There are no Special Exceptions in the Special Economic Development Zone. 
4.20.4 - Special Permits: 
The following may be permitted when granted a Special Permit by the Planning & Zoning Commission: 
4.20.4.1  Manufacturing, storing, processing, fabricating, packaging or assembling activities wholly within a building or unified complex of buildings. 
4.20.4.2  Printing or publishing. 
4.20.4.3  Wholesale distribution or warehouse facility. 
4.20.4.4  Wholesale showroom with or without storage and repair facilities. 
4.20.4.5  Research and experimental laboratories. 
4.20.4.6  Auditorium, coliseum, or indoor movie theatre(s). 
4.20.4.7  Professional office building, general office buildings, office parks. 
4.20.4.8  Signs subject to Section 16. 
4.20.4.9  Accessory uses customarily incidental to the listed uses. 
4.20.4.10  Retail sale of products assembled or packaged in a building on the premises provided said fabrication, assembling, or packing operations occupy a minimum of seventy-five (75) percent of the floor area of said building. 
4.20.4.11  Plumbing, heating, electrical, industrial and general contracting establishments, which may include showrooms. 
4.20.4.12  Commercial recreational facility. 
4.20.4.12.1  Commercial recreational facilities are exempt from the minimum floor area requirement of five (5) percent if the proposed use is primarily for outdoor activities. 
4.20.4.13  In addition to any other required permits or approvals, a Special Permit shall be required for any use or development in this zone when any of the following thresholds are met for any parcel or development. 
4.20.4.13.1  More than forty (40) off-street parking spaces are required or; 
4.20.4.13.2  The proposed development has any off-street parking or loading spaces within one-hundred (100) feet of a residential structure or; 
4.20.4.13.3  The proposed development has any off-street parking or loading spaces within one-hundred (100) feet of a residential structure or 
4.20.4.13.4  The aggregate square footage for all structures on any parcel exceeds 25,000; 
4.20.4.13.5  This section shall not apply to developments or subsequent modifications to projects approved by the Commission when said original approvals were obtained prior to March 1, 1992. 
4.20.4.13.6  Lot coverage of sixty-five (65) percent or more. In order to grant this Special Permit, the Commission must find that this additional coverage will not increase the off-site storm water runoff or it is the written opinion of the Town Engineer that all storm water runoff should be discharged off-site. If the area is in an aquifer protection zone, the provision of Section 20.5 shall also apply. 
4.20.4.13.7  A structure with a height exceeding three (3) stories or forty (40) feet. In order to grant this Special Permit, the Commission must receive a written opinion from the Fire Marshal as to the fire safety aspects the increased height would involve. 
4.20.4.13.8  A development having less than the required rear and side yards providing the abutting zoning classification is the same as the zoning classification of the proposed development and all other Special Permit requirements are met. 
4.20.4.13.9  Outside displays when said displays occupy an area greater than ten (10) percent of the gross floor area of the individual business utilizing the display. 
4.20.4.14  Bank or other financial institution. 
4.20.4.15  Hotel, motel, convention and resort centers. 
4.20.4.16  Drive-up service window by approval of both a Site Plan and a Special Permit. 
4.20.4.17  Restaurant, located within, and serving food for consumption inside an office, hotel, convention oriented or industrial type building or complex of buildings. 
4.20.4.18  Governmental buildings and facilities including recycling facilities for organic materials. 
4.20.4.19  Telecommunication towers. 
4.20.4.20  Redemption center for used beverage containers. 
4.20.4.21  Commercial kennel, as defined in Section 2, provided that such a facility is located no closer than three hundred (300) feet from a residence or residential district. The three hundred (300) feet separation requirement shall not apply to veterinary facilities housed inside a building. 
4.20.4.22  Message board sign by approval of both a Site Plan and Special Permit. 
4.20.5 - Protective Provisions: 
4.20.5.1  To protect the traffic flow and improve the aesthetic character of Route 83, lots which abut Route 83 must meet the following area and yard requirements: 
Minimum lot area: 1 acre 
Minimum lot width: 150 feet 
Minimum front yard: 60 feet 
Additionally no parking area shall be allowed within the required front yard of properties on Route 83. 
40.20.5.2  A complete Site Plan as required in Section 14 shall be submitted to the Commission as part of the Special Permit requirement. 
40.20.5.3  Parcels abutting the I-84 right-of-way and within the I-84 Corridor as defined in the Master Plan of Development shall have minimum lot sizes of one acre, minimum lot widths of one hundred fifty feet, and no parking or loading zones between the building and I-84 unless said parking areas and loading zones can be screened in such a manner as to preserve the overall aesthetic character of the area. 
4.20.6 - Use Variances: 
Under no circumstances shall the Zoning Board of Appeals grant a variance to allow a use in this zoning district specifically allowed by the Planning and Zoning Commission under Section 4.20.4. 
4.21 - PLANNED COMMERCIAL ZONE 

4.21.1 - The Planned Commercial Zone (PCZ) has been designed in accordance with Town Master Plan, to regulate commercial and office space development along Route 83 (Talcottville Road) from its intersection with Wilshire Road to the area adjacent to Dart Hill Road. The intent of the regulations is to: 
4.21.1.1  Encourage the development of commercial/office space uses, which have the least potential for generating additional traffic to the Route 83 daily and peak hour volumes existing as of March 1, 1983. 
4.21.1.2  Insure that the traffic ingress and egress patterns for new developments under these regulations takes place in a manner which is safe and which minimize traffic conflicts resulting from turning movements of vehicles entering or leaving the property being developed. 
4.21.1.3  Encourage development of medium or large-scale commercial buildings rather than small structures on individual parcels. 
4.21.1.4  Encourage development, which provides adequate buffering between residential areas, and encourage site layout, parking areas, landscaping and signage, which will serve to enhance area property values. 
4.21.2 - Area and Yard Requirements: 
4.21.2.1  Minimum lot area: 3 acres 
4.21.2.2  Minimum front yard: 50 feet 
4.21.2.3  Minimum rear yard: 50 feet 
4.21.2.4  Minimum side yard: 50 feet 
4.21.2.5  Minimum floor area: 7 percent of land area Per P.O.D. 
4.21.2.6  Minimum lot width: 180 feet 
4.21.3 - Permitted Uses: 
4.21.3.1  Professional office buildings, general office buildings, office parks. 
4.21.4 - Special Exceptions: 
None. 
4.21.5 - Special Permits: 
The following may be permitted when granted a Special Permit by the Planning & Zoning Commission: 
4.21.5.1  Full service restaurants. 
4.21.5.2  Research and experimental laboratories. 
4.21.5.3  Banks or other financial institutions without drive-up windows. 
4.21.5.4  Governmental facility. 
4.21.5.5  Retail sale of food, non-alcoholic beverages, drugs, clothing, jewelry, hardware and building materials, stationery, household appliances or furnishings, specialty items, and general merchandise. 
4.21.5.6  Recreational and educational facilities. 
4.21.5.7  Personal convenience services excluding weight studios, counseling and therapy services, and encounter groups, other than those performed in a professional office. 
4.21.5.8  Nursing or convalescent homes and assisted living facilities. 
4.21.5.9  Hotels or motels. 
4.21.5.10  Accessory uses customarily incidental to the above uses. 
4.21.5.11  In addition to any other required permits or approvals, a Special Permit shall be required for any use or development in this zone when any of the following thresholds are met for any parcel or development. 
4.21.5.11.1  More than forty (40) off-street parking spaces are required or; 
4.21.5.11.2  The proposed structure is within two-hundred (200) feet of a residential structure or; 
4.21.5.11.3  The proposed development has any off-street parking or loading spaces within one hundred (100) feet of a residential structure or; 
4.21.5.11.4  The aggregate square footage for all structures on any parcel exceeds twenty-five (25,000) thousand; 
4.21.5.11.5  This section shall not apply to developments or subsequent modifications to projects approved by the Commission when said original approvals were obtained prior to March 1, 1992. 
4.21.5.11.6  Lot coverage of fifty-five (55) percent or more. In order to grant this Special Permit, the Commission must find that this additional coverage will not increase the off-site storm water runoff or it is the written opinion of the Town Engineer that all storm water runoff should be discharged off-site. If the area is in an aquifer protection zone, the provision of Section 20.5 shall also apply. 
4.21.5.11.7  A structure with a height exceeding three (3) stories or forty (40) feet. In order to grant this Special Permit, the Commission must receive a written opinion from the Fire Marshal as to the fire safety aspects the increased height would involve. 
4.21.5.11.8  A development having less than the required rear and side yards providing the abutting zoning classification is the same as the zoning classification of the proposed development and all other Special Permit requirements are met. 
4.21.5.11.9  Outside displays when said displays occupy an area greater than 10% of the gross floor area of the individual business utilizing the display. 
4.21.5.12  Retail sale of food with alcoholic beverages permit. 
4.21.5.13  Day care centers. 
4.21.5.14  Drive-up service window by approval of both a Site Plan and a Special Permit. 
4.21.5.15  Message board sign by approval of both a Site Plan and Special Permit. 
4.21.5.16  One sign, per business, not larger than fourteen (14) square feet, provided this sign meets all the other requirements of Section 16. Additional signage and/or signs in excess of fourteen (14) square feet and otherwise in compliance with Section 16 may be permitted when granted a Special Permit by the Planning & Zoning Commission. 
4.21.5.17  Indoor movie theaters. 
4.21.5.18  Funeral homes. 
4.21.5.19  Seller or server of alcoholic beverages subject to Section 17.1, Alcoholic Liquors. 
4.21.5.20  Hospitals, medical offices, laboratories and similar health care facilities. 
4.21.6 - Protective Provisions: 
4.21.6.1  To protect the traffic flow and improve the aesthetic character of the area, the parking of vehicles shall not be allowed within the first thirty-(30) feet of the front yard. 
4.21.6.2  For each existing subdivided lot of record as of March 1, 1983, subject to PC zoning only, one (1) curb cut for access and egress onto Route 83 shall be permitted for all future development of the parcel. The width, turning radii, and location of this curb cut with respect to each individual lot shall be established at the time of initial Plan of Development application so as to accommodate future planned development of each parcel. The Planning & Zoning Commission may require the submission of a schematic development plan for undeveloped portions of the property to assist in determining the best location of the curb cut. If warranted by traffic flow and/or safety consideration, this requirement may be waived at the sole discretion of the Planning & Zoning Commission. 
4.21.6.3  The complete Site Plan as required in Section 14 shall be submitted to the Planning & Zoning Commission as part of the submission of the application for development. 
4.21.6.4  To provide landscaped outdoor spaces and attractive buffers between adjacent uses in the zone and between the rear parcel boundaries and adjacent zones, the following general landscaping criteria are required: 
All setback areas shall be landscaped at a minimum with sod, ground cover and/or low-level shrubbery, or natural buffering shall be preserved. 
Where a parcel in the PC zone abuts a residential zone and in the setback area between parcels, the Planning & Zoning Commission may at its discretion, and where topographical conditions permit, require the construction of an earth berm within the side or rear yard setback whose minimum dimensions with be three (3) feet in height and ten (10) feet wide with a 2:1 slope and require that such berm be landscaped with an impervious coniferous hedge and/or comparable planting of deciduous trees and low-level shrubbery. Where such buffering is required, the minimum requirements are: 
Trees (deciduous or coniferous) must be three (3) inches in caliper-planted within four (4) feet of each other. 
In the front yard setback area, the Planning & Zoning Commission may require the construction of a berm to shield large expanses of parking located in the area between the building and the street line. If a berm is required, the Commission will first take into consideration the visibility of the building from the street line and the effect of the berm on sight distances from the parcel's curb cut. At a minimum the front yard setback area must be landscaped with low-level shrubbery, ground cover and/or sod. 
4.21.6.5  Signage of the commercial and office uses permitted in the zone shall conform to the following criteria: 
One (1) all-purpose sign per parcel to be located at the ingress/egress point shall be permitted per lot of record. The sign shall not exceed one hundred (100) square feet in area and shall not exceed ten (10) feet in height, nor be located less than fifteen (15) feet from the edge of pavement. The sign may be illuminated either internally or by spotlights. Each individual business located upon a lot of record may have one (1) parallel sign affixed to the building/store façade. The maximum area of the sign shall be determined by multiplying the length of the building/store façade times 1 (e.g., thirty (30) foot façade results in thirty (30) square foot sign area). 
No neon, movable, temporary or banner type signs are permitted. 
4.21.7 - Use Variances: 
Under no circumstances shall the Zoning Board of Appeals grant a variance to allow a use in this zoning district specifically allowed by the Planning and Zoning Commission under Section 4.21.5. 
4.22 - SPECIAL FLOATING ZONE-GARDEN ZONE (GZ) 

4.22.1 - Area and Yard Requirements: 
4.22.1.1  Minimum lot area: 3 acres 
4.22.1.2  Minimum lot width: 200 feet 
4.22.1.3  Minimum front yard, residential uses 50 feet 
4.22.1.4  Minimum front yard, non-residential uses: 50 feet 
4.22.1.5  Minimum rear yard, residential uses 20 feet 
4.22.1.6  Minimum rear yard, non-residential uses: 50 feet 
4.22.1.7  Minimum side yard, residential uses: 10 feet 
4.22.1.8  Minimum side yard, non-residential uses: 50 feet 
4.22.1.9  Minimum floor area, residential uses (single level) 1,000 square feet 
4.22.1.10  Maximum floor area, non-residential uses: 3,500 feet 
4.22.2 - Permitted Uses: 
4.22.2.1  Use as a nursery, greenhouse or garden center may be accompanies by a single-family residential use. 
4.22.2.2  Nurseries, greenhouses and garden centers including facilities for the wholesale and retail sale of products ordinarily grown and/or sold at nurseries, greenhouses or garden centers, subject to the conditions set forth in Section 4.22.3. 
4.22.2.3  Signs, subject to the requirements of Section 16.1, Section 16.3, and Section 16.5. 
4.22.3 - Conditions: 
4.22.3.1  Use as a nursery, greenhouse or garden center may be accompanied by a single-family residential use. 
4.22.3.2  In no case shall more than one residential structure be permitted per lot. 
4.22.4 - Inapplicability of certain general provisions: 
The following sections shall not apply to buildings directly related to the growth, storage and/or sale of nursery, greenhouse or garden products: 3.20 and 3.3. 
4.22.5 - Procedure: 
With any application for a Garden Zone (GZ) Floating Zone, the applicant must submit a site plan showing the following: (a) existing roads, driveways, loading and parking areas, if any; (b) existing walkways and sidewalks, if any; (c) existing topography; (d) existing drainage, if any; and (e) existing buildings or structures, if any. 
4.22.6 - Use Variances: 
Under no circumstances shall the Zoning Board of Appeals grant a variance to allow a use in this zoning district specifically allowed by the Planning and Zoning Commission under Section 4.22.8. 
4.22.7 - A Site Plan showing the proposed improvements or development of the site must be submitted for approval to the Commission within a six (6) month period of time following the approval of the "Special Floating Zone" or the zoning approval will become null and void and the parcel of land will return to its original zoning classification. 
4.22.7.1  Exception for Expansion of Existing Garden Zone: When an application is made for approval of an expansion of an existing Special Floating Zone - Garden Zone, then the provisions of Section 4.22.7 above shall not apply, and a Site Plan containing all information required under Section 14 must be submitted for approval to the Commission when new construction, changes in or on a site, or changes of the exterior of a structure on the site is proposed, unless determined to be a Minor Modification pursuant to Section 14.1.1.2. 
4.22.8 - In addition to any other required permits or approvals, a Special Permit shall be required for any use or development in this zone when any of the following thresholds are met for any parcel or development. 
4.22.8.1  More than forty (40) off-street parking spaces are required or; 
4.22.8.2  The aggregate square footage for all structures on any parcel exceeds 25,000; 
4.22.8.3  This section shall not apply to developments or subsequent modifications to projects approved by the Commission when said original approvals were obtained prior to March 1, 1992. 
4.22.8.4  Lot coverage of forty-five (45) percent or more. In order to grant this Special Permit, the Commission must find that this additional coverage will not increase the off-site storm water runoff or it is the written opinion of the Town Engineer that all storm water runoff should be discharged off-site. If the area is in an aquifer protection zone, the provision of Section 20.5 shall also apply. 
4.22.8.5  A structure with a height exceeding two and a half (2 1/2) stories or thirty-five (35) feet. In order to grant this Special Permit, the Commission must receive a written opinion from the Fire Marshal as to the fire safety aspects the increased height would involve. 
4.22.8.6  A development having less than the required rear and side yards providing the abutting zoning classification is the same as the zoning classification of the proposed development and all other Special Permit requirements are the same. 
4.22.8.7  Message board sign by approval of both a Site Plan and Special Permit. 
4.23 - HISTORIC DISTRICT-DOWNTOWN BUSINESS & RESIDENTIAL (DBR) 

4.23.1 - The purpose of this district is to foster the economic revitalization of downtown Rockville by attracting a variety of new retail and residential uses and promoting growth and expansion of existing uses, all in a manner that is compatible with the character of the existing downtown area. 
4.23.2 - Area and Yard Requirements: 
4.23.2.1  Minimum lot area: 5,000 square feet 
4.23.2.2  Minimum lot width: 50 feet 
4.23.2.3  Minimum front yard: No minimum, but shall be equal to or exceed the median average front yard of the buildings on either side of the lot. 
4.23.2.4  Minimum rear yard: Where the lot does not abut the RC or PND district, the rear yard shall be equal to five feet (5'). Where the lot does abut the RC or PND district, the rear yard must be twenty feet (20'). 
4.23.2.5  Minimum side yard: Where the lot does not abut the RC or PND district, the minimum side yard shall be five feet (5') unless a common firewall is constructed in which case there shall be no minimum side yard. Where the lot does abut the RC or PND district, the side yard must be ten feet (10'). 
4.23.2.6  Minimum floor area: 1,000 square feet. 
4.23.3 - Permitted uses: 
4.23.3.1  Retail sale of food, non-alcoholic beverages, drugs, clothing, jewelry, hardware, stationery, specialty items, household appliances, and furnishings. 
4.23.3.2  Restaurants, non-full service and full service, subject also to the provisions of Section 17.1 
4.23.3.3  Professional or business offices; governmental offices and facilities; clinics; dental, medical and health offices, provided none of the aforementioned uses is to be located on the ground floor of a building. For purposes of these regulations, "ground floor" shall be defined as the floor of the building that is entered from street level. 
4.23.3.4  Places of worship or religious facilities, provided the same are not to be located on the ground floor of a building, unless the building was originally constructed for such purpose. 
4.23.3.5  Banks or other financial institutions. 
4.23.3.6  Hospitals. 
4.23.3.7  Commercial recreational facilities. 
4.23.3.8  Cultural, arts, crafts and education facilities; libraries; galleries; studios; and workshops. 
4.23.3.9  Personal convenience services limited to barbershops, beauty shops nail salons and dry cleaning establishments, provided the dry cleaning is performed off the premises. 
4.23.3.10  Single and two-family dwellings. 
4.23.3.11  Accessory uses customarily incidental to the above permitted uses. 
4.23.3.12  One parallel sign, i.e., signs affixed to and parallel to the façade of the building, per business conducted within the building upon the premises, provided that the total area for all parallel signs on a given wall of a building shall not exceed two square feet (2 SF) per linear foot of that wall, and further provided that the parallel sign(s) meet all other requirements of Section 16. Additional signs complying with the provisions of Section 16 may be permitted when granted a Special Permit by the Planning & Zoning Commission. 
4.23.4 - Special Exceptions: 
The following uses may be permitted when granted a Special Exception by the Zoning Board of Appeals (ZBA). 
4.23.4.1  Laundromats serviced by public sewers. 
4.23.4.2  Roadside selling, subject also to the provisions of Section 3.19. 
4.23.5 - Special Permits: 
The following uses may be permitted when granted a Special Permit by the Planning & Zoning Commission (PZC) subject also to the provisions of Section 17.3: 
4.23.5.1  Massage therapy establishments, subject also to the provisions of Sections 4.9.4.22 and 4.9.4.23. 
4.23.5.2  Facilities containing three (3) or more electronic, mechanical, video or similar games or devices. 
4.23.5.3  Sellers and servers of alcoholic beverages when not accessory to a full service restaurant. This use shall also be subject to the provisions of Section 17.1. 
4.23.5.4  Veterinary offices, provided there shall be no over-night facilities for animals. 
4.23.5.5  Manufacturing, storing, processing, fabricating, packaging or assembling activities wholly within a building or a unified complex of buildings. 
4.23.5.6  Wholesale distribution or warehousing. 
4.23.5.7  Printing or publishing establishments. 
4.23.5.8  Indoor movie theatres; performing arts theatres, auditoriums. 
4.23.5.9  Multi-family dwellings, subject also to the provisions of Sections 10.1, 4.7.5, and 4.7.7. However, there shall be no increase permitted in the number of separate dwelling units within existing multi-family residential buildings. 
4.23.5.10  Mixed non-residential and residential uses upon a single parcel. 
4.23.5.11  Conversion of residential to non-residential use, conversion of non-residential to residential use. 
4.23.5.12  Bed and Breakfast (B&B); hotels, motels. 
4.23.5.13  Day care establishments. 
4.23.5.14  Emergency shelters for the homeless. 
4.23.5.15  Home based businesses of Major-Type 2. 
4.23.5.16  Professional or business offices; governmental offices and facilities, clinics; dental, medical and health offices, tattoo studio, any of which are to be located on the ground floor of a building. 
4.23.5.17  Places of worship or religious facilities to be located on the ground floor of a building that was not originally constructed for that purpose. 
4.23.5.18  Retail sales of merchandise similar in nature, as determined by the Commission, to the items permitted in Section 4.23.3.1. 
4.23.5.19  Additional signs other than those permitted in Section 4.23.3.12, subject also to the provision of Section 16. 
4.23.5.20  Laboratories and research facilities. 
4.23.5.21  In addition to any other permits or approvals, a special permit is required for development in this zone when any of the following thresholds are met: 
4.23.5.21.1  The proposed development has off-street parking area or loading spaces located within fifty feet (50') of a residence. 
4.23.5.21.2  Lot coverage of eighty percent (80%) or more. In order to grant this Special Permit, the Planning and Zoning Commission (PZC) must find that the additional lot coverage will not increase the off-site storm water run-off or it is the opinion, in writing, of the Town Engineer that all storm water run off should be discharged from the site. If the parcel is in an aquifer protection zone, the provisions of Section 20.5 shall also apply. 
4.23.5.21.3  A structure exceeding three (3) stories or forty feet (40') of height. In order to grant this Special Permit, the Planning & Zoning Commission (PZC) must receive a written opinion from the Fire Marshal in regard to the fire safety aspect related to the increased height. 
4.23.5.21.4  Outside displays by retail sales establishments when said displays occupy an area greater than ten percent (10%) of the gross floor area of the individual business utilizing the display and continue for a period in excess of seventy-two (72) hours. 
4.23.5.21.5  Drive-up service window by approval of both a Site Plan and a Special Permit. 
4.23.5.22  Adaptive Re-use per Sections 2.96 & 3.26 
4.23.5.23  Message board sign by approval of both a Site Plan and Special Permit. 
4.23.5.24  Convalescent homes or nursing homes and assisted living facilities when connected to public water and sanitary sewer. 
4.23.5.25  Residential facilities for special education. 
4.23.6 - Use variances: 
Under no circumstances shall the Zoning Board of Appeals grant a variance to allow a use in this zoning district specifically allowed by the Planning and Zoning Commission under Section 4.23.5. 
4.24 - PLANNED DEVELOPMENT ZONE (PDZ): GERBER FARM AREA 

4.24.1 - Purpose: 
The purpose of this district is to allow orderly development consistent with the Town Plan of Conservation & Development, while taking into account the economic development, fiscal improvement of the community, potential negative impacts on traffic, conservation, neighboring residential areas and critical natural resources, including the protection of the Hockanum River. This zone is directed at fostering a compatible mixture of residential, commercial, and light industrial uses through the use of appropriate placement of building and parking areas, as well as the use of significant landscape buffers to provide an effective transition between dissimilar uses. 
4.24.2 - Area and Yard Requirements: 
Standard Requirement Abutting Residential* Aggregate Building(s) Footprint(s) Exceeds 40,000 Square Feet** 4.24.2.1 Minimum lot area 1 acre 4.24.2.2 Minimum lot width 150 feet 4.24.2.3 Minimum front yard 50 feet 50 feet* 4.24.2.4 Minimum rear yard 50 feet 100 feet* 125 feet** 4.24.2.5 Minimum side yard 50 feet 100 feet* 125 feet** 4.24.2.6 Maximum lot coverage 60% 4.24.2.7 Minimum Requirement to rezone to Planned Development Zone (PDZ): Forty (40) acre contiguous land area including streets and highways, abutting and/or including existing parcels zoned PDZ. 4.24.2.8 Minimum Developable Acreage: Any Development shall be limited to the Developable Acreage of the parcel on which it is proposed, or shall obtain a Wetlands Permit for regulated activity as defined by the Inland Wetlands and Watercourse Regulations of the Town. Development of areas with slopes in excess of 15% shall be allowed by a three-quarters vote of all members of the Commission.  
Notes: 
* Applies only to specific yard(s) abutting residential use or residential zoning district. 
** An additional twenty-five feet (25') of depth of rear, and side yards is required for each additional twenty thousand square feet (20,000 SF) of building(s) footprint(s) area over the first forty thousand square feet (40,000 SF) aggregate areas of building(s) footprint(s) up to a maximum of two hundred feet (200') depth. 
4.24.3 - Permitted and Prohibited Uses: 
There are no permitted uses or Special Exceptions in this zone. Prohibited uses and activities include, but are not limited to, those uses and activities that would pose an unreasonable risk of having significant adverse impact upon the surface water or groundwater resources of the Hockanum River Watershed, including but not limited to, the following: Gasoline sales; automotive, sales, service, repairs or storage; the garaging or over-night parking of trucks or recreation vehicles (RV's); dry cleaning or commercial laundry facilities; car wash facilities; film processing or commercial photographic processing; junk yards; industrial waste storage or disposal facilities; and the manufacture, treatment, handling, transportation, disposal or storage of hazardous materials, including bulk fuel storage. 
4.24.4 - Special Permit/Site Plan: 
4.24.4.1  The uses below may be permitted when granted a Special Permit and a Site Plan by the Planning & Zoning Commission (PZC). The Commission shall not grant any Special Permit until it has determined that the proposed use and activities are compatible with the Town Plan of Conservation and Development, comply with the applicable standards for Special Permits as contained in this Section, as well as in Section 17.3 of these Regulations, and are in the public interest after considering: (1) The existing or future character of the neighboring uses; (2) environmental and ecological impacts, (3) the potential for unreasonable amounts of noise, odors, or other noxious effects, and (4) any necessary safeguards to protect neighboring properties and the Town of Vernon, including: 
4.24.4.1.1  That the location and size of the proposed use and the nature and intensity of use in relation to the size of the lot will be in harmony with the orderly development of the area and compatible with other neighboring uses; 
4.24.4.1.2  That the design elements of the proposed development are attractive and suitable in relation to the site characteristics and style of other buildings in the immediate area, and that the proposed use would not pose an unacceptable risk of altering the essential characteristics of the area or adversely effecting property values in the neighborhood; 
4.24.4.1.3  That the kind, size, location and height of structure and the nature and extent of landscaping on the lot are appropriate for the use and will not pose an unacceptable risk of hindering or discouraging the appropriate use of adjoining property or diminishing the value thereof; 
4.24.4.1.4  That the proposed plan, to include the location, size, height and orientation of the building, access to the building, location of parking, and provision of landscape buffers provide for a reasonable transition to adjoining uses and structures of a lesser scale; 
4.24.4.1.5  That streets providing access to the proposed use are adequate in width, grade, alignment and visibility, and have adequate capacity for the additional traffic generated by the proposed use. Traffic on town roads and their corresponding intersections with other town roads and driveways that are shown to be affected by the proposed development shall be LOS C or better on average, during peak hours of operation of the proposed use (i.e. Retail, Restaurant) when considering the impacts of the proposed development. If LOS C is to be reduced as a result of the proposed development, the applicant may have the option of reducing such LOS by providing whatever modifications and or improvements that are necessary onsite and/or offsite in order to maintain the LOS recommended above as long as such improvements or modification are within the control of the applicant and/or the Town of Vernon. If the existing conditions of the Town Road and their corresponding intersections with other town roads and driveways affected by the proposed development is already LOS C or worse, the applicant shall make whatever modifications and or improvements, that are reasonable, and technically and economically feasible, to improve the LOS in those affected areas. 
4.24.4.1.6  As part of the site plan criteria in the PDZ the applicant should demonstrate the location and design of the proposed buildings and associated parking by taking into consideration the location of significant landforms, ecological systems, natural site drainage, flood plains, existing grading and stands of mature trees or other natural resources, and the minimization of grading activities and the provision of open space near these resources. 
4.24.4.1.7  In addition to the standard site plan requirements, any development proposed within the PDZ shall provide for pedestrian and bicycle access including but not limited to: 
  Bike racks and or bike parking to be located as close to the building entrance as possible; 
  Stations for transit riders, where feasible; 
  Sidewalks connecting the new development to transit stops, where feasible; 
  Public sidewalks, unless waived by Section 3.25; 
4.24.4.2  Portions of this Zone also are subject to the provisions of the Aquifer Protection Zone, Section 20, wherein certain uses are restricted or permitted only under specified conditions. 
4.24.4.2.1  In addition to the requirements of Section 20, any site plan or use proposed within Planned Development Zones containing areas shown on the Town Aquifer Map as containing Aquifer Protection Areas shall accept and recharge rainfall as it relates to the natural characteristics of the site and the amount of rainfall it receives. Development proposals shall show that the aquifer shall receive the same volume of water post development that would naturally be received under pre- developed conditions. In order to show compliance with this section the applicant shall utilize the "Hydrologic Soil Group Approach" methodology outlined in Section 7.5.1 Groundwater Recharge Volume (GRV) in the "2004 Connecticut Stormwater Quality Manual" 
4.24.4.3  The following uses may be granted a special permit by the PZC if complying with the Regulations and criteria for a special permit: 
4.24.4.3.1  Manufacturing, storing, printing, publishing, processing, fabricating, packaging or assembling activities wholly within a building or unified complex of buildings; 
4.24.4.3.2  Multiple, single-family and multi-family dwellings subject to the following requirements: 
4.24.4.3.2.1  All multi-family and multiple-single-family structures shall be entirely serviced by public sewers and by a public water supply. 
4.24.4.3.2.2  Multi-family and multiple-single-family units shall be subject to the requirements of sections 4.7.5 & 10.1. 
4.24.4.3.2.3  Single-family dwellings for lots with frontage on Dart Hill Road. 
4.24.4.3.3  Hotels, motels, conference and convention centers, indoor theaters, and museums; 
4.24.4.3.4  Research and experimental laboratories, veterinary hospitals and animal care services (excluding kennels), and medical facilities; 
4.24.4.3.5  Full-service restaurants; 
4.24.4.3.6  Professional office buildings, general office buildings, and office parks; 
4.24.4.3.7  Retail sales and services when the lots have frontage on a State highway. The Commission may limit the hours of operation for retail operations to protect adjacent residential neighborhoods; 
4.24.4.3.8  Outside displays, when said displays occupy an area greater than ten percent (10%) of the gross floor area of the individual business utilizing the display; 
4.24.4.3.9  Drive-up service window by approval of both a Site Plan and a Special Permit. 
4.24.4.3.10  Recreation facilities, education facilities, religious facilities, cultural, non-profit, and philanthropic activities; 
4.24.4.3.11  Plumbing, heating, electrical, industrial, and general contracting establishments, which may include showrooms. Any outside storage of materials or equipment, shall be screened from abutting properties and views from public streets through landscape buffering which may include fencing; 
4.24.4.3.12  Accessory uses customarily incidental to the listed uses. (Refer to Section 2.132 for definition). However, the storage of chemicals, pesticides, fertilizers, and similar materials is prohibited. 
4.24.4.3.13  Signs subject to Zoning Regulations Section 16: 
4.24.4.3.13.1  Residentially used lots are not subject to Section 16.3; 
4.24.4.3.13.2  Lots used for non residential uses are not subject to Section 16.2; 
4.24.4.3.13.3  Lots with mixed uses, when said uses include a residential component, shall be subject to the least restrictive requirement of Section 16. 
4.24.4.3.13.4  Message board sign by approval of both a Site Plan and Special Permit. 
4.24.4.3.14  Reserved. 
4.24.4.3.15  In addition to any other required permits or approvals, a special permit shall be required for any use or development in this zone, when any of the following thresholds are met for any parcel or development. However, the requirements of the Section shall not apply to developments or subsequent modifications to projects approved by the Commission when said original approvals were obtained prior to July 1, 1999. 
4.24.4.3.15.1  More than forty (40) off-street parking spaces are required; 
4.24.4.3.15.2  The proposed structure is within two hundred feet (200') of a residential structure; 
4.24.4.3.15.3  The proposed development has any off-street parking or loading spaces within two hundred feet (200') of a residential structure; 
4.24.4.3.15.4  The aggregate square footage for all structures on any parcel exceeds twenty-five thousand square feet (25,000 SF); 
4.24.4.3.15.5  Lot coverage is greater than fifty percent (50%). 
4.24.4.3.15.5.1  In order to grant this special permit, the Commission, must find: 
4.24.4.3.15.5.1.1  That this additional coverage will not increase the off-site storm water run-off or it is the written opinion of the Town Engineer that all storm water run-off should be discharged off-site. 
4.24.4.3.15.5.1.2  That the level of impervious surface is appropriate for the site and will not create a negative impact to the Hockanum River Watersheds. 
4.24.4.3.15.5.1.3  In making these determinations the commission shall consider the use of LID (Low Impact Development) treatment practices for stormwater generated on the site including, but not limited to: the use of rain gardens; grass pavers; porous pavers; reinforced turf, roof stormwater harvesting systems; grass swales; vegetative roofs; bioretention cells/ swales; preservation of native soils and vegetation; and the ability of such proposal to maintain a hydrologically functional landscape. All LID practices proposed shall be consistent with the 2004 DEP Stormwater Quality Manual and 2002 Connecticut Erosion & Sedimentation Guidelines. 
4.24.4.3.15.5.1.4  If the area is in an aquifer protection zone, the provisions of Section 20.5 & 20.6 shall apply also. 
4.24.4.3.15.6  A structure with a height exceeding three (3) stories or forty feet (40'). In order to grant this special permit, the Commission must receive a written opinion from the Fire Marshall as to the fire safety aspects that the increased height will involve. 
4.24.4.3.15.7  A development having less than the required front, rear or side yards when the abutting use classification is the same as the use classification of the proposed development and all other special permit requirements are met. "Use classification" for the purpose of this Section means a residential use, a commercial use, or an industrial use. 
4.24.4.3.15.8  Any use with an activity conducted more than twelve (12) hours per day. 
4.24.4.3.15.9  A development having less than the required front, rear or side yard requirements by showing that such reduction allows for the provision of three or more community amenities including but not limited to: 
• Fountains; 
• Parks; 
• Clock Towers; 
• Patio/Seating Area; 
• An open space that serves a valid public purpose; 
• Pedestrian plaza with benches; 
• Outdoor play area; 
• Scenic area displaying natural or artificial water feature; 
• Courtyard area with or without textured paving for public gathering and/or interaction; 
• Landscaped garden; 
• Artist walk/display area; 
• Benches or ledges with a scenic view; 
• Walking trails; 
• Seasonal planting areas; 
• Sculpture or other artwork in a place for public gathering and reflection; 
• Outdoor eating or café; 
• The provision of Open Space, as defined by Section 3.2.8A of the Subdivision Regulations, which is reasonably related to the size and scale of the development proposed; 
• Or other deliberately shaped area and or focal feature or amenity that adequately enhances such community and public spaces. 
In order to grant this special permit, the Commission must find: 
4.24.4.3.15.9.1  That the proposed amenity or feature adequately enhances the community and creates a public place; 
4.24.4.3.15.9.2  That where possible, these spaces are connected to sidewalks, bus stops, walking trails, bikeways; greenways; linear parks or integrated with traffic patterns, drop off and pick up points for alternate modes of transportation; 
4.24.4.3.15.9.3  That all community amenities provided are designed and placed in a location that will allow for maximum utilization of the public; i.e. - a fountain placed in the middle of a vast parking area is not likely to be utilized; 
4.24.4.3.15.9.4  All community amenities provided must be designed to respond to and/ or stimulate pedestrian activity, but not block or cause congestion. 
4.24.4.3.16  Home Occupations in multiple single-family and multi-family owner occupied dwellings. The applicant must present evidence of approval or permission from the homeowners association of the property at which the activity is to occur. 
4.24.4.3.17  Home occupations in single-family and two-family owner occupied dwellings. 
4.24.4.4  PDZ Parking Requirements: 
In order to ensure that Parking conditions are consistent with the purposes and intent of Sections 4.24.1, the following parking requirements shall apply to all proposed developments within the PDZ, in addition to the requirements of Section 12: 
4.24.4.4.1  Any new development requiring more than fifty (50) parking spaces under Section 12 shall not provide more than one and three tenths (1.3) times the minimum number of spaces required under Section 12; 
4.24.4.4.1.1  The parking requirement of Section 4.24.4.4.1 may be increased to one and one half (1.5) times the minimum number of spaces required by Section 12 if such additional parking is provided by porous pavers, grass pavers, reinforced turf, or a multi-level parking structure; 
4.24.4.4.2  Any new development requiring fifty (50) parking spaces or less under Section 12 shall not provide more than one and one half (1.50) times the minimum number of spaces required under Section 12; 
4.24.4.4.2.1  The parking requirement of Section 4.24.4.4.2 may be increased to two (2) times the minimum number of spaces required by Section 12 if such additional parking is provided by porous pavers, grass pavers, reinforced turf, or a multi-level parking structure; 
4.24.4.4.3  All parking above the minimum specified by Section 12 may be provided by porous pavers, grass pavers, or reinforced turf, as proposed by the applicant, subject to the approval of the Commission upon finding that the utilization of such parking will be limited to peak seasons or overflow parking only and will not be overly utilized (limited to use less than thirty (30) days per year). 
4.24.4.4.4  Any new development containing more than one use or a mix of uses shall, wherever feasible, demonstrate the inclusion of shared parking in order to meet the parking requirements of the Planned Development Zone. 
4.24.4.4.5  The applicant may request a waiver of any parking requirement of this Section (4.24.4.4) by demonstrating that the proposed parking spaces are utilized on a regular basis (more than thirty (30) days per year) and the sharing parking between uses and buildings is not feasible. The applicant may also request the use of paved parking spaces in place of reinforced turf, or porous or grass pavers by demonstrating that the use of such pavers would not be appropriate for the site and would result in environmental harm. The approval of these waivers shall require a three quarters (3/4) vote of all members of the Commission. 
4.24.5 - Use Variance: 
Under no circumstances shall the Zoning board of Appeals grant a Variance to allow a use in this zoning district specifically prohibited under 4.24.3 and specifically allowed by the Planning and Zoning Commission under Section 4.24.4. 
4.24.6 - Fiscal and Public Benefits: 
The following special permit approval criteria shall be applied to uses in addition to the requirements of Zoning Regulations Section 4.24.4 and Section 17.3: 
4.24.6.1  The Applicant must provide a municipal fiscal impact analysis / study demonstrating the net municipal revenue impact of a proposal using acceptable cost/revenue analysis techniques, demonstration of open space conservation and linkage to other open spaces, demonstration of acceptable traffic impact, and demonstration of compatibility of uses within the site and with neighbors in the district as well as neighbors abutting the district. 
4.24.6.2  When the proposal includes a use or a mix of uses, which in sum are net tax revenue negative to the Town or only marginally net revenue positive, the Commission shall make a finding that other considerations outweigh the negative fiscal impacts, such as in regard to general community benefits, nonprofit activities, and activities of cultural or historic significance. 
4.24.6.3  All development shall be required to be compatible with the Town Plan of Conservation & Development and be supportive of the public health, general welfare, and safety of the community, including adequate provision of public facilities, a minimization of the number of access points on existing roads, and consideration of environmental and ecological concerns. 
4.24.7 - Landscape Buffers: 
4.24.7.1  Composition-Landscaped buffers shall be provided where required by this Section of the Zoning Regulations and shall conform to the standards illustrated in the "Buffer Yard" graphic (Appendix A): 
4.24.7.1.1  Canopy trees shall be deciduous shade trees planted at three inches (3") in caliper with a mature height of at least thirty-five feet (35'); 
4.24.7.1.2  Under-story trees shall be deciduous shade or fruit trees planted at two inches (2") in caliper with a mature height of at least twelve feet (12'); 
4.24.7.1.3  Evergreens shall be coniferous species planted at six feet (6') in height; 
4.24.7.1.4  Shrubs shall be either deciduous species planted at two and one- half feet (2 1/2') height with a mature height of at least six feet (6') or coniferous species planted at two and one-half feet (2-1/2') in spread. 
4.24.7.2  Front Yards: 
4.24.7.2.1  Adjacent to residences-A front yard landscaped buffer, meeting or exceeding the requirements of the type "A" Buffer Yard, may be required by the Commission in conjunction with proposed industrial or commercial developments to preserve and protect residential property values and privacy of residential lots; 
4.24.7.2.2  Adjacent to streets-A front yard landscape buffer, meeting or exceeding the requirements of the type "A" Buffer Yard, may be required by the Commission in conjunction with proposed industrial or commercial developments to screen parking lot areas from the public street. 
4.24.7.3  Side / Rear Yards-A landscaped buffer shall be provided along side and rear yards in conjunction with proposed industrial or commercial developments which abut Residential Zones or uses: 
4.24.7.3.1  A type "B" Buffer Yard shall be required where commercial development abuts a residential zone or use; 
4.24.7.3.2  A type "C" Buffer Yard shall be required where an industrial use abuts a residential zone or use or a proposed building has a footprint greater than forty thousand square feet (40,000SF). 
4.24.7.4  The front, side/rear yard buffer requirements may be reduced or waived at the discretion of the Commission, when warranted by special conditions. The Commission shall determine which type of Buffer Yard within each category shall be used upon a review of the site design, topography, existing vegetation and abutting land uses. The Commission may authorize the use of existing vegetation in lieu of part or all the Buffer yard requirements. Where conditions are such that a buffer cannot be located directly adjacent to a yard because of other regulatory considerations such as, but not limited to, wetlands preservation, the buffer may be reduced or waived as provided for above, or the Commission may require an alternate location for the buffer. Also, the Commission may require the substitution of the evergreen plant materials shown in the Buffer Yard graphic (Appendix A). 
4.25 - PLANNED DEVELOPMENT ZONE (PDZ): I-84 EXIT #67 AREA 

4.25.1 - Purpose: 
This district encompasses an area which is served by an Interstate highway and two (2) State roads. The purpose of this district is to provide for development that can take advantage of this transportation infrastructure and contribute to the economic development and fiscal improvement of the community, while being compatible with the Town Plan of Conservation and Development and taking into account the existing commercial and residential development and to avoid negative impacts of traffic and negative impacts on existing natural resources, especially in regard to the environmental characteristics, constraints, and resources of the Tankerhoosen River Watershed. 
4.25.2 - Area and Yard Requirements: 
Standard Requirement Abutting 
Residential* 4.25.2.1 Minimum lot area 1 acre 4.25.2.2 Minimum lot width 150 feet 4.25.2.3 Minimum front yard 50 feet 50 feet* 4.25.2.4 Minimum rear yard 50 feet 100 feet* 4.25.2.5 Minimum side yard 50 feet 100 feet* 4.25.2.6 Maximum lot coverage 60% 4.25.2.7 Minimum Requirement to rezone to Planned Development Zone (PDZ): Forty (40) acre contiguous land area including streets and highways, abutting and/or including existing parcels zoned PDZ. 4.25.2.8 Minimum Developable Acreage: Any Development shall be limited to the Developable Acreage of the parcel on which it is proposed, or shall obtain a Wetlands Permit for regulated activity as defined by the Inland Wetlands and Watercourse Regulations of the Town. Development of areas with slopes in excess of 15% shall be allowed by a three-quarters vote of all members of the Commission.  
Note: 
* Applies only to specific yard(s) abutting residential use or residential zoning district. 
4.25.3 - Permitted and Prohibited Uses: 
There are no permitted uses or Special Exceptions in this zone. Prohibited uses and activities include, but are not limited to, those uses and activities that would pose an unreasonable risk of having a significant adverse impact upon the surface water or groundwater resources of the Tankerhoosen River Watershed, including but not limited to, the following: Gasoline sales; automotive, sales, service, repairs or storage; the garaging or overnight parking of trucks or recreation vehicles (RV's); dry cleaning or commercial laundry facilities; car wash facilities; film processing or commercial photographic processing; junk yards; industrial waste storage or processing facilities; and the manufacture, treatment, handling, transportation, disposal or storage of hazardous materials, including bulk fuel storage. 
4.25.4 - Special Permit Site Plan: 
4.25.4.1  The uses below may be permitted when granted a Special Permit and a Site Plan by the Planning & Zoning Commission (PZC). The Commission shall not grant any Special Permit until it has determined that the proposed use and activities are compatible with the Town Plan of Conservation and Development, comply with the applicable standards for Special Permits as contained in this Section, as well as in Section 17.3 of these Regulations, and are in the public interest after considering: (1) The existing or future character of the neighboring uses; (2) environmental and ecological impacts, (3) the potential for unreasonable amounts of noise, odors, or other noxious effects, and (4) any necessary safeguards to protect neighboring properties and the Town of Vernon, including: 
4.25.4.1.1  That the location and size of the proposed use and the nature and intensity of use in relation to the size of the lot will be in harmony with the orderly development of the area and compatible with other neighboring uses; 
4.25.4.1.2  That the design elements of the proposed development are attractive and suitable in relation to the site characteristics and style of other buildings in the immediate area, and that the proposed use would not pose an unacceptable risk of altering the essential characteristics of the area or adversely effecting property values in the neighborhood; 
4.25.4.1.3  That the kind, size, location and height of structure and the nature and extent of landscaping on the lot are appropriate for the use and will not pose an unacceptable risk of hindering or discouraging the appropriate use of adjoining property or diminishing the value thereof; 
4.25.4.1.4  That the proposed plan, to include the location, size, height and orientation of the building, access to the building, location of parking, and provision of landscape buffers provide for a reasonable transition to adjoining uses and structures of a lesser scale; 
4.25.4.1.5  That streets providing access to the proposed use are adequate in width, grade, alignment and visibility, and have adequate capacity for the additional traffic generated by the proposed use. Traffic on Town Roads and their corresponding intersections with other town roads and driveways that are shown to be affected by the proposed development shall be LOS C or better on average, during peak hours of operation of the proposed use (i.e. Retail, Restaurant) when considering the impacts of the proposed development. If LOS C is to be reduced as a result of the proposed development, the applicant may have the option of reducing such LOS by providing whatever modifications and or improvements that are necessary onsite and/or offsite in order to maintain the LOS recommended above as long as such improvements or modification are within the control of the applicant and/or the Town of Vernon. If the existing conditions of the Town Road and their corresponding intersections with other town roads and driveways affected by the proposed development is already LOS C or worse, the applicant shall make whatever modifications and or improvements, that are reasonable, and technically and economically feasible, to improve the LOS in those affected areas. 
4.25.4.1.6  As part of the site plan criteria in the PDZ the applicant should demonstrate the location and design of the proposed buildings and associated parking by taking into consideration the location of significant landforms, ecological systems, natural site drainage, flood plains, existing grading and stands of mature trees or other natural resources, and the minimization of grading activities and the provision of open space near these resources. 
4.25.4.1.7  In addition to the standard site plan requirements, any development proposed within the PDZ shall provide for pedestrian and bicycle access including but not limited to: 
• Bike racks and or bike parking to be located as close to the building entrance as possible; 
• Stations for transit riders, where feasible; 
• Sidewalks connecting the new development to transit stops, where feasible; 
• Public sidewalks, unless waived by Section 3.25; 
4.25.4.2  Portions of this Zone also are subject to the provisions of the Aquifer Protection Zone, Section 20, wherein certain uses are restricted or permitted only under specified conditions. 
4.25.4.2.1  In addition to the requirements of Section 20, any site plan or use proposed within Planned Development Zones containing areas shown on the Town Aquifer Map as containing Aquifer Protection Areas shall accept and recharge rainfall as it relates to the natural characteristics of the site and the amount of rainfall it receives. Development proposals shall show that the aquifer shall receive the same volume of water post development that would naturally be received under pre- developed conditions. In order to show compliance with this section the applicant shall utilize the "Hydrologic Soil Group Approach" methodology outlined in Section 7.5.1 Groundwater Recharge Volume (GRV) in the "2004 Connecticut Stormwater Quality Manual" 
4.25.4.3  The following uses may be granted a special permit by the PZC if complying with the Regulations and criteria for a special permit: 
4.25.4.3.1  Manufacturing, storing, printing, publishing, processing, fabricating, packaging or assembling activities wholly within a building or unified complex of buildings; 
4.25.4.3.2  Single-and two-family structures meeting the requirements of the Residential 27 (R-27) zoning district. 
4.25.4.3.3  Multiple, single-family and multi-family dwellings subject to the following requirements: 
4.25.4.3.3.1  All multi-family and multiple-single-family structures shall be entirely serviced by public sewers and by a public water supply. 
4.25.4.3.3.2  Multi-family and multiple-single-family units shall be subject to the requirements of sections 4.7.5 & 10.1. 
4.25.4.3.4  Hotels, motels, conference and convention centers, indoor theaters, and museums; 
4.25.4.3.5  Research and experimental laboratories, veterinary hospitals and animal care services (excluding kennels), and medical facilities; 
4.25.4.3.6  Full-service restaurants; 
4.25.4.3.7  Professional office buildings, general office buildings, and office parks; 
4.25.4.3.8  Retail sales and services when the lots have frontage on a State highway. The Commission may limit the hours of operation for retail operations to protect adjacent residential neighborhoods; 
4.25.4.3.9  Outside displays, when said displays occupy an area greater than ten percent (10%) of the gross floor area of the individual business utilizing the display; 
4.25.4.3.10  Drive-up service window by approval of both a Site Plan and a Special Permit. 
4.25.4.3.11  Recreation facilities, education facilities, religious facilities, cultural, non-profit, and philanthropic activities; 
4.25.4.3.12  Plumbing, heating, electrical, industrial, and general contracting establishments, which may include showrooms. Any outside storage of materials or equipment, shall be screened from abutting properties and views from public streets through landscape buffering which may include fencing; 
4.25.4.3.13  Accessory uses customarily incidental to the listed uses. (Refer to Section 2.132 for definition). However, the storage of chemicals, pesticides, fertilizers, and similar materials is prohibited. 
4.25.4.3.14  Signs subject to Zoning Regulations Section 16: 
4.25.4.3.14.1  Residentially used lots are not subject to Section 16.3; 
4.25.4.3.14.2  Lots used for non residential uses are not subject to Section 16.2; 
4.25.4.3.14.3  Lots with mixed uses, when said uses include a residential component, shall be subject to the least restrictive requirement of Section 16. 
4.25.4.3.14.4  Message board sign by approval of both a Site Plan and Special Permit. 
4.25.4.3.15  Reserved. 
4.25.4.3.16  In addition to any other required permits or approvals, a special permit shall be required for any use or development in this zone, when any of the following thresholds are met for any parcel or development. However, the requirements of the Section shall not apply to developments or subsequent modifications to projects approved by the Commission when said original approvals were obtained prior to July 1, 1999. 
4.25.4.3.16.1  More than forty (40) off-street parking spaces are required; 
4.25.4.3.16.2  The proposed structure is within two hundred feet (200') of a residential structure; 
4.25.4.3.16.3  The proposed development has any off-street parking or loading spaces within two hundred feet (200') of a residential structure; 
4.25.4.3.16.4  The aggregate square footage for all structures on any parcel exceeds twenty-five thousand square feet (25,000 SF); 
4.25.4.3.16.5  Lot coverage is greater than fifty percent (50%). 
4.25.4.3.16.5.1  In order to grant this special permit, the Commission, must find: 
4.25.4.3.16.5.1.1  That this additional coverage will not increase the off-site storm water run-off or it is the written opinion of the Town Engineer that all storm water run-off should be discharged off-site storm water run-off or it is the written opinion of the Town Engineer that all storm water run-off should be discharged off-site. 
4.25.4.3.16.5.1.2  That the level of impervious surface is appropriate for the site and will not create a negative impact to the Tankerhoosen River Watershed. 
4.25.4.3.16.5.1.3  In making these determinations the Commission shall consider the use of LID (Low Impact Development) treatment practices for stormwater generated on the site including, but not limited to: the use of rain gardens; grass pavers; porous pavers; reinforced turf; roof stormwater harvesting systems; grass swales; vegetative roofs; bioretention cells/swales; preservation of native soils and vegetation; and the ability of such proposal to maintain a hyrdologically functional landscape. All LID practices proposed shall be consistent with the 2004 DEP Stormwater Quality Manual and 2002 Connecticut Erosion & Sedimentation Guidelines. 
4.25.4.3.16.5.1.4  If the area is in an aquifer protection zone, the provisions of Section 20.5 & 20.6 shall apply also. 
4.25.4.3.16.6  A structure with a height exceeding three (3) stories or forty feet (40'). In order to grant this special permit, the Commission must receive a written opinion from the Fire Marshall as to the fire safety aspects that the increased height will involve. 
4.25.4.3.16.7  A development having less than the required front, rear or side yards when the abutting use classification is the same as the use classification of the proposed development and all other special permit requirements are met. "Use classification" for the purpose of this Section means a residential use, a commercial use, or an industrial use. 
4.25.4.3.16.8  Any use with an activity conducted more than twelve (12) hours per day. 
4.25.4.3.16.9  A development having less than the required front, rear or side yard requirements by showing that such reduction allows for the provision of three or more community amenities including but not limited to: 
• Fountains; 
• Parks; 
• Clock Towers; 
• Patio/Seating Area; 
• An open space that serves a valid public purpose; 
• Pedestrian plaza with benches; 
• Outdoor play area; 
• Scenic area displaying natural or artificial water feature; 
• Courtyard area with or without textured paving for public gathering and/or interaction; 
• Landscaped garden; 
• Artist walk/display area; 
• Benches or ledges with a scenic view; 
• Walking trails; 
• Seasonal planting areas; 
• Sculpture or other artwork in a place for public gathering and reflection; 
• Outdoor eating or café; 
• The provision of Open Space, as defined by Section 3.2.8A of the Subdivision Regulations, which is reasonably related to the size and scale of the development proposed; 
• Or other deliberately shaped area and or focal feature or amenity that adequately enhances such community and public spaces. 
In order to grant this special permit, the Commission must find: 
4.25.4.3.16.9.1  That the proposed amenity or feature adequately enhances the community and creates a public place; 
4.25.4.3.16.9.2  That where possible, these spaces are connected to sidewalks, bus stops, walking trails, bikeways; greenways; linear parks or integrated with traffic patterns, drop off and pick up points for alternate modes of transportation; 
4.25.4.3.16.9.3  That all community amenities provided are designed and placed in a location that will allow for maximum utilization of the public; i.e.-a fountain placed in the middle of a vast parking area is not likely to be utilized; 
4.25.4.3.16.9.4  All community amenities provided must be designed to respond to and/or stimulate pedestrian activity, but not block or cause congestion. 
4.25.4.3.17  Home occupations in single-family and two-family owner occupied dwellings 
4.25.4.3.18  Home occupations in multiple single-family and multi-family owner occupied dwellings. The applicant must present evidence of approval or permission from the homeowners association of the property at which the activity is to occur. 
4.25.4.4  PDZ Parking Requirements: 
In order to ensure that Parking conditions are consistent with the purposes and intent of Sections 4.24.1 (and 4.25.1, respectively), the following parking requirements shall apply to all proposed developments within the PDZ, in addition to the requirements of Section 12: 
4.25.4.4.1  New development requiring more than fifty (50) parking spaces under Section 12 shall not provide more than one and three tenths (1.3) times the minimum number of spaces required under Section 12 if such additional parking is provided by porous pavers, grass pavers, reinforced turf; or a multi-level parking structure; 
4.25.4.4.1.1  The parking requirement of Section 4.25.4.4.1 may be increased to one and one half (1.5) times the minimum number of spaces required by Section 12 if such additional parking is provided by porous pavers, grass pavers, reinforced turf, or a multi-level parking structure; 
4.25.4.4.2  Any new development requiring fifty (50) parking spaces or less under Section 12 shall not provide more than one and one half (1.50) times the minimum number of spaces required under Section 12; 
4.25.4.4.2.1  The parking requirement of Section 4.25.4.4.2 may be increased to two (2) times the minimum number of spaces required by Section 12 if such additional parking is provided by porous pavers, grass pavers, reinforced turf, or a multi-level parking structure; 
4.25.4.4.3  All parking above the minimum specified by Section 12 may be provided by porous pavers, grass pavers, or reinforced turf, as proposed by the applicant, subject to the approval of the Commission upon finding that the utilization of such parking will be limited to peak seasons or overflow parking only and will not be overly utilized (limited to use less than thirty (30) days per year). 
4.25.4.4.4  Any new development containing more than one use or a mix of uses shall, wherever feasible, demonstrate the inclusion of shared parking in order to meet the parking requirements of the Planned Development Zone. 
4.25.4.4.5  The applicant may request a waiver of any parking requirement of this Section 4.25.4.4 by demonstrating that the proposed parking spaces are utilized on a regular basis (more than thirty (30) days per year) and the sharing parking between uses and buildings is not feasible. The applicant may also request the use of paved parking spaces in place of reinforced turf, or porous or grass pavers by demonstrating that the use of such pavers would not be appropriate for the site and would result in environmental harm. The approval of these waivers shall require a three quarters (3/4) vote of all members of the Commission. 
4.25.5 - Use Variances: 
Under no circumstances shall the Zoning board of Appeals grant a Variance to allow a use in this zoning district specifically prohibited under 4.25.3 and specifically allowed by the Planning and Zoning Commission under Section 4.25.4. 
4.25.6 - Fiscal and Public Benefits: 
The following special permit approval criteria shall be applied to uses in addition to the requirements of Zoning Regulations Section 4.25.4 and Section 17.3: 
4.25.6.1  The Applicant must provide a municipal fiscal impact analysis / study demonstrating the net municipal revenue impact of a proposal using acceptable cost/revenue analysis techniques, demonstration of open space conservation and linkage to other open spaces, demonstration of acceptable traffic impact, and demonstration of compatibility of uses within the site and with neighbors in the district as well as neighbors abutting the district. 
4.25.6.2  When the proposal includes a use or a mix of uses, which in sum are net tax revenue negative to the Town or only marginally net revenue positive, the Commission shall make a finding that other considerations outweigh the negative fiscal impacts, such as in regard to general community benefits, nonprofit activities, and activities of cultural or historic significance. 
4.25.6.3  All development shall be required to be compatible with the Town Plan of Conservation & Development and be supportive of the public health, general welfare, and safety of the community, including adequate provision of public facilities, a minimization of the number of access points on existing roads, and consideration of environmental and ecological concerns. 
4.25.7 - Landscape Buffers: 
4.25.7.1  Composition-Landscaped buffers shall be provided where required by this Section of the Zoning Regulations and shall conform to the standards illustrated in the "Buffer Yard" graphic (Appendix A): 
4.25.7.1.1  Canopy trees shall be deciduous shade trees planted at three inches (3") in caliper with a mature height of at least thirty-five feet (35'); 
4.25.7.1.2  Under-story trees shall be deciduous shade or fruit trees planted at two inches (2") in caliper with a mature height of at least twelve feet (12'); 
4.25.7.1.3  Evergreens shall be coniferous species planted at six feet (6') in height; 
4.25.7.1.4  Shrubs shall be either deciduous species planted at two and one-half feet (2.5') height with a mature height of at least six feet (6') or coniferous species planted at two and one-half (2.5') feet in spread. 
4.25.7.2  Front Yards: 
4.25.7.2.1  Adjacent to residences-A front yard landscaped buffer, meeting or exceeding the requirements of the type "A" Buffer Yard, may be required by the Commission in conjunction with proposed industrial or commercial developments to preserve privacy of residential lots; 
4.25.7.2.2  Adjacent to streets-A front yard landscape buffer, meeting or exceeding the requirements of the type "A" Buffer Yard, may be required by the Commission in conjunction with proposed industrial or commercial developments to screen parking lot areas from the public street. 
4.25.7.3  Side/Rear Yards-A landscaped buffer shall be provided along side and rear yards in conjunction with proposed industrial or commercial developments which abut Residential Zones or uses: 
4.25.7.3.1  A type "B" Buffer Yard shall be required where commercial development abuts a residential zone or use; 
4.25.7.3.2  A type "C" Buffer Yard shall be required where an industrial use abuts a residential zone or use or a proposed building has a footprint greater than forty thousand square feet (40,000SF). 
4.25.7.4  The front, side/rear yard buffer requirements may be reduced or waived at the discretion of the Commission, when warranted by special conditions. The Commission shall determine which type of Buffer Yard within each category shall be used upon a review of the site design, topography, existing vegetation and abutting land uses. The Commission may authorize the use of existing vegetation in lieu of part or all the Buffer yard requirements. Where conditions are such that a buffer cannot be located directly adjacent to a yard because of other regulatory considerations such as, but not limited to, wetlands preservation, the buffer may be reduced or waived as provided for above, or the Commission may require an alternate location for the buffer. Also, the Commission may require the substitution of the evergreen plant materials shown in the Buffer Yard graphic (Appendix A). 
4.26 - OPEN SPACE ZONE (OSZ) 

4.26.1 - Purpose: 
The purpose of the open space zone is to allow for the clear identification of land on the Town of Vernon Zoning Map that has been set aside from or permanently protected from development by legislation, dedication conservation or other legal means, which shall be used only for recreational, conservation, educational and agricultural purposes. Areas zoned as open space may be used for disconnection of impervious surface to manage stormwater provided that this does not adversely affect use of the area for open space. 
4.26.2 - Permitted Uses: 
Uses permitted within this zone include recreation, conservation, education and agriculture. These areas may be used for disconnection of impervious surface to manage stormwater provided that this does not adversely affect use of the area for open space. Under no circumstances shall a use or activity ensue on a parcel of land within this zone which is contrary and/ or detrimental to the intent and purpose of open space. There are no Special Permit Uses or Special Exceptions within the OSZ. 
4.27 - COMPREHENSIVE MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING ZONE 

4.27.1 - Purpose: 
This district has been created to address the situation where multi-family dwellings and multiple single-family dwellings may be appropriate, but the Planning and Zoning Commission does not believe a zone change to allow said dwellings should be granted until the Planning and Zoning Commission has simultaneously approved a Preliminary Plan of Development for the dwellings to be developed. Therefore, this zone has been created so that the Planning and Zoning Commission can address both the zone change and the Preliminary Plan of Development simultaneously, and the approvals of both the zone change and the Preliminary Plan of Development shall be considered part of one approval process. 
4.27.2 - General Considerations: 
A Comprehensive Multi-Family Dwelling Zone shall permit development which is planned to encourage the appropriate use of the site, with due consideration to the natural features that exist on the site. The design elements of a proposed development shall be attractive and suitable in relation to the character of the neighborhood. 
4.27.3 - Open Space Requirements: 
4.26.3.1  Minimum lot area: 1 acre 
4.26:3.2  Minimum lot width: 150 feet 
4.26.3.3  Minimum front yard: 50 feet 
4.26.3.4  Minimum side yard: 20 feet 
4.26.3.5  Minimum rear yard: 50 feet 
4.26.3.6  Minimum floor area (single level) See Section 10, "Minimum Floor Areas" 
4.27.4 - Permitted Uses: 
There are no permitted uses in this zone. 
4.27.5 - Special Exceptions: 
There are no special exceptions uses in this zone. 
4.27.6 - Allowable Uses: 
The uses allowed shall be either multi-family dwellings or multiple single- family dwellings, but in either case, an applicant must initially receive approval of a zone change and preliminary plan of development and subsequently receive approval for a final plan of development/site plan approval, all as set forth in the following sections. 
4.27.7 - Application Procedures: 
4.27.7.1  The applicant shall file with the Planning and Zoning Commission an application for a zone change, together with an application for approval of a Preliminary Plan of Development for all of the property proposed to be located within the Comprehensive Multi-Family Dwelling Zone. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall hold a public hearing on the zone change application together with the application for a Preliminary Plan of Development. The Commission shall vote on the zone change simultaneously with its decision to approve, deny, or modify and approve the Preliminary Plan of Development. Approval of the zone change application and the Preliminary Plan of Development shall establish a Comprehensive Multi-Family Dwelling Zone and shall permit the applicant and/or his assigns to proceed with the completion of the development as set forth in the Preliminary Plan of Development subject to the provisions of these Regulations. 
4.27.7.2  The Preliminary Plan of Development shall be prepared by a registered professional engineer, a registered architect and/or a registered landscape architect and shall contain those accompanying documents in sufficient detail to indicate: 
4.27.7.2.1  Existing topography with five foot contours, existing structures, existing roads and rights-of-way, boundary description of the site, and major topographic features (including wooded and open areas, slopes greater than 15%, and the approximate location of inland wetlands and watercourses). 
4.27.7.2.2  The location of all proposed vehicular and pedestrian patterns (including location of proposed drive-ways, public roads, sidewalks and pedestrian paths, and parking areas), open space and recreation areas and proposals for connection of roads, driveways, and sidewalks and paths within the site to the existing public road system. A report shall be included regarding existing traffic conditions and information on traffic generated by development of the proposed plan. 
4.27.7.2.3  The proposed location of all buildings within the site. 
4.27.7.2.4  The proposed general system of utilities (including domestic water supply, fire protection, storm water drainage, and sanitary sewer). 
4.27.7.2.5  A table of ratios which shall establish that the requirements of Section 4.7.5 and 4.7.6 have been met. 
4.27.7.2.6  A general description of conservation measures to be utilized in the development of the site to minimize erosion and sedimentation. 
4.27.7.2.7  Where development within the site is to be in phases or units, the anticipated location and acreage of such phases or units. 
4.27.7.2.8  Building Plan-a plan indicating: 
4.27.7.2.8.1  The size of each building in square feet. 
4.27.7.2.8.2  Exterior building elevations identifying the building finish materials and colors. 
4.27.8 - Approval Requirements: 
The applicant shall establish that all of the following conditions have been met: 
4.27.8.1  All necessary utilities shall be available to service the site. 
4.27.8.2  To the extent reasonably possible, the applicant shall develop the site in a manner that will blend harmoniously with the natural landscape. 
4.27.8.3  The applicant shall design the site so that the site can be adequately drained to carry off storm water without impacting any adjoining properties. 
4.27.8.4  All roadways, driveways and off-street vehicle parking shall be designed to facilitate traffic circulation and emergency vehicle movements in a safe and proper manner. 
4.27.8.5  The requirements of sections 4.7.5, 4.7.6 and 4.7.7 shall be met to the extent applicable to the application. 
4.27.8.6  The application must be compatible with neighboring land uses, not create a nuisance, not hinder the future sound development of the community, and shall be in conformance with all applicable sections of the zoning regulations. 
4.27.9 - Final Plan of Development/Site Plan Approval: 
An application for approval of the Final Plan of Development/Site Plan shall include all matters set forth in Section 14 of the Zoning Regulations and all sections of Section 14 shall apply, except that no public hearing shall be required by the Planning and Zoning Commission and no information shall be required which shall duplicate the information that was required as part of the Preliminary Plan of Development approval as set forth in Section 4.26.7.2. Any Inland wetland approvals that are required must be obtained before approval of the Final Plan of Development / Site Plan. 
4.27.10 - Modifications: 
Modifications to the Preliminary Plan of Development shall be made in accordance with Sections 4.26.7 and 4.26.8 of the Zoning Regulations and said applications shall be processed in the same manner as a new application under Sections 4.26.7 and 4.26.8 of the Zoning Regulations. Modifications to the Final Plan of Development/Site Plan approval shall be made in accordance with Section 4.26.9 of the Zoning Regulations. 
SECTION 5 - AREAS SUBJECT TO FLOODING 

5.1 - Special Flood Hazard Areas: 
For the purposes of these regulations, the Special Flood Hazard areas are zones A, A1-30, AE, and AH as delineated on the Flood Insurance rate map as part of the Flood Insurance Study prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (F.E.M.A.) dated August 9, 1999. 
Notwithstanding any other provisions of these regulations, within areas of special flood hazards, no buildings or structures shall be built and no land shall be used, excavated or filled without approval by the Building Inspector in accordance with the provisions of this section and all other requirements of these regulations which are in concert with this section. 
5.2 - Prior to the issuance of any Certificate of Occupancy, building, and/or zoning permits for development in a special flood hazard area, 
all necessary permits required under federal or state law by other governmental agencies, must be obtained. 
5.2.1  New Construction and Substantial Improvements: New construction and substantial improvements shall be (1) anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement on the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy; (2) constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; (3) constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; (4) constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment, and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
5.2.2  Utilities and drainage systems must be located and designed to be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. Water should be prevented from entering or accumulating within the components. 
5.2.3  New water and sewer systems, including on-site systems, must be located and designed to avoid impairment and minimize infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters. 
5.2.4  Any manufactured (mobile) home (including a recreational vehicle placed on a site for one-hundred-eighty (180) consecutive days or longer) shall be installed using methods and practices, which minimize flood damage. Elevation construction standards include piling foundations placed no more than ten (10) feet apart, and the provision of reinforcement for piers more than six feet (6') above ground level. 
5.2.5  The Building Inspector shall review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
5.2.6  As-built elevations and levels to which any flood proofing is effective must be submitted to the Building Inspector who shall maintain these records. 
5.3 - The following minimum requirements apply in specific zones designated on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (F.I.R.M.): 
5.3.1  In unnumbered A zones, the developer and the Building Official shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize, base flood elevation and floodway data from alternative sources, prior to its being provided by FIA (Federal Insurance Administration) through its Flood Insurance Rate Study, as criteria for requiring that the standards of Sections 5.3.2, 5.3.3, and 5.5 be met. 
5.3.2  In Zones A1-30, AE, or AH, new construction and substantial improvements, must meet the following standards: 
5.3.2.1  Residential structures shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the base flood level. 
5.4.2.2  Nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the base flood level; or to be flood proofed to or above that level provided the standards of Section 5.3.3 are met. 
5.3.3  Flood Proofing: Non-residential structure located in all A-zones may be flood proofed in lieu of being elevated provided that together with all attendant utilities and sanitary facilities the areas of the structure below the required elevation are water tight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and use structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall review and/or develop structural designs, specifications, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction which are in accordance with acceptable standards of practice for meeting the provisions of this subsection. 
5.3.4  All manufactured homes (including "mobile" homes placed on a site for one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days or longer) to be placed or substantially improve shall be: 
5.3.4.1  Elevated so that the lowest floor is above the base flood elevation; and 
5.3.4.2  Placed on a permanent foundation which itself is securely anchored and to which the structure is securely anchored so that it will resist flotation, lateral movement, and hydrostatic and hydrodynamic pressures. Anchoring may include, but not be limited to, the use of over the top or frame ties to ground anchors. 
5.4 - In riverine situations, 
the developer must notify adjacent communities and the State Coordinating office prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit copies of such notifications to the PZC and FEMA. No permit shall be issued for any proposed alteration or relocation of a watercourse unless the flood carrying capacity is maintained. 
5.5 - The following floodway provisions shall apply: 
5.5.1  In A zones where base flood elevations have been determined, but before a floodway is designated, no new construction, substantial improvement, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted which will increase base flood elevations more than one (1) foot at any point along the watercourse when all anticipated development is considered cumulatively with the proposed development. 
5.5.2  Should data be requested and/or provided, the Town shall adopt a regulatory floodway based on the principle that the floodway must be able to convey the waters of the base flood without increasing the water surface elevation more than one (1) foot at any point along the watercourses. 
5.5.3  The regulatory floodways established by FEMA on the flood boundary and floodway map are adopted and incorporation herein by reference. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters, which carry debris and potential projectiles and have erosion potential, any development or encroachment (including fill) which would result in any increase (0.00) in flood levels during base flood discharge is prohibited. To demonstrate a less than 0.00 increase the applicant must provide hydraulic analysis performed in accordance with standard engineering practices. 
5.6 - Permitted Uses: 
5.6.1  Agriculture and farming. 
5.6.2  Forestry and nurseries. 
5.7 - Special Permits: 
The following uses may be permitted when granted a Special Permit by the Planning & Zoning Commission: 
5.7.1  Residential, commercial and industrial structures; this includes both primary and secondary structures. 
5.7.2  Public and private open-type recreational uses; including, but not necessarily limited to golf, tennis, equitation, swimming, boating, parks, game farms, and athletic fields. 
5.7.3  Municipal sewer plant or public utility structure not subject to major flood damage. 
5.7.4  Parking as an accessory use to either a special use or for a use permitted immediately adjacent to the floodplain. 
5.7.5  Filling or excavation of land. The filling of land within the special flood hazard area is permitted, subject to the following requirements as well as those of Section 5.5 above. 
5.7.5.1  An application must be submitted to the Planning & Zoning Commission for its consideration and approval, which shall include the following information: 
5.7.5.1.1  An engineering plan prepared by a registered professional engineer showing the existing and proposed contours and the effect upon flooding and drainage conditions on adjacent properties. 
5.7.5.1.2  The engineering plan shall show the location and elevation of all proposed buildings, and building permits shall be issued only for buildings shown on such approved plans. 
5.7.5.1.3  The proposed filling of land for the purpose of building construction shall be logical extensions of land lying at higher elevations. 
5.7.5.1.4  The filling of land shall not retard the flow of the stream or significantly reduce the volume of the storage, which alleviates flooding elsewhere. 
5.7.5.1.5  Application for approval for construction and/or land filling within any encroachment lines established by the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection shall be considered and approved only with the approval in writing of the said State Water Resources Commissioner. 
5.8 - For the purposes of this section, the following definition shall apply: 
5.8.1  Regulatory Floodway: The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
5.8.2  Base Flood: The flood having a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
5.8.3  Flood Insurance Rate Map (F.I.R.M.): An official map of a community on which the F.E.M.A. Administrator has delineated both the special hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
5.8.4  Flood or Flooding: 
5.8.4.1  A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
5.8.4.1.1.  The overflow of inland or tidal waters. 
5.8.4.1.2.  The unusual and rapid accumulation or run-off of surface waters from any source. 
5.8.4.1.3.  Mudslides (i.e., mudflows), which are proximately caused or precipitated by accumulations of water on or under the ground. 
5.8.4.2  The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by similarly unusual or unforeseeable event which results in flooding. 
5.8.5  New construction: For insurance purposes, new construction will pertain to structures for which the start of construction or substantial improvement commenced on or after the effective date of the Flood Insurance Rate Map. 
5.8.5.1  For flood plain management purposes, new construction means structures for which the start of construction or substantial improvement commenced after the effective date of these regulations. 
5.8.6  Start of construction: Includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of a structure (including a manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation or placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations, or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. 
5.8.7  "Structure" for flood plain management purposes, is a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. "Structure" for insurance coverage purposes, means a walled and roofed building, other than a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground and affixed to a permanent site, as well as a manufactured home or foundation. For the latter purpose, the term included a building in the course of construction, alteration or repair, but does not include building materials or supplies intended for use in such construction, alteration or repair, unless such materials or supplies are within an enclosed building on the premises. 
5.8.8  "Development" shall be defined as "any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials". 
5.8.9  "Flood proofed" is defined to mean "watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy". 
5.8.10  Substantial damage: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its origin before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the structure before the damage occurred. 
5.8.11  Mean Sea Level means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced. 
5.8.12  Area of Special Flood Hazard is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. 
5.8.13  Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or store, in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor. 
5.8.14  Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term also includes recreational vehicles, park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable structures placed on a site for one hundred eighty (180) days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
5.8.15  Flood Insurance Study is the official report by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The report contains flood profiles, the water surface elevation of the base food, and other flood data. 
5.8.16  Recreational Vehicles means a vehicle which is: 
a. built on a single chassis; 
b. four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
c. designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
d. designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
5.8.17  Substantial Improvement means any combination of repairs, reconstruction, alteration, or improvements to a structure-taking place over a ten-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure. The market value of the structure should be; 1) the appraised value of the structure "using the cost approach to value" prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or 2) in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. For the purposes of this definition, "Substantial Improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include any improvement project required to comply with existing health, sanitary, or safety code specification, which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions. 
5.9 - Standards for subdivision proposals. 
In all special flood hazard areas the following requirement shall apply: 
5.9.1  All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
5.9.2  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
5.9.3  All subdivision proposals shall provide adequate drainage to reduce exposure to flood hazards; and 
5.9.4  Base flood elevation data shall be provided for all subdivision proposals and other proposed developments (including manufactured home parks and subdivisions) which are five (5) acres of fifty (50) lots, whichever occurs first, and are located in Zone A. 
SECTION 6 - BUILDING ON EXISTING LOTS 

6.1 
Provided that safe and adequate disposal of sewage and a safe water supply can be provided without endangering the health and safety of adjoining residents, the requirements of Section 4 shall not prevent the construction of a permitted building or establishment of a permitted use on a lot containing less than the lot area and width required in Section 4, provided said lot is: 
6.1.1  Recorded prior to July 1, 1965, in the Land Records of the Town of Vernon; or 
6.1.2  Shown on a plan of subdivision approved by the Planning & Zoning Commission of the Town of Vernon and placed on file in the office of the Town Clerk of the Town of Vernon; provided, however, that if five (5) years have elapsed since the filing date of such plan, then all work as defined in Section 8-26(c) of the Connecticut General Statutes as amended must have been completed. 
6.1.3  Recorded prior to the adoption of any zoning amendment changing the required lot area or width. 
6.2 
A group of adjacent lots of record under the same ownership may be re-divided or re-subdivided in accordance with the subdivision regulations into larger lots: 
6.2.1  For permanent dwellings where permitted, provided such lots have not less than seventy-five (75) percent of the required lot area and lot width; and 
6.2.2  Where in each case a safe water supply and a safe and adequate disposal of sewage can be provided without endangering the health and safety of adjoining residents. 
SECTION 7 - CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT 

7.1 
In order to promote the health and general welfare of the community and to preserve and make available natural open space for recreation and conservation, the Planning & Zoning Commission may grant a developer the option to vary the lot size requirements in Residential 40 and Residential 27 zoning districts, leaving a substantial area free of building lots. Such variations shall be subject to the requirements of Subdivision Regulations Section 3.2.2.A, 6.1.3, and 6.1.3.3.3, in addition to the following requirements: 
7.2 - The minimum parcel 
to be considered for variation as stated above shall be ten (10) acres. 
7.3 - The maximum number of building lots 
shall not exceed one and two-tenths (1.2) per net acre in the R-40 district, or one and nine-tenths (1.9) per net acre in the R-27 district. Net acreage shall be determined by subtracting fifteen (15) percent of the gross acreage of the parcel (for streets). The gross area of the parcel shall include only land that is not encumbered with easements or other restrictions that would prevent full use of the land. 
7.4 - The land area not allocated to building lots and streets 
shall be permanently reserved in open space. Such areas shall be in locations designated open spaces or greenbelts on the comprehensive plan or, where the sub-divider proposes open space in other areas; such proposals shall be subject to the approval of the Commission. 
7.5 
No proposed cluster development shall be considered or approved unless the dwelling units on the proposed lots are to be serviced by public sewers and either a public water supply or individual wells approved by the North Central District Health Department. 
7.6 - In cluster subdivision, 
the lots shall satisfy the following requirements; 
R-27 R-40 7.6.1 Minimum lot area (square feet) 20,000 30,000 7.6.2 Minimum lot width (feet) 100 150 7.6.3 Maximum lot coverage (percent) When not in an aquifer protection Zone 20 20 7.6.3.1.  A Special Permit shall be required for any lot coverage exceeding twenty (20) percent in an aquifer protection zone and subject to the requirements of Section 20.5 7.6.4 Minimum side yards (feet) 10 10 7.6.5 Minimum rear yard (feet) 20 20 7.6.6 Minimum front yard (feet) 20 20 7.6.7 Maximum building height (stories) 2 1/2 2 1/2  
7.7 - The balance of the land not contained in the building lots 
shall be in condition, size and shape as to be readily usable for recreation or conservation, and shall be reserved by one of the following means: 
7.7.1  Deeded to the Town. 
7.7.2  Held in corporate ownership by the owners of the lots within the subdivision and such other nearby landowners who may wish to become members of the corporation. However, membership in said corporation shall be mandatory for all residents of the proposed subdivision. In the case of a corporate ownership, the developer shall include in the deed to the owners of the building lots the membership stipulation and the beneficial right of the use of the open land. 
7.7.3  Held in ownership by the developer subject to a legal agreement with the Town regarding the developer's responsibility for maintenance of the balance of the land as noted above. 
7.7.4  Governed by a special tax district. 
7.7.5  A combination of the above. 
SECTION 8 - DUMPS AND INCINERATOR SITES 

8.1 - Conditions for operation. 
Landfill-type dumps or areas for incinerator sites for refuse disposal when owned, operated or under control of the Town of Vernon or a non-profit refuse disposal district of corporation, are permitted in any zone district subject to the following conditions: 
8.1.1  The decision of the Planning & Zoning Commission should be made in accordance with the provisions of Section 17.3, "Special Uses". 
8.1.2  The site and method of operation has been approved by the Planning & Zoning Commission of the Town of Vernon after a public hearing. 
SECTION 9 - LANDSCAPE BUFFER STRIPS 

9.1 - Provision: 
The Planning & Zoning Commission (PZC) may require a landscaped buffer strip to be provided along a property line to buffer adjacent property from the proposed development. The PZC may impose provision of the landscape buffer to address the following conditions: 
9.1.1  To minimize potential conflict between different uses; 
9.1.2  To assure privacy and/or the undisturbed use of property; 
9.1.3  To lessen potential glare from light sources or reflections; 
9.1.4  To screen motor vehicles, parking and loading areas, dumpsters, storage or display areas, heating, ventilating, air condition (HVAC) mechanical equipment, or other industrial equipment. 
9.1.5  To provide landscape transitions; 
9.1.6  To increase compatibility with neighboring uses, lessen the potential for nuisance, and promote the sound development of the community relative to special permit criteria of Zoning Regulations Section 17.3.1 in regard to both existing and potential development; 
9.1.7  To prevent blight, preserve the quality of existing development, and maintain property values. 
9.1.8  To provide for enhanced stormwater management through the use of low impact development (LID) techniques such as bioretention in accordance with the Town LID Manual. 
9.2 - Location: 
The landscaped buffer strip, if required by the PZC: 
9.2.1  Shall be shown on the site plan of development or may be a separate landscaping plan to be recorded with the approved site plan of development; 
9.2.2  Shall be located immediately adjacent to the property line; an existing tree belt along a property line may serve as a landscape buffer strip if deemed adequate by the PZC as is or enhanced with additional plantings or additional depth; 
9.2.3  Shall have a minimum depth of twenty-five feet (25'). The requirement of a buffer deeper than 25' between non-residential uses and residential districts shall be based upon the nature and intensity of the non-residential use. The PZC may reduce such minimum depth if precluded by lot size or configuration; 
9.2.4  Shall extend from the property line within, or if necessary beyond, the required zoning district yard setback; 
9.2.5  Shall be located on the property for which approval of development is being sought, and maintenance of such buffer shall be the sole responsibility of the owner of the property on which it is located; 
9.2.6  Shall be planted such that the field of view between abutting residential and nonresidential uses/zones at grade shall be obscured visually both within 5 years time and at maturity so that activity on the abutting lot is not immediately apparent; 
9.2.7  Shall not obstruct line-of-sight for vehicles entering and exiting the premises, nor shall it unduly obstruct line-of-sight for vehicles traveling on abutting Town or State highways. Corner visibility shall be maintained. Buffer landscaping shall not obstruct line-of-sight for vehicles entering and leaving either common driveways or other access ways; 
9.2.8  If a landscaped buffer is located so as to overlay, in part, a designated utility or drainage easement, that portion of the buffer that lies within the bounds of such easement shall remain unvegetated. 
9.3 - Composition: 
The landscape buffer strip, if required by the PZC. 
9.3.1  Shall be designed by a licensed landscape architect; 
9.3.2  Shall be shown on the site plan or landscaping plan in terms of the types of plants, maturities or sizes, spacing, planting schedule, and maintenance plan; 
9.3.3  Shall be designed to retain and incorporate existing healthy mature trees whenever possible; 
9.3.4  Shall contain a variety of interplanted evergreen, deciduous, trees and shrubs suitable in the judgment of the PZC or its designated agent to provide an adequate screen sufficient to buffer adjacent property from the proposed development, and to meet the following guidelines: 
9.3.4.1  Shall contain trees and shrubs that are spaced and located as follows: 
1. Evergreen trees and large deciduous trees should be spaced using accepted landscaping practices, usually 20 feet or more on center; 
2. Flowering trees should be spaced using accepted landscaping practices, usually 10 or more feet on center; 
3. Trees shall not be planted within 20 feet of a sewer line or area of heavy equipment use; 
9.3.4.2  Shall contain plantings staggered/clustered to achieve maximum screening after 5 years, and at maturity. Evergreen trees shall be a minimum of 5 feet in height at the time of plantings; deciduous shade trees shall be a minimum of 2'' caliper and 10 feet in height at the time of planting; and flowering trees shall be a minimum of 6 feet in height at the time of planting and 1-1/2 '' caliper; 
9.3.4.3  For screening purposes may include, but shall not be limited to, the following varieties of trees and shrubs: Canada Hemlock, Scotch Pine, White Pine, Norway Spruce, Douglas Fir, Pyramidal Arborvitae, Juniper (including Red Cedar), Rhododendron, Azalea, Holly, Forsythia, Viburnum, Lilac, Yew, Flowering Crab, Dogwood, Magnolia, Hawthorn, Flowering Quince, Mountain Ash, Flowering Cherry, Sycamore (Plane Tree), and Male Ginko; 
9.3.4.4  Shall not include the following invasive species, identified in part by the Connecticut Invasive Plants Council in accordance with Connecticut Public Act 03-136: White Poplar, Amur Maple, Norway Maple, Sycamore Maple, Princess Tree, Black Locust, Tree of Heaven (Ailanthus), Box Elder, Cottonwood, Basswood (Linden), Catalpa, Silver Maple, Red Maple, and Chinese Elm; 
9.3.5  Shall be designed so that when a required interplanted buffer abuts an undeveloped Residential and/or non-Residential Zone, the taller and/or larger varieties of trees and shrubs (at maturity) shall be established adjacent to the zone line; 
9.3.6  Shall be subject to modification, which may include an increase of depth or installation of a fence, wall, or barrier, as may be considered necessary by the PZC to fulfill the purpose of the landscaped buffer; 
9.3.7  Shall, whenever stormwater best management practices are incorporated, be designed in accordance with the Town LID Manual. 
9.3.8  Shall be planted prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy (CO) and a bond may be required to be posted sufficient to complete the planting of the landscape buffer within one (1) year of the issuance of a building permit; 
9.4 - Maintenance: 
9.4.1  Maintenance of a landscaped buffer in a healthy, neat and attractive condition by the property owner shall be a condition of compliance with these regulations. Maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, watering, fertilizing, weeding, cleaning, pruning, trimming, spraying and cultivating. Vegetation that dies shall be replaced as quickly as possible and within one growing season. Replacement plantings shall conform to the original intent of the landscape design; 
9.4.2  Clear cutting/harvesting of trees within a buffer area is expressly prohibited at any time without prior Commission approval; 
9.4.3  To facilitate operation and maintenance, stormwater best management practices shall be designed in accordance with the Town LID Manual. 
9.4.4  The Commission may require the execution of a Landscape Buffer Conservation Easement to insure compliance with the landscape buffer conditions. 
SECTION 10 - MINIMUM FLOOR AREAS 

10.1 - Requirements: 
Minimum floor area requirements; a building permit shall not be issued for any building that does not conform to the following: 
10.1.1  Multi-family dwelling units shall have not less than the following footage of living quarters: 
10.1.1.1  For one-bedroom units: Five hundred fifty (550) square feet. 
10.1.1.2  For each additional bedroom over one: One hundred twenty-five (125) square feet. 
10.1.2  Two-Family Dwellings: Newly constructed two-family dwellings shall have a minimum floor are of seven hundred (700) square feet per unit for single level structures and a minimum floor area of seven hundred seventy-five (775) square feet per unit for multi-level structures. Existing structures, which are converted to two-family dwellings, shall contain a minimum floor area of six hundred fifty (650) square feet per dwelling unit containing one bedroom. A unit containing more than one bedroom shall provide one hundred twenty-five (125) square feet for each additional bedroom. 
No single-family structure shall be converted to a two-family structure if additions to the existing building are required to meet the above square footage requirements. Where an existing single-family dwelling is converted to a two- family, the external appearance and general characteristics of the building as a single-family shall be preserved. 
Each individual dwelling unit must be individually metered for all utility services and must be served by public water and sewers. 
SECTION 11 - NON-CONFORMING USES AND BUILDINGS 

11.1 - Requirements, non-conforming use. 
11.1.1  Any building or use lawfully existing at the time of adoption or subsequent amendment of these regulations which does not conform to the requirements for the zone in which it is located may be continued subject to compliance with the following conditions: 
11.1.1.1  Such non-conforming use may not be changed to another non- conforming use without a Special Exception from the Zoning Board of Appeals, and then only to use equally or more nearly in conformity. 
11.1.1.2  Such non-conforming use shall not be re-established after three (3) months of non-use unless the property owners can show that they intended not to abandon the use. 
11.2 - Any use of a building or structure having within it a non-conforming use shall not be: 
11.2.1  Extended or enlarged. 
11.2.2  Rebuilt or restored at the same location and again used after damage by fire, explosion or other catastrophe exceeding eighty (80) percent of its fair market value immediately prior to damage. Application for a permit to rebuild or restore the damaged portion shall be filed within six (6) months of damage. 
11.3 - Requirements, non-conforming lots/building. 
Any building which is on a non-conforming lot by reason of inadequate lot width, lot area, yards or floor area may be altered, enlarged, extended or rebuilt provided such enlargement meets the yard and height requirements or, as a variance by the Zoning Board of Appeals, any enlargement may extend into the required yards a distance not greater than the existing building. 
11.4 - The operative date of the regulations for the purpose of establishing non-conformance status is July 1, 1965, the effective date of consolidation of the Town of Vernon. 
SECTION 12 - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING 

12.1 - Provisions: 
Off-street parking shall be provided for all uses in structures hereafter constructed or enlarged or in which there is a change of use in accordance with the following requirements: 
12.1.1  Assisted living facility: 1 space for each two units plus 1 space for each 2 employees. 
12.1.2  Auditorium or other place of public assembly - one parking space for each four (4) fixed seats of capacity or one (1) parking space for each sixty (60) square feet of floor area available to patrons in cases where the capacity is not determined by the number of fixed seats. 
12.1.3  Boarding or rooming house or tourist home - one parking space for each guest bedroom, plus one parking space for the resident family. 
12.1.4  Bowling alley - three (3) parking spaces for each lane. 
12.1.5  Club - one parking space for each one-hundred (100) square feet of floor area available to patrons. 
12.1.6  Commercial recreation center - one parking space for each employee and one space for each four (4) participants and/or patrons. 
12.1.7  Dwellings, single-family - one parking space located behind the building line. Two-family - three (3) parking spaces located behind the building line. Multi- family - two (2) parking spaces per dwelling unit. 
12.1.8  Motor vehicle service station or establishment - a minimum of seven (7) spaces, without repairer's license - maximum of four (4) vehicles on-site in any forty- eight (48) hour period. With limited repairer's or general repairer's license - maximum of eight (8) vehicles in any forty eight (48) hour period. No vehicle may be kept in outside storage over two (2) weeks. 
12.1.9  Home occupation or home professional office - two (2) parking spaces, in addition to one (1) parking space for each employee and the requirement for the dwelling to which such use is accessory. 
12.1.10  Hospital or convalescent home - one parking space for every two (2) beds. 
12.1.11  Hotel or motel - one (1) parking space for each guest bedroom or suite, plus one. 
(1) parking space for each three (3) persons customarily employed at one time. 
12.1.12  Manufacturing or industrial establishment, whole establishment or laboratory - one (1) parking space for each two (2) employees customarily employed at one time. 
12.1.13  Mortuary establishment - one parking space for each seventy-five (75) square feet of floor area devoted to assembly rooms for services. 
12.1.14  Office, office building, bank, medical or dental clinic - one parking space for each two hundred fifty (250) square feet of floor area. 
12.1.15  Philanthropic or eleemosynary Institution - one parking space for each two hundred fifty (250) square feet of floor area devoted to office or administrative use. 
12.1.16  Restaurant or tavern - one parking space for each fifty (50) square feet of public floor area. 
12.1.17  Retail store, personal service store or studio, shop for custom work - one (1) parking space for each two hundred fifty (250) square feet of floor area. 
12.1.18  Roadside stand - four (4) parking spaces in addition to the requirement for any dwelling. 
12.1.19  School, public or parochial - twenty (20) parking spaces plus one (1) parking space for each employee, plus one (1) parking space for each three (3) students in the eleventh and twelfth grades or above. 
12.1.20  Other uses not specifically listed - the same requirement as for most similar listed use. 
12.1.21  Mixed uses - total requirement shall be the sum of the requirements of the component uses computed separately. 
12.1.22  Day care centers - one (1) for each employee plus one space for each five (5) persons attending the facility. 
12.1.23  Commercial education facility - one (1) for each employee plus one (1) space for each one hundred (100) square feet of floor area available to patrons. 
12.1.24  Emergency shelter for the homeless - one (1) space for each employee. 
12.1.25  Vocation Training & Employment services: One (1) parking space for each full time staff member based in the facility, two spaces for visitors and an additional handicapped only parking space. 
12.1.26  School bus parking facility - one (1) parking space for each school bus on site, one (1) parking space for each bus driver originating from the site, one (1) parking space for each worker on the site. 
12.1.27  Climate controlled indoor self-storage - two (2) parking spaces for employee parking and one (1) parking space for each 100 storage units. 
12.2 - Off street loading: 
Every building or structure, lot or land hereafter put into use for business or industrial purposes or for a hospital, and which has an aggregate floor area of seventy five hundred (7,500) square feet or more devoted to any such use, shall be provided with off-street truck loading spaces in accordance with the following schedule: 
Square Feet of Aggregate Floor 
Devoted to Such Use Required Number of Off-Street Area 
Truck Loading Spaces 7,500 to 20,000 1 20,001 to 50,000 2 50,001 to 150,000 3 Each additional 50,000 1 additional  
12.3 - Supplemental Regulations and Standards: 
12.3.1  In all districts, a paved access drive to a garage may be located within the required setbacks. 
12.3.2  No portion of a parking area shall be located closer than ten (10) feet to the boundaries of the parcel to be used or to any highway right-of-way. The parking area is taken to be that area where a vehicle is normally stored or parked and shall not be part of an access drive. 
12.3.3  In all districts, required parking areas for dwellings shall be on the same lot with the main dwelling. 
12.3.4  Required accessory parking and loading areas for non-residential uses shall be within three hundred (300) feet of the main building or use to be served. Any accessory parking area which is not upon the same lot as the main building or use and its necessary access-ways shall be reserved for off-street. 
12.3.5  In all districts, required parking areas and truck loading shall have safe and adequate access to a public street either by a driveway on the same lot or by means of a permanent easement across an adjoining lot. 
12.3.6  An off-street truck loading space shall have a minimum width of ten (10) feet, a minimum length of twenty-five (25) feet and a minimum clear height of fourteen (14) feet, excluding its access from the street. 
12.3.7  All off-street parking spaces shall have a minimum width of nine (9) feet and a minimum length of seventeen (17) feet exclusive of access drive. 
12.3.8  In all zones, all driveways, parking areas, and access aisles, automobile dealer lots, and all off-street truck loading spaces shall be suitably paved, drained and lighted, and appropriately planted and fenced for the protection of adjacent properties, and shall be arranged for convenient access, egress, snow removal and safety of vehicles and pedestrians. Such facilities shall be maintained in good condition by the owner. 
12.3.8.1  Parking lot aisle widths shall conform to the following table: 
Parking Stall Angle Aisle Width 90° 24' 60° 16' 45° 11' 30° 8'  
12.3.8.2  For parking stall angles not list, the appropriate aisle width shall be determined by the Town Engineer. 
12.3.8.3  Stacked parking shall not be allowed for any non-residential use or mixed residential/commercial use. Stacked parking is any parking where a parking stall does not have direct access to a parking aisle or access way without going through another parking stall. 
12.3.9  When the number of parking spaces calculated as provided in Section 12 results in the requirement of a fractional space, any fraction under one-half (1/2) may be disregarded and any fraction over one-half (1/2) shall be construed as requiring a full space. 
12.3.10  In the case of an expansion of a non-conforming building or the expansion of a permitted use, which does not meet the parking and loading requirements of Section 12 above, such expansion shall be subject to the following requirements: 
12.3.10.1  That portion of the building or use, which constitutes the expansion, is subject to the requirements of Section 12. 
12.3.10.2  An additional twenty-five (25) percent of the off-street parking requirements for the existing use shall be required; provided, however, that such provision does not exceed one hundred (100) percent of the requirements of Section 12. 
12.3.11  In all residential districts including PRD and MHP districts, the outside parking of any commercial vehicle in excess of one ton carrying capacity is prohibited with the exception of farm vehicles which are permitted in all districts in conjunction with commercial or non-commercial farming and agricultural use, provided the vehicles are parked on said premises. 
12.3.12  Floor area defined. For the purpose of the off-street parking requirements, "floor area" in the case of office uses, service uses, retail trade uses, and cultural, entertainment and recreational uses, shall mean the gross floor area used, designed or intended to be used for service to the public as customers, patrons, clients, patients, or members, including those areas occupied by fixtures and equipment used for the display and/or sale of merchandise. "Floor area" shall not include areas used principally for non-public purposes such as storage and incidental repair, for rest rooms, for utilities, or for required stairways or elevators. 
12.3.13  In any zone, as per C.G.S. 8-2c, the Planning & Zoning Commission may reduce the number of off-street parking spaces which must be installed by the developer subject to the following conditions: 
12.3.13.1  The total reduction of spaces shall not exceed twenty (20) percent of the required number of spaces. 
12.3.13.2  The developer shall pay a fee of $500 for each space eliminated. This fee to be used in accordance with the guidelines established in C.G.S. 8-2c. 
12.3.13.3  In granting an exemption from the required off-street parking requirements the Commission, by two-thirds vote, must find that the reduced number of spaces will not result in an increase of on-street parking. 
12.3.14  The replacement, installation or addition of off-street parking or parking aisles areas, in the cumulative aggregate amount of fifteen hundred (1500) or more square feet on any lot from January 15, 1988, being the date of initial adoption of this regulation, shall require site plan approval from the Planning & Zoning Commission. 
12.3.14.1  This requirement shall not apply to single or two-family residential structures. 
12.3.14.2  For the purpose of this section, the applicant shall submit an engineered Site Plan showing at a minimum the location, topography, landscaping, and drainage for the proposed parking area. 
12.3.14.3  The fee for this section shall be the same as those outlined in Section 19.2.6. 
12.3.14.4  This procedure is instituted to ensure that increases in storm water run-off resulting from increases in paved parking areas are managed in such a way so as to not cause flooding of public facilities or adjoining properties. 
12.4 - PDZ Parking Requirements 
per Section 4.24.4.4 and 4.25.4.4 Planned Development Zone: 
12.5 - Access Management: 
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall institute access management wherever possible as a means to manage driveways and intersections on state highways and other major streets in Vernon to reduce congestion and traffic conflicts. Provisions for immediate or future driveway connections to adjoining lots of similar existing or potential uses shall be made when such driveway connections will facilitate efficient emergency response and/or when such connections will enable the public to travel between adjoining lots without the need to travel upon a highway or street. The property owners' right to use and the obligation to maintain common driveways shall be assured by a written dedication and/or agreement between adjoining property owners to be recorded in the Vernon Land Records. Where street geometry, traffic volumes or traffic patterns warrant, the Commission may: 
12.5.1  Limit the number of driveways that provide access to a lot from the street. 
12.5.2  Designate the location of any street access. 
12.5.3  Require the use and/or provision of a common driveway with an adjoining lot, an access easement to an adjoining lot for shared access, and limit access to and from a street. 
12.5.4  As part of an application approval, the Commission may require a property owner to: 
12.5.4.1  Establish mutual driveway or other easements to provide a single point of access for two or more abutting lots in a location acceptable to the Commission. 
12.5.4.2  File such easements on the land records in favor of the abutting lot owners and/or the Town of Vernon as shall be acceptable to the Commission and the Town Attorney, and/or 
12.5.4.3  Utilize a mutual driveway or other easement that exists on an abutting lot in lieu of having a separate curb cut onto a road or street. 
12.5.5  No property shall be penalized for the elimination of existing or proposed parking spaces in order to accommodate shared access driveway connections if such elimination reduces the number of spaces below that required by section 12.1, and the property owner(s) shall not be required to pay a fee for each space eliminated as otherwise required by section 12.3.13. 
12.6 - Shared Parking: 
12.6.1  In order to minimize paved surfaces and eliminate the need to construct unnecessary parking spaces, the Commission may reduce the cumulative minimum parking requirements within a mixed-use development or for adjacent commercial or industrial properties if the applicant provides a parking study (based on empirical field data or similar data gathered by surveys by the American Planning Association, Institute of Transportation Engineers, or similar organizations) that demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Commission that one or more of the following conditions exist to warrant the reduction: 
12.6.1.1  Differences in the timing of peak parking demands among existing and/or proposed uses result in a net peak parking demand that is significantly lower than the cumulative minimum parking requirements; 
12.6.1.2  Synergistic relationships among uses create captive markets, resulting in multiple purpose walking trips within the development; and/or 
12.6.1.3  The development is likely to generate bus, bicycle, or pedestrian trips and accommodations exist or are proposed to support these alternative modes of transportation. 
12.6.2  If any use of the property changes at any time that negatively affects one or more of the conditions approved pursuant to section 12.6.1, this approval shall become invalid unless re-approved for the new use. 
12.6.3  Shared parking that straddles the property line(s) of adjacent properties of a mixed use, commercial, or industrial development shall not be subject to the provisions of section 12.3.2. However, no such shared parking shall be located closer than ten (10) feet to any highway or street line. 
SECTION 13 - PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 
    All land uses within the Town of Vernon shall be subject to the following performance standards. 

13.1 
Provision shall be made for fire protection adequate in the judgment of the Fire Marshal of the Town of Vernon for the use intended. 
13.2 
The storage of flammable or explosive materials shall be in a manner approved by the Fire Marshal of the Town of Vernon, who may require any precautionary measures necessary in his judgment to eliminate exposure hazards to life and property. 
13.3 
The use shall emit no offensive odors perceptible at any property line of the lot on which the use is located and shall emit no noxious, toxic or corrosive fumes or gases. 
13.4 
The use shall not discharge into the air exhaust, waste or dust in excess of one (1) cubic centimeter of settled matter per cubic meter of air, or produce heat or glare perceptible from any property line on the lot on which the use is located for a period of more than three (3) continuous minutes. 
13.5 
Exterior and/or interior lighting shall not produce glare on public highways or neighboring property or conflict with any traffic signals. 
13.6 
Smoke or other air contaminant shall not be discharged into the atmosphere from any single source of emission for a period or periods aggregating more than three (3) minutes in any one hour, which is as dark or darker in shade than is designated as No. 2 on the Ringlemann Chart as published by the United States Bureau of Mines, or which is of such opacity as to obscure an observer's view to a degree equal to or greater than does smoke designated as No. 2 on the Ringlemann Chart. 
13.7 
The use shall not discharge into any stream, river, watercourse, or water body any sanitary sewage or industrial wastes except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with applicable local and state regulations, and approved by the responsible agencies. 
13.8 
The use shall not discharge into any stream, river, and watercourse or water body, any storm water, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, a subsurface water drainage, cooling water, air conditioning and refrigeration wastewaters, or unpolluted industrial process waters, without specific approval by the responsible local and state agencies. 
13.9 
Existing and proposed drainage: Stormwater management systems shall be developed consistent with LID practices, which shall be designed and maintained to renovate stormwater through mechanical or natural means before discharging into storm sewers, wetlands, watercourses, or infiltrating into the ground. The stormwater management system shall comply with the practices recommended in the latest edition of the "Stormwater Quality Manual" of the State of Connecticut Department of Energy and Environmental Protection (DEEP) and with the Town LID Manual. Where a conflict arises between the state and Vernon manuals, the more restrictive provision(s) shall apply. Application of LID practices shall not be required for a single lot containing a single- or two-family dwelling. 
13.10 - Storage Containers and Dumpsters: 
Portable storage containers and dumpsters may be located on a lot in any zone subject to the following restrictions: 
13.10.1  A zoning permit shall be obtained from the zoning enforcement officer prior to the placement of a portable storage container or dumpster on property in any residential zone; a zoning permit shall not be required where one or more storage containers and/or dumpsters are (1) shown on a site plan approved in accordance with Section 14, or (2) are necessary for construction-related work as provided below; 
13.10.2  Except for dumpsters used for construction-related work, no zoning permit shall be valid for a term longer than 30 days; a zoning permit may be renewed for one or two additional 30 day periods if compelling justification is provided to the zoning enforcement officer; under no circumstances shall such a zoning permit be valid for longer than 90 days; 
13.10.3  Placement of a dumpster used for construction-related work shall require, as a precondition, issuance of a building permit for work that will generate waste or construction debris; such dumpster shall be removed within five (5) days of completion of the work or upon issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy; 
13.10.4  Not more than one portable storage containers or dumpster shall be placed on property in a residential zone; a portable storage container or dumpster shall be placed on a driveway or other hard surface; where feasible, the portable storage container or dumpster shall be placed behind the front line of the principal building. No dumpster shall be placed within the travelled portion of any roadway unless authorized by the Chief of Police. This authorization will be done on a case by case basis and the property owner shall assume full liability for such placement. 
13.10.5  Portable storage containers and dumpsters shall not be used for the storage of hazardous materials or garbage and shall not create offensive odors or create a condition that may prejudice the public health. 
13.10.6  No dumpster or portable storage container shall be emptied or filled between 11:00PM and 7:00AM. 
13.11 - Permanent Shipping/Cargo Storage Container: 
Permanent Shipping/cargo storage containers may only be located on a lot in the Industrial zone subject to the following restrictions: 
13.11.1  Shipping/cargo containers shall be permitted in Industrial Zone as storage units upon approval of a site plan in accordance with section 14, site plans, and the following requirements: 
13.11.1.1  The container shall be an ancillary use to the main business in an Industrial zone and the primary use must be established before storage may commence. 
13.11.1.2  The container shall be placed in the least conspicuous location available to minimize disturbance to any adjoining properties; must be screened from the public right-of-way and adjoining use districts through the use of trees, a continuous hedge, or opaque fencing if the former are not feasible. The containers cannot be stacked upon each other or elevated by a substructure. They must be placed directly on even grade. 
13.11.1.3  The storage areas must conform to the minimum setback regulations of the zone. 
13.11.1.4  The storage unit cannot exceed forty feet (40') in length or three hundred twenty (320) square feet per container. 
13.11.1.5  There shall be a maximum of one (1) shipping/cargo container per four thousand (4,000) square feet of floorspace. 
13.11.1.6  It shall be the obligation of the owner or user of such structure to secure it in a manner that does not endanger the safety of persons or property in the vicinity of the temporary structure. 
13.11.1.7  The storage structure must not contain any electrical, plumbing or mechanical work and is not to be used to store hazardous materials. 
13.11.1.8  The container cannot include any sign or advertising and must be painted and maintained in a continuous, solid, neutral color. 
13.11.1.9  Nothing shall be stored on top of the unit and the area surrounding the container must remain free from weeds and debris. 
13.11.1.10  The use of any shipping/cargo containers as storage units shall comply with the provisions of this article within one (1) year from the adoption of same. 
13.11.1.11  Should the shipping/cargo container storage unit not comply with all of the above conditions the Zoning Enforcement Officer may upon inspection consider the unit a violation of Zoning Ordinance and proceed with enforcement actions which could result in the removal of the unit from the site at the expense of the owner. 
13.12 - Charitable Donation Collection Bins: 
Donated items steel or similar storage containers (hereinafter referred to in this section as "bins") are prohibited in the Town of Vernon with the following exceptions: 
13.12.1  Registered nonprofit organizations are permitted to place used clothing bins on nonresidential property in accordance with the following: 
13.12.1.1  Bins shall not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular circulation, nor be located in public rights-of-way, required building setbacks, landscape areas, drive aisles, required parking spaces, fire lanes, loading zones, buffers or any other location that may cause hazardous conditions, constitute a threat to the public safety, or create a condition detrimental to surrounding land uses. 
13.12.1.2  The bin(s) shall be of the type that are enclosed by use of a receiving door and locked so that the contents of the bin(s) may not be accessed by anyone other than those responsible for the retrieval of the contents. 
13.12.1.3  Each bin shall not cover a ground surface area in excess of five feet(5') by five feet (5'), nor be more than six feet (6') in height. 
13.12.1.4  Each bin must be regularly emptied of its contents so that it does not overflow, resulting in used clothing being strewn about the surrounding area. 
13.12.1.5  Each bin shall be maintained in good condition and appearance with no structural damage, holes, or visible rust, and shall be free of graffiti. The permittee shall maintain or cause to be maintained the area surrounding the bin free of any junk, garbage, trash, debris or other refuse material. 
13.12.1.6  Each bin shall be clearly marked to identify the specific items and materials requested to be left for donation, the name of the operator or owners of the bin, the entity responsible for maintenance of the bin and removal of materials and trash from the immediate area, and a telephone number where the owner, operator or agent of the bin may be reached at any time. The bin shall display a notice stating that no items or materials shall be left outside of the donation drop-off box. 
13.12.1.7  Occupation of parking spaces by bins shall not reduce the number of available parking spaces below the minimum number required for the site. 
13.12.1.8  There shall not be more than two (2) bins on properties less than one (1) acre and no more than four (4) bins on properties greater than one (1) acre. 
13.12.1.9  A permit for charitable donation bins shall be required. The permit shall be issued by the Zoning Officer, but can only be granted when it is determined by the Zoning Officer that: 
(a) The bin(s) are for use by a duly registered nonprofit organization; 
(b) The proper types of bin(s) are being used as described by this section; 
(c) The bin(s) are being placed in a proper location as described by this section; 
(d) The permit application includes a letter of authority/permission from the owner of the property upon which the bins are to be and/or are already located which includes the statement that the Town of Vernon shall hold both the property owner and the charitable organization liable for violation of these regulations; and 
(e) Name, address and phone number of the nonprofit organization or Church displayed on each bin. 
The term of the permit shall expire one year from the date of issuance. 
13.12.10  If any charitable donation bins are placed without a permit, or an inspection reveals that such bins are not in compliance with this section, enforcement and abatement shall take place as generally provided under this article. 
These regulations shall apply to all donation bins in place on the effective date of this regulation (03.23.2015) and all clothing bins placed subsequent to the effective date. 
SECTION 14 - SITE PLANS 

14.1 - Requirements: 
14.1.1  Plan of Development (POD) or Minor Modification: 
14.1.1.1  Plan of Development (POD): A detailed Site Plan is required for approval by the PZC for all new construction, changes in or on a site, or changes of the exterior of a structure(s) in all planned residential districts, mobile home park districts, commercial districts, industrial districts, downtown business & residential districts, and for all commercial or industrial development in residential districts, unless determined to be a "Minor Modification". 
14.1.1.2  Minor Modification: New construction, changes in or on a site, or changes of the exterior of a structure(s), which in the opinion of the Town Building Official, Town Engineer, and Town Planner, will not adversely affect the public health or safety, may be designated as "Minor Modifications" that do not require a detailed site plan. The Town Building Official, Town Engineer, and Town Planner may require plans and may set stipulations to assure that the changes to the site or structure(s) are Minor Modifications and will not adversely affect public health or safety. No "Minor Modification" shall be approved if there are any outstanding zoning violations, unless such changes will eliminate the zoning violations. 
14.1.1.3  Plan of Development and Modifications in Historic Districts: When a Site Plan and/or Modification of an existing Site Plan is requested for a property located in or abutting a historic building, structure, site or district the Local Historic Properties Commission shall be notified at least twenty (20) days prior to the date of the public hearing. The Local Historic Properties Commission shall have the opportunity to review the proposed application and make recommendations to the Planning and Zoning Commission. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall be obligated to seriously consider the recommendations provided by the Local Historic Properties Commission. When the Planning & Zoning Commission makes a decision contrary to the written recommendations of the Local Historic Properties Commission, The Planning and Zoning Commission shall state on the record the reasons for the decision. If recommendations from the Local Historic Properties Commission are not received by the Planning and Zoning Commission at or before the public hearing, it shall be presumed that the Local Historic Properties Commission does not disapprove of the proposal. Notice of Minor Modifications approved in all Historic Districts shall be provided to the Local Historic Properties Commission within 30 days of the action. 
14.1.2  When a detailed Site Plan is required to be submitted to the PZC for approval, the detailed Site Plan shall include the following: 
14.1.2.1  The applicant must submit copies of the legal description of the property on which the development will take place. 
14.1.2.2  The applicant must submit copies of the site plan prepared by the appropriate design professionals (engineer, architect, landscape architect, or surveyor) licensed to practice in the State of Connecticut. The plan shall be signed, dated and sealed by the appropriate design professionals. All site plans shall be prepared at a scale of not less than 1"=40' and shall be of sufficient detail and accuracy, class A-2 for boundary and class T-2 for topography, as defined in; "Standards for Surveys and Maps in the State of Connecticut, Prepared and Adopted by the Connecticut Association of Land Surveyors, Inc., September 26, 1996," as may be amended. Plans shall be sized in accordance with Connecticut General Statutes Chapter 92, Section 7-31. The site plan shall include at a minimum. 
14.1.2.2.1  Name of development; 
14.1.2.2.2  Abutters, to include names and referenced deed volume and page; 
14.1.2.2.3  North arrow, scale and bar scale, date, and signatures and certification of the appropriate design professionals; 
14.1.2.2.4  The location of general features, based on the best available information, within 100 feet of the subject property, shall be depicted on the plan; 
14.1.2.2.5  Boundary survey of the site with angles or bearings and distances; 
14.1.2.2.6  Zoning classification of the property; 
14.1.2.2.7  Area of the parcel, in both acres and square feet; 
14.1.2.2.8  Existing and proposed buildings and structures within the site including dimensions, distances from building corners to property lines, finish floor elevations, and number of stories; 
14.1.2.2.9  Existing and proposed roads, driveways, loading and parking areas, curbs and curb cuts; 
14.1.2.2.10  Existing and proposed walkways and sidewalks; 
14.1.2.2.11  Where appropriate, existing contours and proposed contours at no more than 2 foot intervals and spot grades to the tenth of a foot; 
14.1.2.2.12  Where appropriate, existing and proposed drainage with invert and top of frame elevations; wherever feasible, drainage design for roof area, parking lots and driveways shall employ low impact development (LID) techniques for stormwater management in accordance with the Town LID Manual; 
14.1.2.2.13  Location of field delineated inland wetlands as delineated by a certified soils scientist; 
14.1.2.2.14  Where applicable, 100 year base flood elevation as published by FEMA, in their latest flood insurance study and State of Connecticut Stream Channel Encroachment Lines; 
14.1.2.2.15  Adequate provisions for potable water supply and sewage disposal; where applicable, existing and proposed sanitary sewer facilities with elevations; 
14.1.2.2.16  Method of ingress and egress; 
14.1.2.2.17  Method of refuse storage and disposal; 
14.1.2.2.18  General landscaping plan, including a list indicating size and count of all trees and shrubs to be planted; 
14.1.2.2.19  Location of existing healthy trees larger than 18" in diameter at breast height shall be located by field survey, either singly or as groups and shall be incorporated into the site design to the maximum extent possible. Whenever possible existing trees shall be saved by "welling" or "mounding". All trees larger than 8" in diameter within the public right-of-way shall be depicted on the plan. Groups of trees may be located by a "tree line". Stands of significant (10 or more trees) of similar species shall be located by field survey and preserved and incorporated into the site plan whenever possible, except that a site plan prepared for selective clearing within a wooded area shall show those trees or clusters of trees to be removed. Trees within areas not proposed to be disturbed need not be individually located and may be designated as "treed area not to be disturbed." 
14.1.2.2.20  Soil erosion and sedimentation control measures designed in accordance with the 2002 Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control, as may be amended; 
14.1.2.2.21  Location and description of existing and proposed easements and/or rights-of-way; 
14.1.2.2.22  Adequate storage facilities for outside maintenance equipment, including storage of recreational equipment in the PRD and MHP districts; 
14.1.2.2.23  Location of fire hydrants and/or fire alarms boxes, as required; 
14.1.2.2.24  Elevations and floor plans for proposed structures; 
14.1.2.2.25  Numbering plan for unit identification; 
14.1.2.2.26  Location plan showing property in relation to area in Town of Vernon, including zoning districts and type of development in the immediate area; 
14.1.2.2.27  Location of all recreation areas and facilities; 
14.1.2.2.28  The soil classification(s) as given by the USDA Natural Resource Conservation Service (NRCS); 
14.1.2.2.29  A statement or analysis indicating the traffic impact of the proposed development; 
14.1.3  The detailed Site Plan shall be submitted to the Town Planner's office; 
14.1.4  Approval of any Site Plan shall become null and void, unless construction of the building is in progress and not less than fifty (50) percent of the building foundations are complete within two (2) years of the effective date of approval. Extensions of time for the above time frames may be granted by the Commission for an approved site; providing, however, that any such extension does not exceed two (2) years. The total period of approval with extensions shall not exceed the time frames specified in Section 8-3 and 8.26c of the C.G.S. 
14.1.4.1  The effective date of the original approval for any site plan shall be considered the start of the five (5) or ten (10) year time frame and subsequent modifications shall not alter that date or time frame; 
14.1.5  A public hearing on any Site Plan may be required by the Commission. 
14.1.6  A submission of a Site Plan as an alternate of a previously approved plan shall make the approved plan null and void, upon the approval of a subsequently approved plan. The Commission, in approving a Site Plan, may stipulate such restrictions as appear to the Commission to be reasonable to protect or promote the rights of individuals, property values, and the environment in the area as a whole, the public health, safety or welfare, sound planning and zoning principles, improved land use, site planning and land development or better overall neighborhood compatibility. Such restrictions may concern, without limitation, the components of the Site Plan and the layout, distribution and relationship between uses and structures, vehicular and pedestrian circulation, parking, open space, landscaping, screening, signs, lighting, and a timeframe within which site improvements must be completed. All conditions shall be satisfied, if possible, prior to the issuance of a building permit, but must be complied with completely at the time of issuance of a certificate of occupancy. Additional stipulations may include, but are not limited to the following: 
14.1.6.1  Sidewalk requirement as determined by the Commission; 
14.1.6.2  Contribution to town downstream development fund as determined by the Commission to handle storm water runoff, as it will affect downstream property owners; 
14.1.6.3  Maintenance bonds and performance bonds to guarantee compliance; 
14.1.6.4  Planting plans; 
14.1.6.5  Rights-of-way for drainage and sanitary sewers in the form of easements to be granted to the Town of Vernon; 
14.1.6.6  Landscaped buffer strips, to be constructed in accordance with the provisions of Section 9, Landscaped Buffer Strips; 
14.1.6.7  Fencing as required by the Commission; 
14.1.6.8  Hold harmless agreements for storm drainage and storm water runoff as required by the regulations; 
14.1.6.9  Lighting plans to be approved by the Commission; 
14.1.6.10  Sanitary sewers and drainage systems; 
14.1.6.11  All stipulations to be shown on the maps to be filed with the Commission; 
14.1.6.12  Grading, seeding, and landscaping; 
14.1.6.13  The plan shall become null and void unless construction is commenced within one (1) year of approval, unless an extension is granted by the Commission; 
14.1.6.14  All roads to be conveyed to the Town of Vernon shall be built to Town specifications; 
14.1.6.15  Location of dumpsters and screening; 
14.1.7  An erosion and sedimentation control plan subject to Section 18 may be required by the Commission or Zoning Enforcement Officer; 
14.1.8  The Planning & Zoning Commission may require that existing roads shown to be directly or indirectly impacted by the proposed development, be improved to bring these roads up to town standards; 
14.1.9  In cases where reasonable and necessary need for an off-site improvement or improvements is demonstrated or required by the proposed development application and where no other property owners received a special benefit thereby, the Commission may require the applicant, as a condition of development approval and at the applicant's sole expense to provide for and construct such improvements, including development of public roads contiguous to the development. 
14.1.10  In the case of a proposed Adaptive Re-use project per Sections 2.97 & 3.26, the site plan of development shall include also architectural and historical preservation plans, and floor plans for specific uses of buildings and activities within buildings to assure the preservation of the property and the successful re- use of the site and structures without conflicts of uses. 
14.2 
In considering an application for those uses requiring Site Plan approval, the application shall conform to all applicable sections of these regulations and as per CGS 8-3(g), all Inland Wetlands Regulations. 
SECTION 15 - REMOVAL OF EARTH, SAND, AND GRAVEL 

15.1 - Provisions: 
15.1.1  There shall be no grading, fill, excavation or removal of earth, loam, topsoil, sand, gravel, clay peat, humus or stone for sale or for use other than on the premises for which such grading, fill, excavation or removal shall be made. The following activities are excluded from obtaining a Special Permit from the Planning & Zoning Commission provided the following conditions are met: 1) the amount of material involved does not exceed fifty (50) cubic yards and 2) no more than one half (1/2) acre of land is disturbed. 
15.1.1.1  Bona fide construction or alteration of a structure for which a building permit has been issued. 
15.1.1.2  The landscaping of an existing structure. 
15.1.1.3  The construction of a water hole for fire protection. 
15.1.1.4  The construction of a drainage field, septic tank or dry well. 
15.1.1.5  The construction of a pond for agriculture or conservation purposes. 
15.1.1.6  A residentially zone lot which has on it a primary residential structure. 
15.1.2.  In all cases other than those referred to above, the Planning & Zoning commission may grant Special Permit approval for the removal, deposit, fill, excavation or grading of earth, loam, topsoil, sand, gravel, clay, stone, peat or humus. The maps and plans shall include the following: 
15.1.2.1  The area to be excavated. 
15.1.2.2  Existing contour lines on the premises and final contour lines resulting from the intended excavation or removal shown on a map drawn to a scale not more than forty (40) feet to the inch and with a contour interval not to exceed five (5) feet. 
15.1.2.3  Existing and proposed drainage on the premises. 
15.1.2.4  Surrounding properties and streets. 
15.1.2.5  Proposed truck access to the property. 
15.1.2.6  Proposed commencement and completion data. 
15.1.2.7  Purpose of excavation. 
15.1.3.  The Commission may grant permission for a limited period of time not exceeding five years if it shall find that such excavation or removal will not result in the creation of any sharp declivities, pits, or depressions, soil erosion or fertility problems, permanently depressed land values, or create any drainage or sewerage problems or other conditions which would impair the use of the property in accordance with the zoning regulations and that such excavation or removal will be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of the zoning regulations. Permission shall be granted only upon the following conditions: 
15.1.3.1  That the premises shall be filled or excavated and graded in conformity with the proposed contour plans as approved. 
15.1.3.2  That slopes shall not exceed thirty (30) degrees to the horizontal. 
15.1.3.3  That only such equipment as is necessary for the digging, leveling, and carting away of excavated material shall be utilized at or maintained on the site. Further, it is the specific intention of the Commission to permit on site only equipment that is used in the incidental processing of excavated material for the purposes of trucking off-site. 
15.1.3.4  That there will be no sharp declivities, pits, or depressions and that proper drainage will be provided to avoid stagnant water and sewerage problems. 
15.1.3.5  That after fill, excavation or removal, the premises shall be cleared of debris. 
15.1.3.6  That top layer of arable soil for a depth of at least four (4) inches shall be set aside and retained on the premises and shall be re-spread over the premises and appropriately seeded upon completion of the excavation or removed, in accordance with approved contour lines. 
15.1.3.7  That no excavation shall be made nearer to the side and rear property lines than the distance of twenty (20) feet in all residential zones, the measurements to be taken to the top of slopes. 
15.1.3.8  There shall not be any processing of any material, which originated off site. 
15.1.3.9  There shall be no buildings erected on the premises without appropriate approvals. 
15.2 - In all zoning districts, excavation, removal of fill 
which in the opinion of the Building Inspector, Town Engineer, and Town Planner are of such a minor nature that the public health and safety will not be adversely affected, may be exempt from obtaining Commission approval if a minor modification approval is obtained provided the quantities outlines in Section 15.1.1 are not exceeded. 
15.3 - In all situations when approval is obtained for fill, excavation, or removal of material, 
the property owner shall be responsible and liable for any damage to public infrastructure, which includes but is not limited to sidewalks, curbs, roadways, and drainage systems. 
SECTION 16 - SIGNS 

16.1 - General requirements: 
All signs erected in the Town of Vernon shall comply with the requirements set forth below in addition to all other applicable regulations. 
16.1.1  Flashing, rotating, and animated signs are not permitted in any zone under any circumstances. Electronic Message Boards (EMBs) may be permitted when granted a Special Permit by the Planning and Zoning Commission (PZC) subject to the provisions of Section 17.3 and the requirements and criteria of section 16.3. EMBs that display only static messages of time and/or temperature or gasoline pricing shall not require a special permit. For purposes of this section "static messages" or "static displays" shall mean electronic messages that change infrequently (generally fewer than two or three times within 24 hours). 
16.1.2  The painting of signs on the exterior of any building is not permitted in any zone under any circumstances. 
16.1.3  The light source in any lighted sign shall be shielded in such a manner as to prevent undue glare. Colored lights shall not be used where they create any conflict with highway-control traffic signals. 
16.1.4  All signs must be erected in accordance with a building permit granted by the Building Inspector and shall be constructed of sound materials, firmly supported and maintained in good condition and repair. All such signs shall be removed (and all appurtenances thereto shall be removed) within thirty (30) days by their owners upon the completion or cessation of activities or business. 
16.1.5  No part of any sign shall be erected within ten (10) feet from any property lines of the premises to which they pertain except as permitted under Section 16.1.10. 
16.1.5.1  No sign shall be placed in the traffic visibility as outlined in Section 3.7. 
16.1.6.  Any sign hereafter erected shall conform to the height limitations of the section for the district in which it is located. 
16.1.7  Streamers, fluttering banners or similar displays shall be allowed for a period of five (5) days only. Such display shall not be allowed more than once every one hundred eighty (180) days. 
16.1.8  Signs shall not extend more than four (4) feet from the face of any building over any sidewalk but in any case shall not project within two (2) feet of the curb line. 
16.1.9  The area restrictions below shall be interpreted as maximum areas per sign face and are not meant to prohibit the use of more than one face. 
16.1.10  Portable, temporary signs are prohibited in all zones at all times except that signs shall be permitted in the public pedestrian right-of-way in the Historic District - Downtown Business & Residential zone subject to the following requirements: 
16.1.10.1  Only one portable sign shall be permitted for an individual business or establishment and the sign content must be limited to the business, service, or goods of the establishment immediately adjacent to the sign, or to an establishment located on the upper floors of the building immediately adjacent to the sign. 
16.1.10.2  Each property shall be entitled to no more than one portable sign for every 20 feet of property frontage on a public street, regardless of the number of businesses in a given property. Properties on corner lots shall only be entitled to count the frontage on Main Street. 
16.1.10.3  The sign shall not exceed eight (8) square feet in total area based on the dimensions of a single side and shall not be more than 2.5 feet wide nor more than 4 feet high. 
16.1.10.4  Signs shall be located either adjacent to the building frontage or a minimum of 18 inches from the curb and shall provide at least four (4) feet of unobstructed sidewalk area for pedestrians. Signs shall not obstruct any required means of egress from adjacent buildings or driveways providing access to parking or loading areas at the rear of adjacent buildings. 
16.1.10.5  Signs may be displayed only when the establishment is open for business and must be removed from the right-of-way when the business is closed. 
16.1.10.6  Signs must be constructed of durable, weatherproof materials, including wood, metal, or composite wood or synthetic materials. Glass, PVC pipe frames or similar materials are not permitted. Signs shall not be illuminated. All signs must be maintained in good repair including the sign frame structure, materials, and lettering and graphics. The message content on the sign may be contained on paper or laminated paper. Signs shall bear on each face a Rockville Downtown Association (RDA) decal provided by the RDA. 
16.1.10.7  Anyone wishing to display a portable sign must file an application with the Vernon Zoning Enforcement Officer for a portable sign permit. A $25 fee must accompany the completed application. The permit shall be valid from July 1 through June 30 of each year and may be renewed upon payment of a new permit fee. The permit fee shall not be prorated for less than a full year. 
16.1.10.8  Portable sign permits may be issued by the Zoning Enforcement Officer upon a showing of compliance with the provisions of these regulations. The Zoning Enforcement Officer may deny or revoke a permit if the applicant has a history of violations of any of the requirements of this section. 
16.1.10.9  The applicant must provide a certificate of liability insurance to the Zoning Enforcement Officer in an amount determined by the director of finance. A portable sign permit shall not be issued until the insurance certificate is provided. 
16.1.10.10  The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall be empowered to notify the permittee of a portable sign that their permit has been revoked if it is found that any of the terms or requirements of this section are not met after a 10 day written notice to correct has been issued. The Town is entitled to remove a sign which violates the regulations, and said signs shall not be returned or be located unless all violations are remedied. The Town may charge a pick-up fee in addition to any fines associated with said enforcement. 
16.1.10.11  The Town reserves the right, acting through direction of the Town Administrator or a designee, the Vernon Traffic Authority, or the Vernon Public Works Director to prohibit the use of portable signs at any time because of anticipated or actual problems or conflicts in the use of a sidewalk area. These situations include but are not limited to festivals, parades, road races, repairs to the street or sidewalk, or hazardous weather conditions or other emergencies occurring in the area. To the extent possible the permittee shall be given prior written notice of the time period during which the prohibition is in effect, but failure to give notice shall not affect the right of the Town to prohibit portable signs at any time. 
16.1.10.12  Any permittee aggrieved by any action of the zoning enforcement officer shall have a right to appeal to the Zoning Board of Appeals as set forth in section 17.2.2.7 of these regulations. Any sign subject to an enforcement action must be removed from the sidewalk until the appeal is decided. 
16.1.11  Directional signs shall conform to the manual of uniform traffic control devises (MUTCD) and shall not advertise any products or services. 
16.1.12  Signs placed within the public right-of-way are subject to confiscation by the Town or State. 
16.1.13  All signs must be located on the same parcel as the use to which the sign pertains. 
16.1.14  Message board may be permitted by approval of a site plan or modification and a special permit, but not by minor modification. 
16.2 - Signs Permitted in Residential Districts: 
16.2.1  One sign for each family residing on the premises indicating the name of the owner or occupant, provided that said sign shall not exceed two (2) square feet in area. 
16.2.2  Deleted. 
16.2.3  One sign indicating the principal use of the premises such as nursing homes, apartment, non-profit clubs, etc., providing said sign shall not exceed ten (10) square feet in area. Signs for multifamily units may be increased to fifty (50) square feet if the development exceeds fifty (50) units. 
16.2.4  One (1) temporary sign pertaining to the construction on, or the sale or lease of the premises, providing that said sign shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area. Said sign shall not be permitted for a period exceeding one (1) year and shall be located on the same property to which they pertain. 
16.2.4.1  Construction signs shall be removed upon the installation of permanent signs and/or prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
16.2.4.2  Construction/for sale/for lease signs are exempt from obtaining building permits. 
16.2.5  Directional signs which provide guidance to the public and offer no advertising or business identification, may be allowed providing they meet all requirements of Section 16 of these regulations, do not pose any obstruction to traffic or pedestrian visibility. 
16.3 - Signs Permitted in Commercial and Industrial Districts: 
16.3.1  Angle signs, one sign affixed at an angle to the façade of a structure and pertaining to a permitted use or business within the structure, providing said sign shall not exceed nine (9) square feet in area for each business within a structure. 
16.3.2  Parallel signs, signs affixed and parallel to the façade of a building pertaining to a permitted use or business within the structure, providing said signs on a given wall surface shall not exceed two (2) square feet for every linear foot of the same wall of that section of the structure occupied by said use except as limited by the provisions of Section 16.3.3. 
16.3.3  One (1) free-standing sign representing all permitted uses or businesses on a single parcel, providing said sign does not exceed eighty (80) square feet per face and the sign serves only to identify the name and type of business, provided however, in a commercial zone, or two or more contiguous commercial parcels sharing the same parking facilities and sharing common access drives, having an area of at least fifteen (15) acres and containing more than one hundred fifty thousand (150,000) square feet of building area, or in the case of commercial recreational facilities having an area of at least fifteen (15) acres and containing more than one hundred fifty thousand (150,000) square feet overall of commercially utilized areas, excluding parking areas, one (1) additional free- standing sign may be permitted. Such additional free-standing sign may contain a maximum of two hundred (200) square feet per face, providing the applicant reduces the amount of square footage allowed by Section 16.3.2 for parallel signs on the same premises by the amount per face said free-standing sign exceeds eighty (80) square feet per face. 
16.3.4  Directional signs, which provide guidance to the public and offer no advertising or business identification, may be allowed provided they meet all requirement of Section 16 of these regulations, do not pose any obstruction to traffic or pedestrian visibility. Directional signs may not exceed two (2) square feet in area or three (3) feet in height measured from grade to the top of the sign. 
16.3.5  Roof signs, providing said signs should not exceed two (2) square feet for every linear foot of outside wall of the section of the structure occupied by said use. 
16.3.6  Gasoline price signs: One free standing price sign, not exceeding fifteen (15) square feet or not larger than specified in state statutes shall be allowed, provided the required location, and height requirements of the zone are met and the signs meet all the requirements of Section 16.1. 
16.3.7  One sign pertaining to the construction on, or the sale or lease of the premises, providing that said sign should not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area. Said sign shall not be permitted for a period exceeding one (1) year and shall be located on the same property to which they pertain. 
16.3.7.1  Construction signs shall be removed upon the installation of permanent signs and/or prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
16.3.7.2  Construction/for sale/for lease signs are exempt from obtaining building permits. 
16.3.8  One menu board sign per drive-up service lane provided that the total sign face area allowed per Sections 16.3.2 and 16.3.3 is reduced by an equivalent area to the face areas of the menu board sign(s). Menu board signs require approval of a site plan of development or modification, which may be a minor modification. 
16.3.9  A message board sign requires approval of a Site Plan and Special Permit provided that the total sign face area allowed per Sections 16.3.2 and 16.3.3 is reduced by an equivalent area to the face areas of the message board sign. 
16.3.10  Electronic Message Boards (EMBs) subject to the following requirements and conditions: 
16.3.10.1  EMBs shall only be permitted in the following zones upon the granting of a special permit: Commercial, Industrial, and Planned Commercial; 
16.3.10.2  In lieu of the standards in section 16.3.3, EMBs shall be limited to a display area not exceeding 40 sq. ft., dimensions not exceeding 5' by 8', and a height of 12' if the EMB is not proposed as part of a larger freestanding sign; 
16.3.10.3  EMBs shall display no more than two colors against a black background at any one time; the combination of colors may change with a change in the message displayed; no graphics other than a business logo may be displayed as part of a message provided there is no animation, scrolling, or flashing of the logo; 
16.3.10.4  EMBs shall display any single message for not fewer than 30 minutes before the message is changed; 
16.3.10.5  The transition from one message to another displayed on an EMB may be instantaneous, may include an off-time between messages, or may include a fade or dissolve transition; 
16.3.10.6  An application for an EMB proposed for placement within 300' of another EMB as measured along a line parallel to the street line shall require submission of a photographic image of the streetscape with the proposed EMB superimposed in relation to any existing EMBs located within 500 feet in either direction along the travelway; 
16.3.10.7  An EMB shall be turned off, display no message, or display a static message during non-business hours; for businesses operating 24 hours, an EMB shall be turned off, display no message, or display a static message daily between the hours of midnight and 5:00 am; 
16.3.10.8  In addition to the special permit criteria of section 17.3, approval of a special permit for an EMB shall meet the following requirements: 
16.3.10.8.1  Its longitudinal or sight line proximity to existing EMBs shall not create visual clutter or an undue distraction to drivers by virtue of non-synchronous message change intervals of proximate EMBs, the rapid sequential viewing of proximate EMBs, or the viewing of multiple EMBs in an average glance duration of 0.3 second; 
16.3.10.8.2  The height of the EMB relative to proximate EMBs shall not create the illusion of a larger EMB mass or cluster. 
16.4 - Other provisions: 
The total area of all angle signs, parallel signs, and roof signs shall not exceed two (2) square feet for every linear foot of wall of that section of the structure occupied by said use. 
16.5 - Sign Policy: 
It is in the best interest of Vernon to establish a sign policy. This policy should provide a means of conveying a message without restricting the rights of the person communicating the message. Additionally, this policy should address the safety concerns of the citizenry and the overall aesthetic character of the Town. Signs present, often more than roads, buildings, or landscaping, a sense of negative ness via clutter, untidiness or overwhelming size, or a sense of visual pleasantness via consistency of scale. 
It is the intent of the Zoning Regulations to encourage the approval of signage which allow the necessary balance desired by all members of the community by focusing on the following aspects: 
• Relationship of signs to site; 
• Relationship of signs and site to adjoining areas; 
• Sign design; 
• Planning & Design Factors affecting safety to motorists, pedestrians, and property owners. 
16.5.1  Signs should facilitate efficient communication between businesses and the patrons they wish to attract. Signs should blend with the architectural style of the building to which they relate and should be visually pleasing and attractive. To create architecturally harmonious and visually attractive signs, the following criteria should be used: 
16.5.1.1  Signs should be designed as an architectural element of the building and should complement the architectural style of the building. 
16.5.1.2  Signs should be in good proportional scale to the building and site to which they relate. 
16.5.1.3  Whenever possible, sign letters should be attached directly to the building and signs should be located on the buildings sign freeze. 
16.5.1.4  Sign materials, lettering style, and form should be compatible with the building's design and use. 
16.5.1.5  Sign colors should be limited in number and be compatible with the building's façade. 
16.5.1.6  Signs should relate to the business at hand and not advertise brand names or symbols. 
16.5.1.7  The number of graphic elements on a sign should be held to a minimum and should not contain selling slogans or product descriptions. 
16.5.2  The boundary between residential and commercial/industrial zones represents a potential friction point in land use development. This is particularly true for intensive retail developments that bound along residential districts. Signs can represent the most visible element of development along this boundary and should be handled differently. By creating a buffering requirement along these boundaries, there is the opportunity to ensure more compatible development, maintain residential property values, and foster better relationships between these disparate neighbors. This may be accomplished, for example by the use of reduced lighting, harmonious colors, or non-flashing or rotating or blinking lights. 
SECTION 17 - SPECIAL REGULATIONS 

17.1 - Alcoholic liquors: 
In those districts, which permit sellers and/or servers of alcohol, the standards to be applied are as follows and are in addition to the requirements of Section 17.2. 
17.1.1  The following separating distances shall be applied to all establishments seeking to permit the sale of alcoholic liquors, excluding; 
1) full service restaurants as defined under Section 2 and; 
2) the sale of beer by an establishment, chiefly engaged in the sale of groceries under a grocery store beer permit (as defined in the State Liquor Control Act) and 
3) the sale of alcoholic liquor to be consumed on the premises of a commercial bowling establishment containing ten (10) or more lanes under a bowling establishment permit (as defined in the State Liquor Control Act). 
4) manufacturer of alcoholic liquors with on-site selling of their product as accessory to the manufacturing component, for consumption on-site or off-site (as permitted in the State Liquor Control Act). 
17.1.2  Separating distances shall be measured from the main public access door of an establishment to the main public access door of any other establishment in a straight line. 
FEET Seller to seller 3,000 Server to server 2,000 Seller/server to public institution 1,000 except for distance to any high school, which shall be   
  
2,000  
17.1.2.1  A Special Permit will be required: 
17.1.2.2  Upon the change of primary use within either class (example, convenience store with a beer permit to a package store) of sellers or servers. 
17.1.2.3  Upon a change from seller to server or vice versa (example, a package store to a restaurant). 
17.1.3  In addition to this paragraph, all sales or serving of alcoholic liquors are subject to the requirements of the Liquor Control Act of the State of Connecticut. 
17.1.4  On an annual basis, the Zoning Enforcement Officer shall verify in writing, that no zoning violations exist at any establishment holding an alcoholic beverages permit. 
17.2 - Special Exceptions, Variances, and Appeals: 
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hear and decide Special Exceptions, Variances, and Appeals in accordance with Section 8-6 of the General Statutes of Connecticut, Revision of 1958, as amended, and the terms of this ordinance as follows: 
17.2.1  Special Exceptions: 
17.2.1.1  Only those uses specifically designated as Special Exceptions in Section 4, "Use Regulations" may be permitted by the Board following a Public Hearing. Such use shall meet the following requirements: 
17.2.1.1.1  It shall be compatible with neighboring land uses. 
17.2.1.1.2  It shall not create a nuisance. 
17.2.1.1.3  It shall not hinder the future sound development of the community. 
17.2.1.1.4  It shall conform to all applicable sections of this ordinance. 
17.2.1.2  The Zoning Board of Appeals is empowered to grant the Special Exception subject to such reasonable conditions, restrictions, and safeguards as may be deemed necessary by said Board for the purpose of protecting the health, safety, and general welfare of the community. 
17.2.1.3  Special Exceptions in/abutting Historic Districts: When a Special Exception is requested for a property located in or abutting a historic building; structure, site or district the Local Historic Properties Commission shall be notified at least twenty (20) days prior to the date of the public hearing. The Local Historic Properties Commission shall have the opportunity to review the proposed application and make recommendations to the Zoning Board of Appeals. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall be obligated to seriously consider the recommendations provided by the Local Historic Properties Commission. If recommendations from the Local Historic Properties Commission are not received by the Zoning Board of Appeals at or before the public hearing, it shall be presumed that the Local Historic Properties Commission does not disapprove of the proposal. When the Zoning Board of Appeals makes a decision contrary to the written recommendations of the Local Historic Properties Commission, The Zoning Board of Appeals shall state on the record the reasons for the decision. 
17.2.2  Variances: 
17.2.2.1  The applicant for a variance from the provisions of this ordinance shall show to the satisfaction of the Zoning Board of Appeals that such relief will not be contrary to the public interest and that, owing to a special or peculiar condition, enforcement of the provisions of this ordinance would result in unnecessary hardship to the applicant. 
17.2.2.2  The unnecessary hardship, which an applicant seeks to avoid, shall not have been imposed by any prior action of the applicant. Such hardship shall arise only from special or peculiar site conditions or features of the land or structures in question rather than from physical infirmities of the applicant or merely from the desire to realize greater financial gain. 
17.2.2.3  No non-conforming use of neighboring lands, structures or buildings in adjacent districts shall be considered grounds for the issuance of a variance. 
17.2.2.4  In granting relief from the provisions of this ordinance, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall grant the least variance from the provisions needed to remove the unnecessary hardship and may impose any condition or safeguard as may be deemed in the public interest. 
17.2.2.5  A variance shall become null and void twelve (12) months after said variance is granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals unless the construction or changes authorized have been diligently prosecuted and substantial progress made. 
17.2.2.6  The Zoning Board of Appeals is empowered to grant the variance subject to such reasonable conditions, restrictions and safeguards as may be deemed necessary by said Board for the purpose of protecting the health, safety, and general welfare of the community. 
17.2.2.7  Said appeal must be filed with the Zoning Board of Appeals within fourteen (14) days of receipt of the written order or remedy from the Zoning Enforcement Officer. 
17.2.2.8  A community shall notify the applicant in writing over the signature of the Chairman of the Zoning Board of Appeals that, 1) the issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance coverage and 2) such construction below the base flood level increases risk to life and property. Such notification shall be maintained with a record of all variance actions as required in 5.2. 
17.2.2.9  A community shall 1) maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and 2) report such variances issued in its annual report submitted to the Administrator. 
17.3 - Special Permits: 
The Planning & Zoning Commission shall hear and decide on all request for Special Permits in accordance with the General Statutes of Connecticut and the terms of this ordinance as follows: 
17.3.1  Only those uses specifically designated as Special Permits in Section 4, "Use Districts" or Section 8, "Dumps and Incinerator Sites" may be permitted by the Planning & Zoning Commission following a Public Hearing. Such uses shall meet the following requirements: 
17.3.1.1  It shall not create a hazardous condition relative to public health or safety. 
17.3.1.2  It shall be compatible with neighboring uses. 
17.3.1.3  It shall not create a nuisance. 
17.3.1.4  It shall not hinder the future sound development of the community. 
17.3.1.5  It shall conform to all applicable sections of this ordinance. 
17.3.1.6  In the case of conversion of existing residential structures, said conversion shall not alter the residential character of the exterior of the building or increase the existing floor area of the building. 
17.3.1.7  In the case of adaptive re-use of mill or former mill sites or structures per Sections 2.97 & 3.26, said adaptive re-use shall preserve the architecturally and historically significant features and character of the site and structures. 
17.3.1.8  The Commission may at its discretion require the submission of a Site Plan for approval as outlined in Section 14 of this ordinance. 
17.3.2  The Planning & Zoning Commission is empowered to grant a Special Permit subject to such reasonable conditions, restrictions, and safeguards such as those outlined in Section 14.1.6 as may be deemed necessary by said Commission for the purpose of protecting the health, safety, and general welfare of the community. 
17.3.2.1  A submission of a modification to a Special Permit already approved shall make the approved plan void upon the approval of the modifications. 
17.3.2.2  Special Permit Modifications, which in the opinion of the Building Inspector, Town Engineer and the Town Planner are of such a minor nature that the public health and safety will not be adversely affected, are exempt from obtaining Commission approval. 
17.3.3  Vernon has areas containing concentrations of historic buildings, structures, and sites that have been identified as being of historic and/or architectural significance, both individually and as neighborhoods. There are two National Register Historic Districts: The City of Rockville Historic district which covers approximately on square mile and contains approximately eight hundred (800) contributing buildings in the area of mixed uses, varied styles, and high density and the Talcottville Historic District which covers approximately ninety-two (92) acres of land and contains thirty-eight (38) contributing buildings and six (6) sites or structures other than buildings. Vernon Center has been surveyed as a potential historic district. It covers approximately one hundred forty (140) acres and contains twenty-five (25) historically significant buildings. Additionally, seven (7) individual buildings have been listed on the National Register of Historic Places, and thirteen (13) historic engineering sites have been documented. These historic resources must be given special consideration when evaluating a request for a Special Permit. Therefore, all Special Permits requested for the City of Rockville Historic District, Talcottville Historic District, Local Historic Districts, buildings individually listed on the National Register of Historic Places, listed in "Vernon, Connecticut; a survey of Architectural and Historical Resources", or Vernon Engineering sites listed in Connecticut: An Inventory of Historic Engineering and industrial Sites (1981) are subject to the following criteria: 
17.3.3.1  No Special Permit shall be issued if it is found to be detrimental to the neighborhood or its residents, or alters the neighborhood's essential characteristics. 
17.3.3.2  Throughout the Historic Districts, excluding the Restricted Watershed and Industrial Zones, single-family and two-family housing units shall be allowed. 
17.3.3.3  The Special Permit uses shall be considered as a "special use" and allowed only when it is determined that the issuance of the Special Permit will have a positive effect on the historic district, building, structure or site. 
17.3.3.4  When a Special Permit is requested for a historic building, structure, or site, the Local Historic Properties Commission shall be notified at least twenty (20) days prior to the date of the Public Hearing. The Planning & Zoning Commission shall be obligated to seriously consider the recommendations provided by this Commission. When the Planning & Zoning Commission makes a decision contrary to the written recommendations of the Local Historic Properties Commission, the PZC shall state on the record the reasons for the decision. 
17.3.4  Bed & Breakfast use may be proposed as a Special Permit use for a property located in either a Historic District, or designated a Local Historic Property, or listed on the National Register of Historic Places as an individual building or a contributing building in a Historic District, or listed in the State Register of Historic Places. 
17.3.4.1  The proposed Bed & Breakfast use will be compatible with the permitted uses of the existing district and will not have an adverse effect upon the neighborhood. 
17.3.4.2  The proposed Bed & Breakfast use will contribute to the preservation of historic architectural features of the property. And the construction, conversion, improvement, modernization, rehabilitation, renovation, or restoration of the property will be in compliance with the "United States Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation and Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings." 
SECTION 18 - ACTIVITIES REQUIRING A CERTIFIED EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN 

18.1 - A soil erosion and sediment control plan 
shall be submitted with any application for development when the disturbed area of such development is cumulatively more than one-half acre. 
18.2 - A single family dwelling that is not a part of subdivision 
of land shall be exempt from these soil erosion and sediment control regulations. 
18.3 - Erosion and Sediment Control Plan: 
18.3.1  To be eligible for certification, a soil erosion and sediment control plan shall contain proper provisions to adequately control accelerated erosion and sedimentation and reduce the danger from storm water runoff on the proposed site based on the best available technology. Such principles, methods and practices necessary for certification are found in the Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control (2002) as amended. Alternative principles, methods and practices may be used with prior approval of the Commission. 
18.3.2  Said plan shall contain, but not be limited to: 
18.3.2.1  A narrative describing: 
18.3.2.1.1  The development: 
18.3.2.1.2  The schedule for grading and construction activities including 
18.3.2.1.2.1  Start and completion dates; 
18.3.2.1.2.2  Sequence of grading and construction activities; 
18.3.2.1.2.3  Sequence for installation and/or application of soil erosion and sediment control measures; 
18.3.2.1.2.4  Sequence for final stabilization of the project site. 
18.3.2.1.3  The design criteria details for proposed soil erosion and sediment control measures and storm water management facilities. 
18.3.2.1.4  The construction details for proposed soil erosion and sediment control measures and storm water management facilities. 
18.3.2.1.5  The installation and/or application procedures for proposed soil erosion and sediment control measures and storm water management facilities. 
18.3.2.1.6  The operation and maintenance program for proposed soil erosion and sediment control measures and storm water management facilities. 
18.3.3  Site plan map at a sufficient scale to show: 
18.3.3.1  The location of the proposed development and adjacent properties; 
18.3.3.2  The existing and proposed topography including soil types, wetland, watercourses, and water bodies; 
18.3.3.3  The existing structures on the project site, if any; 
18.3.3.4  The proposed area alterations including cleared, excavated, filled or graded areas and proposed structures, utilities, road and, if applicable, new property lines; 
18.3.3.5  The location of and design details for all proposed soil erosion and sediment control measures and storm water management facilities; 
18.3.3.6  The sequence of grading and construction activities; 
18.3.3.7  The sequence for installation and/or application of soil erosion and sediment control measures; 
18.3.3.8  The sequence for final stabilization of the development site. 
18.3.4  Any other information deemed necessary and appropriate by the applicant or requested by the Commission or its designated agent. 
18.4 - Issuance or Denial of Certification: 
18.4.1  Plans for soil erosion and sediment control shall be developed in accordance with these regulations using the principles as outlined in Chapters 3 and 4 of the Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control (2002), as amended. Soil erosion and sediment control plans shall result in a development that minimizes erosion and sedimentation during construction; is stabilized and protected from erosion when completed; and does not cause offsite erosion and/or sedimentation. 
18.4.2  The minimum standards for individual measures are those in the Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control (2002), as amended. The Commission (or the Country Soil and Water Conservation District) may grant exceptions when requested by the applicant if technically sound reasons are presented. 
18.4.3  The appropriate method from Chapter 9 of the Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control (1985), as amended, shall be used in determining peak flow rates and volumes of runoff unless an alternative method is approved by the Commission. 
18.5 - Issuance or Denial of Certification: 
18.5.1  The Certifying Agent shall either certify that the soil erosion and sediment control plan, as filed, complies with the requirements and objectives of this regulation or deny certification when the development proposal does not comply with these regulations. 
18.5.2  Nothing in these regulations shall be construed as extending the time limits for the approval of any application under Chapters 124, 124A or 126 of the General Statutes. 
18.5.3  Prior to certification, any plan submitted to the municipality may be reviewed by the County Soil and Water Conservation District, which may make recommendations concerning such plan, provided such review, shall be completed within thirty (30) days of receipt of such plan. 
18.5.4  The Commission may forward a copy of a development proposal to the Conservation District or other review agency or consultant for review comment. 
18.6 - Conditions Relating to Soil Erosion and Sediment Control: 
18.6.1  The estimated costs of measures required to control soil erosion and sedimentation, as specified in the certified plan, that are a condition of certification of any modified site plan may be required to be covered in a performance bond or other assurance acceptable to the Commission in accordance with the provisions specified under Section 4 of the regulations. 
18.6.2  Site development shall not begin unless the soil erosion and sediment control plan is certified and those control measures and facilities in the plan scheduled for installation prior to site development are installed and functional. 
18.6.3  Planned soil erosion and sediment control measures and facilities shall be installed as scheduled according to the certified plan. 
18.6.4  All control measures and facilities shall be maintained in effective condition to ensure the compliance of the certified plan. 
18.7 - Inspection: 
18.7.1  Inspections shall be made by the Commission or its designated agent during development to ensure compliance with the certified plan and that control measures and facilities are properly performed or installed and maintained. The Commission may require the permittee to verify through progress reports that soil erosion and sediment control measures and facilities have been performed or installed according to the certified plan and are being operated and maintained. 
SECTION 19 - REAR LOTS 

19.1 
The intent of this section is to provide greater residential development flexibility, particularly where a site has an unusual lot line or natural resource configuration of where rear lot development would promote or enhance the protection of valuable natural resource features. This section is not intended to encourage development of land characterized by severe or very severe development limitations or to discourage new development and is limited to residential construction. 
19.1.1  No approval shall be granted authorizing construction on rear lots unless the applicants for such permits have demonstrated compliance with all of the following conditions to the satisfaction of the Commission: 
19.1.1.1  That such lot or lots provide the best development of the land, considering subject lot and lot configurations, topography and other natural resources, characteristics, drainage and traffic impacts, and driveway site lines 
19.1.1.2  That any proposed Rear Lot development is not detrimental to the health, safety, general welfare, property values, future land use or road layouts of the future occupants of rear lot or lots, abutting landowners or the community at large and shall not impair future land use and road layouts anticipated by the Master Plan of Development. 
19.1.1.3  That there is no logical or feasible alternate for the lot or subdivision to be properly served by an accepted Town road, street or highway in the foreseeable future. 
19.1.2  If rear lots are proposed in subdivisions, the incidence of rear lots shall not exceed the greater of one (1) lot or ten percent (10%) of the number of lots for which subdivision approval is sought. 
19.1.3  Rear lot applications shall be considered as special situations, each requiring individual justification by the applicant. The burden of proof shall be on the applicant to demonstrate how special circumstances make a specific rear lot development proposal consistent with this section and how it will avoid adverse effects on surrounding land. 
19.2 - All rear lots require approval of the Commission. 
Those lots, which do not require subdivision approval, must apply for and receive a Special Permit from the Planning & Zoning Commission. All applications for a subdivision or Special Permit must meet the following requirements: 
19.2.1  The provision of an unobstructed right of access (aka access strip) in fee simple, at least twenty-five (25) feet wide at all points to a public street and designed to accommodate emergency vehicles, etc., to such lot. If however the rear of such lot shall exceed twice the area requirements of the zone in which the rear area is located, such access strip to said area shall be at least fifty (50) feet wide to all points (to provide for future roadway development) and no building permit shall be issued for more than one building in the original rear area until all regulations for subdivision have been complied with. 
19.2.2  The rear lot line of the primary lot and that from which the access strip for the rear lot originates, shall be considered the front yard line of the rear lot. 
19.2.3  The access strip shall not be used in computing lot size area requirements. 
19.2.4  No access strip shall exceed five-hundred (500) feet from the centerline of the traveled portion of any street. 
19.2.5  Rear lots more than twenty-five (25) acres in area shall have two (2) access strips spaced a minimum distance of six-hundred (600) feet apart with all measurements taken from the midpoint of the access strip(s). 
19.2.6  The maximum number of adjoining rear lot access strips shall not exceed two (2) and a common driveway shall be employed. 
19.2.7  The minimum separation distance, as measured along one side of the street, between single rear lots shall be three hundred fifty (350) feet. The minimum separation distance between adjoining access strips sharing a common driveway and any other access strip(s) shall be six hundred (600) feet. All measurements shall be from the midpoint of the access strip(s). 
19.2.8  The Commission shall require written reports as for each rear lot from the Chief of Police and the Fire Marshal as to the feasibility of rear access to each proposed dwelling and accessory buildings from the point of view of fire and police protection. 
19.2.9  Parking on the access strip shall be prohibited to permit unrestricted entry of emergency vehicles. 
19.2.10  An unobstructed vehicular turnaround with at least a forty-five (45) foot radius shall be provided at the dwelling to accommodate emergency vehicles. 
19.2.11  To ensure a buildable area exists on the rear lot, at least fifty (50) percent of the minimum lot area required shall be "developable", as defined in Section 2 of the Zoning Regulations. 
19.3 
In order to approve a subdivision containing rear lots or a Special Permit for a rear lot the Commission shall find: 
19.3.1  That the development of rear lots will provide the most suitable use of the land considering such factors as drainage, natural resources configuration, accessibility, and topography and 
19.3.2  The rear lot(s) shall not present any problems with the provision of emergency services and 
19.3.3  All the requirements of the Zoning and/or Subdivision Regulations are met. 
SECTION 20 - AQUIFER PROTECTION 

20.1 - In establishing these regulations, the Town recognizes that: 
20.1.1  The groundwater underlying this town is a significant source of its present and future and drinking water supply. 
20.1.2  The groundwater aquifers are integrally connected with, and flow into, the surface waters, lakes, and streams which constitute significant recreational and economic resources of the Town; and 
20.1.3  Spills and discharges of petroleum products and other toxic and hazardous materials and discharge of sewage have threatened the quality of such ground water supplies and related water resources throughout Connecticut and elsewhere, posing potential public health and safety hazards and threatening economic losses to the affected communities; and 
20.1.4  Sections 8-2 and 8-23 of the Connecticut General Statutes require consideration of protecting existing and future public water supplies. 
20.2 - Therefore, this section of the Regulations is established in order to: 
20.2.1  Preserve and maintain existing and potential groundwater supplies, aquifers, and groundwater recharge areas of the Town, and protect them from adverse development of land use practices. 
20.2.2  Preserve and protect present and potential sources of the water supply for the public health and safety. 
20.2.3  Conserve the natural resources of the Town. 
20.3 - Delineation of Aquifer Protection Zone: 
20.3.1  For the purposes of these Regulations, there is hereby established within the Town of Vernon an overlay zone consisting of certain aquifer protection areas, including Favorable Aquifer Areas - Saturated Thickness over thirty (30) feet and Stratified Drift Aquifer and Primary Recharge Area which are delineated on a map dated August, 1992, entitled "Unconsolidated Aquifers, Aquifer Management Study, Town of Vernon, Connecticut" and which shall be considered as superimposed over other districts established by the Zoning Regulations of this Town. This map, as it may be amended from time to time, is on file with the office of the Town Clerk and Town Engineer and, with any explanatory material thereon, is hereby made a part of this Regulation. 
20.3.2  Amendments to the Aquifer Protection Zone. Any person may petition the Commission for an amendment to the above referenced map. If the material beneath the subject property is: 
(a) Not stratified drift or; 
(b) The stratified drift does not exceed 30 feet in saturated thickness or; 
(c) Is not a primary recharge area to the Stratified Drift Aquifer 
then the aquifer area designation may be removed from the property. All petitions for an amendment shall be submitted in writing and shall include all relevant facts and circumstances which support the change. The petitioner shall bear the burden of proof regarding the proposed map amendment. 
Such proof shall include: 
(1) Subsurface investigation by a qualified hydrogeologist, including the drilling of borings and the construction of a groundwater-monitoring well to determine the saturated thickness of overburden sediments beneath the site. 
(2) A watershed and drainage analysis to determine if runoff from the site is a significant contributor of both groundwater and surface water recharge to the stratified drift aquifer. 
All map amendments are subject to a public hearing. 
20.4 - Use Regulations applying to the Aquifer Protection Zone: 
20.4.1  Within the Favorable Aquifer Areas - Saturated Thickness over thirty (30) feet and Stratified Drift Aquifer and Primary Recharge Area the following uses shall not be allowed under any circumstances: 
20.4.1.1  Stockpiles of road salt or other ice control chemicals. 
20.4.1.2  Underground storage tanks or pipelines for petroleum products or any toxic or hazardous materials. 
20.4.1.3  Dry cleaning establishments where cleaning is performed on the premises. 
20.4.2  Special Permit uses: Within the Favorable Aquifer Areas - Saturated Thickness over thirty (30) feet and Stratified Drift Aquifer and Primary Recharge Area of the Aquifer Protection Zone the following uses are allowed only by Special Permit. The phrase "when connected to public sanitary sewers" when used in relation to a specific use or use category, shall mean, that within the Aquifer Protection Zone, the Commission shall not grant the Special Permit unless the structure, use, etc., is connected to the public sanitary sewer. 
20.4.2.1  Golf courses, whether public or private. 
20.4.2.2  Commercial cabinetry or furniture making when connected to public sanitary sewers. 
20.4.2.3  Residential development of more than one (1) dwelling unit. 
20.4.2.4  Cluster Developments when connected to public sewer and water supplies. 
20.4.2.5  Excavation of land of more than one-hundred (100) cubic yards for off site use or the disturbing of more than one half (1/2) acre on a site. 
20.4.2.6  Any use involving the retention of less than fifty (50) percent of the lot in a natural state. 
20.4.2.7  Any use other than single family dwellings where sewage flow exceeds four hundred fifty (450) gallons per day per acre of upland lot area, of ten thousand (10,000) gallons per day total design sewage flow. 
20.4.2.8  Any use which involves as an accessory activity the storage, use, transportation, or disposal of toxic or hazardous materials, not including, everyday ordinary household use. 
20.4.2.9  Hotels or motels when connected to public sanitary sewers and water supplies. 
20.4.2.10  Any other use, which involves as a principal activity the manufacture, storage, use, transportation, or disposal of toxic or hazardous materials. 
20.4.2.10  Commercial and industrial establishments or facilities for the fueling, washing, servicing, painting, or repair of airplanes, boats or motor vehicles when connected to public sanitary sewers. 
20.4.2.12  Commercial establishments for the plating, finishing, etching, polishing of metals or semiconductors when connected to public sanitary sewers. 
20.4.2.13  Painting, wood preserving or stripping paint on a commercial scale when connected to public sanitary sewers. 
20.4.2.14  Manufacture of semiconductors or other electronic components when connected to public sanitary sewers. 
20.4.2.15  Electronic circuit assembly on a commercial scale when connected to public sanitary sewers. 
20.4.2.16  Medical, chemical or bacteriological laboratories when connected to public sanitary sewers. 
20.4.2.17  Commercial establishments for printing or photographic processing when connected to public sanitary sewers. 
20.4.2.18  Storage of herbicides, pesticides, or fertilizers in amount greater than one hundred ten (110) gallons or two hundred fifty (250) pounds dry weight. 
20.4.2.19  Storage and/or sale of petroleum or refined petroleum products, except within a building which it will heat. 
20.4.2.20  Commercial development limited to retail shopping, business or professional office, or warehousing limited to storage of nontoxic, non- hazardous materials. Roof and other building run-off shall be retained and recharged on site to the maximum extent practical. All sanitary wastewater generated at the facility shall be conveyed off-site via public sanitary sewers, when available within one thousand five hundred feet (1,500') of the proposed development. If sewers are not currently available, the applicant shall submit a Plan of the treatment and disposal of wastewater pursuant to Section 20.6 of these Regulations. The Plan presented shall be based on sound engineering practices and shall include a written certification by a registered Professional Engineer in the State of Connecticut that the proposed septic system will not adversely affect the underlying aquifer or recharge area. Septic systems permitted under this Section shall be for the sole purpose of disposing sanitary wastewater, and shall be designed in accordance with the appropriate local, state, and federal codes pursuant to Section 20.5.2 of these Regulations. All other forms of wastewater generated shall be contained and disposed off-site. 
The burden to demonstrate that the aquifer and recharge areas will not be adversely affected by the proposed development will be on the applicant. The applicant shall connect to the public sewer system at such time as it becomes available. The Commission may, at its discretion, elect to retain the services of a qualified professional at the applicant's expense, to review the Plans and render an opinion on the Commission's behalf. 
20.4.2.21  Non intensive agricultural uses: Pasture light grazing, hay, gardening, nursery, conservation, forestry, and harvesting provided that fertilizers, herbicides, pesticides, and other Leachable materials are not stored outdoors or in any other manner which would permit leakage thereof. 
20.4.2.22  Proper operation and maintenance of existing water bodies and dams, splashboards, and other water control, supply, and conservation devices. 
20.4.2.23  Existing conforming commercial and industrial buildings and uses may be maintained, repaired, expanded, or altered notwithstanding any change in ownership, but subject to the provisions of this district and the underlying zoning district. 
20.4.2.23.1  This section shall not apply to the expansion of uses listed in Section 20.4.1 above and shall supersede Section 11 of these Regulations. 
20.4.2.23.2  The Special Permit shall be granted for the repair, expansion or alteration of existing conforming structures and uses if said structure is connected to public sanitary sewers. 
20.4.2.24  Any use which increases the lot coverage to sixty (60) percent or more. 
20.4.2.25  Aquifer Protection within the Planned Development Zones per Sections 4.24.4.2 & 4.25.4. 
20.5 - Density Regulations applying to the Aquifer Protection Zone: 
20.5.1  The Commission may increase the lot coverage if an applicant's civil engineer registered in the State of Connecticut having the appropriate qualifications, shall declare in writing that the increased lot coverage will not adversely affect the underlying aquifer or recharge area. The plan presented shall be based on sound engineering practice and the burden to demonstrate that the aquifer or recharge areas will not be adversely affected will be on the applicant. 
20.5.2  In any Aquifer Protection Zone the density of design gallons per day of an on site sewage disposal according to State of Connecticut Public Health Code criteria shall not exceed one hundred (100) gallons per day per ten thousand (10,000) square feet of developable upland lot area (exclusive of wetlands, floodplains, and impermeable surfaces). No additional development on an already developed site shall exceed this standard. 
20.6 - Special Permit within the Aquifer Protection Zone: 
20.6.1  A Special Permit shall be granted if the PZC determine that Section 17.3 of the Regulations and the intent of this section as well as its specific criteria are met. 
In making such determination, the PZC shall give consideration to the simplicity, reliability, and feasibility of the control measures proposed and the degree of threat to water quality. In addition the following shall apply: 
20.6.1.1  The use will not, during construction or thereafter, have a significant adverse impact on any aquifer or recharge area in the District and: 
20.6.1.2  The use will not have a significant adverse impact on an existing or potential domestic or municipal water supply; and is consistent with existing and probable future development or surrounding areas and; 
20.6.1.3  Groundwater quality at the down-gradient boundary of the property shall not be allowed to violate State and Federal drinking water standards. 
20.6.2  Materials to be submitted by Applicant: The following materials shall be submitted to the PZC in addition to those materials required by Sections 14 or 17 of the Regulations. 
20.6.2.1  A site plan showing existing and proposed structures and the location of all facilities relevant to the other requirements specified in the paragraphs below. 
20.6.2.2  A complete list of all chemicals, pesticides, fuels, and other potentially toxic or hazardous materials to be used, generated, stored, or disposed of on the premises. 
20.6.2.3  A description of proposed measures to protect all storage containers or facilities associated with such materials from vandalism, accidental damage, corrosion and leakage. Such measures might include secure storage areas, shelters for corrodible or water soluble materials, spill control provisions around transfer points, and a schedule of future monitoring of waste streams or groundwater on the site to ensure that proper control has been maintained. 
20.6.2.4  A description of proposed methods by which runoff from building areas will be recharged into the ground within the premises, preferably by diversion into vegetated areas where surface infiltration will occur. Dry wells shall be used only where surface infiltration is not feasible. 
20.6.2.5  Projections of concentrations of nitrogen and other relevant solutes in the groundwater at the down-gradient boundary of the property and at any other locations deemed pertinent by PZC including drinking water wells identified by construction of flow lines from the proposed site. 
20.6.3  Pesticide and Fertilizer Use: Any use which includes more than five (5) acres of land including, but not limited to, crop, lawn, garden or landscaping, requiring regular applications of chemical pesticides, or fertilizers shall be accompanied by a management plan. The management plan shall indicate types of materials, application schedule, and conformance with applicable best management practices. 
20.6.4  Deleted. 
20.7 - Treatment of Pre-Existing Non Conforming Uses: 
20.7.1  Any construction or operation to be performed under a building permit or Special Permit issued prior to the effective date of this section shall conform with the requirements of this section unless the construction or operation is commenced within six (6) months after the issuance of the building permit or Special Permit and (for construction only) has been continued through to completion as continuously and expeditiously as is reasonable. Identical conditions shall apply on the occasion of any further amendment of this section. 
20.7.2  Any non-conforming use or structure, which is abandoned or not used for a period of one year or more, shall be subject to the provisions of this section. 
20.7.3  Deleted. 
20.7.4  Except a conforming dwelling or conforming accessory use on a non conforming lot, a non conforming structure or use shall not be altered, reconstructed, extended or changed without a Special Permit from the PZC, provided that said Board finds that such alteration is not substantially more detrimental to the neighborhood than the existing non conforming structure or use, except as the same may apply to non non-conforming buildings, structures or land used primarily for agriculture, floriculture or horticulture within defined aquifer resource protection districts. No Special Permit shall be granted for any alteration, reconstruction, extension or structural change for a non conforming structure or use without a specific finding by the PZC that the proposed alteration, reconstruction, extension or structure change will not violate any of the provisions or other parts of this regulation. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant proposing said alteration, reconstruction, extension or change to demonstrate to the PZC that the proposed alteration, reconstruction, extension or structure change will not violate any of the provisions of this Regulation. 
20.8 - Design and Operations Guidelines: 
The following design and operation guidelines shall be observed within the Aquifer Protection Zone: 
20.8.1  Standards: Provision shall be made to protect against toxic or hazardous materials discharge or loss resulting from corrosion, accidental damage, spillage or vandalism through measures such as; prohibition of underground fuel storage tanks; spill control provisions in the vicinity of chemical or fuel delivery points; secured storage areas for toxic or hazardous materials; and indoor storage provisions for corrodible or dissolvable materials. For operations, which allow the evaporation of toxic or hazardous materials into the interiors of any structures, a closed vapor to prevent discharge of contaminated condensate into the groundwater. 
20.8.2  Location: Where the premises are partially outside of the Aquifer Protection Zone, potential pollution sources such as on site waste disposal system shall be located outside the zone to the extent feasible. 
20.9 - Use Variances: 
Under no circumstances shall the Zoning board of Appeals grant a Variance to allow a use in this zoning district specifically prohibited under 20.4.1 and specifically allowed by the Planning and Zoning Commission under Section 20.4.2. 
SECTION 21 - ARCHITECTURAL & DESIGN REVIEW REGULATIONS 

21.1 - Intent: 
21.1.1  The Planning & Zoning Commission, in accordance with CGS 8-2, shall require Architectural and Design Review for all applications for Special Permits, Site Plan approval, or modifications to an already approved plan only when said modification or Special Permit or Site Plan involves significant architectural features. 
21.1.2  The purpose of architectural design and review is to promote and encourage public and private actions to: 
21.1.2.1  Maintain a high standard of community development; 
21.1.2.2  To protect the public health, safety, convenience and welfare; 
21.1.2.3  Protect the value of all real property within the community; 
21.1.2.4  Promote aesthetically pleasing development; and 
21.1.2.5  Preserve the special character of existing neighborhoods. 
21.1.3  Findings as to the adequacy of design, architectural treatment and aesthetic character shall be made in view of the fact that excessive uniformity, inappropriateness of poor quality of design in the exterior appearance of buildings erected in any neighborhood adversely affect the desirability of the immediate area and the neighboring areas for residential, business, or other purposes. 
21.1.4  It is the policy of the Design Review Advisory Committee that it will seek improvements in design rather than practice censorship of creativity. It is not the charge of the Committee to review projects for compliance with building codes or fire safety codes. 
21.2 - Criteria for Plan Evaluation: 
21.2.1  The Committee will consider the general criteria outlined below to review the following: 
21.2.1.1  The basic design for the proposed uses, buildings or development; 
21.2.1.2  The relationship between the buildings, and the land, and the physical environment; 
21.2.1.3  The relationship between uses and building/structures; and 
21.2.1.4  The overall physical appearance of the proposed use/buildings/development and its compatibility with surrounding development and the neighborhood. 
21.2.2  Specific Criteria for Plan Evaluation. 
21.2.3  The purpose of these criteria is to establish a checklist of those items that affect the physical aspect of Vernon's environment, pertinent to appearance is the design of the site, building and structures, plantings, signs, lighting, and other objects that are observed by the public. 
21.2.4  These criteria are not intended to restrict imagination, innovation, or variety, but rather to assist in focusing on design principles, which can result in creative solutions that will develop a satisfactory visual appearance within the Town. 
21.2.5  The criteria are: 
21.2.5.1  Impact on the market value of existing structures in the adjoining area; 
21.2.5.2  Impact on the historic significance of the site and the affected area; 
21.2.5.3  Compatibility with the Plan of Development of the Town; 
21.2.5.4  Types, styles and colors of building materials, exterior facades, and facing, and fenestration; 
21.2.5.5  Special architectural features; 
21.2.5.6  Relationship of scale, massing and width to height of new structures; 
21.2.5.7  Colors, materials, location of lighting; 
21.2.5.8  Design and placement of signs; 
21.2.5.9  Blending of mechanical hardware and miscellaneous; 
21.2.5.10  Location and dimensions of public and private vehicular and pedestrian streets, drives and walkways. 
21.3 - Standards: 
The following standards are intended as guidelines to aid applicants in conforming to the Zoning Regulations as stated in this document. 
21.3.1  Relationship of Buildings to Site: 
21.3.1.1  The site shall be planned to accomplish a desirable transition with the streetscape and to provide for adequate planting, safe pedestrian movement and parking area; 
21.3.1.2  Parking areas shall be treated with building wall extensions, planting, berms, or other innovative means to partially screen parking areas from view from public ways. These elements should also be designed with public safety in mind; 
21.3.1.3  Without restricting the permissible limits of the applicable zoning district, the height and scale of each building shall be compatible with its site and existing (or anticipated) adjoining buildings; 
21.3.1.4  Newly installed utility services, and service revisions necessitated by exterior alterations shall be underground. 
21.4 - Landscaping and Site Treatment: 
Landscape elements included in these standards consist of all forms of planting and vegetation, ground forms, rock groupings, water patterns and all visible construction except buildings and utilitarian structures. 
21.4.1  Landscape treatment shall be provided to enhance architectural features, strengthen vistas, and provide shade; 
21.4.2  Plant material shall be selected for interest in its structure, texture, and color and for its ultimate growth. Plants that are indigenous to the area and others that will be hardy, harmonious to the design, and of good appearance shall be used; 
21.4.3  Plants shall be of sufficient size and number to ensure an attractive appearance upon completion of the landscape construction; 
21.4.4  Where natural or existing topographic patterns contribute to beauty and utility of a development, they shall be preserved and developed. Modification to topography will be permitted where it contributes to good appearance; 
21.4.5  Existing trees at four (4) inches caliper or greater shall be incorporated into the site plan wherever possible; 
21.4.6  Screening of service yards and other places that tend to be unsightly shall be accomplished by use of walls, fencing, planting, or combinations of these. Screening shall be effective in winter and summer; 
21.4.7  In locations where plants will be susceptible to injury by pedestrian or motor traffic, they shall be protected by appropriate curbs, tree guards, or other devices; 
21.4.8  In areas where general planting will not survive, other materials such as fences, walls, and pavings of wood, brick, stone, grave, and cobbles shall be used. Carefully selected plants shall be combined with such materials where possible. 
21.4.9  Parking areas and traffic ways shall be enhanced with landscaped spaces containing shrubs, tree or tree groupings. Landscape spaces shall be developed consistent with LID practices, which shall be designed to incorporate stormwater best management practices in accordance with the Town LID Manual. Parking areas shall provide a minimum of one island for every twenty (20) parking spaces. 
21.4.10  For every five (5) parking spaces, a minimum of one (1) three (3) inch caliper tree shall be provided. Preferred varieties include: Pin Oaks, Norway Maples, Crimson Maples, Great Ash, Little Leaf Linden, and Black Locusts. 
21.4.11  Within wetlands and regulated areas, plantings must conform to those listed in the document entitled "Native Wetland Plants for the Hockanum Watershed" and outlined in "Planting Guide to Native Wetlands Plants of the Connecticut River Watershed for Wetland Restoration Use" dated February, 1997. 
21.5 - Building Design: 
21.5.1  Architectural style is not restricted. Evaluation of the appearance of a project shall be based on the quality of its design and relationship to surroundings; 
21.5.2  Buildings shall be in good scale and in harmonious conformance with permanent neighboring development. 
21.5.3  Building Materials: 
21.5.3.1  Materials shall have good architectural character; 
21.5.3.2  Materials shall be selected for suitability to the type of building and the design in which they are used; and 
21.5.3.3  Materials shall be of durable quality. 
21.5.4  Building components, such as windows, doors, eaves, and parapets, shall have good proportion and relationships to one another. 
21.5.5  Colors shall be harmonious. 
21.5.6  Mechanical equipment or other utility hardware on roof, ground, or buildings shall be screened from public view with materials harmonious with the building or they shall be located as not to be visible from any public ways. 
21.5.7  Refuse and waste removal areas, service yards, storage yards, and exterior work areas shall be screened from view of public ways. 
21.5.8  Monotony of design in single or multiple building projects is discouraged. Variation of detail, form, and setting shall be used to provide visual interest. 
21.5.9  Prototype structures (the first new structure in an area which has been designed for a particular character) shall reflect the desired character of the entire area. 
21.6 - Lighting, Street Hardware and Miscellaneous Structures: 
21.6.1  Exterior lighting standards and building fixtures shall be of a design and size compatible with the building and adjacent areas. Lighting shall be restrained in design and excessive brightness avoided. 
21.6.2  Miscellaneous structures and street hardware shall be designed to be part of the architectural concept of design and landscape. Materials shall be compatible with buildings, scale shall be appropriate, colors shall be in harmony with buildings and surroundings, and proportions shall be attractive. 
21.7 - Signs: 
21.7.1  Every sign shall have appropriate scale and proportion in its design and in its visual relationship to buildings and surroundings. 
21.7.2  Every sign shall be designed as an integral architectural element of the building and site to which it principally relates. 
21.7.3  The colors, materials, and lighting of every sign shall be restrained and harmonious with the building and site to which it principally relates. 
21.7.4  The number of graphic elements on a sign shall be held to the minimum needed to convey the sign's major message and shall be composed in proportion to the area of the sign fence. 
21.7.5  Each sign shall be compatible with signs on adjoining premises and shall not compete for attention. 
21.7.6  Identification signs of a prototype design and corporation logos shall conform to the criteria for all other signs. 
21.7.7  Signs with specifically advertise brand names or symbols of products of any kind shall be strongly discouraged. 
21.8 - Maintenance-Planning and Design Factors: 
21.8.1  Continued good appearance depends upon the extent and quality of maintenance. The choice of materials and their use, together with the types of finishes and other protective measures, must be conducive to easy maintenance and upkeep. 
21.8.2  Materials and finishes shall be selected for their durability and wear as well as for their beauty. Proper measures and devices shall be incorporated for protection against the elements, neglect, damage and abuse. 
21.8.3  Provision for washing and cleaning of buildings and structures, and control of dirt and refuse, shall be included in the design. 
21.9 - Application Submission Requirements: 
The following items are required in addition to the Site Plan of Development prepared in accordance with the Town's Zoning Regulations. 
21.9.1  The overall architectural design of the proposed structure including elevations at an appropriate scale, of the façade and all exterior elevations, showing all fenestration, signs and other architectural features including the color and style of the building materials (and samples if required by the Design Review Advisory Committee). 
21.9.2  Color photographs and/or color rendering. 
21.9.3  A drawing showing the height and architectural style of the proposed structure in relationship to surrounding buildings; composite elevations from all streets abutting the site if multiple buildings are proposed. 
21.9.4  The height, location, fixture design, and intensity of all exterior lighting, expected illumination off the site. 
21.9.5  The height location, exact colors and design of all signs. 
21.9.6  Elevations drawings from all streets abutting the site with all proposed plantings superimposed. Location and size of plants and trees shall be shown. 
21.9.7  All foundations and other ornamental or decorative features visible from surrounding properties. 
21.9.8  All provisions for the designs of the following appurtenances if visible from the exterior. 
21.9.8.1  Utility lines, meters, boxes; 
21.9.8.2  Refuse storage and pickup areas; 
21.9.8.3  Stairs, ramps; 
21.9.8.4  Flues, chimneys, exhaust fans; 
21.9.8.5  Sunshades, awnings, louvers; 
21.9.8.6  Balconies; 
21.9.8.7  Mechanical equipment visible from exterior; 
21.9.8.8  Loading docks, loading spaces; 
21.9.8.9  Roof leaders, downspouts; 
21.9.8.10  Antennas; 
21.10 - Procedures: 
21.10.1  All applicants shall submit one (1) copy of all items required under Section 21.9 (Application Submission Requirements) no later than the date of submission of a formal application to the Planning & Zoning Commission. When possible, applicants are encouraged to submit applications for design review in advance of submittal to the Planning & Zoning Commission. Moreover, an applicant may request preliminary consideration by the Design Review Advisory Committee of his general plans prior to seeking a Special Permit, Site Plan approval, or modification to an already approved plan. Applicants are advised to make submittals as complete as possible to avoid delays in the design review process. 
21.10.2  The Design Review Advisory Committee will review all applications at the next meeting of the Committee subsequent to submittal. The Committee will make recommendations to the applicant regarding plan modifications, which the Committee finds desirable, based on the standards and criteria outlined in the above Sections. The recommendations of the Committee will be forwarded to the Planning & Zoning Commission at or before the scheduled public hearing. Recommendations of the Committee are advisory to the Commission, which has final approval authority for all applications. 
SECTION 22 - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

22.1 
The provisions of these Regulations shall be enforced by the Planning & Zoning Commission via a Zoning Enforcement Officer. 
22.1.1  When a difference of opinion exists among the technical advisers to the various land use Commissions concerning a zoning regulation, the Planning & Zoning Commission shall be asked for, and be required to give guidance to the Zoning Enforcement Officer on the intent of the regulation. 
22.1.2  Appeals from the decisions of the Planning & Zoning Commission shall be made to Superior Court in accordance with Section 8-8 and 8-9 of the CGS. The Vernon Board of Appeals shall not have authority to hear an appeal of any decision of the Vernon Planning & Zoning Commission whether on a matter that is a discretionary decision or a ministerial decision. 
22.2 - Fees: Schedule of Application Fees: 
22.2.1  Zone District or Regulation Change: ..... $200.00 
22.2.2  Special Permit: ..... $200.00 
22.2.3  Special Exceptions, variances or appeal from the Zoning Enforcement Officer: ..... $200.00 
22.2.5  Variance: ..... $200.00 
22.2.5  Special hearing for gasoline station or repairer's license ..... $200.00 
22.2.6  Detailed Site Plan Residential (New Construction/ Expansion) 
22.2.6.1  Up to 4 dwellings ..... $200.00 
22.2.6.2  Detailed Site Plan Residential each additional dwelling over 4 units ..... $5.00 
22.2.7  Detailed Site Plan Non-Residential (New Construction/ Expansion) 
22.2.7.1  Up to 2,000 square feet ..... $200.00 
22.2.7.2  Each additional 1,000 square feet ..... $15.00 
22.2.8  Deleted. 
22.2.9  When a development requires Special Permit and Site Plan approval, the larger of the two fees is required. 
22.2.10  All applications require an additional a $60.00 fee mandated by the State of Connecticut. 
22.2.11  All applications requiring a soil and erosion control plan certification will require an additional $300.00 fee required by the North Central Conservation District. 
22.2.12  Minor Modifications ..... $100.00 
22.2.13  In addition to the standard fees for the processing of an application, the applicant may be require to pay an additional fee to cover the costs of technical services and consultants to analyze, review and report on areas requiring a detailed, technical review if one or more of the following thresholds are met: 
22.2.13.1  The proposed action directly abuts or is within 500' of or has the potential to directly or indirectly impact a significant natural and cultural resource identified in the Plan of Conservation and Development (POCD) (pp. 71-73), or; 
22.2.13.2  The proposed action fronts, requires access to, or has potential to impact those roadways and intersections identified in the POCD as part of the Traffic Management Plan, Traffic Calming Recommendations, or Accident Mitigation Areas (pp. 94-107), or; 
22.2.13.3  The proposed action fronts, requires access to, or has potential to impact sites identified in the Connecticut Department of Transportation (CT DOT) Suggested List of Safety Surveillance Sites (SLOSS), or; 
22.2.13.4  The proposed action directly or indirectly conflicts with one or more of the Policies, Goals, and Objectives recommended in the POCD (pp. 109-120), specifically: 
A. Housing Policies, Goals and Objectives 
B. Economic Base Policies, Goals and Objectives 
C. Design Policies Goals and Objectives 
D. Community Facilities Polices, Goals and Objectives 
E. Transportation Policies, Goals, and Objectives 
F. Open Space Policies, Goals, and Objectives, or; 
22.2.13.5  The proposed action directly or indirectly conflicts with the Land Use Plan and Strategy as stated in the POCD (pp. 121-129), or; 
22.2.13.6  The proposed action is identified as an Area Sensitive to Development in the POCD (pp. 17-18), or; 
22.2.13.7  The proposed action is identified as being within a Stratified Drift Aquifer and or Primary Recharge Area as identified in the Town of Vernon Aquifer Protection Map, or has a reasonable potential to impact the public water supply, or; 
22.2.13.8  The proposed action is within or has the potential to impact to areas identified by the United States Department of Agriculture to contain Prime Important Farmland Soil, and as indicated in the POCD (pp. 16-17), or; 
22.2.13.9  The proposed action is within or has the potential to impact areas identified by the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection in the Natural Diversity Database (NDDB) as an area containing Endangered, Threatened, & Species of Special Concern, or; 
22.2.13.10  The proposed action is within or has the potential to impact those areas identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency Flood Insurance Rate Map as a Flood Zone or Flood Plain, or; 
22.2.13.11  The proposed action is within or has the potential to impact those areas identified as a Priority Area for Open Space Protection, or Part of the Existing and/or Potential Open Space System, or is in direct or indirect conflict with the Open Space Policies and Goals as identified in the POCD (pp. 74-87), or; 
22.2.13.12  That is proposed in a use district (specified in Section 4 of the Zoning Regulations) where the proposed activity in its entirety exceeds the impervious coverage thresholds established in such relevant district, or; 
22.2.13.13  Where the aggregate square footage for all structures on any parcel exceeds 25,000, or; 
22.2.13.14  Where the proposed action includes greater than 50 off-street parking or loading spaces, or; 
22.2.13.15  Any application in which additional technical evaluations are determined by the Commission to be necessary to fulfill the Town requirements for processing the application and/ or may be necessary to obtain a satisfactory evaluation of the Application, inclusive of legal reviews and guidance. 
22.2.14  Whenever an application establishes criteria identified in 22.2.13, the Town Planner will provide an estimated cost for technical services and consultants. The commission will review said estimate and determine the necessary scope of services and establish an appropriate additional fee. 
22.2.15  The fees required under Sections 22.2 will be paid to the Town of Vernon prior to futher proceeding on the application. Upon completion of the technical review and/or other services, a determination of the costs incurred will be performed, and any excess will be refunded to applicant. During the course of the application review, if the fee as set by the Commission is found to be insufficient, the Commission may review and revise such fee as appropriate. 
22.2.16  If the fees required under Section 22.2 are not paid in a timely fashion as to allow the Commission to comply with provisions of C.G.S 8-7d, such failure may be ground for the Commission to deny the application without prejudice. Any partial fees paid may be credited towards a subsequent application. 
22.2.17  The Commission may, in determining standard, and additional fees, may take into consideration: 
22.2.17.1  Such application is substantially similar to one previously filed and withdrawn, or denied without prejudice; 
22.2.17.2  The previous application had paid all fees in full; 
22.2.17.3  Minimal additional staff time will be needed for review and processing the application; 
22.2.17.4  The application is from a municipal entity; 
22.2.17.5  The application pertains to a non-profit entity. 
22.2.18  An applicant may contest the fee required for any application submitted by submitting a letter to the Town of Vernon Building Department at 55 West Main Street, to the attention of the Zoning Enforcement Officer. Any request to reduce the amount of fee required for any aspect of the application should be made within 30 days of the date of submission to the Department. The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall review said request within 65 days of its receipt, and issue a decision within 65 days of the conclusion of said review. 
SECTION 23 - COMMERCIAL WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION SITES 

23.1 - Background and Purpose: 
Recent advances in wireless communications technology have resulted in a new generation of telecommunication services. These new services transmit radio waves of such a frequency and power that will likely require numerous antenna locations. These antennas may be located on buildings, water towers, and other similar structures but will also frequently be located on new or enlarged towers. This requires that the Town of Vernon regulate these wireless communication system facilities in a different manner than conventional television and radio transmission towers, which are able to transmit their signals at much greater distances. 
A number of providers of wireless communication services have recently been licensed by the Federal Communications Commission and additional providers are expected to be licensed in the near future. These firms are expected to pursue antenna sites within the Town of Vernon and these efforts are expected to include requests to construct new communication towers and antennas. 
The intent of the Regulation is to provide for the establishment and/or expansion of cellular telephone, mobile radio and personal communication systems within the Town of Vernon while protecting neighborhoods and minimizing the adverse visual and operational effects of wireless telecommunication facilities through careful design, siting, and screening. More specifically this regulations has been developed in order to: 
23.1.1  Maximize use of existing and approved towers and other structures to accommodate new antennas and transmitters in order to reduce the number of communication towers needed to serve the Community. 
23.1.2  Encourage providers to co-locate their facilities on a single site; 
23.1.3  Site facilities below visually prominent ridge lines; 
23.1.4  Minimize the location of facilities in visually sensitive areas; 
23.1.5  Encourage creative design measures to camouflage facilities; 
23.1.6  Protect historic and residential areas from potential adverse impacts of communication towers; 
23.1.7  Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failure through engineering and careful siting of tower structures. 
23.2 - Location Preferences: 
The locations for siting the equipment involved in receiving or transmitting radio waves associated with commercial wireless telecommunication services are listed in paragraphs 1 through 5 below, in order of preference. 
23.2.1  On existing structures such as buildings, water towers, and utility poles. 
23.2.2  On existing or approved towers. 
23.2.3  On replacement towers located on property occupied by one or more existing tower. 
23.2.4  On replacement towers less than fifteen (15) feet in height located in commercial or industrial zones. 
23.2.5  On replacement towers less than seventy-five (75) feet in height located in residential zones. 
23.3 - General Requirements: 
23.3.1  No lights shall be mounted on proposed towers unless otherwise required by the FAA. 
23.3.2  Towers shall be maintained in good order. 
23.3.3  Deleted. 
23.3.4  All towers shall be a monopole design unless otherwise approved by the Commission. A monopole tower shall be designed to collapse upon itself. 
23.3.5  The Commission may require that monopole be of such design and treated with an architectural material so that it blends in with its surroundings to the greatest extent feasible. 
23.3.6  Any proposed tower shall be designed in all respects to accommodate both the applicant's antennas and comparable antennas for at least two additional users if the tower is over one hundred (100) feet in height or for at least one (1) additional comparable antenna if the tower is over fifty (50) feet in height. The Commission may require the tower to be of such design as to allow for future rearrangement of antennas upon the tower and to accommodate antennas mounted at varying heights. 
23.3.7  Each tower site must be served by a driveway with parking for at least one (1) vehicle. 
23.3.8  Antennas or equipment building/boxes mounted to or on buildings or structures shall to the greatest degree possible blend with the color and design of such building. 
23.3.9  All dish antennas shall be of mesh construction unless otherwise approve by the Commission. 
23.3.10  Dish antennas shall not exceed six (6) feet in diameter. Panel antennas shall not exceed ten (10) feet in height. 
23.3.11  No proposed commercial wireless telecommunication shall be designed, located or operated as to interfere with existing or proposed public safety communications. 
23.3.12  All applications for commercial wireless telecommunication sites within the Flood Protection Zone shall comply with the standards found in Section 5 of the Regulations. 
23.3.13  The design of all commercial wireless telecommunication sites shall comply with the standards promulgated by the FCC for non-ionizing electromagnetic emissions. In the absence of such standards sites shall comply with standards set by American National Standards Institute. 
23.3.14  All utilities proposed to serve a new commercial wireless telecommunications site shall be installed underground unless otherwise approved by the Commission. 
23.3.15  All generators installed in conjunction with any commercial wireless telecommunication site shall comply with all State noise regulations. 
23.3.16  Commercial wireless telecommunication sites located on non-residential buildings shall be as architecturally compatible with the structures as possible. 
23.3.17  Commercial wireless telecommunications sites where the antenna is mounted to existing towers, utility poles, water towers, light standards, bridges or other structures not classified as buildings provided the following standards are met: 
23.3.17.1  No panel antenna shall exceed fifteen hundred (1500) square inches in area. 
23.3.17.2  No dish antenna shall exceed six (6) feet in diameter. 
23.3.17.3  All accompanying equipment buildings or boxes shall be screened and fenced as required by the Commission. 
23.3.18  Commercial wireless telecommunication sites where a monopole tower is located on property occupied by one or more towers erected prior to the date of adoption of this regulation provided the following standards are met: 
23.3.18.1  The height of the tower to be constructed shall not exceed one hundred seventy-five (175) feet or shall not exceed the height of the tallest tower on the property, whichever is the least restrictive. 
23.3.18.2  All accompanying equipment buildings or boxes shall be screened and fenced as required by the Commission. 
23.4 - Uses Allowed Only by Special Permit: 
In addition to specific requirements listed in Section 17, the standards of the specific zoning classification shall also apply to applications submitted under this section. 
23.4.1  Site Plan Requirements: All proposals to develop a commercial wireless telecommunication site as a permitted use or Special Permit use shall be subject to the Site Plan requirements listed in Section 14 of these regulations. In addition the following information shall be submitted in accordance with each particular application where applicable. 
23.4.1.1  A plan showing where and how the proposed antenna will be affixed to a particular building or structure. 
23.4.1.2  Details of all proposed antenna and mounting equipment including size and color. 
23.4.1.3  Details of proposed shielding and details of materials including color. 
23.4.1.4  An elevation of all proposed equipment buildings or boxes. Details of all proposed fencing including color. 
23.4.1.5  A design drawing including cross section and elevation of all proposed towers. A description of the tower's capacity including the number and type of antennas it can accommodate as well as the proposed location of all mountain positions for co-located antennas and the minimum separation distances between antennas. 
23.4.1.6  A report from a licensed engineer indicating that the proposed wireless telecommunication site will comply with the emission standards found in this regulation. 
23.4.1.7  For new or modified towers, a map depicting the extent of the provider's planned coverage within the Town and the service area of the proposed wireless telecommunication site, map indicating the search radius - or the proposed wireless telecommunication site. 
23.4.1.8  All of the plans and information required in Section 23.3 above. 
23.4.1.9  Upon request of the Commission the applicant shall provide visual representation of the proposed wireless telecommunication site in order to help the Commission ascertain the visual impacts associated with such proposal. 
23.4.2  Height and Area Requirements: 
23.4.2.1  Lot Size. Commercial wireless telecommunication sites containing a free standing tower shall not be located on any lot less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet in area. Where it is proposed that such a wireless telecommunication site occupies a lot as a principal use the minimum lot size shall be equal to that required for the underlying zone or twenty thousand (20,000) square feet, whichever is greater. 
23.4.2.2  Height. The maximum height of a tower proposed under this Regulation shall be two hundred (200) feet including the antenna and all other appurtenances. The height of a tower mounted on a building shall be measured from the average level of the ground along all walls of the building to the tallest point on the tower including the antenna and all other appurtenances. 
23.4.2.3  The maximum height of any roof top mounted equipment, building or box, shall be fifteen (15) feet. 
23.4.2.4  All freestanding towers shall comply with the following minimum property line setbacks: 
23.4.2.4.1  Front Yard or Side Yard along a street: A distance equal to 3/4 the height of the tower or the setback required for the underlying zone, whichever is greater. 
23.4.2.4.2  Side or Rear Yards: In residential zones, fifty (50) feet for towers less than seventy-five (75) feet in height and one hundred (100) feet for towers equal to or greater than seventy-five (75) feet. 
23.4.2.4.3  Side or rear yards in non-residential zones twenty-five (25) feet for towers less than seventy-five (75) feet in height and fifty (50) feet for towers equal to or greater than seventy-five (75) feet. 
23.4.2.4.4  Free standing towers on rear lots: All other freestanding towers shall be located at minimum distance from any property line at least one hundred (100) feet or a distance equal to the height of the tower, whichever is greater. 
23.4.2.5  All accessory buildings, equipment buildings/boxes or equipment areas each fifty (50 square feet or greater in area shall comply with the minimum property line setbacks for a principal building in the underlying zone. 
23.4.2.5.1  All equipment buildings/boxes or equipment areas each less than fifty (50) square feet in area shall comply with the following minimum property line setbacks. 
23.4.2.5.2  Front Yard or Side Yard along a street: Same as for a principal building in the underlying zone. 
23.4.2.5.3  Rear and side yards: twenty (20) feet. 
23.4.3  Factors upon which Special Permit decisions of the Commission shall be based: In passing upon applications for commercial wireless telecommunication sites, the Commission in addition to the standards found in Section 17, shall also find: 
23.4.3.1  In the case where a commercial wireless telecommunication site is proposed to be located on a property designated on the National Historic Register or within an approved historic district that such proposal will preserve the historic and/or architectural character of the landscape of any structure. 
23.4.3.2  In the case where an application for the proposed location of a commercial wireless telecommunication site is not a preference one (1) through three (3) location the applicant has adequately described the efforts and measures taken to pursue those preferences and why a higher preference location was not technologically, legally or economically feasible. The supplied documentation should evaluate the following factors: 
23.4.3.2.1  The planned equipment would cause unacceptable interference with the operation of other existing or planned equipment on an existing or approved tower as documented by a qualified licensed engineer and that the interference cannot be prevented or eliminated at a reasonable cost. 
23.4.3.2.2  The planned equipment cannot be accommodated on existing or approved towers due to structural deficiencies as documented by a qualified licensed engineer and that such deficiencies cannot be eliminated at a reasonable cost. 
23.4.3.2.3  The existing or planned equipment on an existing or approved tower would cause unacceptable interference with the equipment proposed by the applicant as documented by a qualified licensed engineer and that the interference cannot be prevented or eliminated at reasonable cost. 
23.4.3.2.4  Any restriction or limitation imposed by the FCC. 
23.4.4  Abandonment: A commercial wireless telecommunication site not in use for six (6) consecutive months shall be removed by the service facility owner. This removal shall occur within ninety (90) days of the end of such six (6) month period. Upon removal the site shall be restored to its previous appearance and where appropriate revegetated to blend with the surrounding area. 
SECTION 24 - ROCKVILLE VILLAGE DISTRICT OVERLAY ZONE (January 2014) 

24.1 - Purpose: 
It is the purpose of the Rockville Village District Overlay Zone (RVDOZ) to ensure that the unique character of Rockville is maintained and enhanced for present and future generations in accordance with Connecticut General Statutes §8-2j, Village Districts. The provisions of this zone are intended to preserve and enhance the character of Rockville by encouraging the preservation and, when possible, the restoration of sites and buildings of unique historical and architectural value and by assuring that new structures and uses, in their design and layout, will be in keeping with the historical development pattern and character of Rockville. 
24.2 - District boundary: 
The RVDOZ is that area depicted on the map entitled, "Rockville Village District, Adopted February 6, 2014," and as depicted on the Vernon Zoning Map. 
24.3 - Consistency with the 2012 Plan of Conservation and Development: 
In administering the provisions of this section the Planning and Zoning Commission (PZC), the Design Review Advisory Commission (DRC), and the Local Historic Properties Commission (LHPC) shall give due consideration to the Rockville section in Chapter 6 of the 2012 Plan of Conservation and Development (POCD). 
24.4 - Other design guidelines and resources: 
In administering the provisions of this section the PZC and the DRC shall give due consideration to the following design guidelines and resources: 
24.4.1  The Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation and Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings; 
24.4.2  Design Guidelines-A Plan of Appropriateness & Protection, by the Vernon Local Historic Properties Commission, October 2010; 
24.4.3  The Rockville Charette Report prepared by the Yale Urban Design Workshop sponsored by the Connecticut Main Street Center, May 14-May 16, 2004. 
24.5 - Uses: 
In the RVDOZ the following uses are permitted, notwithstanding the provisions of section 4.23 Historic District-Downtown Business & Residential Zone: 
24.5.1  Retail sale of food, non-alcoholic beverages, pharmaceuticals, clothing, jewelry, hardware, stationery, specialty items, household appliances, and furnishings; 
24.5.2  Restaurants, non-full service and full service; the service of alcohol shall be limited to full service restaurants but shall not be subject to the provisions of Section 17.1; drive-up service windows shall not be permitted; 
24.5.3  Taverns, pubs, and private clubs with a Club or Café liquor permit; these uses shall not be subject to the provisions of Section 17.1; 
24.5.4  Professional or business offices; governmental offices and facilities; clinics; dental, medical and health offices, provided none of the aforementioned uses is to be located on the ground floor of a building, unless a special permit is granted; for purposes of these regulations, "ground floor" shall be defined as the floor of the building that is entered from street level; 
24.5.5  Places of worship or religious facilities, provided the same are not to be located on the ground floor of a building, unless the building was originally constructed for such purpose; 
24.5.6  Banks or other financial institutions; 
24.5.7  Hospitals; 
24.5.8  Commercial recreational facilities; 
24.5.9  Cultural, arts, crafts and education facilities; libraries; galleries; studios; and workshops; 
24.5.10  Personal convenience services limited to barbershops, beauty shops, nail salons, and similar services; 
24.5.11  Printing and graphic services; 
24.5.12  Indoor movie theatres; performing arts theatres, auditoriums; 
24.5.13  Existing single family dwellings; and the rebuilding of these structures (as originally constructed) if destroyed by natural disaster or fire; 
24.5.14  Multi-family dwellings; these uses shall be subject to the provisions of Section 4.7.7 and for one bedroom and studio units, section 10.1; 
24.5.15  Mixed Non-residential uses (that are allowed in this section) and residential uses upon a single parcel or within a single building shall be allowed. The non-residential uses can be on any floor for the structure while the residential use will be allowed on any floor except the ground floor. Residential use on the ground floor is only allowed by granting of a special permit; 
24.5.16  Conversion of residential to non-residential use and conversion of non-residential to residential use; either conversion shall require the granting of a special permit; If granted a special permit Buildings originally constructed as single family or multifamily residences may be occupied by professional offices on all floors including the ground floor; 
24.5.17  Bed and Breakfast (B&B); hotels, motels; 
24.5.18  Day care establishments when accessory to a permitted non-residential use; by special permit when it is the principal use; 
24.5.19  Home based businesses of Minor Type; 
24.5.20  Adaptive Re-use per Sections 2.96 & 3.26; 
24.5.21  Any uses not listed above but authorized in the underlying zone by special permit shall also be allowed in the RVDOZ by special permit. 
24.6 - Applicability: 
Any exterior building construction or modification associated with a proposed development or use in the RVDOZ shall be reviewed in relation to the design guidelines in Subsection 24.8 and the additional design considerations specified in Subsection 24.9. 
24.7 - Procedure: 
24.7.1  Applications subject to the provisions of this Section shall be referred to the DRC. The DRC may refer applications to the LHPC for comment. 
24.7.2  The application shall be reviewed by the DRC in relation to the design guidelines of this Section. 
24.7.3  The application shall be commented upon by the DRC prior to the closing of any public hearing on the application, and such report be issued no more than thirty-five (35) days from the date of acceptance of a complete application. 
24.7.4  Failure to act within the prescribed period shall be construed as approval of the design of the proposed application by the DRC. 
24.7.5  A request from the DRC for resubmission of the application material based on the DRC or LHPC recommendations shall not be considered failure to act. 
24.7.6  The PZC shall take action on the application upon receipt of the report from the DRC, notwithstanding the requirements of CGS § 8-7d. 
24.7.7  Recommendations of the DRC and LHPC are not binding on the PZC and do not imply or guarantee approval of an application by the PZC. 
24.8 - Design guidelines: 
24.8.1  Lot Size & Lot Coverage. 
24.8.1.1  There is no minimum lot size or lot width, provided the proposed lot configuration presents no conflicts with the Building Code and/or Fire Code. 
24.8.1.2  Lot coverage by all impervious surfaces including buildings, structures, parking areas, and access roads shall not exceed 85% of the total lot area. Low Impact Development (LID) practices shall be employed consistent with the Town LID Manual. 
24.8.2  Building Setback Requirements & Building Height. 
24.8.2.1  Non-residential structures and mixed use structures should be built to the sidewalk (front property) line. Appropriate exceptions could include relief for commercial hardscapes and commercial or public green spaces. 
24.8.2.2  Residential structures may have a greater front setback to allow for landscape treatments, porches, bay windows and other architectural embellishments but shall not exceed 8 feet from the sidewalk line. 
24.8.2.3  Garages, car ports, and other accessory structures shall be located behind the principal building. 
24.8.2.4  There are no side or rear setback requirements, subject to building and fire code regulations. 
24.8.2.5  Building height shall be a minimum of two (2) stories or 24 feet and may not exceed forty-eight (48) feet without the granting of a special permit by the PZC. The minimum height requirement shall not apply to accessory structures, such as gazebos and bus shelters. 
24.8.3  Property Layout. 
Layouts of primary structures, parking structures, and parking lots should be designed with the purpose of deemphasizing the dominance of the automobile and emphasizing the relationship of the primary structure and pedestrian access to the public domain. 
24.8.4  Building Fronts & Sides. 
The front or side of every building shall face the street. Loading docks, overhead doors, and service entries are prohibited from facing the street. 
24.8.5  Placement of Utilities. 
All new utilities shall be placed underground in all public streets and in rear service alleys unless waived by a three-fourths (3/4) vote of all members of the PZC. 
24.8.6  Parking: 
24.8.6.1  General: 
24.8.6.1.1  The intent of these parking regulations is to encourage a balance between compact pedestrian oriented development and necessary car storage. The goal is to construct neither more nor less parking than is needed. 
24.8.6.1.2  On-street parking is permitted throughout the district except where posted otherwise. Parking need not be contiguous with the building or the use it serves. 
24.8.6.1.3  Minimum parking requirements in the RVDOZ are as follows: 
1 space/dwelling unit. 
1 space/300 sf of retail. 
1 space/300 sf of office. 
24.8.6.1.4  Shared parking solutions are encouraged. Required parking minimums can be reduced by up to 50% with a shared parking solution approved by the PZC. The applicant shall provide a parking analysis justifying the proposed shared parking solution. 
24.8.6.1.5  Minimum parking space dimensions for head-in or diagonal parking shall be 9'×17' with 10 foot drive lanes (20' for 2 way traffic) and parallel parking spaces shall be 8'x20' minimum with 10 foot drive lanes (20' for 2 way traffic). 
24.8.6.1.6  Parking shall be provided as necessary to meet the requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act. 
24.8.6.2  On-Street Parking. 
The selection of diagonal, head-in, or parallel parking along any section of road shall be determined in consultation with the Town Engineer and Town Planner. 
24.8.6.3  Off-Street Surface Parking Lot Placement. 
Off-street surface parking lots shall be setback a minimum of 10 feet from the sidewalk line. 
24.8.6.4  Access to Off-Street Parking. 
24.8.6.4.1  Alleys may be incorporated into lots as standard drive aisles. Access to all properties adjacent to the alley shall be maintained. Access between parking lots across property lines is also encouraged. 
24.8.6.4.2  Circular drives are prohibited except for civic buildings. Where space permits, garage doors shall face the side or the rear property lines, not the front. 
24.8.6.4.3  Off-street parking areas in front of new buildings are not permitted. Off-street parking areas in front of existing buildings shall be discouraged wherever alternative parking solutions exist. 
24.8.7  Street Trees. 
Streets bordering new development or substantial rehabilitation shall be planted with street trees. Trees shall be selected and arranged in consultation with the DRC. Street trees should be at least 3" in caliper at chest height. 
24.8.8  Street Lighting. 
Street lighting shall be provided on all streets bordering new development or substantial rehabilitation. Street light fixtures should be located within 3 feet of the curb and should be provided at consistent regular intervals. Street light fixtures shall be chosen in consultation with the DRC. 
24.8.9  Street Furniture. 
Street furniture includes benches, trash receptacles, street signs and traffic lights. Street furniture shall be chosen in consultation with the DRC. Benches and trash receptacles shall be provided on all streets at consistent regular intervals. Street furniture shall be located so as to maintain a clear pedestrian path. Street furniture should be consistent in color and style along both sides of any street. A five foot wide street furniture strip should be set aside and maintained. 
24.8.10  Drainage. 
24.8.10.1  Stormwater control measures shall be provided for impervious surfaces within the site, either as stipulated below or in other situations as deemed appropriate by the PZC. All storm water control structures shall be reviewed, approved, and inspected by the Town Engineer. 
24.8.10.2  All storm drainage for proposed development in which the combined square footage of roofs, paved parking areas and other impervious surfaces exceeds 10,000 square feet shall be designed in accordance with and subject to the provisions of the Town LID Manual. 
24.8.11  Access & Traffic. 
24.8.11.1  The PZC may require the applicant to present a traffic survey conducted by a qualified traffic engineer evaluating the impact of the anticipated traffic on fire safety and congestion of traffic flow on the public roadway, and on pedestrian use in front of the property. The PZC may require such measures as are necessary to ensure pedestrian and vehicular safety and ease of travel, including limiting access to and from the parking area to right turns only, and requiring other measures to enhance visibility for persons exiting from the parking area and for drivers and pedestrians on the public roadways. 
24.8.11.2  The PZC may require minimum sight line distances depending on present or anticipated traffic conditions and upon posted speed limits and surveyed average vehicular speeds. 
24.8.11.3  Vehicular entrances shall be a maximum of 25 feet wide and shall be clearly defined. Vehicular entrances shall not exceed 30% of the lot frontage. The total number of entrances which can safely be accommodated along the same road will be a consideration for approval or disapproval of a special permit and/or site plan application. Wherever possible, each development shall be limited to one access point per property on the same road. Shared entrances are encouraged. 
24.8.11.4  The applicant must demonstrate that the site design makes proper provision for pedestrian access and safety. All site plans shall provide for pedestrian walkways and circulation in and around buildings. Pedestrian pathways allowing access from the sidewalk to the primary building entrances are required. 
24.8.12  Civic Sites. 
24.8.12.1  Civic buildings include, but are not limited to, municipal buildings, churches, libraries, schools, recreation facilities, and places of assembly. Civic buildings do not include retail buildings, residential buildings, or privately owned office buildings. Traditionally, civic buildings have greater front yard setbacks and building frontage requirements; therefore civic buildings are not subject to set back requirements or building frontage requirements. Civic buildings should be set farther back from the street than non-civic buildings in the district. 
24.9 - Architectural Syntax: 
The requirements and materials described in this section are intended to provide direction to applicants on the types of syntax the PZC expects to find on new or improved structures. 
Alternative materials may be proposed by the applicant and may be approved by the PZC if they meet the purpose and intent of the district. 
24.9.1  Details & Acceptable Building Materials. 
24.9.1.1  Columns, Arches, Piers, Railings, & Balustrades: 
1. General Requirements: 
 a. Columns and piers shall be spaced no farther apart than they are tall. 
2. Permitted Finish Materials: 
 a. Columns: 
i. Wood, painted or natural. 
ii. Cast iron. 
iii. Concrete with smooth finish. 
iv. Stone. 
 b. Arches: 
i. Concrete Masonry Units with Stucco (C.B.S.). 
ii. Reinforced concrete with stucco. 
iii. Brick. 
iv. Wood. 
v. Stone. 
 c. Piers: 
i. Concrete Masonry Units with Stucco (C.B.S.). 
ii. Reinforced Concrete with Stucco. 
iii. Brick. 
iv. Stone. 
 d. Railings & Balustrades: 
i. Wood (termite resistant), painted or natural. 
ii. Wrought iron. 
iii. Balustrades shall not be farther apart than 3" minimum or 4" maximum. 
3. Permitted Configurations: 
 a. Columns: 
i. Square, 6" minimum, with or without capitals and bases. 
ii. Round, 6" minimum outer diameter, with or without capitals and bases. 
iii. Classical orders. 
 b. Arches: 
i. Semi-circular & segmental. 
 c.Piers: 
i. 8" minimum dimension. 
 d. Porches: 
i. Railings 2-3/4" minimum diameter. 
ii. Balustrades 3" minimum spacing, 4" maximum spacing. 
24.9.1.2  Windows & Doors: 
1. General Requirements: 
 a. Window openings facing streets should be oriented vertically. 
 b. Storefront windows should replicate single panes of glass not larger than 8' in height x 6' in width. 
 c. For retail uses, windows should cover 75% of the street frontage on the ground floor facing the street. 
 d. Storefront windows should begin a maximum of three feet height above the sidewalk. 
 e. The following accessories are permitted: 
i. Shutters (standard). 
ii. Wooden window boxes. 
iii. Muntins and mullions. 
iv. Awnings. 
2. Finish Materials: 
 a. Windows & Storefronts: 
i. Wood. 
ii. Aluminum. 
iii. Copper. 
iv. Steel. 
v. Vinyl clad wood. 
 b. Doors: 
i. Wood or metal. 
ii. Fiberglass. 
3. Permitted Configurations: 
 a. Windows: 
i. Rectangular. 
ii. Square. 
iii. Round (18" maximum outer diameter). 
iv. Semi-circular. 
 b. Window Operations: 
i. Casement. 
ii. Single and double-hung. 
iii. Industrial. 
iv. Fixed frame. 
 c. Door Operations: 
i. Casement. 
ii. French. 
iii. Sliding. 
24.9.1.3  Roofs & Gutters: 
1. General Requirements: 
 a. Permitted Roof Types: 
i. Gabled, hipped, flat, and domed. 
ii. Down spouts are to match gutters in material and finish. 
 2. Permitted Finish Materials: 
  a. Metals: 
i. Painted galvanized steel. 
ii. Copper. 
iii. Aluminum. 
iv. Zinc-Aluminum. 
  b. Shingles: 
i. Asphalt or metal, "dimensional" type. 
ii. Slate. 
iii. Cedar Shake. 
  c. Tile: 
i. Clay, Terracotta, Concrete. 
  d. Gutters: 
i. Copper. 
ii. Aluminum. 
iii. Painted galvanized steel. 
  e. Rubber panels and sealed membrane roofs are allowed on flat roofs or low pitched roofs: 
 3. Permitted Configurations: 
  a. Metals: 
i. Standing Seam spacing, panel ends exposed at overhang, 24" maximum. 
  b. Shingles: 
i. Square, Rectangular, Fishscale, Shield. 
  c. Tile: 
i. Barrel, Flat, French. 
  d. Gutters: 
i. Rectangular section. 
ii. Square section. 
iii. Half-round section. 
24.9.1.4  Garden Walls & Fences: 
 1. Permitted Materials: 
  a. Wood (termite resistant), painted white, left natural, or painted/stained with colors approved by the DRC. 
  b. Concrete Masonry Units with Stucco (C.B.S.). 
  c. Reinforced Concrete with stucco. 
  d. Wrought Iron. 
  e. Brick. 
  f. Vinyl. 
  g. Stone. 
2. Permitted Finish: 
 a. Wood: 
i. Picket Fences: minimum 30% opaque with corner posts. 
ii. Other: to match building walls. 
 b. Stucco: 
i. With texture and color to match building walls. 
 c. Wrought Iron: 
i. Vertical, ?" minimum dimension, 3" to 4" spacing. 
3. Chain link fencing is not permitted. 
24.9.1.5  Street Walls: 
1. Street walls along any unimproved street frontage shall be between 4'-6' above the adjacent ground. The better side of a street wall shall face the street. 
2. Building, Façade, Site Design Requirements 
a. All spaces and structures and related site improvements visible to the public from public roadways shall be designed to add to the visual amenities of the area in relationship to the proposed development. 
b. The color, size, height, location, roof treatments, building materials, landscaping and proportion of openings of any proposed new construction, substantial reconstruction or rehabilitation, and whatever signs and lighting that may be proposed for such uses, shall be evaluated for compatibility with the architecture of existing buildings in the vicinity. The color, size, height, and architectural style of the building shall complement and not compete with other architecturally distinguished buildings in the district. These details shall be reviewed by the DRC. 
c. Primary colors shall not be used for building walls unless they are muted in tone. Neon colors are not allowed. 
d. Trim colors for windows, soffits, cornices, moldings, etc. should be whites or dark saturated cool colors (for example, greens, blues, bronze). Brick and stone may be left their natural color. 
e. Roof colors must be natural colors. 
f. Entry doors may have greater color latitude. 
g. Wherever possible and where site conditions allow the front building plane should be oriented towards the street. Accessory buildings may be exempt. 
h. The street elevation of buildings shall have at least one entrance oriented towards the street. 
i. Façade materials should be finished with brick, stucco, wood, stone, or appropriate concrete masonry units. 
24.9.1.6  Where Clearly Visible From Streets or Public Areas. 
1. Design standards generally apply only in conditions WHERE CLEARLY VISIBLE FROM THE STREET OR PUBLIC AREAS. The architectural and façade controls concentrate on the public realm and minimize requirements of private views. For example, an architectural element that is visible only through an opening in a street wall is not clearly visible from the street. 
2. The following are prohibited where visible from parks, squares and pubic streets: Utility boxes and machinery including but not limited to: backflow devices, electric meters and air conditioning units. Blank walls must not be visible from a public street. The applicant shall propose a site plan that minimizes the view of parking lots, driveways, or garage doors from public view. 
24.9.1.7  Building Numbering: 
Building numbers shall be located over the primary entrance to the building and shall be visible from the street. 
24.9.1.8  Signage: 
Signage shall be permitted in accordance with Section 16 of these regulations. 
SECTION 25 - VALIDITY 

25.1 - Validity clause: 
If any section, paragraph, clause or provision of these Regulations shall be adjudged invalid, such decision shall apply only to the section, paragraph, clause or provision in question, and the remainder of these regulations shall be deemed valid and effective. 
APPENDIX A - BUFFERYARD 

APPENDIX B-ZONING AMENDMENTS 
SECTION EFFECTIVE DATE REMARKS AMENDED BY APPLICATION NO. 21.2 1/1/80 Var. fee 2 1/1/80 Definition devel. Acre 17.3 1/1/80 Special permits in flood hazard areas 2 3/10/80 Condo related definitions 4 3/10/80 Condos e17 3/10/80 Condo and condo conversion Regulation 4 4/1/80 Municipal buildings 4 4/1/80 Bedroom ratios 4 3/3/79 Massage parlors 3 6/1/79 Building below street level 4 8/20/79 Municipal buildings 5 10/1/79 Flood plain regulations 1 11/2/79 Application withdrawal 2, 4 11/25/79 Special Ed. Facilities 4 11/19/79 Use variances 12.3.8 and 9 5/15/79 Off-street parking 21.2 5/1/80 Fee structure 17.3 5/8/80 Fee structure 2 11/25/79 Lot width 4.13 7/23/80 Body shops in IP zone 14.1 7/23/80 Planning Commission approval of mobile home parks 17.3 7/23/80 Special Permits 4.19, 4.10, 4.11, 4.13 9/1/80 Full service restaurants with liquor 17 10/1/80 Separating distances 4.9, 4.10, 4.11, 4.12, 4.13 10/1/80 Use variances 4.14 10/1/80 Floating industrial zone 18 11/1/80 Condo regulations 18.6 2/2/80 Garages and unit fees in condos 4 2/2/81 Governmental buildings 15.1 4/1/81 Excavation permits 5 4/1/81 Governmental buildings 17.3 4/17/81 Special Permit wording 5.2 4/17/81 Permits in flood hazard zones 18 12/1/81 Utility connections in condos 5.17.3 12/1/81 Special Permits in flood zones 4.17.3 3/8/82 Rockville rezoning as per Master Plan 14 3/8/82 POD requirements as per Master Plan 14 6/1/82 POD requirements as per Master Plan 4.15, 4.19 6/1/82 Erosion-Sedimentation Control 4.17 6/1/82 Use variances - Rockville commercial 4.1 6/1/82 Condos in R-10 zones 2 5/1/82 Use, Accessory definition 10.15, 4.1, 4.2, 4.15, 4.17 7/1/82 Duplex - allowed 21 9/1/82 Fee structure 4.20 11/1/82 Rt. 83 Special Dev'l Zone 4.20.6 2/1/83 Use variance prohibition 4.21 3/1/83 Planned Commercial Zone 2 5/24/83 Lot corner 17.1 5/24/83 Alcoholic beverage sale by Special Permit 3.3 6/23/83 Height of automobile garages 14.1.1 6/23/83 POD approvals 4.10.3 6/23/83 Repairer's license with car dealerships 6.1.1.1 6/23/83 Lots of record ownership 2 8/1/83 Retail sales comm. ed. Facilities 16.3.4 8/1/83 Directional signs 12.1 8/1/83 Daycare facility comm. ed. Facility 21 9/21/83 Fee structure 4 9/21/83 Billboards 3.19 12/1/83 Roadside selling 18.6.4 1/1/84 Off street parking setbacks 21.2.7 1/2/84 Fees for plan modifications 4.6.1.1 3/1/84 MHP size to 15 acres 2, 3, 4, 18, 19, 20, 21,22 6/1/84 Roadside selling, lot, condos/multiple single family dwellings 2 8/24/84 Animal definitions 4.15.3.6, 17.3.6 10/22/84 Hospitals added 4.22, 12, 2 1/1/85 GZ zoning 12 2/2/85 Off street parking 2, 17 5/1/85 Elderly housing 2, 18 7/5/85 Erosion/Sed. Control 4.17 10/25/85 Site Plan/Sp. Permit mod. 14.1.3. 4/12/86 Remove time limits 14.2 10/10/86 POD Criteria 12.3.15, 12.1 11/15/86 Off street parking 2.4, 12 12/1/86 Emergency Shelters 4.17.4 12/1/86 Multiple single family in RC 4.3.4.6 12/1/86 Municipal Non Profit Rec 4.7.2, 4.7.4 2/12/87 Multi Family to Special Permit 16, 2.4 7/1/87 Signs 6 7/1/87 Lots of record 4.12.4.7 11/1/87 Small engine repair GI zones 2 1/15/88 Streets, public utility structures, day care 3.11 1/15/88 Public street access 1, 6, 11 1/15/88 Non conforming dates 4.7.5 1/15/88 Bedroom mix 13.1.9 1/15/88 Deleted 14.2.4 1/15/88 P.A. 87-533 16.1.5 1/15/88 Signs to property lines 17.3 1/15/88 Special Permit approval 4.9.3.8, 4.10.3.5, 4.11.2.4, 4.21.5.7 1/15/88 Delete massage establishment 12.3, 15 1/15/88 Off street parking P.O.D. approval 2.27.1, 2.91.1 1/15/88 Move to Section 3 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.4, 4.5 1/15/88 Day Care facilities 12.3.9 1/15/88 Access drives 4.17 1/15/88 Day Care Centers 4.2, 4.3, 4.4 1/15/88 Delete multiple single family 2.6, 18.5.1 4/1/88 Certifying Agent ESCP 4.7.4 5/1/88 Single/Two families in PRD 17.2 6/15/88 Appeals from ZEO to ZBA 4.6 6/15/88 Mobile Home Decks 4.16.3.4 7/15/88 Vocational training facilities 12.1.24 7/15/88 Parking for vocational training 2 12/15/88 Residential floor area, affordable housing; community rec; aquifer protection 3.20 12/15/88 RC zones multiple buildings per lot 3.22 12/15/88 vacancy rates 4 12/15/88 Minimum floor areas 4.20 12/15/88 Add. Comm.. rec. facilities 10 12/15/88 Minimum floor areas 12 12/15/88 Underground parking, parking for comm. rec. loading dock locations, stacked park 11/3 12/15/88 clarify language 14 12/15/88 delete 90 day requirement on mylar filing, delete references to staff 400,000 per 10 yr. Approval, delete 12 copy requirement 15 12/15/88 require POD for all movement, fill or excavation of earth, delete 15.1.1. 19 12/15/88 Revise fee schedule 2 1/1/89 Definitions of lot, lot coverage, open space; retail sales, mobile, manufactured homes; day care services 3 12/15/89 Back taxes, frontage on streets, surfacing, roadside 4 12/15/89 Lot coverage, contract zoning for affordable housing, day care centers, restaurants as Special Permits 5 12/15/89 Substantial improvements, damage 11 12/15/89 Non-conforming intent 12 12/15/89 Size of spaces pavement of vehicle storage; setbacks 14 12/15/89 Delete 14.2, Special Permits over 35 parking spaces, site plan wording 15.1.2 12/15/89 Wording to site plan 16 12/15/89 Delete billboards confiscation 17 12/15/89 Zoning violation alcoholic beverages 2/3 5/15/90 Accessory building def. & uses 4.9,4.10,4.11 5/15/90 Rest. As Sp. Permits 4.21 5/15/90 Lot width 14.1.8 5/15/90 Off site road improvements 16.2 5/15/90 Real estate signs 19 5/15/90 Fee structure/enforcement 2,4,12 8/15/90 Adult day care 3.23 11/1/90 Delete Back Taxes slips 4 11/1/90 Delete Family Day Care 5 1/1/91 Flood hazard 3 1/1/91 Delete buffer strip; fences one foot from line 15 1/1/91 Residential excavation 4 1/1/90 MHP street length 5.7.5.8 4/1/91 Flood hazard def. 14.1.4 4/1/91 Time frames for start of const. 4.6.5.8 12/1/91 Mobile home site width 2,4 12/1/91 Bed & Breakfasts 19 1/1/92 Rear lots 1/1/92 MPOD (Comm/Industrial) Design (Review) 1/1/92 Appeals to ZBA, eliminate conflict with building codes 4.6 3/1/92 Mobile Home Placement 3.19 3/1/92 Roadside Selling 14.2 3/1/92 Delete Criteria 4.9/4.10 3/1/92 Special Permit Thresholds 2.40 5/15/92 Frontage definition 4.20.2 5/15/92 Uses 4.20.5 5/15/92 I-84 MPOD 4.4.46 5/15/92 Composting sites 4.5.4.7 5/15/92 Composting sites 12.1 5/15/92 Use changes 17.3.3 5/15/92 Historic zoning MPOD 3.3 5/15/92 Access building 9.1 5/15/92 Landscaping buffer strips 4 5/15/92 Organic recycling 20 7/1/92 Aquifer Protection Regs 4.6 11/15/92 MHP Subdivisions 4.9.3 11/15/92 Repair License Procedures 20.7 11/15/92 Delete Section 20.7.3 4.9.4 12/1/92 Gasoline Sales 2 4/1/93 Rear lot definition 19.2.8 4/1/93 Clarify procedures 4.20.4.16.1 4/1/93 Outdoor recreational facilities floor areas 2/4.9 6/1/93 Massage Regulations 20 11/1/93 Stratified Drift Areas Added 14 11/1/93 Time Frames (P.A. 93-19) 4.6 12/1/93 Delete 4.6.5.4.4 12.3.12 1/1/94 Clarify outside parking 16.3 2/15/94 Second Free Standing Sign 3/4/4.9 2/1/95 Home Occupations, Burial of materials, Residential Uses in Commercial zones Repairer's license Requirement 4.9 5/15/95 Alcoholic beverage approvals 15.1 5/15/95 Time frames/Special Permits 2 9/1/95 Define hospital 16.2/21.7.7 10/1/95 Define Non full service restaurants 20.6.4/4.9.4 10/1/95 Map amend aquifer zones 4.9 11/1/95 Independent Massage Therapy 4.17 11/15/95 Clarify sign procedures 17.1.1 1/15/96 20,000 sq. foot except sep. dist. 22 5/1/96 Fee structure 17.1.1 5/1/96 Alcoholic beverage, bowling alleys 4/20 6/1/96 Delete coverage, heights make Special Permit threshold 4.20 6/1/96 Indoor movie theaters 4.20 8/15/96 MPOD Revisions 16 12/1/96 Sign Policy 16 2/1/97 Banner; Free standing signs 23 8/1/97 Telecommunication facilities 3 2/15/98 Building below street level 15 3/1/98 Rock crushers; 50-yard min. 23 3/1/98 Tower heights 2 4/14/98 Day care in nursing homes 3.14 4/15/98 To all zones 2/3 4/15/98 Adult day care/trash and debris 2/4 5/15/98 Assist. Living facilities 3 5/15/98 Sidewalk installation 6 7/1/98 Existing lots 3.19 9/15/98 Roadside selling 21 9/15/98 Design Review Procedures 2/4.10 9/15/98 Redemption Centers 4.20 10/15/98 1 acre min. SED 2.59 4/1/99 Elderly Housing private dev. 3.20 4/1/99 Elderly Housing 17.4 4/1/99 Elderly Housing setback, coverage 23.4 4/1/99 Towers on rear lots 4.9 4/1/99 Delete license types 4.10.4.10 4/15/99 Add banks 5 6/1/99 Flood hazard 4.20 6/1/99 Lot width 4.23 6/15/99 Mixed-use development zone 16.1.4 12/1/99 Add business 3.20 1/15/2000 M.U.D. exception 22 1/15/2000 Make all fees uniform 3.18 4/15/2000 Below grade building 4.23/16 4/15/2000 Signs in MUD zones 14.1.9 6/1/2000 Offsite improvements 14.1.1 10/15/2000 Comm/Ind. In Resid Zones 12.3.14 10/15/2000 "Replacement" 21.4 10/15/2000 Wetlands Plants 2.128 10/15/2000 Clarify hazard material 2 4/1/01 Define Applicant 17.1.2 6/1/01 Separating distances 4.22.3 6/1/01 Delete S.F. home mandates 16.1.13 6/1/01 Signs on same parcel 4.9.4.1 6/15/01 Mixed Uses 4.23.4.9 4/21/02 Planned MUD District 4.24.5.13 9/5/02 Add Day Care Centers 3.25 4/7/03 Sidewalks 1.2, 14.1.1.1 & 4.24 5/30/03 Historic District Downtown Business & Residential (DBR) 20.4.2.20 11/17/03 Aquifer Protection 2.132. 3.4 & 3.22 02/02/05 Definition of 'Accessory Buildings' 4.23.1.1 02/02/05 Extend Moratorium for PMUD Section 9 02/02/05 Landscape Buffer Strips Sections 2,3,4, 13,14,17, 05/05/05 Adaptive Re-use of Mill Properties PZ-2005-07 4.24 7/2/05 PDZ (Gerber Farm) PZ-2005-18 4.25 7/2/05 PDZ (Exit 67 Area) PZ-2005-18 Section 2.61 02/15/06 Kennels PZ-2005-23 4.9.4.13 02/15/06 Delete PZ-2005-23 4.10.2.9 02/15/06 Delete PZ-2005-23 4.9.4.13 02/15/06 Commercial District Kennel PZ-2005-23 4.10.4.15 02/15/06 Industrial District Kennel PZ-2005-23 4.20.4.21 02/15/06 SED District Kennel PZ-2005-23 2.60 2/15/06 Delete Definition- Housing for the Elderly PZ-2005-29 4.1,4.2,4.3,4.4,4.5,4.7, 2/15/06 Delete Special Permits Housing for Elderly PZ-2005-29 4.15,4.16,4.17,4.24,25 2/15/06 Delete Special Permits Housing for Elderly PZ-2005-29 2.35 - 2.43 2/15/06 Dwelling PZ-2005-29 2.55A, 2.55b, 2.55c 4/15/06 Historic district use, local, national register PZ-2005-30 14.1.1.3 4/15/06 Plan of development and modifications in historic districts PZ-2005-30 17.2.1.3 4/15/06 Special exceptions in/abutting historic districts PZ-2005-30 2.114 5/5/06 delete PZ-2005-31 2.106 -1,2,3 5/5/06 Sign Advertising, PZ-2005-31 16.1.14 5/5/06 message board PZ-2005-31 16.3.8,.9, 5/5/06 message board PZ-2005-31 4.9.4.24, 4.10.4.16, 4.14.4.13, 4.17.3.32, 4.19.3.8, 4.20.4.22, 4.21.5.15, 4.22.8.7, 4.23.5.23, 4.24.4.3.14.4, 4.25.4.3.15.4 5/5/06 4.74.18, 4.74.19, 4.24.4.3.16, 4.25.4.3.17, 4.25.4.3.18 9/25/06 Home Occupations PZ-2006-15 3.9 7/8/07 Delete Fences PZ-2007-15 4.1.4, 4.2.5, 4.3.5, 4.4.5, 4.5.5, 4.6.7, 4.7.9, 4.9.5, 4.10.5, 4.14.6, 4.15.5, 4.16.5, 4.17.5, 4.18.4, 4.19.4, 4.20.6, 4.22.6, 4.21.7, 4.22.6, 4.23.6, 4.24.5, 4.25.5, 20.9 5/6/07 Use Variances PZ-2006-31 4.24.2.3, 4.24.4.3.15.7, 4.24.7.4 5/6/07 PDZ-Gerber Front Yards PZ-2007-06 4.25.2.3, 4.25.4.3.16.7, 4.25.7.4 5/6/07 PDZ-Exit 67 Front Yards PZ-2007-06 3.28, 4.5.4.11 5/24/07 Outdoor Wood Burning Furnaces PZ-2007-02 4.24.2.7 , 4.24.2.8, 4.24.4.1.5, 4.24.4.1.6, 4.24.4.1.7, 4.24.4.2.1, 4.24.4.3.2.3, 4.24.4.24.4.3.15.5, 4.24.4.3.15.9, 4.24.4.4 4.25.2.7, 4.25.2.8, 4.25.4.1.5, 4.25.4.1.6, 4.25.4.1.7, 4.25.4.2.1, 4.25.4.3.16.5, 4.25.4.3.16.9, 4.25.4.4, 12.4, 20.4.2.25 7/29/07 PDZ, LID, Parking, Aquifer Protection PZ-2007-16 22.2.1-22.2.16 Application fees PZ-2007-08 4.22.5, 4.22.7 12/3/07 Garden Zone - Floating Zone PZ-2007-25 2.65 , 2.84 , 2.136 2.137 , 2.139, 2.140, 3.10, 4.2.1 et. seq., Open space & yard definitions, captions for area & yard 4.7.6, 4.20.5.1, 4.26 1/24/08 requirements in residential zones, new open space zone PZ-2007-19 2.106.3, 16.1.1 3/28/08 Electronic Message Board PZ-2008-03 16.1.5, 16.1.10 10/8/08 Signs, portable PZ-2008-15 13.10 10/10/08 Storage containers, dumpster PZ-2008-15 4.27 10/24/08 Comprehensive Multifamily Dwelling zone PZ-2008-17 3.12 10/28/08 Storage of boats & trailers PZ-2008-15 2.56, 3.28 3/23/09 Home Based Business PZ-2008-19 9.1-9.4 9/25/09 Landscape Buffer Strips PZ-2009-13 14.1.1-14.1.10, 14.2 9/25/09 Site Plan Requirements PZ-2009-13 4.23.5.15 11/12/09 Tattoo Studio, HD-DBR zone PZ-2009-17 3.26 10/21/10 Adaptive Reuse PZ-2010-13 4.25.2 11/17/10 PDZ-Exit 67 Area: Area and Yard Requirements PZ-2010-17 4.1.3.8, 4.2.4.8, 4.3.4.8, 4.4.4.8, 4.5.4.9, 4.15.3.8, Change home occupation in residential & mixed use zones to home 4.16.3.8, 4.23.5.15 8/25/11 based business of major - type 2 PZ-2011-03 4.9.2.2, 4.9.2.3, 4.9.3.2, 4.9.3.3, 4.9.4.4, 4.9.4.10, Changes to permitted uses, special exception uses, and special PZ-2011-17 4.9.4.12, 4.9.4.21 6/15/12 permit uses in the Commercial zone 4.10.2.15, 4.10.2.16 6/15/12 Changes to permitted uses in the Industrial zone PZ-2011-17 4.10.4.1, 4.10.4.9, 4.10.4.10 6/15/12 Changes to special permit uses in the Industrial zone PZ-2011-17 4.16.3.3 6/15/12 Change in nomenclature in the HD-Neighborhood R-10 zone PZ-2011-17 4.19.2.6, 4.19.2.7, 4.19.2.8 6/15/12 Changes to permitted uses in the HD-Industrial zone PZ-2011-17 4.19.3.1, 4.19.3.2, 4.19.3.4 6/15/12 Changes to special permit uses in the HD-Industrial zone PZ-2011-17 4.21.5.16, 4.21.5.17, 4.21.5.18 4.21.5.19, 4.21.5.20 6/15/12 Changes to special permit uses in the Planned Commercial zone PZ-2011-17 4.23.5.21, 4.23.5.24, 4.23.5.25 6/15/12 Changes to special permit uses in the Downtown Business Residential zone PZ-2011-17 4.9.2, 4.9.3, 4.9.4, 11.1.1, Restrictions on sales of used vehicles, changes to qualification of non- 11.1.1.2, 12.5, 12.6 3/27/2013 conforming uses, add sections on access mgmt & shared parking PZ-2013-01 2.74A, 3.15, 3.25, 4.26.1, 4.26.2, 9.1, 9.3.4, 9.3.7, Incorporate Low Impact Development (LID) requirements into 13.9, 14.1.2, 21.4.9 5/1/2013 relevant sections of the zoning regulations PZ-2013-02 1.3A, 3.7, 4.9.2.15, 7.5, 12/3/13 Changes to general provisions, permitted uses, cluster development PZ-2013-18 12.1.27 and off-street parking. 24, 25 Rockville Village District Overlay Zone was added renumbered. PZ-2013-22 2.9, 2.17, 2.34, 2.86, 2.104, 3/23/15 Definitions - additions PZ-2015-01 4.9.2.14 3/23/15 Require a site plan with commercial parking facilities PZ-2015-01 13.10.4, 13.10.6 3/23/15 Addition of Police Chief approval to dumpsters and time limits PZ-2015-01 13.11 3/23/15 Addition of section on Permanent Shipping/Cargo Storage Containers PZ-2015-01 13.12 3/23/15 Charitable Donation Collection Bins PZ-2015-01 20.3.2 3/23/15 Amendments to Aquifer Protection Maps PZ-2015-01 2.121 6/6/15 Definition - Amendment to definition of Street, Public PZ-2015-05 1.2, 1.5, 1.6. 6/4/15 General - Amendments, deletions and clarifications PZ-2015-08 2.6, 2.7, 2.17A, 2.21, 2.22,2.33, 2.36, 2.43.1, 2.46,2.55,2.70, 2.71, 2.72, 2.79, 2.85,2.87, 2.97, 2.98, 2.100, 2.122,2.125, 2.127, 2.136, 2.137, 2.139, 2.140 6/4/15 Definitions - Amendments, deletions and clarifications 3.20, 3.22, 3.23 6/4/15 General Provisions: Deleted reference to MUD and deleted definition and clarified PZ-2015-08 4.1.1.8, 4.2.4.9, 4.4.4.9, 6/4/15 Reformatting, deletion of some text, correct typographical errors PZ-2015-08 4.5.1.8, 4.6.5.4.4, 4.8, 4.9.4.11, 4.10.6, 4.15.6, 4.17.3.12, 4.23.5.18, 4.23.5.19, 4.24.4.1.5 4.24.4.3.15.5, 4.24.4.3.15.9, 4.24.4.3.15.9.4 4.25, 4.25.4.1.5, 4.25.4.3.16.5.1.3 4.25.4.3.16.9, 4.25.7.1.4 4.25.7.2.1, 4.25.7.3, 12.1.15 6/4/15 Correct typographical errors PZ-2015-08 17.1.1, 17.1.2.3 6/4/15 Reformatting, correction typographical errors PZ-2015-08 18.3.2.1,18.3.2.1.1 6/4/15 Correct typographical errors PZ-2015-08 20.4.2.25, 20.6.4 6/4/15 Deleting text that is superseded by previously approve PZ-2015-01 PZ-2015-08 22.2.8, 22.2.12 6/4/15 Deletion or and redefining minor mod application fee PZ-2015-08 4.9.4.1 2/8/16 Mixed Commercial and Multi-Family Uses PZ-2015-17 17.1.1 12/15/16 Addition of alcoholic liquors manufacturers PZ-2016-18 4.4.4.11 11/15/17 Addition of Adaptive Re-Use PZ-2017-09  
